a major role in the second seminole war fought in resistance to removal from 1835 to 1842.
general thomas w jesup the leader of the u s army claimed this you may be assured is a negro and not an indian war treaties like the one signed at moultrie creek in 1823 reduced tribal holdings the federal government used a combination of deception bribery and threats to induce land cessions.
state governments also began to act on their own proclaiming state jurisdiction over lands still allotted by federal treaty to indians within the states borders.
the stage was thus set for the forced removal of the five civilized tribes to the trans mississippi west during the administration of andrew jackson.
see the feature essay confronting a new environment pp.
jacksons indian removal policy is discussed in further detail in chapter 10.
farther north in the ohio valley and the northwest territory native americans had already suffered military defeat in the conflict between britain and the united states leaving them only a minor obstacle to the ambitions of white settlers and land speculators.
when the british withdrew from the old northwest in 1815 they left their former indian allies virtually defenseless before the tide of whites who rushed into the region.
consigned by treaty to reservations outside the main lines of white advance most of the tribes were eventually forced west of the mississippi.
the last stand of the indians in this region occurred in 1831 1832 when a faction of the confederated sac and fox indians under chief the cherokee treaty of 1817 mountain men and native americans met at a rendezvous to trade their furs to company agents in exchange for food ammunition and other goods.
feasting drinking gambling and sharing exploits were also part of the annual event.
the painting rendezvous ca.
1837 by alfred jacob miller.
expansion and migration black hawk refused to abandon their lands east of the mississippi.
federal troops and illinois state militia pursued black hawks band and drove the indians back to the river where they were almost exterminated while attempting to cross to the western bank.
uprooting once populous indian communities of the old northwest was part of a national program for removing indians of the eastern part of the country to an area beyond the mississippi.
as originally conceived by thomas jefferson removal would have allowed those indians who became civilized to remain behind on individually owned farms and qualify for american citizenship.
this policy would reduce indian holdings without appearing to violate american standards of justice.
not everyone agreed with jeffersons belief that indians unlike blacks had the natural ability to adopt white ways and become useful citizens of the republic.
during the monroe era it became clear that white settlers many of whom saw native americans as irredeemable savages wanted nothing less than the removal of all indians civilized or not.
andrew jackson who made his name as an indian fighter in the 1810s presided over a shift to a far more aggressive indian removal policy.
settlement to the mississippi while indians were being hustled or driven beyond the mississippi white settlers poured across the appalachians and filled the agricultural heartland of the united states.
in 1810 only about one seventh of the american population lived beyond the appalachians by 1840 more than one third did.
during that period illinois grew from a territory with 12 282 inhabitants to a state with 476 183 mississippis population of about 40 000 increased tenfold and michigan grew from a remote frontier area with fewer than 5000 people into a state with more than 200 000.
eight new western states were added to the union during this period.
because of the governments removal policies few settlers actually had to fight indians.
but they did have to obtain possession of land and derive a livelihood from it.
much of the vast acreage opened up by the westward movement passed through the hands of land speculators before it reached farmers and planters.
in the prosperous period following the war of 1812 and again during the boom of the early to mid 1830s speculation in public lands proceeded at a massive and feverish rate.
after a financial panic in 1819 brought ruin to many who had purchased tracts on credit the minimum price was lowered from 2 00 to 1 25 an acre but full payment was required in cash.
since few settlers could afford the necessary outlays wealthy speculators continued to acquire most good land.
eventually most of the land did find its way into the hands of actual cultivators.
in some areas squatters arrived before the official survey and formed claims associations that policed land auctions to prevent outsiders from bidding up the price and buying their farms out from under them.
squatters also agitated for formal right of first purchase or preemption from the government.
between 1799 and 1830 congress passed a number of special acts that granted squatters in specific areas the right to purchase at the minimum price the land that they had already improved.
in 1841 congress formally acknowledged the right to farm on public lands with the assurance of a future preemption right.
settlers who arrived after speculators had secured title had to deal with land barons.
fortunately for the settlers most speculators operated on credit and needed a quick return on their investment selling land at a profit to settlers who had some capital renting out farms until tenants had earned enough to buy them or loaning money to squatters who would later pay for the land in installments.
as a result the family farm or owner operated plantation became the characteristic unit of western agriculture.
farmers had to produce enough food to subsist and to sell at market to pay off their debts.
not surprisingly most of the earliest settlement was along rivers that provided a natural means of transportation for flatboats loaded with corn wheat cotton or cured meat.
from more remote areas farmers drove livestock over primitive trails and roads to eastern markets.
to turn bulky grain especially corn into a more easily transportable commodity farmers in remote regions often distilled grain into whiskey.
local marketing centers quickly sprang up usually at river junctions.
some of these grew into small cities virtually overnight greatly accelerating regional development.
most frontier people welcomed the opportunity to sell some of their crops in order to acquire the consumer goods they could not produce for themselves.
women especially benefited from the chance to buy some household necessities that they had previously made at home such as soap candles and some articles of clothing.
but many of them also valued self sufficiency and tried to produce enough of the necessities of life to survive when cash crops failed or prices were low.
the people and culture of the frontier most of the settlers who populated the west were farmers from the seaboard states.
rising land prices and declining fertility of the soil in the older regions often motivated their migration.
most moved in family units and tried to recreate their former ways of life as soon as possible.
women were often reluctant to migrate in the first place and when they arrived in new areas they strove valiantly to recapture the comfort and stability they had left behind.
in general pioneers sought out the kind of terrain and soil with which they were already familiar.
people from eastern uplands favored western hill country.
piedmont and tidewater farmers or planters usually made for the lower and flatter areas.
early settlers avoided the fertile prairies of the midwest preferring instead river bottoms or wooded sections because they were more like home and could be farmed by tried and true methods.
rather than being the bold and deliberate innovators pictured in american mythology typical agricultural pioneers were deeply averse to changing their habits.
yet adjustments were necessary simply to survive under frontier conditions.
initially at least isolated homesteads required a high degree of self sufficiency.
men usually cut down trees built cabins broke the soil and put in crops.
besides cooking keeping house and caring for children women made clothes manufactured soap and other household necessities churned butter preserved food for the winter and worked in the fields at busy times at one time or another women performed virtually all the tasks required by frontier farming.
crops had to be planted harvested and readied for home consumption with simple tools brought in wagons from the east often little more than an axe a plow and a spinning wheel.
complete the assignment confronting a new environment on myhistorylab feature essay confronting a new environment this 1839 satire on western emigration depicts a battered wagon of half starved pioneers returning to new england after suffering hardships in illinois while an optimistic traveler is on his way there.
t he era of indian removal in the 1830s during which tens of thousands of indians were driven from the southeast to present day kansas and oklahoma also saw hundreds of thousands of white farmers move to illinois and missouri.
despite obvious differences in their experiences both groups of migrants had to adapt to the same unfamiliar prairie environment.
seeking to convince indian tribes to move west and abandon their lands for white settlement u s government officials argued that western lands would afford space and bounty for indian and european american settlers alike.
indeed in his address to congress on december 6 1830 president andrew jackson chided indians for their resistance to removal our white children by thousands yearly leave the land of their birth to seek new homes in distant regions.
does humanity weep at these painful separations from every thing animate and inanimate with which the young heart has become entwined.
far from it.
it is rather a source of joy that our country affords scope where our young population may range unconstrained.
certainly the new western environment offered plenty of space.
but european americans and eastern indians were woodland people.
they lived at the tail end of the age of wood when forests provided the primary material for building fencing and heating not to mention habitat for game that supplemented their diets.
the ideal landscape was a clearing for a farm or small village surrounded by thick forest.
in the prairie emigrants confronted an opposite landscape huge openings barrens fringed by trees.
to one unaccustomed to it there is something inexpressibly lonely in the solitude of a prairie wrote washington irving.
the loneliness of the forest seems nothing to it settlers clustered at the prairies edge and only partly for the timber.
the grassland had a reputation for fire dryness and infertility.
james madison writing to thomas jefferson expressed the conviction that illinois was a miserably poor country that would never bear a single bush unsurprisingly therefore most of the early settlers to the prairie states gravitated to the relatively rare hilly and wooded areas that reminded them from where they had come.
at the time most americans believed that vegetation revealed its soils fertility the bigger the greenery the richer the earth.
soil that produced no trees seemed mighty poor indeed.
people eventually tried farming the prairie of course and discovered the truth the soil was in fact so immensely fertile it supported a thick shield of tangled roots.
sod busting required oxen tools and muscle before the john deere iron plow became readily available in the mid nineteenth century most early settlers were not up to the difficult task.
if illinois initially seemed barren the lands of present day kansas and oklahoma seemed positively sterile.
in 1820 a government surveyor gave an exaggerated but well publicized name to this swath of the continent the great american desert it was here that a diverse assemblage of indian refugees tried their best to set up new homes in the removal era.
in addition to the well known five civilized tribes from the south the newcomers included groups from the northeast and old northwest including the chippewa kickapoo miami ottawa potawatomi sac fox seneca and winnebago indians among others.
for these woodland peoples the sea of grass came as a shock.
no wonder that many of the relocated indians complained to the great father the federal government.
writing to indian agent william clark of lewis and clark fame shawnee leaders related that they traveled three days through prairies and thought we were in the land of the great spirit for we could see nothing but what was above us and the earth we walked upon the wyandot nation of ohio decided to send an unbiased unprejudiced exploring expedition to see their promised land on the missouri kansas border.
the report was discouraging t here is but little timber and what there is is of a low scrubby knotty and twisted kind and fit for nothing but firewood.
t here is not good timber sufficient for the purposes of a people that wish to pursue agriculture although many indian tribes had extensive experience with various forms of agriculture old methods could not be easily replicated on the prairie where the soil was too hard to be easily cultivated and water was scarce.
a few indian groups such as the cherokee had learned to grow marketable crops in their traditional homelands and continued to do so in the new lands after removal.
nonetheless some cherokee chose to become seasonal bison hunters on the southern plains.
even with changes in their farming and hunting methods it took decades for the cherokee to recover from the dispossession of their towns and farms in georgia.
adaptation was made more difficult by the staggering human losses they suffered on their forced march to the west.
the sickness and death on the cherokee trail of tears about a fourth of the migrants died on the way was an extreme form of an experience that european american settlers also faced.
for whites and natives alike moving west meant growing ill the body became unsettled in its new environment.
a spokesperson for tribes removed from upstate new york to kansas called it a poor barren unhealthy country where many families have lost all their children in a course of a few years for both groups catching the ague was an inevitable part of seasoning in this new country which had a reputation for sickliness.
now understood as malaria the ague commonly presented itself in cycles of shaking.
indeed the experience was so common that there were essentially two types of settlers veterans of the pioneer shakes and greenhorns.
likewise it was impossible to completely avoid the chills because it could arrive on the very air that permeated wooden cabins.
antebellum settlers attributed many of their maladies to miasma noah webster defined it as infecting substances floating in the air the effluvia of any putrefying bodies rising and floating in the atmosphere according to popular belief miasma came from rot in humus rich forests fertile bottomlands and well watered prairie.
when settlers broke the prairie in order to improve the land they released foul airs.
people attempted to fight miasma by purging the air with coal smoke or wearing strong smelling bags of herbs around the neck.
but the land got sicker before it got healthier.
the irony was not lost on settlers.
timothy flint who published an influential western guidebook in 1831 wrote that there appears to be in the great plan of providence a scale in which the advantages and disadvantages of human condition are balanced.
where the lands are extremely fertile it seems to be appended to them as a drawback to that advantage that they are generally sickly in the antebellum period many americans believed that land like bodies had intrinsic constitutions or states of health.
ideally individuals and races could be matched to their proper environment an idea used to defend slavery.
many northerners and indians from the north feared for their health when migrating to the hot humid mississippi basin.
billy caldwell a half irish half indian chief from the great lakes region declared that kansas was unhealthy for people from a cold climate there was always the hope that the new indian homelands would prove unsuitable to white settlers.
in 1836 en route to their new home the sac and fox indians said with bitter sarcasm that the south side of the missouri river is intended by the great spirit for the red skins and for this reason he made so much prairie that it would not suit.
the white man and if this had not been the case the red man would in short time have been without a home in a matter of time though the white man would find the prairie suitable and would claim this homeland too.
indians removed from the southeast lost not only their homelands and tribal governments but a way of life that had depended upon their familiar physical environment.
all migrants to the west had to learn new ways of eking out a living from what seemed an inhospitable land.
questions for discussion 1.
how did the experiences of native american migrants to the west compare with those of white americans.
why did so many migrants to the west become sick.
why was it so difficult for native americans and whites to adapt to new environments in the west.
chapter 9 nation building and nationalism but this picture of frontier self reliance is not the whole story.
most settlers in fact found it extremely difficult to accomplish all the tasks using only family labor.
a more common practice was the sharing of work by a number of pioneer families.
except in parts of the south where frontier planters had taken slaves with them the normal way to get heavy labor done in newly settled regions was through mutual aid.
assembling the neighbors to raise a house burn the woods roll logs harvest wheat husk corn pull flax or make quilts helped turn collective work into a festive social occasion.
passing the jug was a normal feature of these bees and an uproarious good time often resulted from the various contests or competitions that speeded the work along.
these communal events represented a creative response to the shortage of labor and at the same time provided a source for community solidarity.
they probably tell us more about the spirit of the frontier than the conventional image of the pioneer as a lonely individualist.
while some settlers remained in one place and grew up with the country many others moved on after a relatively short time.
the wandering of young abraham lincolns family from kentucky to indiana and finally to illinois between 1816 and 1830 was fairly typical.
the physical mobility characteristic of nineteenth century americans in general was particularly pronounced in frontier regions.
improved land could be sold at a profit and the proceeds used to buy new acreage beyond the horizon where the soil was reportedly richer.
the temptations of small scale land speculation and the lure of new land farther west induced a large proportion of new settlers to pull up stakes and move on after only a few years.
few early nineteenth century american farmers developed the kind of attachment to the land that often characterized rural populations in other parts of the world.
americans who remained in the east often ignored the frontier farmers and imagined the west as an untamed american wilderness inhabited by indians and solitary white pathfinders who turned their backs on civilization and learned to live in harmony with nature.
james fenimore cooper the first great american novelist fostered this mythic view of the west in his stories of the frontier.
he began in 1823 to publish a series of novels featuring natty bumppo or leatherstocking a character who became the prototype for the western hero of popular fiction.
natty bumppo was a hunter and scout who preferred the freedom of living in the forest to the constraints of civilization.
through natty bumppo cooper engendered a main theme of american romanticism the superiority of a solitary life in the wilderness to the kind of settled existence among the families schools and churches to which most real pioneers aspired.
a revolution in transportation how did transportation networks change and improve after the war of 1812.
it took more than the spread of settlements to bring prosperity to new areas and ensure that they would identify with older regions or with the country as a whole.
along the eastern seaboard land transportation was so primitive that in 1813 it took seventy five days for one wagon of goods drawn by four horses to make a trip of about a thousand miles from worcester massachusetts to charleston south carolina.
coastal shipping eased the problem to some extent in the east and stimulated the growth of port cities.
traveling west over the mountains however meant months on the trail.
after the war of 1812 political leaders realized that national security economic progress and political unity were all more or less dependent on a greatly improved transportation network.
accordingly president madison called for a federally supported program of internal improvements in 1815.
recommending such a program in congress representative john c calhoun described it as a great nationalizing enterprise let us then bind the nation together with a perfect system of roads and canals.
let us conquer space in ensuing decades calhouns vision of a transportation revolution was realized to a considerable extent although the direct role of the federal government proved to be less important than anticipated.
roads and steamboats americans who wanted to get from place to place rapidly and cheaply needed at a bare minimum new and improved roads.
the first great federal transportation project was the building of the national road between cumberland maryland on the potomac and wheeling virginia on the ohio 1811 1818.
this impressive toll road had a crushed stone surface and immense stone bridges.
it was subsequently extended to reach vandalia illinois in 1838.
another thoroughfare to the west completed during this period was the lancaster turnpike connecting philadelphia and pittsburgh.
other major cities were also linked by turnpikes privately owned toll roads chartered by the states.
by about 1825 thousands of miles of turnpikes crisscrossed southern new england upstate new york much of pennsylvania and northern new jersey.
by themselves however the toll roads failed to meet the demand for low cost transportation over long distances.
for the most part travelers benefited more than transporters of bulky freight for whom the turnpikes proved expensive.
even the national road could not offer the low freight costs required for the long distance hauling of wheat flour and the other bulky agricultural products of the ohio valley.
for these commodities water transportation of some sort was required.
the united statess natural system of river transportation was one of the most significant reasons for its rapid economic development.
the ohio mississippi system in particular provided ready access to the rich agricultural areas of the interior and a natural outlet for their products.
by 1815 large numbers of flatboats loaded with wheat flour and salt pork were making a part of the 2 000 mile trip from pittsburgh to new orleans.
even after the coming of the steamboat flatboats continued to carry a major share of the downriver trade.
the flatboat trade however was necessarily one way.
a farmer from ohio or illinois or someone hired to do the job could float down to new orleans easily enough but there was generally no way to get back except by walking overland through rough country.
until the problem of upriver navigation was solved the ohio mississippi could not carry the manufactured goods that farmers desired in exchange for their crops.
fortunately a solution was readily at hand the use of steam power.
late in the eighteenth century a number of american a revolution in transportation view the map expanding america and internal improvements the clermont on the hudson 1830 1835 by charles pensee.
although some called his clermont fultons folly robert fulton immediately turned a profit from his fleet of steamboats which reduced the cost and increased the speed of river transport.
inventors had experimented with steam driven riverboats.
john fitch even exhibited an early model to delegates at the constitutional convention.
but making a commercially successful craft required further refinement.
in 1807 inventor robert fulton demonstrated the full potential of the steamboat by successfully propelling the clermont 150 miles up the hudson river.
the first steamboat launched in the west was the new orleans which made the long trip from pittsburgh to new orleans in 1811 1812.
besides becoming a principal means of passenger travel on the inland waterways of the east the river steamboat revolutionized western commerce.
in 1815 the enterprise made the first return trip from new orleans to pittsburgh.
within five years sixty nine steamboats with a total capacity of 13 890 tons were plying western waters.
steam transport reduced costs increased the speed of moving goods and people and allowed a two way commerce on the mississippi and ohio.
the steamboat quickly captured the american imagination.
great paddle wheelers became luxurious floating hotels the natural habitats of gamblers confidence men and mysterious women.
for the pleasure of passengers and onlookers steamboats sometimes raced against each other and their more skillful pilots became folk heroes.
but the boats also had a lamentable safety record frequently running aground colliding or blowing up.
the most publicized disasters of antebellum america were spectacular boiler explosions that claimed the lives of hundreds of passengers.
as a result of such accidents the federal government began in 1839 to attempt to regulate steamboats and monitor their construction and operation.
the legislation which failed to create an agency capable of enforcing minimum safety standards stands as virtually the only federal effort in the pre civil war period to regulate domestic transportation.
the canal boom a transportation system based solely on rivers and roads had one enormous gap it did not provide an economical way to ship western farm produce directly east to ports engaged in transatlantic trade or to the growing urban market of the seaboard states.
the solution offered by the politicians and merchants of the middle atlantic and midwestern states was to build a system of canals that linked seaboard cities directly to the great lakes the ohio and ultimately the mississippi.
the best natural location for a canal connecting a river flowing into the atlantic with one of the great lakes was between albany and buffalo a relatively flat stretch of 364 miles.
the potential value of such a project had long been recognized but when it was actually approved by the new york legislature in 1817 it was justly hailed as an enterprise of breathtaking boldness.
at that time no more than about 100 miles of canal existed in the entire united states and the longest single canal extended only 26 miles.
credit for the project belongs mainly to new yorks vigorous and farsighted governor de witt clinton.
he persuaded the new york state legislature to underwrite the project by issuing bonds and construction began in 1818.
chapter 9 nation building and nationalism in less than two years 75 miles were already finished and the first tolls were being collected.
in 1825 the entire canal was opened with great public acclaim and celebration.
at 364 miles long 40 feet wide and 4 feet deep and containing 84 locks the erie canal was the most spectacular engineering achievement of the young republic.
furthermore it was a great economic success.
it reduced the cost of moving goods from buffalo to albany to one twelfth the previous rate.
it not only lowered the cost of western products in the east but caused an even sharper decline in the price of goods imported from the east by westerners and helped to make new york city the commercial capital of the nation.
the great success of the erie canal inspired other states to extend public credit for canal building.
during the 1830s and 1840s pennsylvania ohio and illinois embarked on ambitious canal construction projects from philadelphia to pittsburgh from the ohio river to cleveland and from chicago to the illinois river and the mississippi.
the canal boom ended when it became apparent in the 1830s and 1840s that most of the waterways were unprofitable.
state credit had been overextended and the panic and depression of the late 1830s and early 1840s forced retrenchment.
while some canals continued to be important arteries up to the time of the civil war and well beyond railroads were already beginning to compete successfully for the same traffic and a new phase in the transportation revolution was beginning.
emergence of a market economy how did developments in transportation support the growth of agriculture banking and industry.
the desire to reduce the costs and increase the speed of shipping heavy freight over great distances laid the groundwork for a new economic system.
canals made it less expensive and more profitable for western farmers to ship wheat and flour to new york and philadelphia and also gave manufacturers in the east ready access to an interior market.
steamboats reduced shipping costs on the ohio and mississippi and put farmers in the enviable position of receiving more for their crops and paying less for the goods they needed to import.
hence improved transport increased farm income and stimulated commercial agriculture.
the beginning of commercial agriculture at the beginning of the nineteenth century the typical farming household consumed most of what it produced and sold only a small surplus in nearby markets.
most manufactured articles were produced at home.
easier and cheaper access to distant markets caused a decisive change in this pattern.
between 1800 and 1840 agricultural output increased at an annual rate of approximately 3 percent and a rapidly growing portion of this production consisted of commodities grown for sale rather than consumed at home.
the rise in productivity was partly due to technological advances.
iron or steel plows proved better than wooden ones the grain cradle displaced the scythe for harvesting and better varieties or strains of crops grasses and livestock were introduced.
but the availability of good land and the revolution in marketing were the most important spurs to profitable commercial farming.
the existence or extension of transportation facilities made distant markets available and plugged farmers into a commercial network that provided credit and relieved them of the need to do their own selling.
the emerging exchange network encouraged movement away from diversified farming and toward regional concentration on staple crops.
wheat was the main cash crop of the north and the center of its cultivation moved westward as soil depletion pests and plant diseases lowered yields in older regions.
in 1815 the heart of the wheat belt was new york and pennsylvania.
by 1839 ohio was the leading producer and indiana and illinois were beginning to come into their own.
on the rocky hillsides of new england sheep raising was displacing the mixed farming of an earlier era.
but the prime examples of successful staple production in this era were in the south.
tobacco continued to be a major cash crop of the upper south despite declining fertility and a shift to wheat in some areas rice was important in coastal south carolina and sugar was a staple of southern louisiana.
cotton however was the king crop in the lower south as a whole.
in the course of becoming the nations principal export commodity it brought wealth and prosperity to a belt of states running from south carolina to louisiana.
for more on the rise of king cotton see chapter 11 pp.
commerce and banking as regions specialized in growing commercial crops a new system of marketing emerged.
during the early stages in many areas farmers did their marketing personally even when it required long journeys overland or by flatboat.
with the growth of country towns local merchants took charge of the crops near their sources bartering clothing and other manufactured goods for produce.
these intermediaries shipped the farmers crops to larger local markets such as pittsburgh cincinnati and st louis.
from there the commodities could be sent on to philadelphia new york or new orleans.
cotton growers in the south were more likely to deal directly with factors or agents in the port cities from which their crop was exported.
but even in the south commission merchants in such inland towns as macon atlanta montgomery shreveport and nashville became increasingly important as intermediaries.
credit was a crucial element in the whole system.
farmers borrowed from local merchants who received an advance of their own when they consigned crops to a commission house or factor.
the commission agents relied on credit from merchants or manufacturers at the ultimate destination which might be liverpool or new york city.
the intermediaries all charged fees and interest but the net cost to the farmers was less than when they had handled their own marketing.
the need for credit encouraged the growth of money and banking.
before the revolutions in transportation and marketing small scale local economies could survive to a considerable extent on barter.
under the constitution the u s government is the only agency authorized to coin money and regulate its value.
but in emergence of a market economy listen to the audio file the erie canal illustration of a lock on the erie canal at lockport new york 1838.
the successful canal facilitated trade by linking the great lakes regions to the eastern seaports.
the early to mid nineteenth century the government printed no paper money and produced gold and silver coins in such small quantities that it utterly failed to meet the expanding economys need for a circulating currency.
private or state banking institutions filled the void by issuing banknotes promises to redeem their paper in specie gold or silver on the bearers demand.
after congress failed to recharter the bank of the united states in 1811 existing state chartered banks took up the slack.
many of them however lacked adequate reserves and were forced to suspend specie payments during the war of 1812.
the demand for money and credit during the immediate postwar boom led to a vast increase in the number of state banks from 88 to 208 within two years.
the resulting flood of state banknotes caused this form of currency to depreciate well below its face value and threatened a runaway inflation.
in an effort to stabilize the currency congress established a second bank of the united states in 1816.
the bank was expected to serve as a check on the state banks by forcing them to resume specie payments.
but it did not perform this task well in its early years.
in fact its own free lending policies contributed to the overextension of credit that led to financial panic and depression in 1819.
when the economy collapsed as it would do again in 1837 many americans questioned whether the new system of banking and credit was as desirable as it had seemed to be in times of prosperity.
as a result hostility to banks became a prominent feature of american politics.
early industrialism the growth of a market economy also created new opportunities for industrialists.
in 1815 most manufacturing in the united states was carried on in households in the workshops of skilled artisans or in small mills which used waterpower to turn wheat into flour or timber into boards.
the factory form of production in which supervised workers tended or operated machines under one roof was rare.
it was found mainly in southern new england where a number of small spinning mills relying heavily on the labor of women and children accomplished one step in the manufacture of cotton textiles.
but most spinning of thread as well as the weaving cutting and sewing of cloth was still done by women working at home.
chapter 9 nation building and nationalism as late as 1820 about two thirds of the clothing worn by americans was made entirely in households by female family members wives and daughters.
a growing proportion however was produced for market rather than direct home consumption.
under the putting out system of manufacturing merchant capitalists provided raw material to people in their own homes picked up finished or semifinished products paid the workers and took charge of distribution.
home manufacturing of this type was centered in the northeast and often involved farm families making profitable use of their slack seasons.
the making of articles that required greater skill such as high quality shoes and boots carriages or wagons mill wheels and barrels or kegs was mostly carried on by artisans working in small shops in towns.
but in the decades after 1815 shops expanded in size masters tended to become entrepreneurs rather than working artisans and journeymen often became wage earners rather than aspiring masters.
at the same time the growing market for low priced goods led to an emphasis on speed quantity and standardization in the methods of production.
a fully developed factory system emerged first in textile manufacturing.
the establishment of the first cotton mills utilizing the power loom as well as spinning machinery thus making it possible to turn fiber into cloth in a single factory resulted from the efforts of a trio of boston merchants francis cabot lowell nathan appleton and patrick tracy jackson.
on a visit to england in 1810 1811 lowell succeeded in memorizing the closely guarded industrial secret of how a power loom was constructed.
returning to boston he joined with appleton and jackson to acquire a water site at nearby waltham and to obtain a corporate charter for textile manufacturing on a new and expanded scale.
under the name of the boston manufacturing company the associates began their waltham operation in 1813.
its phenomenal success led to the erection of a larger and even more profitable mill at lowell massachusetts in 1822 and another at chicopee in 1823.
lowell became the great showplace for early american industrialization.
its large workforce of unmarried young women residing in supervised dormitories its unprecedented scale of operation its successful mechanization of almost every stage of the production process all captured the american middle class imagination in the 1820s and 1830s.
but in the late 1830s and 1840s conditions in the mills changed for the worse as the owners began to require more work for lower pay and some of the mill girls became militant labor activists.
one of these was sarah bagley who helped found the lowell female labor reform association in 1844.
she subsequently led a series of protests against long hours and changes in the work routine that required more work from each operative.
other mills using similar labor systems sprang up throughout new england and the region became the first important manufacturing area in the united states.
the shift in textile manufacture from domestic to factory production shifted the locus of womens economic activity.
as the new england textile industry grew the putting out system rapidly declined.
between 1824 and 1832 household production of textiles dropped from 90 to 50 percent in most parts of new england.
the shift to factory production changed the course of capitalist activity in the region.
before the 1820s new england merchants concentrated mainly on international trade and boston mercantile houses read the document the harbinger female workers at lowell 1836 read the document a week in the mill lowell offering vol.
v 1845 lowell massachusetts became americas model industrial town in the first half of the nineteenth century.
in this painting of the town in 1814 when it was still called east chelmsford a multistory brick mill is prominent on the river.
textile mills sprang up throughout lowell in the 1820s and 1830s employing thousands of workers mostly women.
the second photograph from c 1848 shows a lowell mill worker operating a loom.
the politics of nation building after the war of 1812 made great profits.
a major source of capital was the lucrative china trade carried on by fast well built new england vessels.
when the success of waltham and lowell became clear many merchants shifted their capital away from oceanic trade and into manufacturing.
this change had important political consequences as leading politicians such as daniel webster no longer advocated a low tariff that favored importers over exporters.
they now became leading proponents of a high duty designed to protect manufacturers from foreign competition.
although most manufacturing was centered in the northeast the west also experienced modest industrial progress.
increasing rapidly in number and size were facilities for processing farm products such as gristmills slaughterhouses and tanneries.
distilleries in kentucky and ohio began during the 1820s to produce vast quantities of corn whiskey for a seemingly insatiable public.
one should not assume however that america had already experienced an industrial revolution by 1840.
in that year 63 4 percent of the nations labor force was still employed in agriculture.
only 8 8 percent of workers were directly involved in factory production others were employed in trade transportation and the professions.
although this represented a significant shift since 1810 when the figures were 83 7 and 3 2 percent respectively the numbers would have to change a good deal more before it could be said that industrialization had really arrived.
the revolution that did occur during these years was essentially one of distribution rather than production.
the growth of a market economy of national scope still based mainly on agriculture but involving a rapid flow of capital commodities and services from region to region was the major economic development of this period.
and it was one that had vast repercussions for all aspects of american life.
for those who benefited from it most directly the market economy provided firm evidence of progress and improvement.
but many of those who suffered from its periodic panics and depressions regretted the loss of the individual independence and security that had existed in a localized economy of small producers.
these victims of boom and bust were receptive to politicians and reformers who attacked corporations and the money power the growth of cities in 1800 the united states was a rural nation.
only 6 percent of its five million people lived in towns of twenty five hundred or more and just two cities philadelphia and new york had populations above fifty thousand.
by 1850 one sixth of the twenty three million americans lived in towns of twenty five hundred or more.
this was hardly a complete urbanization of american life but it did reflect the rise of significant urban centers throughout the northeast and as far west as chicago and st louis as a result of the transportation revolution and the growing market economy.
the expansion of commerce banking and industry in the northeast drew people to towns like lowell massachusetts and albany new york which grew to more than twenty five thousand people and the growing web of canals and railroads made inland cities like cincinnati st louis and chicago viable and thriving.
new york city alone had grown to more than half a million people by 1850.
these young cities were magnets for new immigrants from europe.
canals and railroads also led to the growth of great cities on the western frontier.
from a small town in the 1830s chicago grew into the nations fourth largest city by 1860.
it was the hub of a thriving market economy funneling grain and other farm products from all over the northwest to cities and towns in the east.
the politics of nation building after the war of 1812 what decisions did the federal government face as the country expanded.
geographic expansion economic growth and the changes in american life that accompanied them were bound to generate political controversy.
farmers merchants manufacturers and laborers were affected by the changes in different ways.
so were northerners southerners and westerners.
federal and state policies that were meant to encourage or control growth and expansion did not benefit all these groups or sections equally and unavoidable conflicts of interest and ideology occurred.
but for a time these conflicts were not prominently reflected in the national political arena.
during the period following the war of 1812 a single party dominated politics.
without a party system in place politicians did not have to band together to offer the voters a choice of programs and ideologies.
a myth of national harmony prevailed culminating in the era of good feelings during james monroes two terms as president.
behind this facade individuals and groups fought for advantage as always but without the public accountability and need for broad popular approval that a party system would have required.
as a result popular interest in national politics fell.
the absence of party discipline and programs did not completely immobilize the federal government.
congress did manage to legislate on some matters of national concern.
although the president had little control over congressional action he could still take important initiatives in foreign policy.
the third branch of government the supreme court was in a position to make farreaching decisions affecting the relationship between the federal government and the states.
the common theme of the public policies that emerged between the war of 1812 and the age of andrew jackson which began in the late 1820s was an awakening nationalism a sense of american pride and purpose that reflected the expansionism and material progress of the period.
the republicans in power by the end of the war of 1812 the federalist party was no longer capable of winning a national election.
the party of jefferson now known simply as the republicans was so completely dominant that it no longer had to distinguish itself from its opponents.
retreating from their original philosophy of states rights and limited government party leaders now openly embraced some of the programs of their former federalist rivals policies that seemed dictated by postwar conditions.
in december 1815 president madison proposed to congress that it consider such measures as the chapter 9 nation building and nationalism read the document henry clay defense of the american system 1832 senator henry clay of kentucky was the leading proponent of the american system a series of proposals for the federal government to play a more active role in promoting economic development.
these proposals included a national bank federally financed internal improvements such as roads and canals and a tariff on imported goods to protect emerging u s industries.
reestablishment of a national bank a mildly protective tariff for industry and a program of federally financed internal improvements to bind more closely together the various parts of our extended confederacy thus did jeffersons successor endorse parts of a program enunciated by alexander hamilton.
in congress henry clay of kentucky took the lead in advocating that the government take action to promote economic development.
the keystone of what clay called the american system was a high protective tariff to stimulate industrial growth and provide a home market for the farmers of the west making the nation economically self sufficient and free from a dangerous dependence on europe.
in 1816 congress took the first step toward establishing a neo federalist american system.
it enacted a tariff raising import duties an average of 25 percent.
the legislation was deemed necessary because a flood of british manufactured goods was beginning to threaten the infant industries that had sprung up during the period when imports had been shut off by the embargo and the war.
the tariff had substantial support in all parts of the country both from a large majority of congressmen from new england and the middle atlantic states and from a respectable minority of the southern delegation.
in 1816 manufacturing was not so much a powerful interest as a patriotic concern.
many americans believed the preservation of political independence and victory in future wars required industrial independence for the nation.
furthermore important sectors of the agricultural economy also felt the need of protection especially hemp growers of kentucky sugar planters of louisiana and wool producers of new england.
later the same year congress voted to establish the second bank of the united states.
the new national bank had a twenty year charter an authorized capital of 35 million and the right to establish branches throughout the country as needed.
organized much like the first bank it was a mixed public private institution with the federal government owning one fifth of its stock and appointing five of its twenty five directors.
the bank served the government by providing a depository for its funds an outlet for marketing its securities and a source of redeemable banknotes that could be used to pay taxes or purchase public lands.
legislation dealing with internal improvements made less headway in congress because it aroused stronger constitutional objections and invited disagreements among sectional groups over who would benefit from specific projects.
except for the national road the federal government undertook no major transportation projects during the madison and monroe administrations.
both presidents believed that internal improvements were desirable but that a constitutional amendment was required before federal monies could legally be used for the building of roads and canals within individual states.
consequently public aid for the building of roads and canals continued to come mainly from state and local governments.
monroe as president as did jefferson before him president madison chose his own successor in 1816.
james monroe thus became the third successive virginian to occupy the white house.
he served two full terms and was virtually uncontested in his election to each.
monroe was well qualified in terms of experience having been an officer in the revolution governor of virginia a special emissary to france and secretary of state.
he was reliable dignified and high principled as well as stolid and unimaginative lacking the intellectual depth and agility of his predecessors.
nominated as was the custom of the time by a caucus of republicans in the house of representatives monroe faced only nominal federalist opposition in the general election.
monroe avoided controversy in his effort to maintain the national harmony that was the keynote of his presidency.
his first inaugural address expressed the complacency and optimism of the time and he followed it up with a goodwill tour of the country the first made by a president since washington.
a principal aim of monroes administrations was to encourage good feelings.
he hoped to accommodate or conciliate all the sectional or economic interests of the country and devote his main attention the politics of nation building after the war of 1812 to the task of asserting american power and influence on the world stage.
for example during the panic of 1819 an economic depression that followed the postwar boom congress acted by passing debt relief legislation but monroe himself had no program to relieve the economic crisis.
he did not feel called on to exert that kind of leadership and the voters did not seem to have expected it of him.
monroe prized national harmony even more than economic prosperity.
but during his first administration a bitter controversy developed between the north and the south over the admission of missouri to the union.
once again monroe remained above the battle and suffered little damage to his own prestige.
it was left entirely to the legislative branch of the government to deal with the nations most serious domestic political crisis between the war of 1812 and the late 1840s.
the missouri compromise in 1817 the missouri territorial assembly applied for statehood.
since there were two to three thousand slaves already in the territory and the petition made no provision for their emancipation or for curbing further introduction of slaves it was clear that missouri would enter the union as a slave state unless congress took special action.
missouri was slated to be the first state other than louisiana to be carved out of the louisiana purchase and resolution of the status of slavery there would have implications for the rest of the trans mississippi west.
the election of 1816 candidate monroe king party republican federalist electoral vote when the question came before congress in early 1819 sectional fears and anxieties bubbled to the surface.
many northerners resented southern control of the presidency and the fact that the three fifths clause of the constitution by which every five slaves were counted as three persons in figuring the states population gave the souths free population added weight in the house of representatives and the electoral college.
the south on the other hand feared for the future of what it regarded as a necessary balance of power between the sections.
up until 1819 a strict equality had been maintained by alternately admitting slave and free states in that year there were eleven of each.
but northern population was growing more rapidly than southern and the north had built up a decisive majority in the house of representatives.
hence the south saw its equal vote in the senate as essential for preservation of the balance.
in february 1819 congressman james tallmadge of new york introduced an amendment to the statehood bill banning further introduction of slaves into missouri and requiring steps toward the gradual elimination of slavery within the state.
after a heated debate the house approved the tallmadge amendment by a narrow margin.
the senate however voted it down.
the issue remained unresolved until a new congress convened in december 1819.
in the great debate that ensued in the senate federalist leader rufus king of new york argued that congress was within its rights to require restriction of slavery before missouri could become a state.
southern senators protested that denying missouris freedom in this matter was an attack on the principle of equality among the states and showed that northerners were conspiring to upset the balance of power between the sections.
they were also concerned about the future of african american slavery and the white racial privilege that went with it.
a statehood petition from the people of maine who were seeking to be separated from massachusetts suggested a way out of the impasse.
in february 1820 the senate passed the missouri compromise voting to couple the admission of missouri as a slave state with the admission of maine as a free state.
a further amendment was also passed prohibiting slavery in the rest of the louisiana purchase north of the southern border of missouri or above the latitude of 3630 and allowing it below that line.
the senates compromise then went to the house where it was initially rejected.
through the adroit maneuvering of henry clay who broke the proposal into three separate bills it eventually won house approval.
the measure authorizing missouri to frame a constitution and apply for admission as a slave state passed by a razor thin margin of 90 to 87 with most northern representatives remaining opposed.
the election of 1820 candidate monroe j q adams party electoral vote republican no party designation a major sectional crisis had been resolved.
but the missouri affair had ominous overtones for the future of north south relations.
thomas jefferson described the controversy as a fire bell in the night threatening the peace of the union.
in 1821 he wrote prophetically of future dangers all i fear do not see the speck on our horizon which is to burst on us as a tornado sooner or later.
the line of division lately marked out between the different portions of our confederacy is such as will never i fear be obliterated the congressional furor had shown that when the issue of slavery or its extension came directly before the peoples representatives regional loyalties took precedence over party or other considerations.
an emotional rhetoric of morality and fundamental rights issued from both sides and votes followed sectional lines much more closely than on any other issue.
if the united states were to acquire any new territories in which the status of slavery had to be determined by congress renewed sectional strife would be unavoidable.
postwar nationalism and the supreme court while the monroe administration was proclaiming national harmony and congressional leaders were struggling to reconcile sectional differences the third branch of government the supreme court was making a more substantial and enduring chapter 9 nation building and nationalism view the map the missouri compromise maine admitted as free state british north america canada gre at oregon country joint u s british occupation of disputed territory la ke s vt n h mass.
n y michigan territory r i unorganized territory conn pa n j ohio ind.
ill pa c i f i c ocean new spain independent mexico 1821 del.
d c va missouri admitted as slave state 3630 missouri compromise line md.
ky n c tenn arkansas territory s c miss.
at l a n t i c ocean ga ala la.
florida terr.
closed to slavery by missouri compromise free states and territories open to slavery by missouri compromise slave states 500 miles 500 kilometers the missouri compromise 1820 1821 the missouri compromise kept the balance of power in the senate by admitting missouri as a slave state and maine as a free state.
the agreement temporarily settled the argument over slavery in the territories.
contribution to the growth of nationalism and a strong federal government.
much of this achievement was due to the firm leadership and fine legal mind of the chief justice of the united states john marshall.
a virginian a federalist and the devoted disciple and biographer of george washington marshall served as chief justice from 1801 to 1835 and during that entire period he dominated the court as no other chief justice has ever done.
he discouraged dissent and sought to hammer out a single opinion on almost every case that came before the court.
as the author of most of the major opinions issued by the supreme court during its formative period marshall gave shape to the constitution and clarified the crucial role of the court in the american system of government.
he placed the protection of individual liberty especially the right to acquire property above the attainment of political social or economic equality.
ultimately he was a nationalist believing that the strength security and happiness of the american people depended mainly on economic growth and the creation of new wealth.
the role of the supreme court in marshalls view was to interpret and enforce the constitution in a way that encouraged economic development especially against efforts of state legislatures to interfere with the constitutionally protected rights of individuals or combinations of individuals to acquire property through productive activity.
to limit state action he cited the contract clause of the constitution that prohibited a state from passing a law impairing the obligation of contracts as the legal watchdog of an enterprising capitalist society the court could also approve a liberal grant of power for the federal government so that the latter could fulfill its constitutional responsibility to promote the general welfare by encouraging economic growth and prosperity.
in a series of major decisions between 1819 and 1824 the marshall court enhanced judicial power and used the contract clause of the constitution to limit the power of state legislatures.
it also strengthened the federal government by sanctioning a broad or loose construction of its constitutional powers and by clearly affirming its supremacy over the states.
in dartmouth college v woodward 1819 the court was asked to rule whether the legislature of new hampshire had the right to convert dartmouth from a private college into a state university.
daniel webster arguing for the college and against the the politics of nation building after the war of 1812 state contended that dartmouths original charter of 1769 was a valid and irrevocable contract.
the court accepted his argument.
speaking for all the justices marshall made the far reaching determination that any charter granted by a state to a private corporation was fully protected by the contract clause.
in practical terms the courts ruling in the dartmouth case meant that the kinds of business enterprises then being incorporated by state governments such as turnpike or canal companies and textile manufacturing firms could hold on indefinitely to any privileges or favors that had been granted in their original charters.
the decision therefore increased the power and independence of business corporations by weakening the ability of the states to regulate them or withdraw their privileges.
the ruling helped foster the growth of the modern corporation as a profit making enterprise with only limited public responsibilities.
about a month after the dartmouth ruling in march 1819 the marshall court handed down its most important decision.
the case of mcculloch v maryland arose because the state of maryland had levied a tax on the baltimore branch of the bank of the united states.
the unanimous opinion of the court delivered by marshall was that the maryland tax was unconstitutional.
the two main issues were whether congress had the right to establish a national bank and whether a state had the power to tax or regulate an agency or institution created by congress.
in response to the first question marshall set forth his doctrine of implied powers conceding that no specific authorization to charter a bank could be found in the constitution the chief justice argued that such a right could be deduced from more general powers and from an understanding of the great objects for which the federal government had been founded.
marshall thus struck a blow for loose construction of the constitution and a broad grant of power to the federal government to encourage economic growth and stability.
in answer to the second question the right of a state to tax or regulate a federal agency marshall held that the bank was indeed such an agency and that giving a state the power to tax it would also give the state the power to destroy it.
in an important assertion of the supremacy of the national government marshall argued that the american people did not design to make their government dependent on the states this opinion ran counter to the view of many americans particularly in the south that the constitution did not take away sovereignty from the states.
the debate over federal state relations was not resolved until the northern victory in the civil war decisively affirmed the dominance of federal authority.
but marshalls decision gave great new weight to a nationalist constitutional philosophy.
the gibbons v ogden decision of 1824 bolstered the power of congress to regulate interstate commerce.
a steamboat monopoly granted by the state of new york was challenged by a competing ferry service operating between new york and new jersey.
the court declared the new york grant unconstitutional because it amounted to state interference with congresss exclusive right to regulate interstate commerce.
the courts ruling went a long way toward freeing private interests engaged in furthering the transportation revolution from state interference.
read the document the opinion of the supreme court for mcculloch v maryland 1819 chief justice john marshall affirmed the supreme courts authority to overrule state laws and overrule congressional legislation that it held to be in conflict with the constitution.
the portrait is by chester harding ca.
this case clearly showed the dual effect of marshalls decision making.
it broadened the power of the federal government at the expense of the states while at the same time encouraging the growth of a national market economy.
the actions of the supreme court provide the clearest and most consistent example of the main nationalistic trends of the postwar period the acknowledgment of the federal governments major role in promoting the growth of a powerful and prosperous america and the rise of a nationwide capitalist economy.
nationalism in foreign policy the monroe doctrine the new spirit of nationalism was also reflected in foreign affairs.
the main diplomatic challenge facing monroe after his reelection in 1820 was how to respond to the successful revolt of most of spains latin american colonies after the napoleonic wars.
in congress henry clay called for immediate recognition of the new republics.
in doing so he expressed the belief of many americans that their neighbors to the south were simply following the example of the united states in its own struggle for independence.
before 1822 the administration stuck to a policy of neutrality.
monroe and secretary of state adams feared that recognizing the revolutionary governments would antagonize spain and impede negotiations to acquire florida.
but pressure for recognition grew in congress and in 1821 monroe agreed chapter 9 nation building and nationalism read the document the monroe doctrine 1823 president james monroe presented this doctrine as part of his annual message to congress in december 1823.
he proposed it at a time when the old world powers were losing their colonial interests in the new world.
the united states had recognized the former colonies of argentina chile peru mexico and colombia as independent nations in 1822.
monroe was in the unenviable position of trying to maintain a strong stance with the european powers who were struggling over a balance of world power.
to recognize and establish diplomatic ties with the latin american republics.
this action put the united states on a possible collision course with the major european powers.
austria russia and prussia were committed to rolling back the tides of liberalism self government and national selfdetermination that had arisen during the french revolution and its napoleonic aftermath.
after napoleons first defeat in 1814 the monarchs of europe had joined in a grand alliance to protect legitimate authoritarian governments from democratic challenges.
great britain was originally a member of this concert of nations but withdrew when it found that its own interests conflicted with those of the other members.
in 1822 the remaining alliance members joined now by the restored french monarchy gave france the green light to invade spain and restore a bourbon regime that might be disposed to reconquer the empire.
both great britain and the united states were alarmed by this prospect.
the threat from the grand alliance pointed to a need for american cooperation with great britain which had its own reasons for wanting to prevent a restoration of spanish or french power in the new world.
independent nations offered better and more open markets for british manufactured goods than the colonies of other nations and the spokesmen for burgeoning british industrial capitalism anticipated a profitable economic dominance over latin america.
monroe welcomed british overtures for cooperation against the grand alliance because he believed the united states should take an active role in transatlantic affairs by playing one european power against another.
when monroe presented the question to his cabinet however he encountered the opposition of secretary of state adams who distrusted the british and favored a more isolationist policy.
political ambition also predisposed adams against joint action with great britain he hoped to be the next president and did not want to give his rivals the chance to label him as pro british.
he therefore advocated unilateral action by the united states.
in the end adams managed to swing monroe and the cabinet around to his viewpoint.
in his annual message to congress on december 2 1823 monroe included a far reaching statement on foreign policy that conclusion the end of the era of good feelings was actually written mainly by adams who did become president in 1824.
what came to be known as the monroe doctrine solemnly declared that the united states opposed any further colonization in the americas or any effort by european nations to extend their political systems outside their own hemisphere.
in return the united states pledged not to involve itself in the internal affairs of europe or to take part in european wars.
the statement envisioned a north and south america composed entirely of independent republics with the united states preeminent among them.
although the monroe doctrine made little impression on the great powers of europe at the time it was proclaimed it signified the rise of a new sense of independence and self confidence in american attitudes toward the old world.
the united states would now go its own way free of involvement in european conflicts and would energetically protect its own sphere of influence from european interference.
conclusion the end of the era of good feelings the consensus on national goals and leadership that monroe had represented could not sustain itself.
the era of good feelings turned out to be a passing phase and something of an illusion.
although the pursuit of national greatness would continue there would be sharp divisions over how it should be achieved.
a general commitment to settlement of the west and the development of agriculture commerce and industry would endure despite serious differences over what role government should play in the process but the idea that the elite nonpartisan statesmen could define common purposes and harmonize competing elements the concept of leadership that monroe and adams had advanced would no longer be viable in the more contentious and democratic america of the jacksonian era.
chapter 9 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 9 nation building and nationalism on myhistorylab time line 1813 boston manufacturing company founds cotton mill at waltham massachusetts war of 1812 ends james monroe elected president andrew jackson invades florida supreme court hands down far reaching decision in dartmouth college case and in mcculloch v maryland adams ons treaty cedes spanish territory to the united states financial panic is followed by a depression lasting until 1823 1820 missouri compromise resolves nations first sectional crisis monroe reelected president almost unanimously monroe doctrine proclaimed lafayette revisits the united states supreme court decides gibbons v ogden john quincy adams elected president erie canal completed canal era begins chapter review expansion and migration emergence of a market economy what key forces drove american expansion westward during this period.
how did developments in transportation support the growth of agriculture banking and industry.
westward expansion was fueled by the ambition to expand american territory and to economically exploit and develop the far west.
the first seminole war gave monroe and adams a chance to push spain from the southeast under the adams ons treaty while entrepreneurs established a fur trade in the north and an aggressive removal policy forced indian tribes from the south.
p 203 transportation improvements expanded access of producers to regional and even national markets.
farmers began to produce staple crops to sell rather than subsistence crops for their own families.
merchants and banks emerged to connect farm output to distant markets.
textile factories developed to turn southern cotton into clothing.
in the north industrialization increased efficiency but required workers to crowd into factories for long hours.
p 212 a revolution in transportation how did transportation networks change and improve after the war of 1812.
new and improved roads were developed such as the national road between cumberland maryland and wheeling virginia.
steam power transformed travel along natural rivers with the advent of the steamboat lowering costs and decreasing transport times.
man made canals such as the erie canal linked seaboard cities directly with the great lakes.
p 210 the politics of nation building after the war of 1812 what decisions did the federal government face as the country expanded.
the government decided whether new states would allow slavery how the supreme court would function and how the united states would deal with the european powers.
the missouri compromise established the 3630 line dividing slave from free states while the court became the supreme constitutional interpreter.
the monroe doctrine held that the united states and european powers should each control their respective hemispheres.
p 215 key terms and definitions adams ons treaty signed by secretary of state john quincy adams and spanish minister luis de ons in 1819 this treaty allowed for u s annexation of florida.
p 204 era of good feelings a description of the two terms of president james monroe 1817 1823 during which partisan conflict abated and federal initiatives suggested increased nationalism.
p 221 preemption the right of first purchase of public land.
settlers enjoyed this right even if they squatted on the land in advance of government surveyors.
p 207 missouri compromise a sectional compromise in 1820 that admitted missouri to the union as a slave state and maine as a free state.
it also banned slavery in the remainder of the louisiana purchase territory above the latitude of 3630.
p 217 study resources dartmouth college v woodward in this 1819 case the supreme court ruled that the constitution protected charters given to corporations by states.
p 218 mcculloch v maryland this 1819 ruling asserted the supremacy of federal power over state power and the legal doctrine that the constitution could be broadly interpreted.
p 219 gibbons v ogden in this 1824 case the supreme court expanded the power of the federal government to regulate interstate commerce.
p 219 monroe doctrine a key foreign policy declaration made by president james monroe in 1823 it declared the western hemisphere off limits to new european colonization in return the united states promised not to meddle in european affairs.
p 221 critical thinking questions 1.
how did new developments in transportation influence westward expansion.
why do you think some political leaders saw a connection between a growing market economy and a strong national government.
what was the relationship between westward expansion and the institution of slavery.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 9 on myhistorylab the politics of nation building after the war of 1812 expansion and migration read the document the cherokee treaty of 1817 p 206 read the document complete the assignment henry clay defense of the american system 1832 p 216 confronting a new environment p 208 view the map the missouri compromise p 218 a revolution in transportation the opinion of the supreme court for mcculloch v maryland 1819 p 219 expanding america and internal improvements p 211 emergence of a market economy listen to the audio file read the document view the map the erie canal p 213 read the document the harbinger female workers at lowell 1836 p 214 read the document vol.
v 1845 p 214 a week in the mill lowell offering read the document the monroe doctrine 1823 p 220 indicates study plan media assignment the triumph of white mens democracy contents and learning objectives democracy in theory and practice pg.
226 heyday of the second party system pg.
242 how did the relationship between the government and the people change during this time.
what was the two party system and how were the parties different.
jackson and the politics of democracy pg.
229 feature essay racial identity in a white mans democracy what political conflicts did president andrew jackson face and how did he resolve them.
the bank war and the second party system pg.
237 what were the arguments for and against the bank of the united states.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab chapter 10 the triumph of white mens democracy democratic space the new hotels during the 1820s and 1830s the united states became a more democratic country for at least some of its population.
the emerging spirit of popular democracy found expression in a new institution the large hotel with several stories and hundreds of rooms.
presidentelect andrew jackson the political figure who embodied the spirit of the age stayed in the recently opened national hotel when he arrived in washington in 1829 to prepare for his administration.
after a horde of well wishers made a shambles of the white house during his inaugural reception jackson retreated to the hotel for a little peace and a chance to consult with his advisers.
the national was only one of several large first class hotels that opened immediately before or during jacksons presidency.
among the others were the tremont house in boston the baltimore city hotel and new yorks astor house.
the hotel boom responded to the increasing tendency of americans in the 1820s and 1830s to move about the country.
it was to service the rising tides of travelers transients and new arrivals that entrepreneurs erected these large places of accommodation.
there they provided lodging food and drink on an unprecedented scale.
these establishments were as different from the inns of the eighteenth century as the steamboat was from the flatboat.
according to historian doris elizabeth king the new hotels were so obviously public and democratic in their character that foreigners were often to describe them as a true reflection of american society their very existence showed that many people white males in particular were on the move geographically and socially.
among the hotels patrons were traveling salesmen ambitious young men seeking to establish themselves in a new city and restless pursuers of the main chance unexpected economic opportunities who were not yet ready to put down roots.
hotel managers shocked european visitors by failing to enforce traditional social distinctions among their clientele.
under the american plan guests were required to pay for their meals and to eat at a common table dhte with anyone who happened to be there including servants traveling with their employers.
ability to pay was the only requirement for admission unless one happened to be an unes corted woman or dark skinned and every white male patron regardless new yorks astor house completed in 1836 was one of the grandest of the new american hotels offering fine accommodations to travelers who could afford to pay for them.
of social background and occupation enjoyed the kind of personal service previously available only to a privileged class.
many patrons experienced such amenities as gaslight indoor plumbing and steam heat for the first time in their lives.
because a large proportion of the american population stayed in hotels at one time or another a privilege that was in europe reserved for the elite foreigners inferred that there was widespread prosperity and a much greater equality of condition than existed in europe.
he hotel culture revealed some of the limitations of the new era of democratic ideals and aspirations.
african americans native americans and women were excluded or discriminated against just as they were denied suffrage at a time when it was being extended to all white males.
the genuinely poor simply could not afford to patronize the hotels and were consigned to squalid rooming houses.
if the social equality within the hotel reflected a decline in traditional status distinctions the broad gulf between t potential patrons and those who could not pay the rates signaled the growth of inequality based on wealth.
hotel life also reflected the emergence of democratic politics.
professional politicians of a new breed pursuing the votes of a mass electorate spent much of their time in hotels as they traveled about.
those elected to congress or a state legislature often stayed in hotels during the session and the political deals and bargains required for effective party organization or legislative success were sometimes concluded in these establishments.
the hotel can thus be seen as a fitting symbol for the democratic spirit of the age one that shows its shortcomings as well as its strengths.
the new democracy was first of all political involving the extension of suffrage to virtually all white males and the rise of modern political parties appealing to a mass electorate.
it was also social in that it undermined the habit of deferring to people because of their birth or ancestry and offered a greater expectation that individuals born in relatively humble circumstances could climb the ladder of success.
but the ideals of equal citizenship and opportunity did not extend across the lines of race and gender which actually hardened to some degree during this period.
chapter 10 the triumph of white mens democracy democracy in theory and practice how did the relationship between the government and the people change during this time.
during the 1820s and 1830s the term democracy first became a generally accepted term to describe how american institutions were supposed to work.
the founders had defined democracy as direct rule by the people most of them rejected this concept of a democratic approach to government because it was at odds with their conception of a well balanced republic led by a natural aristocracy for champions of popular government in the jacksonian period however the people were truly sovereign and could do no wrong.
the voice of the people is the voice of god was their clearest expression of this principle.
conservatives were less certain of the wisdom of the common folk.
but even they were coming to recognize that public opinion had to be won over before major policy decisions could be made.
besides evoking a heightened sense of popular sovereignty the democratic impulse seemed to stimulate a process of social leveling.
earlier americans had usually assumed that the rich and wellborn should be treated with special respect and recognized as natural leaders of the community and guardians of its culture and values.
by the 1830s as the hotel culture revealed such habits of deference were in decline.
the decline of deference meant that self made men of lowly origins could now rise more readily to positions of power and influence.
but economic equality the equitable sharing of wealth was not part of the mainstream agenda.
this was after all a competitive capitalist society.
the watchword was equality of opportunity not equality of reward.
life was a race and so long as white males appeared to have an equal start there could be no reason for complaint if some were winners and some were losers.
historians now generally agree that economic inequality the gap between rich and poor americans was actually increasing during this period of political and social democratization.
democracy and society although some types of inequality persisted or even grew during the age of democracy they did so in the face of a growing belief that equality was the governing principle of american society.
the plain folk were now likely to greet claims for special treatment with indifference or scorn and to demand equal treatment whatever their place in society.
white domestic workers refused to be called servants and instead called themselves hired help household workers often refused to wear livery agreed to work for only short periods of time and sometimes insisted on eating at the same table as their employers.
as noted in the maids comments quoted at the beginning of chapter 8 no true american was willing to be considered a member of a servant class and those who engaged in domestic work regarded it as a temporary stopgap.
except as a euphemistic substitute for the word slave the term servant virtually disappeared from the american vocabulary.
the decline of distinctive modes of dress for upper and lower classes conveyed the principle of equality in yet another way.
the elaborate periwigs and knee breeches worn by eighteenth century gentlemen gave way to short hair and pantaloons a style that was adopted by men of all social classes.
fashionable dress among women also ceased to be a sure index of gentility serving girls on their day off wore the same kind of finery as the wives and daughters of the wealthy.
those with a good eye for detail might detect subtle differences but the casual observer of crowds in a large city could easily conclude that all americans belonged to a single social class.
in reality though inequality based on control of productive resources was increasing during the jacksonian period.
a growing percentage of the population especially in urban areas possessed no real estate and little other property.
the rise of industrialization was creating a permanent class of low paid unorganized wage earners.
in rural areas there was a significant division between successful commercial farmers and small holders or tenants who subsisted on marginal land as well as enormous inequality of status between southern planters and their black slaves.
but most foreign observers overlooked the widening gap between the propertied middle class and the laboring population their attention was riveted on the fact that all white males were equal before the law and at the polls a situation that was genuinely radical by european standards.
traditional forms of privilege and elitism were also under strong attack as evidenced by changes in the organization and status of the learned professions.
under jacksonian pressure state legislatures abolished the licensing requirements for physicians previously administered by local medical societies.
as a result practitioners of unorthodox modes of healing were permitted to compete freely with established medical doctors.
one popular therapy was thomsonianism a form of treatment based entirely on the use of common herbs and roots.
thomsonians argued that their own form of medicine would make every man his own physician the democratic tide also struck the legal profession.
local bar associations continued to set the qualifications for practicing attorneys but in many places they lowered standards and admitted persons with little or no formal training and only the most rudimentary knowledge of the law.
for the clergy popular sovereignty meant being increasingly under the thumb of the laity.
the growing dependence of ministers on their congregations forced them to develop a more popular and emotional style of preaching.
ministers had ceased to command respect merely because of their office.
they had to please their public in much the same way as a politician had to satisfy the electorate.
in this atmosphere of democratic leveling the popular press came to play an increasingly important role as a source of information and opinion.
written and read by common folk hundreds of newspapers and magazines ushered the mass of white americans into the political arena.
new political views which in a previous generation might have been silenced by those in power could now find an audience.
reformers of all kinds could easily publicize their causes and the press became the venue for the great national debates on issues such as the governments role in banking and the status of slavery in new states and territories.
as a profession journalism was open to those who were literate and thought they had something to say.
the editors of newspapers with a large circulation were the most influential opinion makers of the age.
democracy in theory and practice democratic culture the democratic spirit also found expression in the rise of new forms of literature and art directed at a mass audience.
the intentions of individual artists and writers varied considerably.
some sought success by pandering to popular taste in defiance of traditional standards of high culture.
others tried to capture the spirit of the age by portraying the everyday life of ordinary americans rather than the traditional subjects of aristocratic art.
a notable few hoped to use literature and art as a way of improving popular taste and instilling deeper moral and spiritual values.
but all of them were aware that their audience was the broad citizenry of a democratic nation rather than a refined elite.
the romantic movement in literature which came to the fore in the early nineteenth century in both europe and america valued strong feeling and mystical intuition over the calm rationality and appeal to common experience that had prevailed in the writing of the eighteenth century.
romanticism was not necessarily connected with democracy in europe it sometimes went along with a reaffirmation of feudalism and the right of a superior few to rule over the masses.
in the american setting however romanticism often appealed to the feelings and intuitions of ordinary people the innate love of goodness truth and beauty that all people were thought to possess.
writers in search of popularity and economic success however often deserted the high plane of romantic art for crass sentimentalism a willingness to pull out all emotional stops to thrill readers or bring tears to their eyes.
literacy and a revolution in the technology of printing enabled a mass market for popular literature.
an increase in the number of potential readers and a decrease in publishing costs led to a flood of lurid and sentimental novels some of which became the first american best sellers.
gothic horror and the perils of virtuous heroines threatened by dastardly villains were among the ingredients that readers came to expect from popular fiction.
many of the new sentimental novels were written by and for women.
some women writers implicitly protested against their situation by portraying men in general as tyrannical unreliable or vicious and the women they abandoned or failed to support as resourceful individualists capable of making their own way in a mans world.
but the standard happy endings sustained the convention that a womans place was in the home for a virtuous and protective man usually turned up and saved the heroine from independence.
in the theater melodrama became the dominant genre.
despite religious objections theater going was a popular recreation in the cities during the jacksonian era.
the standard fare involved the inevitable trio of beleaguered heroine mustachioed villain and a hero who asserted himself in the nick of time.
patriotic comedies extolling the common sense of the rustic yankee who foiled the foppish european aristocrat were also popular and aroused the democratic sympathies of the audience.
men and women of all classes went to the theater and those in the cheap seats often behaved raucously and even violently when they did not like what they saw.
unpopular actors or plays could even provoke serious riots.
in an 1849 incident in new york twenty three people were killed in disorders stemming from hostility toward an english actor who was the rival of edwin forrest the most popular american thespian of the time.
read the document herman melville excerpt from moby dick in moby dick herman melville produced a novel sufficiently original in form and conception to more than fulfill the demand of young americans for a new literature to fit the new man in the new age but melville was too deep a thinker not to see the perils that underlay the soaring ambition and aggressiveness of the new age.
the spirit of popular sovereignty expressed itself less dramatically in the visual arts but its influence was still felt.
beginning in the 1830s painters turned from portraying great events and famous people to depicting everyday life.
william sidney mount who painted lively rural scenes expressed the credo of the democratic artist paint pictures that will take with the public never paint for the few but the many architecture and sculpture reflected the democratic spirit in a different way they were viewed as civic art forms meant to glorify the achievements of the republic.
in the 1820s and 1830s the greek style with its columned facades not only predominated in the architecture of public buildings but was also favored for banks hotels and private dwellings.
besides symbolizing an identification of the united states with the democracy of ancient greece it achieved monumental impressiveness at a fairly low cost.
even in newly settled frontier communities it was relatively easy and inexpensive to chapter 10 the triumph of white mens democracy put up a functional square building and then add a classical facade.
not everyone could live in structures that looked like greek temples but almost everyone could admire them from the outside or conduct business within their walls.
serious exponents of a higher culture and a more refined sensibility sought to reach the new public in the hope of enlightening or uplifting it.
the brahmin poets of new england henry wadsworth longfellow james russell lowell and oliver wendell holmes offered lofty sentiments and moral messages to a receptive middle class ralph waldo emerson carried his philosophy of spiritual self reliance to lyceums and lecture halls across the country and great novelists such as nathaniel hawthorne and herman melville experimented with the popular romantic genres.
but hawthorne and melville failed to gain a large readership.
the ironic and pessimistic view of life that pervaded their work clashed with the optimism of the age.
for later generations of american critics however the works of melville and hawthorne became centerpieces of the american literary renaissance of the mid nineteenth century.
hawthornes the scarlet letter 1850 and melvilles mobydick 1851 are now regarded as masterworks of american fiction.
the modern ideal of art for arts sake was alien to the instructional spirit of mid nineteenth century american culture.
the responsibility of the artist in a democratic society it was assumed was to contribute to the general welfare by encouraging virtue and proper sentiments.
only edgar allan poe seemed to fit the european image of romantic genius rebelling against middle class pieties.
but in his own way poe exploited the popular fascination with death in his verse and used the conventions of gothic horror in his tales.
the most original of the antebellum poets walt whitman sought to articulate the rising democratic spirit but his abandonment of traditional verse forms and his freedom in dealing with the sexual side of human nature left him relatively isolated and unappreciated during his most creative years.
democratic political institutions the supremacy of democracy was most obvious in the new politics of universal white manhood suffrage and mass political parties.
by the 1820s most states had removed the last remaining barriers to voting participation by all white males.
this change was not as radical or controversial as it would be later in nineteenth century europe ownership of land was so common in the united states that a general suff rage did not mean men without property became a voting majority.
accompanying this broadening of the electorate was a rise in the proportion of public officials who were elected rather than appointed.
increasingly the people chose judges as well as legislative and executive office holders.
a new style of politicking developed.
politicians had to campaign demonstrating in their speeches on the stump that they could mirror voters fears and concerns.
electoral politics became more festive and dramatic.
skillful and farsighted politicians such as martin van buren in new york began in the 1820s to build stable statewide political organizations out of what had been loosely organized factions.
before the rise of effective national parties politicians created true party organizations on the state level by dispensing government jobs to friends and supporters and by attacking rivals as enemies of popular aspirations.
earlier politicians had regarded parties as a threat to republican virtue and had embraced them only as a temporary expedient but van buren regarded a permanent two party system as essential to democratic government.
in his opinion parties were an effective check on the temptation to abuse power.
the major breakthrough in american political thought during the 1820s and 1830s was the idea of a loyal opposition ready to capitalize politically on the mistakes or excesses of the ins without denying the right of the ins to act the same way when they became the outs changes in the method of nominating and electing a president fostered the growth of a two party system on the national level.
by 1828 presidential electors were chosen by popular vote rather than by state legislatures in all but two of the twenty four states.
the new need to mobilize grassroots voters behind particular candidates required national organization.
coalitions of state parties that could agree on a single standard bearer gradually evolved into the great national parties of the jacksonian era the democrats and the whigs.
when national nominating conventions made their appearance in 1831 candidate selection became a matter to be taken up by representative party assemblies not congressional caucuses or ad hoc political alliances.
new political institutions and practices encouraged a great upsurge of popular interest and participation.
in the presidential election of 1824 the proportion of adult white males voting was less than 27 percent.
in 1828 it rose sharply to 55 percent it held at that level for the elections of 1832 and 1836 and then shot up to 78 percent in 1840 the first election in which two fully organized national parties each nominated a single candidate and campaigned for their choices in every state in the union.
economic issues economic questions dominated the political controversies of the 1820s and 1830s.
the panic of 1819 and the subsequent depression heightened popular interest in government economic policy first on the state and then on the national level.
no one really knew how to solve the problems of a market economy that went through cycles of boom and bust but many people thought they had the answer.
some especially small farmers favored a return to a simpler and more honest economy without banks paper money and the easy credit that encouraged speculation.
others particularly emerging entrepreneurs saw salvation in government aid and protection for venture capital.
entrepreneurs appealed to state governments for charters that granted special privileges to banks transportation enterprises and manufacturing corporations.
politicians attempted to respond to the conflicting views about the best way to restore and maintain prosperity.
out of the economic distress of the early 1820s came a rapid growth of state level political activity and organization that foreshadowed the rise of national parties organized around economic programs.
the party disputes that arose over corporations tariffs banks and internal improvements involved more than the direct economic concerns of particular interest groups.
the republican ideology of the revolutionary period survived through widespread fears of conspiracy against american liberty and equality.
whenever any group appeared to be exerting decisive influence over public policy people who did not identify with that groups aspirations were quick to charge its members with corruption and the unscrupulous pursuit of power.
jackson and the politics of democracy the notion that the american experiment was a fragile one constantly threatened by power hungry conspirators eventually took two principal forms.
jacksonians believed that the money power endangered the survival of republicanism their opponents feared that populist politicians like jackson himself alleged rabble rousers would gull the electorate into ratifying high handed and tyrannical actions contrary to the true interests of the nation.
an object of increasing concern for both sides was the role of the federal government.
should it take positive steps to foster economic growth as the national republicans and later the whigs contended or should it simply attempt to destroy what jacksonians decried as special privilege or corporate monopoly.
almost everyone favored equality of opportunity but there was serious disagreement over whether this goal could best be achieved by active government support of commerce and industry or by divorcing the government from the economy in the name of laissez faire and free competition.
labor radicalism and equal rights for one group of dissenters democracy took on a more radical meaning.
working mens parties and trade unions emerged in eastern cities during the late 1820s and early 1830s.
their leaders condemned the growing gap between the rich and the poor.
they argued that an expansion of low paying labor was putting working people under the dominance of their employers to such an extent that the american tradition of equal rights was in grave danger.
society in their view was divided between producers laborers artisans farmers and small business owners who ran their own enterprises and nonproducing parasites bankers speculators and merchant capitalists.
working mens parties aimed to give the producers greater control over the fruits of their labor.
these radicals called for a number of reforms to achieve equal rights.
thomas skidmore a founder of the new york working mens party advocated the abolition of inheritance and a redistribution of property.
champions of the rights of labor also demanded greatly extended and improved systems of public education.
but education reform however radical or extensive could provide equal opportunities only to future generations.
to relieve the plight of adult artisans and craftspeople at a time when their economic and social status was deteriorating labor reformers and trade unionists experimented with cooperative production and called for a ten hour workday abolition of imprisonment for debt and a currency system based exclusively on hard money so workers could no longer be paid in depreciated banknotes.
during the 1830s federated unions and working mens political parties emerged in several cities.
through mass action these groups were able to achieve better working conditions and shorter workdays.
but the depression that began in 1837 wiped out most of these gains.
in the 1830s and 1840s northern abolitionists and early proponents of womens rights made other efforts to extend the meaning and scope of democracy.
but jacksonian america was too permeated with racism and sexism to give much heed to claims that the equal rights prescribed by the declaration of independence should be extended to blacks and women.
most of those who advocated democratization explicitly limited its application to white males.
in some ways the civil and political status of blacks and women actually deteriorated during the age of the common man see chapter 12 for a discussion of these movements.
jackson and the politics of democracy what political conflicts did president andrew jackson face and how did he resolve them.
the public figure who came to symbolize the triumph of democracy was andrew jackson who came out a loser in the presidential election of 1824.
his victory four years later his actions as president and the great political party that formed around him refashioned national politics in a more democratic mold.
no wonder historians have called the spirit of the age jacksonian democracy.
the election of 1824 and j q adamss administration as monroes second term ended the ruling republican party was in disarray and could not agree on who should succeed to the presidency.
the partys congressional caucus chose william crawford of georgia an old line jeffersonian.
but a majority of congressmen showed their disapproval of this outmoded method of nominating candidates by refusing to attend the caucus.
monroe himself favored john quincy adams of massachusetts.
this gave the new england statesman an important boost but did not discourage others from entering the contest.
supporters of henry clay and john c calhoun mounted campaigns for their favorites and a group of local leaders in his home state of tennessee tossed jacksons hat into the ring.
initially jackson was not given much of a chance.
unlike other aspirants he had not played a conspicuous role in national politics his sole claim to fame was as a military hero and not even his original supporters believed this would be sufficient to catapult him into the white house.
but after testing the waters calhoun withdrew and chose instead to run for vice president.
then crawford suffered a debilitating stroke that weakened his chances.
with one southerner out of the race and another disabled jackson began to pick up support in slaveholding states.
he also found favor among those in the north and west who were disenchanted with the economic nationalism of clay and adams.
in the election jackson won a plurality of the electoral votes but he lacked the necessary majority.
the contest was thrown into the house of representatives where the legislators were to choose from among the three top candidates.
adams emerged victorious over jackson and crawford.
clay who had just missed making the final three provided the winning margin by persuading his supporters to vote for adams.
when adams proceeded to appoint clay as his secretary of state the jacksonians charged that a corrupt bargain had deprived their favorite of the presidency.
although there was no evidence that clay had bartered votes for the promise of a high office the charge was widely believed.
as a result adams assumed office under a cloud of suspicion.
adams had a difficult and frustrating presidency.
adams sought to encourage industrial development improvements in transportation and centralized credit.
among the reforms he urged on congress were federal bankruptcy legislation debt reduction road construction geographical and astronomical exploration and the creation of a new national university and naval academy.
however the political winds were blowing against nationalistic programs partly because the country was just recovering from a depression that many thought chapter 10 the triumph of white mens democracy had been caused or exacerbated by federal banking and tariff policies.
adams refused to bow to public opinion and called for an expansion of federal activity.
he had a special interest in government support for science to which end he advocated the establishment of a national university in washington.
advocates of states rights and a strict construction of the constitution were aghast at such proposals and the opposition that developed in congress turned the administrations domestic program into a pipe dream.
in foreign affairs as well adams found himself stymied.
international commerce to adams was the cornerstone of foreign policy and he believed that expanded trade and shipping would strengthen the new nation.
while he did not oppose all tariffs the tariff became the rallying cry of those hostile to his administration.
the new congress elected in 1826 was dominated by men favorable to andrew jacksons presidential aspirations.
the tariff issue was the main business on their agenda.
pressure for greater protection came not only from manufacturers but also from many farmers especially wool and hemp growers who would supply critical votes in the upcoming presidential election.
the cotton growing south the only section where tariffs of all kinds were unpopular was assumed to be safely in the generals camp regardless of his stand on the tariff.
therefore promoters of jacksons candidacy felt safe in supporting a high tariff to swing critical votes in jacksons direction.
jackson himself had never categorically opposed protective tariffs so long as they were judicious the election of 1824 candidate j q adams jackson clay crawford party no party designations popular vote 108 740 electoral vote 153 544 47 136 46 618 no candidate received a majority of the electoral votes.
adams was elected by the house of representatives.
as it turned out the resulting tariff law was anything but judicious.
congress had operated on a give and take principle trying to provide something for everybody.
those favoring protection for farmers agreed to protection for manufacturers and vice versa.
the substantial across the board increase in duties that resulted however angered southern free traders and became known as the tariff of abominations.
historians long erred in explaining the 1828 tariff as a complex jacksonian plot that backfired it was in fact an early example of how special interest groups can achieve their goals in democratic politics by trading votes in the legislative bargaining process known as logrolling.
jackson comes to power the campaign of 1828 actually began with adamss election in 1824.
rallying around the charge of a corrupt bargain between adams and clay jacksons supporters began to organize on the state and local level with an eye to reversing the outcome of the election.
by late 1827 a jackson committee was functioning in virtually every county town or city in the nation.
influential state or regional leaders who had supported other candidates in 1824 now rallied behind the tennessean.
the most significant of these were vice president calhoun who now spoke for the militant states rights sentiment of the south senator martin van buren who dominated new york politics through the political machine known as the albany regency and two kentucky editors francis p blair and amos kendall who worked in the west to mobilize opposition to henry clay and his american system which advocated government encouragement of economic development through such measures as protective tariffs and federally funded internal improvements.
as they prepared themselves for the canvass of 1828 these leaders and their many local followers laid the foundations for the first modern american political party the democrats.
the fact that the democratic party was founded to promote the cause of a particular presidential candidate revealed a central characteristic of the emerging two party system.
from this time on according to historian richard p mccormick national parties existed primarily to engage in a contest for the presidency without this great prize there would have been less incentive to create national organizations out of the parties and factions developing in the several states.
the election of 1828 saw the birth of a new era of mass democracy.
the mighty effort on behalf of jackson featured the widespread use of such electioneering techniques as huge public rallies torchlight parades and lavish barbecues or picnics paid for by the candidates supporters.
many historians believe that the massive turnout at such events during much of the rest of the nineteenth century revealed a deeper popular engagement with politics than at other times in american history.
but it is also possible as others have argued that it merely showed that politicians had learned that providing entertainment and treats could lure people to the polls.
personalities and mudslinging dominated the 1828 campaign.
the democratic party press and a legion of pamphleteers bombarded the public with vicious personal attacks on adams and praise of old hickory as jackson was called.
the supporters of adams responded in kind they even sank to the level of accusing jacksons wife rachel of bigamy and adultery because she had unwittingly married jackson before being officially divorced from her first husband.
the democrats then came up with the utterly false charge that adamss wife was born out of wedlock.
what gave jacksonians the edge was their success in portraying their candidate as an authentic man of the people despite his substantial fortune in land and slaves.
his backwoods upbringing his record as a popular military hero and indian fighter and even his lack of education were touted as evidence that he was a true representative of the common people especially the plain folk of the south and the west.
in the words of one of his supporters jackson had a judgment unclouded by the visionary speculations of the academician adams according to democratic propagandists was the exact opposite an overeducated aristocrat more at home in the salon than among plain people.
natures nobleman was pitted against the aloof new england intellectual and adams never really had a chance.
jackson won by a popular vote margin of one hundred fifty thousand and by more than 2 to 1 in the electoral college.
clearly jackson and the politics of democracy election of 1828 popular vote electoral vote by state democratic andrew jackson 647 286 national republican john q adams 508 064 1 155 350 oregon country mich terr.
unorganized terr.
nr 6 d 5 midway through his first administration jackson completely reorganized his cabinet replacing almost all of his original appointees.
at the root of this upheaval was a growing feud between jackson and vice president calhoun but the incident that brought it to a head was the peggy eaton affair.
peggy oneale eaton the daughter of a washington tavern owner married secretary of war john eaton in 1829.
because of gossip about her moral character the wives of other cabinet members refused to receive her socially.
jackson became her fervent champion partly because he found the charges against her reminiscent of the slanders against his late wife who had died in 1828.
when he raised the issue of mrs eatons social status at a cabinet meeting only secretary of state van buren a widower supported his stand.
this seemingly trivial incident led to the resignation of all but one of the cabinet members and the president was able to begin again with a fresh slate.
although van buren resigned with read the document a fl andrew jackson first annual message to congress 1829.
rr te bo und ary ark.
f ut ure part of mexico jacksons organization had been more effective and his popular appeal substantially greater.
he had piled up massive majorities in the deep south but the voters elsewhere divided fairly evenly.
adams in fact won a majority of the electoral vote in the northern states.
furthermore it was not clear what kind of mandate jackson had won.
most of the politicians in his camp favored states rights and limited government as against the nationalism of adams and clay but the general himself had never taken a clear public stand on such issues as banks tariffs and internal improvements.
he did however stand for the removal of indians from the gulf states and this was a key to his immense popularity in that region.
jackson turned out to be one of the most forceful and domineering of american presidents.
his most striking character traits were an indomitable will an intolerance of opposition and a prickly pride that would not permit him to forgive or forget an insult or supposed act of betrayal.
it is sometimes hard to determine whether his political actions were motivated by principle or personal spite.
as a young man on his own in a frontier environment he had learned to fight his own battles.
somewhat violent in temper and action he fought a number of duels and served in wars against the british the spanish and the indians with a zeal his critics found excessive.
his experiences had made him tough and resourceful but had also deprived him of the flexibility normally associated with successful politicians.
jacksons presidency commenced with his open endorsement of rotation of officeholders or what his critics called the spoils system although he did not actually depart radically from his predecessors in the extent to which he removed federal officeholders and replaced them with his supporters he was the first president to defend this practice as a legitimate application of democratic doctrine.
he proclaimed in his first annual message that the duties of all public officers are.
so plain and simple that men of intelligence may readily qualify themselves for their performance and that no man has any more intrinsic claim to office than another jacksons resigning cabinet members were according to this cartoon rats deserting a falling house.
jackson is seated on a collapsing chair while the altar of reform and public confidence in the stability of this administration pillars topple to his left and several resignations flutter behind him.
the presidents foot is on the tail of the secretary of state martin van buren rat.
complete the assignment racial identity in a white mans democracy on myhistorylab feature essay i n mid nineteenth century georgia like most american states racial identity was defined by statute a negro was a person with at least one grandparent of african origin.
but in practice statutory rules about ancestry could not decide whether a person was black or white.
across the american south and occasionally in the north as well trials were held in which a persons race was determined according to how he appeared and behaved with whom he associated and whether he performed acts of citizenship.
the jacksonian movement revolutionized southern life by extending full rights of citizenship to all white men voting holding public office participating in party politics.
these political acts were reserved for white men and also became the emblems and markers of white manhood.
honor which had once been seen as the exclusive concern of the gentleman was democratized.
southern politics increasingly depended on a belief that all white men were equals that only blacks constituted the mudsill class.
this white mans democracy helped to mobilize ordinary white people under the planters banner and white supremacy helped to justify slavery in a free republic.
bryan v walton 1864 was a case that became somewhat famous for the georgia supreme courts pronouncements on the social and civil degradation of black people and the idea that the prejudice.
of caste is unconquerable so that black people could never be citizens.
the case went to trial three times between 1848 and 1863 and those trials turned on the prior question racial identity in a white mans democracy of whether the men of the nuez family were in fact black or white.
joseph nuez was the son of lucy a white woman.
before he died he sold six slaves to seaborn bryan.
the administrator of his estate hughes walton sued bryan to recover the human property claiming that nuez was a man of color and so was legally barred from selling slaves.
the first trial in 1848 was decided on technical grounds but as the case went forward there was no doubt that only as a white man did joseph nuez have the right to do what he would with his property.
so the second and third trials focused on the racial identity of joseph and his father james.
dozens of their neighbors testified about them and remarkably they could agree on very little.
bryans witnesses agreed that james had a dark complexion some thought he might be indian others considered him portuguese.
mary rogers described james straight long nose thin lips straight and very black hair rather a narrow long face and of a red complexion he was not a large man walked trim and nice she went on to report that jim was always among respectable white people in the neighborhood in their dances parties c and was received by them as on a footing with whites stephen newman and mary harrel testified that jim nuez looked more indian than negro and that his action and movements were as genteel as any man witnesses have known there was no clumsiness about him they well remembered jim nuezs dancing which was very graceful many persons tried to catch his step and nearly all admired its style contrary to modern stereotypes this evidence of good dancing style went to prove jims whiteness.
mary harrel testified that jim nuez never kept low trifling or rakish company and went where no free negro was allowed to associate with the whites and dined with the whites just the same as any gentleman would have done bryan had offered a persuasive explanation of the nuez mens appearance and had amassed a great deal of testimony about their behavior as white men.
there was only one hole in his argument no one presented any evidence of either nuez exercising political or legal rights.
indeed harriet kilpatrick testified that as far as she knew neither jim n or joe nuez ever voted or exercised any of the rights of citizenship at the third trial william c bates testified that james nuez was treated by his neighbors as a gentleman recognized as a gentleman and enjoyed the privileges of a gentleman and a free citizen yet on cross examination bates explained that he was too young when i knew james nuez to answer whether he voted mustered or served on juries james nuez had never been seen performing the specific acts of white manhood a serious omission.
only one witness gave testimony alleging james nuezs exercise of his civic rights.
the deposition of south carolinian matthew alexander suggested that before james had moved to georgia he had a fine dancer quite a gentleman in manners and appearance with long straight black hair.
more importantly he enjoyed all the privileges of a free man.
james nuez voted mustered and did jury duty and exercised the usual privileges and duties of free white citizens but he could give none of the details.
an attorney in a nineteenth century trial addresses an all white jury in the jury box.
on the opposite side of the courtroom waltons witnesses testified exactly the opposite.
charles cosnahan believed nuez was a mulatto based on appearance tolerable kinky hair.
did not have a fair complexion reputation they passed in the neighborhood as free colored persons and the fact that neither jim nor joseph voted or performed military duty they exercised no other rights than those of free negroes joseph cosnahan explained that he never knew of james and joseph exercising the usual rights of white citizens although james nuez was an educated man and mixed sometimes with white men they were regarded in the neighborhood as mulattoes the white citizens associated with them and regarded them as mulattoes several other witnesses corroborated this version of joseph and jamess racial identity and the jury gave a verdict to walton ratifying the view that nuez was not white.
at the end of the third trial juries had heard conflicting testimony on every aspect of joseph nuezs white identity appearance self presentation reputation and acceptance among blacks and whites white ancestry white conduct white character and on his failure to exercise the rights and privileges of whiteness.
while no one could agree whether james and joseph had straight or curly hair almost everyone agreed on this latter point they had not performed the civic duties of white manhood.
the jury was persuaded they found for hughes walton.
judge lumpkin for the supreme court of georgia sought to set the matter to rest at the cases final disposition in 1864.
lumpkin disparaged all testimony in favor of nuezs whiteness as given by dupes who had been fooled by appearances and found that joseph was a man of color who had no right to sell slaves.
yet despite the communitys disagreement over the nuezes identity they did agree on one point the nuezes race could be known through their performances.
race was not only something joseph and james were it was something they did.
who was a white man.
a civic being who voted served on juries and mustered in the militia.
degraded black men were not capable of such things while honorable white men could not keep from doing them.
in racial identity trials across the south judges made clear that as one south carolina judge put it a man could be found white although of a dark complexion if he had been recognized as a white man received into society and exercised political privileges as such the law was involved not only in recognizing racial identity but in creating it the state itself through its legal and military institutions helped make people white.
in allowing men of low social status to participate in white mens democracy by voting serving on juries and mustering in the militia the state welcomed every white man into symbolic equality with the wealthy southern slaveholder.
questions for discussion 1.
why did political changes emphasize the social importance of slavery.
how did the circumstances of joseph and james nuez lives decide what rights they should have.
chapter 10 the triumph of white mens democracy the rest to promote a thorough reorganization his loyalty was rewarded by his appointment as minister to england and strong prospects of future favor.
indian removal the first major policy question facing the jackson administration concerned the fate of native americans.
jackson had long favored removing eastern indians to lands beyond the mississippi.
in his military service on the southern frontier he had been directly involved in persuading and coercing tribal groups to emigrate.
jacksons support of removal was no different from the policy of previous administrations.
the only real issues to be determined were how rapidly and thoroughly the process should be carried out and by what means.
at the time of jacksons election the states of georgia alabama and mississippi distressed by the federal governments failure to eliminate the substantial indian enclaves remaining within their boundaries were clamoring for quick action.
since adams seemed to have dragged his feet on the issue voters in these states turned overwhelmingly to jackson who promised to expel the indians without delay.
immediately after jacksons election georgia extended its state laws over the cherokee within its borders.
georgia declared that all cherokee laws and customs were null and void made all white people living in the cherokee nation subject to georgias laws declared the cherokee mere tenants at will on their land and made it a crime for any cherokee to try to influence another cherokee to stay in georgia.
at the same time state officials authorized the georgia militia to conduct a campaign of violence against the cherokee to increase pressure on them to give up their land and move west.
before jacksons inauguration alabama and mississippi took similar action abolishing the sovereignty of the creeks and choctaw and declaring state control of the tribes.
this legislation defied both the constitutional provisions giving the federal government exclusive jurisdiction over indian affairs and specific treaties.
jackson endorsed the state actions.
he regarded indians as that they were children when they did the white mans bidding and savage beasts when they resisted.
he was also aware of his political debt to the land hungry states of the south.
consequently in december 1829 he advocated a new and more coercive removal policy.
denying cherokee autonomy he asserted the primacy of states rights over indian rights and called for the speedy and thorough removal of all eastern indians to designated areas beyond the mississippi.
chief john ross warned his people that the object of the president is.
to create divisions among ourselves president jackson rejected rosss appeal against georgias violation of federal treaty and in 1830 the presidents congressional supporters introduced a bill to implement the removal policy.
opponents charged that the president had defied the constitution by removing federal protection from the southeastern tribes.
but jackson and his supporters were determined to ride roughshod over humanitarian or constitutional objections to indian dispossession.
with strong support from the south and the western border states the removal bill passed the senate by a vote of 28 to 19 and the house by the narrow margin of 102 to 97.
jackson then moved quickly to conclude the necessary treaties using the threat of unilateral state action to bludgeon the tribes into submission.
the treaty for cherokee removal was negotiated with 75 out of 17 000 cherokees and none of the tribal officers was present.
by 1833 all the southeastern tribes except the cherokee had agreed to evacuate their ancestral homelands.
choctaw chief david folsom wrote we are exceedingly tired.
we have just heard of the ratification of the choctaw treaty.
our doom is sealed.
there is no course for us but to turn our faces to our new homes in the setting sun alexis de tocqueville the french author of democracy in america watched the troops driving the choctaws across the mississippi river in the winter of 1831.
he wrote that americans had deprived indians of their rights with singular felicity tranquilly legally philanthropically.
it is impossible to destroy men with more respect for the laws of humanity yet president jackson was not always concerned with respect for the law.
in 1832 he condoned georgias defiance of a supreme court decision worcester v georgia that denied a states right to extend its jurisdiction over tribal lands.
georgia had arrested and sentenced to four years hard labor a missionary who violated state law by going on tribal land without georgias permission the supreme court declared the law unconstitutional.
jacksons legendary declaration that chief justice marshall had made his decision now let him enforce it is almost certainly apocryphal as there was nothing for either jackson or marshall to enforce the decision only required the state of georgia to release worcester from custody which it did several months later.
but the story reflects jacksons general attitude towards the courts decisions on federal jurisdiction.
he would not protect indians from state action no matter how violent or coercive and he put the weight of the federal government behind removal policy.
by 1833 all the southeastern tribes except the cherokee had agreed to evacuate their ancestral homes.
a stubbornly resisting majority faction of the cherokee held out until 1838 when military pressure forced them to march to oklahoma.
this trek known as the trail of tears was made under such harsh conditions that almost four thousand of approximately sixteen thousand marchers died on the way.
the final chapter of indian removal was the second seminole war which lasted from 1834 to 1841.
although the government had convinced a small group of seminoles to sign a treaty in 1834 agreeing to removal most seminoles renounced the treaty and resisted for years making the bloody conflict the most expensive indian war in u s history.
the removal of the southeastern indians exposed the prejudiced and greedy side of jacksonian democracy.
see the discussion of the background of indian removal in chapter 9.
the nullification crisis during the 1820s southerners became increasingly fearful of federal encroachment on the rights of the states.
behind this concern in south carolina at least was a strengthened commitment to the preservation of slavery and a resulting anxiety about possible uses of federal power to strike at the peculiar institution hoping to keep the explosive slavery issue out of the political limelight south carolinians seized on another genuine grievance the protective tariff as the issue on which to take their stand in favor of a state veto power over federal actions they viewed as contrary to their interests.
as a staple producing and exporting region the jackson and the politics of democracy view the closer look the trail of tears robert lindneux the trail of tears 1942.
cherokee indians carrying their few possessions are prodded along by u s soldiers on the trail of tears.
several thousand native americans died on the ruthless forced march from their homelands in the east to the newly established indian territory in oklahoma.
south had sound economic reasons for favoring free trade.
tariffs increased the prices that southern agriculturists paid for manufactured goods and threatened to undermine their foreign markets by inciting counterprotection.
an economic crisis in the south carolina upcountry during the 1820s made that state particularly receptive to extreme positions on the tariff and states rights.
vice president john c calhoun emerged as the leader of the states rights insurgency in south carolina abandoning his earlier support of nationalism and the american system.
after the passage of the tariff of abominations in 1828 the state legislature declared the new duties unconstitutional and endorsed a lengthy statement written anonymously by calhoun that affirmed nullification or the right of an individual state to set aside federal law.
calhoun supported jackson in 1828 and planned to serve amicably as his vice president expecting jackson to support his native region on questions involving the tariff and states rights.
he also entertained hopes of succeeding jackson as president.
early in his administration jackson appeared well attuned to the southern slaveholding position on state versus federal authority.
besides acquiescing in georgias de facto nullification of federal treaties upholding indian tribal rights he vetoed a major internal improvements bill in 1830 invoking a strict construction of the constitution to deny federal funds for the building of the maysville road in kentucky.
meanwhile a bitter personal feud developed between jackson and calhoun.
jackson viewed the vice president and his wife as prime movers in the ostracism of peggy eaton.
furthermore evidence came to light that calhoun as secretary of war in monroes cabinet in 1818 had privately advocated punishing jackson for his incursion into florida.
as calhoun lost favor with jackson it became clear that van buren rather than the vice president would be jacksons designated successor.
the personal breach between jackson and calhoun colored and intensified their confrontation over nullification and the tariff.
the two men differed on matters of principle as well.
although generally a defender of states rights and strict construction of the constitution jackson opposed the theory of nullification as a threat to the survival of the union.
in his view federal power should be held in check but this did not mean the states were truly sovereign.
his nationalism was that of a military man who had fought for the country against foreign enemies and he was not about to permit the nations disintegration at the hands of domestic dissidents.
the differences between jackson and calhoun came into the open at the jefferson day dinner in 1830 when jackson offered the toast chapter 10 the triumph of white mens democracy our union it must be preserved to which calhoun responded the union.
next to liberty the most dear.
may we always remember that it can only be preserved by distributing equally the benefits and the burdens of the union in 1830 and 1831 the movement against the tariff gained strength in south carolina.
calhoun openly took the lead elaborating further on his view that states had the right to set aside federal laws.
in 1832 congress passed a new tariff that lowered the rates slightly but retained the principle of protection.
supporters of nullification argued that the new law simply demonstrated that no genuine relief could be expected from washington.
they then succeeded in persuading the south carolina state legislature to call a special convention.
when the convention met in november 1832 the members voted overwhelmingly to nullify the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 and to forbid the collection of customs duties within the state.
jackson reacted with characteristic decisiveness.
he alerted the secretary of war to prepare for possible military action issued a proclamation denouncing nullification as treasonous and asked congress to vote him the authority to use the army to enforce the tariff.
at the same time he sought to pacify the nullifiers somewhat by recommending a lower tariff.
congress responded by enacting the force bill which gave the president the military powers he sought and the compromise tariff of 1833.
the latter was primarily the work of jacksons political enemy henry clay but the president signed it anyway.
faced with jacksons clear intention to use force if necessary and somewhat appeased by the prospect of a lower tariff south carolina suspended view the closer look indian removal unorganized territory ohio indiana illinois virginia missouri kentucky springfield cherokee nashville north carolina creek seminole chickasaw fort coffee tennessee arkansas territory new echota chickasaw choctaw alabama ch choct ta choctaw south carolina cherokee 1835 1838 creek georgia vicksburg mexico mississippi atlantic ocean mobile louisiana florida territory new orleans gulf of mexico ceded lands and dates of cessions routes of indian removal indian reservations cherokees trail of tears 200 miles boundaries of 1830 200 kilometers indian removal because so many native americans uprooted from their lands in the east died on the forced march to oklahoma the route they followed became known as the trail of tears.
treaty signed in 1835 by a minority faction was met with defiance from the majority but removal was forced in 1838.
seminole the bank war and the second party system the nullification ordinance in late january 1833 and formally rescinded it in march after the new read the document south carolinas ordinance of nullification tariff had been enacted.
to demonstrate that they had not conceded their constitutional position the convention delegates concluded their deliberations by nullifying the force bill.
the nullification crisis revealed that south carolinians would not tolerate any federal action that seemed contrary to their interests or raised doubts about the institution of slavery.
the nullifiers philosophy implied the right of secession as well as the right to declare laws of congress null and void.
a fear of northern meddling with slavery was the main spur to the growth of a militant doctrine of state sovereignty in the south.
at the time of the nullification crisis the other slave states had not yet developed such strong anxieties about the future of the peculiar institution and had not embraced south carolinas radical conception of state sovereignty.
jackson was himself a southerner and a slaveholder a man who detested abolitionists.
in general he was a proslavery president later he would use his executive power to stop antislavery literature from being carried by the u s mail.
some farsighted southern loyalists however were alarmed by the unionist doctrines that jackson propounded in his proclamation vice president john c calhoun emerged as a champion of states rights during the nullification against nullification.
more strongly than any crisis when cartoons such as this example depicted the emaciated south burdened by tariffs while previous president he had asserted that the the north grew fat at the southerners expense.
federal government was supreme over the states and that the union was indivisible.
he had further justified the use of force against states that denied federal authority.
for the subsequent depression.
but after nicholas biddle took over the banks presidency in 1823 the institution regained public confidence.
biddle was an able manager who probably understood the the bank war and the second mysteries of banking and currency better than any other american party system of his generation.
a philadelphia gentleman of broad culture extensive education and some political experience he was also arrogant what were the arguments for and against the bank and vain.
he was inclined to rely too much on his own judgment of the united states.
and refused to admit his mistakes.
but his record prior to the conjacksons most important and controversial use of executive power frontation with jackson was a good one.
in 1825 and again in 1828 was his successful attack on the bank of the united states.
the bank he acted decisively to curb an overextension of credit by state banks war revealed some of the deepest concerns of jackson and his supand helped avert a recurrence of the boom and bust cycle.
porters and dramatically expressed their concept of democracy.
it the actual performance of the bank was not the only target also aroused intense opposition to the president and his policies an of criticism about it.
old line jeffersonians had always opposed it opposition that crystallized in a new national party the whigs.
the on principle both because they viewed its establishment as uncondestruction of the bank and the economic disruption that followed stitutional and because it placed too much power in the hands of brought to the forefront the issue of the governments relationship a small privileged group.
the bank was a chartered monopoly to the nations financial system.
differences on this question helped an essentially private corporation that performed public services to sustain and strengthen the new two party system.
in return for exclusive economic rights.
because of its great influence the bank tended to be blamed for any economic problems.
for those who had misgivings about the rise of the national marmr.
biddles bank ket the bank epitomized the forces threatening the independence the bank of the united states had long been embroiled in puband prosperity of small producers.
in an era of rising white mens lic controversy.
its role in precipitating the panic of 1819 by first democracy an obvious and telling objection to the bank was simply extending credit freely and then suddenly calling in its loans had that it possessed great power and privilege without being under led many especially in the south and the west to blame the bank popular control.
chapter 10 the triumph of white mens democracy the bank veto and the election of 1832 jackson came into office with strong reservations about banking and paper money in general in part as a result of his own brushes with bankruptcy after accepting promissory notes that depreciated in value.
he also harbored suspicions that branches of the bank of the united states had illicitly used their influence on behalf of his opponent in the presidential election.
in his annual messages in 1829 and 1830 jackson called on congress to begin discussing possible modification of a system which cannot continue to exist in its present form without.
perpetual apprehensions and discontent on the part of the states and the people biddle began to worry about the fate of the banks charter when it came up for renewal in 1836.
at the same time jackson was listening to the advice of close friends and unofficial advisers members of his kitchen cabinet especially amos kendall and francis p blair who thought an attack on the bank would provide a good party issue for the election of 1832.
biddle then made a fateful blunder.
panicked by the presidential messages and the anti bank oratory of congressional jacksonians such as senator thomas hart benton of missouri he determined to seek recharter by congress in 1832 four years early.
senator henry clay leader of the antiadministration forces on capitol hill encouraged this move because he was convinced that jackson had chosen the unpopular side of the issue and would be embarrassed or even discredited by a congressional endorsement of the bank.
the bill to recharter introduced in the house and senate in early 1832 aroused jackson and unified his administration and party against renewal.
the bill found many supporters in congress however.
a number of legislators had received loans from the bank and the economy seemed to be prospering under the banks guidance.
as a result the bill to recharter passed congress with ease.
the election of 1832 candidate jackson clay wirt floyd party democratic national republican anti masonic independent democratic popular vote 688 242 473 462 101 051 electoral vote delegates chosen by south carolina legislature the next move was jacksons and he made the most of the opportunity by vetoing the bill.
after repeating his opinion that the bank was unconstitutional notwithstanding the supreme courts ruling on the issue he went on to argue that it violated the fundamental rights of the people in a democratic society in the full enjoyment of the gifts of heaven and the fruits of superior industry economy and virtue every man is equally entitled to protection by law but when the laws undertake to add to those natural and just advantages artificial distinctions to grant.
exclusive privileges the humble members of society the farmers mechanics and laborers who have neither the time nor the means of securing like favors to themselves have a right to complain of the injustice of their government government he added should confine itself to equal protection jackson thus called on the common people to join him in fighting the monster corporation.
his veto message was the first ever to use more than strictly constitutional arguments and to deal directly with social and economic issues.
congressional attempts to override the veto failed and jackson resolved to take the entire issue to the people in the upcoming presidential election.
the 1832 election the first in which candidates were chosen by national nominating conventions pitted jackson against henry clay standard bearer of the national republicans.
although the democrats did not adopt a formal platform the party stood firmly behind jackson in his opposition to rechartering the bank.
clay and the national republicans attempted to marshal the pro bank sentiment that was strong in many parts of the country.
but jackson won a great personal triumph garnering 219 electoral votes to 49 for clay.
his share of the popular vote was not quite as high as it had been in 1828 but it was substantial enough to be interpreted as a mandate for continuing the war against the bank.
killing the bank not content with preventing the bank from getting a new charter the victorious jackson now resolved to attack it directly by removing federal deposits from biddles vaults.
jackson told van buren the bank.
is trying to kill me but i will kill it the bank had indeed used all the political influence it could muster in an attempt to prevent jacksons reelection in an act of self defense.
old hickory regarded biddles actions as a personal attack part of a devious plot to destroy the presidents reputation and deny him the popular approval he deserved.
although he presided over the first modern american political party jackson did not really share van burens belief in the legitimacy of a competitive party system.
in his view his opponents were not merely wrong they were evil and deserved to be destroyed.
furthermore the election results convinced him that he was the peoples chosen instrument in the struggle against corruption and privilege the only man who could save the pure republicanism of jefferson and the founders from the monster bank to remove the deposits from the bank jackson had to overcome strong resistance in his own cabinet.
when one secretary of the treasury refused to support the policy he was shifted to another cabinet post.
when a second balked at carrying out removal he was replaced by roger b taney a jackson loyalist and dedicated opponent of the bank.
beginning in late september 1833 taney ceased depositing government money in the bank of the united states and began to withdraw the funds already there.
although jackson had earlier suggested that the government keep its money in some kind of public bank he had never worked out the details or made a specific proposal to congress.
the problem of how to dispose of the funds was therefore resolved by an ill advised decision to place them in selected state banks.
by the end of 1833 twenty three state banks had been chosen as depositories.
opponents charged that the banks had been selected for political rather than fiscal reasons and dubbed them jacksons the bank war and the second party system pet banks since congress refused to approve administration proposals to regulate the credit policies of these banks jacksons effort to shift to a hard money economy was quickly nullified by the use the state banks made of the new deposits.
they extended credit more recklessly than before and increased the amount of paper money in circulation.
the bank of the united states counterattacked by calling in outstanding loans and instituting a policy of credit contraction that helped bring on an economic recession.
biddle hoped to win support for recharter by demonstrating that weakening the banks position would be disastrous for the economy.
with some justification the presidents supporters accused biddle of deliberately and unnecessarily causing economic distress out of personal resentment and a desire to maintain his unchecked powers and privileges.
the bank never regained its charter.
strong opposition to jacksons fiscal policies developed in congress.
henry clay and his supporters contended that the president had violated the banks charter and exceeded his constitutional authority when he removed the deposits.
they eventually persuaded the senate to approve a motion of censure.
jacksonians in the house were able to block such action but the president was further humiliated when the senate refused to confirm taney as secretary of the treasury.
not all of the criticism and obstructionism can be attributed to bitterness on the part of pro bank politicians.
some congressmen who originally defended jacksons veto became disenchanted with the president because they thought he had gone too far in asserting the powers of his office.
the emergence of the whigs the coalition that passed the censure resolution in the senate provided the nucleus for a new national party the whigs.
the leadership of the new party and a majority of its support came from national republicans associated with clay and new england ex federalists led by senator daniel webster of massachusetts.
the whigs also picked up critical support from southern proponents of states rights who had been upset by jacksons stand on nullification and then saw an unconstitutional abuse of power in his withdrawal of federal deposits from the bank of the united states.
even calhoun and his nullifiers occasionally cooperated with the whig camp.
the initial rallying cry for this diverse antijackson coalition was executive usurpation the whig label was chosen because of its associations with both english and american revolutionary opposition to royal power and prerogatives.
in their propaganda the whigs portrayed the tyrannical designs of king andrew and his court.
the whigs also gradually absorbed the anti masonic party a surprisingly strong political movement that had arisen in the northeastern states in the late 1820s read the document andrew jackson veto of the bank bill and early 1830s.
capitalizing on the hysteria aroused by the 1826 disappearance and apparent murder of a new yorker who had threatened to reveal the secrets of the masonic order the anti masons exploited traditional american fears of secret societies and conspiracies.
they also appealed successfully to the moral concerns of the northern middle class under the sway of an emerging evangelical protestantism.
anti masons detested jacksonianism mainly because it stood for a toleration of diverse lifestyles.
democrats did not think government should be concerned about people who drank gambled or found better things to do than go to church on sundays.
their opponents from the anti masonic tradition believed government should restrict such sinful behavior.
this desire for moral and religious uniformity contributed an important cultural dimension to northern whiggery.
as the election of 1836 approached the governments fiscal policies also provoked a localized rebellion among the urban working class elements of the democratic coalition.
in new york aided by van buren center jackson wields his veto rod against the bank of the united states whose city a dissident faction broke with the heads represent the directors of the state branches.
bank president nicholas biddle is wearing the top hat.
regular democratic organization mainly source collection of the new york historical society negative 42459.
chapter 10 the triumph of white mens democracy listen to the audio file van buren mania he had inadvertently helped to create jackson pricked the bubble on july 11 1836.
he issued his specie circular requiring that after august 15 only gold and silver would be accepted in payment for public lands.
the action served to curb inflation and land speculation but did so in such a sudden and drastic way that it helped precipitate the financial panic of 1837.
the rise and fall of van buren martin van buren only five feet six inches tall was known as the little magician when he became president in 1836.
he was unlucky to preside over the country during the panic of 1837 and his deflationary policies were unsuccessful in alleviating the economic crisis.
he served only one term in office.
over issues involving banking and currency.
these radicals favored a strict hard money policy and condemned jacksons transfer of federal deposits to the state banks as inflationary.
because they wanted working people to be paid in specie rather than banknotes they went beyond opposition to the bank of the united states and attacked state banks as well.
seeing no basis for cooperation with the whigs they established the independent equal rights party and nominated a separate state ticket for 1836.
jackson himself had hard money sentiments and regarded the pet bank solution as a stopgap measure rather than a final solution to the money problem.
he reluctantly surrendered to congressional pressure in early 1836 and signed legislation allocating surplus federal revenues to the deposit banks increasing their numbers and weakening federal controls over them.
the result was runaway inflation.
state banks in the south and west responded to demands from land speculating interests by issuing a new flood of paper money.
reacting somewhat belatedly to the speculative as his successor jackson chose martin van buren who had served him loyally as vice president during his second term.
van buren was the greatest master of practical politics in the democratic party and the democratic national convention of 1835 unanimously confirmed jacksons choice.
in accepting the nomination van buren promised to tread generally in the footsteps of general jackson the newly created whig party reflecting the diversity of its constituency did not try to decide on a single standard bearer.
instead each region chose candidates daniel webster in the east william henry harrison of ohio also the anti masonic nominee in the old northwest and hugh lawson white of tennessee a former jackson supporter in the south.
whigs hoped to deprive van buren of enough electoral votes to throw the election into the house of representatives where one of the whigs might stand a chance.
the stratagem proved unsuccessful.
van buren carried fifteen of the twenty six states and won a clear majority in the electoral college.
but the election foreshadowed future trouble for the democrats particularly in the south.
there the whigs ran virtually even erasing the enormous majorities that jackson had run up in 1828 and 1832.
the emergence of a two party system in the previously solid deep south resulted from two factors opposition to some of jacksons policies and the image of van buren as an unreliable yankee politician.
the division did not reflect basic disagreement on the slavery issue.
southern whigs and democrats shared a commitment to protecting slavery and each tried to persuade the electorate they could do the job better than the opposition.
as he took office van buren was immediately faced with a catastrophic depression.
the price of cotton fell by almost 50 percent banks all over the nation suspended specie payments many businesses went bankrupt and unemployed workers demonstrated in several cities.
the sale of public lands fell off so drastically that the federal surplus earmarked in 1836 for distribution to the states became a deficit.
the panic of 1837 economic historians have concluded was not exclusively or even primarily the result of government policies.
it was in fact international in scope and reflected some complex changes in the world economy that were beyond the control of american policymakers.
but the whigs were quick to blame the state of the economy on jacksonian finance and the administration had to make a politically effective response.
since van buren and his party were committed to a policy of laissez faire on the federal level there was little or nothing they could do to relieve economic distress through subsidies or relief measures.
but van buren could at least try to salvage the federal funds deposited in shaky state banks and devise a new system of public finance that would not contribute to future panics by fueling speculation and credit expansion.
van burens solution was to establish a public depository for government funds with no connections whatsoever to commercial the bank war and the second party system view the closer look general harrisons log cabin march sheet music in this image william henry harrisons log cabin and the flag beside it are composed of sheet music for a march.
a march is a military tune it would have been chosen to communicate harrisons heroism as an indian fighter and protector of frontier families.
his proposal for such an independent subtreasury aroused intense opposition from the congressional whigs who strongly favored the reestablishment of a national bank as the only way to restore economic stability.
whig resistance stalled the independent subtreasury bill for three years it was not until 1840 that it was enacted into law.
in the meantime the economy had temporarily revived in 1838 only to sink again into a deeper depression the following year.
the election of 1836 candidate van buren harrison white webster mangum party democratic whig whig whig independent democratic popular vote 764 198 549 508 145 342 41 287 delegates chosen by south carolina legislature electoral vote van burens chances for reelection in 1840 were undoubtedly hurt by the state of the economy.
the whigs had the chance to offer alternative policies that promised to restore prosperity.
in 1836 the whigs had been disorganized and had not fully mastered the new democratic politics.
but in 1840 they settled on a single nominee and matched the democrats in grassroots organization and popular electioneering.
the whigs passed over the true leader of their party henry clay.
instead they found their own jackson in william henry harrison a military hero of advanced age who was associated in the public mind with the battle of tippecanoe and the winning of the west.
to balance the ticket and increase its appeal in the south they chose john tyler of virginia a converted states rights democrat to be harrisons running mate.
using the slogan tippecanoe and tyler too the whigs pulled out all stops in their bid for the white house.
rallies and parades took place in every locality complete with posters placards campaign hats and emblems special songs and even movable log cabins filled with coonskin caps and barrels of cider for the faithful.
imitating the jacksonian propaganda against adams in 1828 they portrayed van buren as a luxury loving aristocrat and chapter 10 the triumph of white mens democracy election of 1840 electoral vote by state popular vote whig william h harrison 234 1 274 624 democratic martin van buren 1 127 781 2 402 405 oregon country iowa terr.
rr bo und ary fl fut ure texas republic 5 disputed area part of mexico indian terr.
compared him with their own homespun candidate.
there was an enormous turnout on election day 78 percent of those eligible to vote.
when it was over harrison had parlayed a narrow edge in the popular vote into a landslide in the electoral college.
he carried 19 of the 26 states and won 234 electoral votes to 60 for van buren.
buoyed by the electorates belief that their policies might revive the economy the whigs also won control of both houses of congress.
contrary to what most historians used to believe personalities and hoopla did not decide the election of 1840.
the economy was in dire straits and the whigs unlike the democrats had a program that seemed to offer hope for a solution the latest version of henry clays american system.
whigs proposed to revive the bank of the united states in order to restore fiscal stability raise tariffs to protect manufacturers and manufacturing jobs and distribute federal revenues to the states for internal improvements that would stimulate commerce and employment.
whig victories in the state and local elections of 1840 many of which preceded the presidential vote strongly suggest that voters were responding to the party and its program.
heyday of the second party system what was the two party system and how were the parties different.
americas second party system came of age in the election of 1840.
unlike the earlier competition between federalists and jeffersonian republicans the rivalry of democrats and whigs made the two party pattern a normal feature of electoral politics.
during the 1840s the two national parties competed on fairly equal terms for the support of the electorate.
allegiance to one party or the other became an important source of personal identity for many americans and increased their interest and participation in politics.
in addition to drama and entertainment the parties offered the voters a real choice of programs and ideologies.
whigs stood for a positive liberal state which meant government had the right and duty to subsidize or protect enterprises that could contribute to general prosperity and economic growth.
democrats normally advocated a negative liberal state according to them government should keep its hands off the economy only by doing nothing could it avoid favoring special interests and interfering with free competition.
they charged that granting subsidies or special charters to any group would create pockets of privilege or monopoly and put ordinary citizens under the thumb of the rich and powerful.
conflict over economic issues helped determine each partys base of support.
in the whig camp were industrialists who wanted tariff protection merchants who favored internal improvements as a stimulus to commerce and farmers and planters who had adapted successfully to a market economy.
democrats appealed mainly to smaller farmers workers declining gentry and emerging entrepreneurs who were excluded from the established commercial groups that stood to benefit most from whig programs.
democratic rhetoric about monopoly and privilege appealed to those who had mixed or negative feelings about the rise of a national market economy.
to some extent this division pitted richer more privileged americans against those who were poorer and less economically or socially secure.
but it did not follow class lines in any simple or direct way.
many businessmen were democrats and large numbers of wage earners voted whig.
merchants engaged in the import trade had no use for whiggish high tariffs whereas workers in industries clamoring for protection often concluded that their jobs depended on such duties.
lifestyles and ethnic or religious identities also strongly affected party loyalties.
in the northern states one way to tell the typical whig from the typical democrat was to see what each did on sunday.
a person who went to one of the evangelical protestant churches was very likely to be a whig.
on the other hand the person who attended a ritualized service catholic lutheran or episcopalian or did not go to church at all was most probably a democrat.
the democrats were the favored party of immigrants catholics freethinkers backwoods farmers and those of all classes who enjoyed traditional amusements condemned by the new breed of moral reformers.
one thing all these groups had in common was a desire to be left alone free of restrictions on their freedom to think and behave as they liked.
the whigs enjoyed particularly strong support among protestants of old stock living in smaller cities towns and prosperous rural areas devoted to market farming.
in general the whigs welcomed a market economy but wanted to restrain the individualism and disorder it created by enforcing cultural and moral values derived from the puritan tradition.
nevertheless party conflict in congress continued to center on national economic policy.
whigs stood firm for a loose construction of the constitution and federal support for business and economic development.
the democrats persisted in their defense of strict construction states rights and laissez faire.
debates over tariffs banking and internal improvements remained vital and vigorous during the 1840s.
conclusion tocquevilles wisdom true believers in both parties saw a deep ideological or moral meaning in the clash over economic issues.
whigs and democrats had conflicting views of the good society and their policy positions reflected these differences.
the democrats were the party of white male equality and personal liberty.
they perceived the american people as a collection of independent and self sufficient white men.
the role of government was to see to it that the individual was not interfered with in his economic activity in his personal habits and in his religion or lack of it.
democrats were ambivalent about the rise of the market economy because of the ways it threatened individual independence.
the whigs on the other hand were the party of orderly progress under the guidance of an enlightened elite.
they believed that the propertied the well educated and the pious were responsible for guiding the masses toward the common good.
believing sincerely that a market economy would benefit everyone in the long run they had no qualms about the rise of a commercial and industrial capitalism.
read the document alexis de tocqueville democracy in america conclusion tocquevilles wisdom the french traveler alexis de tocqueville author of the most influential account ever written of the emergence of american democracy visited the united states in 1831 and 1832.
he departed well before the presidential election and had relatively little to say about national politics and the formation of political parties.
for him the essence of american democracy was local self government such as he observed in the town meetings of new england.
the participation of ordinary citizens in the affairs of their communities impressed him greatly and he praised americans for not conceding their liberties to a centralized state as he believed the french had done.
however tocqueville was acutely aware of the limitations of american democracy.
he knew that the kind of democracy men were practicing was not meant for women.
observing how women were strictly assigned to a separate domestic sphere he concluded that americans had never supposed that democratic principles should undermine the husbands authority and make it doubtful who is in charge of the family he also believed the nullification crisis foreshadowed destruction of the union and predicted the problem of slavery would lead eventually to civil war and racial conflict.
he noted the power of white supremacy providing an unforgettable firsthand description of the sufferings of an indian community in their forced migration to the west as well as a graphic account of the way free blacks were segregated and driven from the polls in northern cities such as philadelphia.
white americans he believed were deeply prejudiced against people of color and he doubted it was possible for a whole people to rise.
above itself perhaps a despot could force the equality and mingling of the races but alexis de tocqueville 1805 1859 is credited with creating one of the most perceptive and enduring portraits of the american people and their political institutions and his observations democracy in america 2 volumes 1835 1840 are still read and discussed by americans today.
while american democracy remains at the head of affairs no one would dare attempt any such thing and it is possible to foresee that the freer the whites in america are the more they will seek to isolate themselves his observations have value because of their clear sighted insistence that the democracy and equality of the jacksonian era were meant for only some of the people.
his belief that problems associated with slavery would endanger the union was keenly prophetic.
chapter 10 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 10 the triumph of white mens democracy on myhistorylab time line 1824 house of representatives elects john quincy adams president congress passes tariff of abominations jackson elected president over j q adams jackson vetoes the maysville road bill congress passes indian removal act jackson reorganizes his cabinet first national nominating conventions meet jackson vetoes the bill rechartering the bank of the united states jackson reelected defeating henry clay national republican candidate 1833 jackson removes federal deposits from the bank of the united states whig party comes into existence jackson issues specie circular martin van buren elected president financial panic occurs followed by depression lasting until 1843 congress passes the independent subtreasury bill harrison whig defeats van buren democrat for the presidency 1832 1833 crisis erupts over south carolinas attempt to nullify the tariff of 1832 chapter review democracy in theory and practice the bank war and the second party system how did the relationship between the government and the people change during this time.
what were the arguments for and against the bank of the united states.
the federal government grew more accountable to the people it represented.
popular sovereignty meant that men of modest backgrounds could attain new social status while cultural expression reflected this decline in deference more public officials now had to seek popular election but public opinion divided over the role of government in the economy.
p 226 nicholas biddle believed that the bank of the united states was essential to american economic stability.
jackson believed the federal bank to be unconstitutional and saw it as a personal enemy and monster corporation bank proponents believed that jacksons bank war exceeded his constitutional authority and the whig party emerged in opposition to his policies.
p 237 jackson and the politics of democracy heyday of the second party system what political conflicts did president andrew and jackson face and how did he resolve them.
what was the two party system and how were the parties different.
jackson resolved political conflicts with iron fisted authority.
during the peggy eaton affair he sacked his entire cabinet and he handled the indian dilemma by evicting native americans from their homeland.
during the nullification crisis he threatened south carolina with military force.
p 229 the second party system was the rivalry between whigs and democrats.
the whigs included industrialists merchants and farmers who favored stimulus to commerce.
democrats included smaller farmers wage workers and declining gentry individuals the new market economy had left behind.
the division also marked cultural differences in religion ethnicity and lifestyle.
p 242 study resources key terms and definitions tariff of abominations an 1828 protective tariff or tax on imports that angered southern free traders.
p 230 trail of tears in the winter of 1838 1839 the cherokee were forced to evacuate their lands in georgia and travel under military guard to presentday oklahoma.
exposure and disease killed roughly one quarter of the 16 000 forced migrants en route.
p 234 nullification the supposed right of any state to declare a federal law inoperative within its boundaries.
in 1832 south carolina nullified the federal tariff.
p 235 bank war between 1832 1836 andrew jackson used his presidential power to fight and ultimately destroy the second bank of the united states.
p 237 panic of 1837 a financial depression that lasted until the 1840s.
p 240 second party system historians term for the national two party rivalry between democrats and whigs.
the second party system began in the 1830s and ended in the 1850s with the demise of the whigs and the rise of the republican party.
p 242 critical thinking questions 1.
what do you think was the relationship between the new democratic culture and the emergence of the second party system.
why do you think the people the democratic party appealed to were so worried about a national bank.
do you think jacksons forceful style of leadership was a good model for the presidency.
should he have deferred more to the states or to congress in pursuing his policies.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 10 on myhistorylab democracy in theory and practice read the document moby dick p 227 the bank war and the second party system herman melville excerpt from jackson and the politics of democracy read the document andrew jackson first annual message to congress 1829 p 231 complete the assignment mans democracy p 232 racial identity in a white view the closer look the trail of tears p 235 view the closer look read the document the bank bill p 239 listen to the audio andrew jackson veto of van buren p 240 view the closer look general harrisons log cabin march sheet music p 240 heyday of the second party system read the document alexis de tocqueville democracy in america p 243 indian removals p 236 read the document south carolinas ordinance of nullification p 237 indicates study plan media assignment slaves and masters contents and learning objectives the divided society of the old south pg.
248 slavery and the southern economy pg.
261 what were the divisions within black society in the old south.
how was slavery related to economic success in the south.
the world of southern blacks pg.
248 what factors made living conditions for southern blacks more or less difficult.
feature essay harriet jacobs and maria norcom women of southern households white society in the antebellum south pg.
256 what divided and united white southern society.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 11 slaves and masters nat turners rebellion a turning point in the slave south on august 22 1831 the worst nightmare of southern slaveholders became reality.
a group of slaves in southampton county virginia rose in open and bloody rebellion.
their leader was nat turner a preacher and prophet who believed god had given him a sign that the time was ripe to strike for freedom a vision of black and white angels wrestling in the sky had convinced him that divine wrath was about to be visited upon the white oppressor.
beginning with a few followers and rallying others as he went along turner led his band from plantation to plantation and oversaw the killing of nearly sixty whites.
after only forty eight hours white forces dispersed the rampaging slaves.
the rebels were then rounded up and executed along with dozens of other slaves who were vaguely suspected of complicity.
nat turner was the last to be captured and he went to the gallows unrepentant convinced he had acted in accordance with gods will.
after the initial panic and rumors of a wider insurrection had passed white southerners went about making sure such an incident would never happen again.
their anxiety and determination were strengthened by the fact that 1831 also saw the emergence of a more militant northern abolitionism.
just two years after african american abolitionist david walker published his appeal to the colored citizens of the world calling for blacks to take up arms against slavery william lloyd garrison put out the first issue of his newspaper the liberator the first publication by a white author to demand immediate abolition of slavery rather than gradual emancipation.
nat turner and william lloyd garrison were viewed as two prongs of a revolutionary attack on the southern way of life.
although no evidence came to light that turner was directly influenced by abolitionist propaganda many whites believed that he must have been or that future rebels might be.
consequently they launched a massive campaign to quarantine the slaves from possible exposure to antislavery ideas and attitudes.
a series of new laws severely restricted the rights of slaves to move about assemble without white supervision or learn to read and write.
the wave of repression did not stop at the color line laws and the threat of mob action prevented white dissenters from read the document the confessions of nat turner 1831 a ride for liberty the fugitive slaves by eastman johnson depicts a slave family in flight to the north.
source brooklyn museum of art.
gift of gwendolyn o l.
conkling 40 59a a ride for liberty the fugitive slaves by eastman johnson ca.
oil on paper board 22 26 1 4 in.
publicly criticizing or even questioning the institution of slavery.
loyalty to the region was firmly identified with defense of it and proslavery agitators sought to create a mood of crisis and danger requiring absolute unity and single mindedness among the white population.
this embattled attitude lay behind the growth of a more militant sectionalism and inspired threats to secede from the union unless the souths peculiar institution could be made safe from northern or abolitionist attack.
chapter 11 slaves and masters he campaign for repression after the nat turner rebellion apparently achieved its original aim.
between 1831 and the civil war there were no further uprisings resulting in the mass killing of whites.
this fact once led some historians to conclude that african american slaves were brainwashed into a state of docility.
but resistance to slavery simply took less dangerous forms.
the brute force employed in response to the turner rebellion and the elaborate precautions taken against its recurrence provided slaves with a more realistic sense of the odds against direct confrontation with white power.
as a result they sought and perfected other methods of asserting their humanity.
the heroic effort to endure slavery without surrendering to it gave rise to an african american culture of lasting value.
this culture combined unique family arrangements religious ideas of liberation and creative responses to the oppression of servitude.
among white southerners the need to police and control the huge population of enslaved people influenced every aspect of daily life and produced an increasingly isolated divided and insecure society.
while long standing racial prejudice contributed to the divided society the determination of whites to preserve the institution of slavery derived in large part from the important role slavery played in the southern economy.
t the divided society of the old south what were the divisions within black society in the old south.
slavery would not have lasted as long as it did and southerners would not have reacted so strongly to real or imagined threats to its survival if an influential class of whites had not had a vital and growing economic interest in this form of human exploitation.
since the early colonial period forced labor had been considered essential to the souths plantation economy.
in the period between the 1790s and the civil war plantation agriculture expanded enormously and so did dependence on slave labor unfree blacks were the only workers readily available to landowners who sought to profit from expanding market opportunities by raising staple crops on a large scale.
as slavery increased in its importance to the southern economy and society the divisions within that society grew increasingly apparent.
most fundamentally the fact that all whites were free and most blacks were slaves created a sharp cleavage between the races in southern society.
indeed during the last decades before the civil war the racial divide grew ever more congruent with the split between free and unfree.
yet the overwhelming importance of race gives an impression of a basic equality within the master race that some would say is an illusion.
the truth may lie somewhere in between.
in the language of sociologists inequality in the old south was determined in two ways by class differences in status resulting from unequal access to wealth and productive resources and by caste inherited advantages or disadvantages associated with racial ancestry.
awareness of both systems of social ranking is necessary for an understanding of southern society.
white society was divided by class and by region both were important for determining a white southerners relationship to the institution of slavery.
the large planters were the dominant class and nonslaveholders were of lower social rank.
planters defined as those who owned twenty or more slaves tended to live in the plantation areas of the cotton belt stretching from georgia across alabama mississippi louisiana and texas as well as the low country of south carolina.
in upcountry and frontier areas lived yeoman farmers who owned few or no slaves.
in 1860 only one quarter of all white southerners belonged to families owning slaves.
even in the cotton belt slaveholders were a minority of whites on the eve of the civil war about 40 percent.
planters were the minority of a minority just 4 percent of the total white population of the south in 1860.
twenty percent of whites owned twenty slaves or less and the remaining majority three fourths of all whites owned no slaves at all.
thus southern society was dominated by a planter class that was a numerical and geographically isolated minority inequalities of class created regional divisions.
there were also divisions within black society.
most african americans in the south were slaves but a small number about 6 percent were free.
even free blacks faced increasing restrictions on their rights during the antebellum era.
among slaves the great majority lived on plantations and worked in agriculture but a small number worked either in industrial jobs or in a variety of tasks in urban settings.
even on plantations there were some differences in status and experience between field hands and servants who worked in the house or in skilled jobs such as carpentry or blacksmithing.
yet because all blacks even those who were free suffered under the yoke of racial prejudice and legal inequality these diverse experiences did not translate into the kind of class divisions that caused rifts within white southern society.
rather most blacks shared the goal of ending slavery.
the world of southern blacks what factors made living conditions for southern blacks more or less difficult.
the majority of slaves lived on units of land owned by planters who had twenty or more slaves.
on the other hand only 2 4 percent lived on very large plantations of more than two hundred slaves.
few slaves lived in all black worlds like those of some caribbean plantations where it was possible to create autonomous black communities with little white intervention in daily life.
most southern slaves lived in close contact with their masters and suffered their masters strenuous efforts to maintain control over all aspects of their lives.
the masters of these agrarian communities sought to ensure their personal safety and the profitability of their enterprises by using physical and psychological means to make slaves docile and obedient.
by word and deed they tried to convince the slaves that whites were superior and had a right to rule over blacks.
masters also drew constant attention to their awesome power and ability to deal harshly with rebels and malcontents.
as increasing numbers of slaves were converted to christianity and attended white supervised services they were forced to hear repeatedly that god had commanded slaves to serve and obey their masters.
despite these pressures most african americans managed to retain an inner sense of their own worth and dignity.
when conditions the world of southern blacks were right they openly asserted their desire for freedom and equality and showed their disdain for white claims that slavery was a positive good some historians have argued that a stress on the strength of slave culture obscures the harshness and cruelty of the system and its damaging effect on the african american personality.
slavery was often a demoralizing and even brutalizing experience providing little opportunity for learning about the outside world developing mental skills and exercising individual initiative.
compared with serfs in russia or even with slaves on some of the large sugar plantations of the caribbean slaves on the relatively small southern plantations or farms with their high turnover of personnel had less chance to develop communal ties of the kind associated with peasant villages.
nevertheless their sense of being part of a distinctive group with its own beliefs and ways of doing things fragile and precarious though it may have been made psychic survival possible and helped engender an african american ethnicity that would be a source of strength in future struggles.
although slave culture did not normally provoke violent resistance to the slaveholders regime the inner world that slaves made for themselves gave them the spiritual strength to thwart the masters efforts to take over their hearts and minds.
after emancipation this resilient cultural heritage would combine with the tradition of open protest created by rebellious slaves and free black abolitionists to inspire and sustain new struggles for equality.
slaves daily life and labor slaves daily life varied enormously depending on the region in which they lived and the type of plantation or farm on which they worked.
by the time of the civil war 90 percent of the souths four million slaves worked on plantations or farms with the remainder working in industry or in cities.
slaves were close to half of the total population in the black belt or cotton belt of the lower south south carolina georgia alabama mississippi louisiana arkansas and texas and many lived in plantation regions with a slave majority.
in the upper south north carolina virginia maryland delaware kentucky tennessee and missouri whites outnumbered slaves by more than three to one and slaves were far more likely to live on farms where they worked side by side with an owner.
on large plantations in the cotton belt most slaves worked in gangs under an overseer.
white overseers sometimes helped by black drivers enforced a workday from sunup to sundown six days a week.
cotton cultivation required year round labor so there was never a slack season under king cotton enslaved women and children were expected to work in the fields as well often bringing babies and young children to the fields where they could be cared for by older children and nursed by their mothers during brief breaks.
some older children worked in trash gangs doing lighter tasks such as weeding and yard cleaning.
life on the sugar plantations was even harsher sometimes entailing work well into the night during the harvest season.
mortality rates in some parts of sugar growing louisiana were very high.
in the low country of south carolina and georgia slaves who cultivated rice worked under a task system that gave them more control over the pace of labor.
with less supervision many were able to complete their tasks within an eight hour day.
likewise slaves who lived on small farms often worked side by side with their masters rather than in large groups of slaves although such intimacy did not necessarily mean a leveling of power relationships.
yet despite masters efforts to control the pace of work even under the gang system slaves resisted working on clock time enforcing customary rights to take breaks and especially to take sunday off completely.
while about three quarters of slaves were field workers slaves performed many other kinds of labor.
they dug ditches built houses worked on boats and in mills often hired out by their masters for a year at a time and labored as house servants.
some slaves also worked within the slave community as preachers caretakers of children and healers especially women.
while white masters sometimes treated domestic workers or other personal servants as having a special status it would be a mistake to assume that slaves shared their ranking system.
evidence suggests that those with the highest status within slave communities were preachers and healers people whose special skills and knowledge directly benefited their communities.
a small number of slaves about 5 percent worked in industry in the south.
the closest thing to a factory in the old south was the tredegar iron works in richmond virginia staffed almost entirely by slaves.
slaves also built most of the railroads that existed in the southern states but these were few relative to the north before the civil war.
overall the south remained predominantly agricultural throughout the antebellum era and most slaves worked in the fields.
slaves in cities took on a wider range of jobs than plantation slaves and in general enjoyed more autonomy.
some urban slaves even lived apart from their masters and hired out their own time returning a portion of their wages to their owners.
they also worked in eating and drinking establishments hotels and as skilled laborers in tradesmens shops.
in addition to the work they did for their masters in the fields or in other jobs most slaves kept gardens or small farm plots to supplement their daily food rations.
they also fished hunted and trapped animals.
many slaves also worked overtime for their own masters on sundays or holidays in exchange for money or goods or hired out their overtime hours to others.
this underground economy suggests slaves overpowering desire to provide for their families sometimes even raising enough funds to purchase their freedom.
slave families kinship and community more than any other the african american family was the institution that prevented slavery from becoming utterly demoralizing.
contrary to what historians and sociologists used to believe slaves had a strong and abiding sense of family and kinship.
the nature of the families or households that predominated on particular plantations or farms varied.
on large plantations with relatively stable slave populations a substantial majority of slave children lived in two parent households and many marriages lasted for as long as twenty to thirty years.
they were more often broken up by the death or sale of one of the partners than by voluntary dissolution of the union.
here mothers fathers and children were closely bonded and parents shared child rearing responsibilities within the limits allowed by the masters.
marital fidelity was encouraged by masters who believed that stable unions produced more offspring and by christian churches that viewed adultery and divorce as sinful.
chapter 11 slaves and masters read the document overseers report from chicora wood plantation chicora wood was an extremely successful rice plantation in south carolina owned by robert allston.
allston owned several plantations and of course many slaves.
in 1850 he owned 401 slaves by 1860 that number had increased to 603.
but in areas where most slaves lived on farms or small plantations and especially in areas of the upper south where the trading and hiring out of slaves was frequent a different pattern seems to have prevailed.
under these circumstances slaves frequently had spouses who resided on other plantations or farms often some distance away and ties between husbands and wives were looser and more fragile.
the result was that female headed families were the norm and responsibility for child rearing was vested in mothers assisted in most cases by female relatives and friends.
mothercentered families with weak conjugal ties were a natural response to the infrequent presence of fathers and to the prospect of their being moved or sold beyond visiting distance.
where the breakup of unions by sale or relocation could be expected at any time it did not pay to invest all of ones emotions in a conjugal relationship.
but whether the basic family form was nuclear or matrifocal female headed the ties that it created were infinitely precious to its members.
masters acquired great leverage over the behavior of slaves by invoking the threat of family breakup through sale.
the terrible anguish that usually accompanied the breakup of families through sale showed the depth of kinship feelings.
masters knew that the first place to look for a fugitive was in the neighborhood of a family member who had been sold away.
indeed many slaves tried to shape their own sales in order to be sold with family members or to the same neighborhood.
these efforts were fraught with danger.
as one ex slave recalled the mistress asked her which she loved the best her mammy or her daddy and she thought it would please her daddy to say that she loved him the best so she said my daddy but she regretted it very much when she found this caused her to be sold along with her father the next day harriet jacobs an escaped slave famous for her published autobiography hid in her grandmothers attic for seven years while attempting to secure her childrens freedom.
for more on harriet jacobs see the feature essay harriet jacobs and maria norcom women of southern households pp.
feelings of kinship and mutual obligation extended beyond the primary family.
grandparents uncles aunts and even cousins were often known to slaves through direct contact or family lore.
a sense of family continuity over three or more generations was revealed in the names that slaves gave to their children or took for themselves.
infants were frequently named after grandparents and those slaves who assumed surnames often chose that of an ancestors owner rather than the family name of a current master.
kinship ties were not limited to blood relations.
when families were broken up by sale individual members who found themselves on plantations far from home were likely to be adopted into new kinship networks.
orphans or children without responsible parents were quickly absorbed without prejudice into new families.
soon after the civil war one reconstruction official faced an elderly exslave named roger who demanded land to raise crop on for his family of sixty parents that is relations children included a family with sixty parents made no sense to this official but it made sense in a community in which families were defined by ties of affection and cooperation rather than blood relation.
for some purposes all the slaves on a plantation were in reality members of a single extended family as their forms of address clearly reveal.
elderly slaves were addressed by everyone else as uncle and aunty and younger unrelated slaves commonly called each other brother or sister strong kinship ties whether real or fictive meant slaves could depend on one another.
the kinship network also provided a vehicle for the transmission of african american folk traditions from one generation to the next.
african american religion from the realm of culture and fundamental beliefs african americans drew the strength to hold their heads high and look beyond their immediate condition.
religion was the cornerstone of this emerging african american culture.
black christianity may have owed its original existence to the efforts of white missionaries but it was far from a mere imitation of white religious forms and beliefs.
this distinctive variant of evangelical protestantism incorporated elements of african religion and emphasized those portions of the bible that spoke to the aspirations of an enslaved people thirsting for freedom.
most slaves did not encounter christianity in a church setting.
there were a few independent black churches in the antebellum south which mainly served free blacks and urban slaves with indulgent masters.
free blacks who seceded from white congregations that discriminated against them formed a variety of autonomous baptist groups as well as southern branches of the highly successful african methodist episcopal ame church organized as a national denomination under the leadership of the reverend richard allen of philadelphia in 1816.
but the mass of blacks did not have access to the independent churches.
plantation slaves who were exposed to christianity either attended the neighboring white churches or worshiped at home.
the world of southern blacks on large estates masters or white missionaries often conducted sunday services.
but the narratives and recollections of ex slaves reveal that white sanctioned religious activity was only a superficial part of the slaves spiritual life.
the true slave religion was practiced at night often secretly and was led by black preachers.
historian albert j raboteau has described this underground black christianity as the invisible institution this covert slave religion was a highly emotional affair that featured singing shouting and dancing.
in some ways the atmosphere resembled a backwoods revival meeting.
but much of what went on was actually an adaptation of african religious beliefs and customs.
the chanting mode of preaching with the congregation responding at regular intervals and the expression of religious feelings through rhythmic movements especially the counterclockwise movement known as the ring shout had clear african origins.
the black conversion experience was normally a state of ecstasy more akin to possession by spirits a major form of african religious expression than to the agony of those read the document struck down at white revivals.
the emphasis on sinfulness and fear of damnation that were core themes of white evangelicalism played a lesser role among blacks.
for them religion was more an affirmation of the joy of life than a rejection of worldly pleasures and temptations.
slave sermons and religious songs spoke directly to the plight of a people in bondage and implicitly asserted their right to be free.
the most popular of all biblical subjects was the deliverance of the children of israel from slavery in egypt in the book of exodus.
in one moving spiritual god commands moses to tell old pharaoh to let my people go many sermons and songs refer to the crossing of jordan and the arrival in the promised land.
oh canaan sweet canaan i am bound for the land of canaan and oh brothers dont get weary.
well land on canaans shore are typical of lines from spirituals known to have been sung by slaves.
other songs invoke the liberation theme in different ways.
one recalls that jesus had set poor sinners free and another prophesies well soon be free when the lord will call us home frances e w harper the slave mother on large plantations slave men and women formed stable monogamous unions that often lasted until the couple was broken up by the death or sale of one of the partners.
this painting by christian mayr portrays a slave wedding celebrated in white sulphur springs virginia in 1838.
the wedding couple wears white attire.
complete the assignment harriet jacobs and maria norcom women of southern households on myhistorylab feature essay harriet jacobs and maria norcom women of southern households this 1836 engraving from an antislavery novel depicts a plantation mistress scolding a slave woman while the master looks on.
though white women were also subjugated to the authority of white men in southern society the divide of race prevented plantation ladies and slaves from finding potential solidarity as women.
h arriet jacobs born enslaved in north carolina in 1813 became a slave in james and maria norcoms household in 1825.
james began to whisper foul words in harriets ears when she was a young teenager.
harriet had no one to whom she could turn except for her free black grandmother who lived in the town.
although her grandmother had been a slave harriets master dreaded her scorching rebukes and furthermore he did not wish to have his villainy made public for a time this wish to keep up some outward show of decency protected harriet.
harriet jacobss grandmother was an unusual woman who had worked extra for years to buy her childrens freedom only to be cheated out of her earnings at the end.
like most free black women harriets grandmother was the unmarried head of her own household separated long ago from the father of her children.
running their own households gave some free black women a measure of autonomy but also left them with little support in the daily struggle against poverty and racism.
maria norcom as the wife of a prominent doctor and large plantation owner lived a life very different from harriets or her grandmothers.
yet it was not the life of carefree luxury sometimes portrayed in movies and books about the old south.
compared to poorer women in the south maria had more access to education and periods of recreation and relaxation.
but as a lady of the upper class she was expected to master strict rules of womanhood that demanded moral purity and virtue.
she also had to learn the personal and managerial skills necessary to oversee a household staffed by slaves.
most southern white women worked hard to keep households and families together and they all lived within a social system that denied them legal rights by placing them under the domination of husbands and fathers.
james norcoms behavior while it certainly violated his vows of marriage was not egregious enough to have won maria a divorce under the laws of north carolina.
whether they were rich or poor free or enslaved women were to a large degree defined by their relationship to the head of the household nearly always a white man.
although there were expectations that husbands would protect and care for their wives women had little recourse against husbands who departed from those expectations.
for example marion s d converse a woman from a prominent south carolina family dreaded her abusive second husband augustus.
through years of beatings and jealous tirades marion was unable to escape the bonds of marriage because augustuss deplorable conduct fell short of legal grounds for divorce in south carolina only abandonment or impotence.
yet marion converse was able to gain aid and protection from her prominent family who shielded her from the worst consequences of an abusive marriage.
when maria norcom discovered her husbands overtures toward harriet she was distraught and took harriet to sleep in her own room.
yet as harriet later described it maria pitied herself as a martyr but she was incapable of feeling for the condition of shame and misery in which her unfortunate helpless slave was placed harriet often woke to find maria bending over her and came to fear for her safety around this jealous mistress harriet jacobss and maria norcoms story illustrates that planters ruled their wives as well as their slaves.
all southern women were embedded in a social system that gave authority over their lives and choices to men.
despite this commonality few women were able to reach across the divides of race and class to recognize these similarities.
tormented by jealousy and humiliation maria came to blame the slave rather than her husband for their intimacy imagining that harriet herself had seduced him.
harriet managed to elude her masters advances in part due to marias vigilance.
enslaved women such as harriet jacobs were the most vulnerable of southern women.
they were subject to a level of violence and sexual assault that was unknown to other women in the south and when they were victims of violence they lacked even the limited legal defenses that were open to poor white women.
because black women were considered unable to give or withhold consent it was not a crime to rape a black woman.
and had harriet fought back physically against her masters advances she risked criminal prosecution and even death.
when the slave celia killed the master who had been raping her for years her court appointed lawyer argued that she should not be criminally liable based on a georgia statute allowing women to use force to defend their honor against a rapist.
the court however decreed that black women were not women within the meaning of the statute.
celia had no honor that the law recognized.
she was thus convicted of murder sentenced to death and hanged.
excluding black women from the laws of rape also reinforced common images of black women as either sexually aggressive jezebels or sexless nurturing mammies the first stereotype justified the sexual exploitation of slave women and the second fed the slaveowners fantasy that their slaves loved and cared for them.
of course neither of these images corresponded to the realities and hardships of slave life.
enslaved women were often assigned backbreaking labor that paid little attention to common distinctions about womens work they were expected to do all of the normal tasks assigned to women sewing washing child care as well as working a full day in the fields.
despite these brutal conditions slave women organized communities and households and tried to protect them against the worst excesses of the slave system.
harriet and her grandmother were involved in a complicated network of extended kin and invested a great deal of energy in protecting brothers and sons from sale up the river harriet eventually escaped from the norcoms in 1835 hiding in her grandmothers attic for seven years.
escaped from the bonds of slavery harriet eventually joined the battle to abolish it.
her book incidents in the life of a slave girl the autobiography of linda brent was published in 1861 with the help of abolitionist novelist lydia maria child.
for many years critics dismissed the narrative as either a work of fiction or the product of childs own pen but historians today have laid those charges to rest recognizing harriet jacobss important contribution to the struggle against slavery and to american literature.
we know much less about what happened to maria norcom who neither kept a diary nor wrote her own story.
all that we know is that she continued in her unhappy marriage to james norcom.
her daughter mary matilda when she came of age pursued and attempted to reclaim harriet as her slave under the fugitive slave act.
to thwart this effort harriet allowed an abolitionist friend to buy her and set her free.
in slaveholding households like that of the norcoms all the women whether white or black free or enslaved were subject to the will of the master of the household.
most southern women depended on white men legally and socially giving them little recourse against men like james norcom who burst the bounds of decency despite their shared submission to james an impassable gulf separated harriet and maria and its name was race.
after the civil war southern women white and black reorganized their households in a changed society but it would still be another century before they began to bridge that gulf.
questions for discussion 1.
how did race affect the lives of southern women like harriet jacobs and maria norcom.
why did slaveholding white men like james norcom have so much power over their slaves and wives.
why were male slaveholders able to sexually abuse black women without having to face legal consequences in the south.
chapter 11 slaves and masters listen to the audio file when the roll is called up yonder free blacks in the north established african methodist episcopalian churches like the bethel a m e church in philadelphia founded by the minister richard allen.
today it is the oldest church property continuously owned by african americans.
most of the songs of freedom and deliverance can be interpreted as referring exclusively to religious salvation and the afterlife and this was undoubtedly how slaves hoped their masters would understand them.
but the slaves did not forget that god had once freed a people from slavery in this life and punished their masters.
the bible thus gave african americans the hope that they as a people would repeat the experience of the israelites and be delivered from bondage.
besides being the basis for a deep rooted hope for eventual freedom religion helped the slaves maintain their sense of inner worth.
unless their masters were unusually pious religious slaves could regard themselves as superior to their owners.
some slaves even believed that all whites were damned because of their unjust treatment of blacks while all slaves would be saved because any sins they committed were the involuntary result of their condition.
more important the invisible institution of the church gave african americans a chance to create and control a world of their own.
preachers elders and other leaders of slave congregations could acquire a sense of status within their own community that had not been conferred by whites the singers who improvised the spirituals found an outlet for independent artistic expression.
although religion seldom inspired slaves to open rebellion it must be regarded as a prime source of resistance to the dehumanizing effects of enslavement.
resistance and rebellion open rebellion the bearing of arms against the oppressors by organized groups of slaves was the most dramatic and clear cut form of slave resistance.
in the period between 1800 and 1831 a number of slaves participated in revolts that showed their willingness to risk their lives in a desperate bid for liberation.
in 1800 a virginia slave named gabriel prosser mobilized a large band of his fellows to march on richmond.
but a violent storm dispersed gabriels army and enabled whites to suppress the uprising without any loss of white life.
in 1811 several hundred louisiana slaves marched on new orleans brandishing guns waving flags and beating drums.
it took three hundred soldiers of the u s army aided by armed planters and militiamen to stop the advance and to end the rebellion.
in 1822 whites in charleston south carolina uncovered an extensive and well planned conspiracy organized by a free black man named denmark vesey to seize local armories arm the slave population and take possession of the city.
although the vesey conspiracy was nipped in the bud it convinced south carolinians that blacks were the jacobins of the country a reference to the militants of the french revolution against whom we should always be on guard only a year after the vesey affair whites in norfolk county virginia complained of the activities of a marauding band of runaway slaves that had killed several whites.
the militia was sent out and captured the alleged leader a fugitive of several years standing named bob ferebee.
groups of runaways who hid for years in places such as the great dismal swamp of virginia continued to raid plantations throughout the antebellum period and were inclined to fight to the death rather than be recaptured.
as we have already seen the most bloody and terrifying of all slave revolts was the nat turner insurrection of 1831.
although it was the last slave rebellion of this kind during the pre civil war period armed resistance had not ended.
indeed the most sustained and successful effort of slaves to win their freedom by force of arms took place in florida between 1835 and 1842 when hundreds of black fugitives fought in the second seminole war alongside the indians who had given them a haven.
the seminoles were resisting removal to oklahoma but for the blacks who took part the war was a struggle for their own freedom and when it ended most of them were allowed to accompany their indian allies to the transmississippi west.
only a tiny fraction of all slaves ever took part in organized acts of violent resistance.
most realized that the odds against a successful revolt were very high and bitter experience had shown them that the usual outcome was death to the rebels.
as a consequence they characteristically devised safer or more ingenious ways to resist white dominance.
one way of protesting against slavery was to run away and thousands of slaves showed their discontent and desire for freedom in this fashion.
most fugitives never got beyond the neighborhood of the plantation after lying out for a time they would return often after negotiating immunity from punishment.
but many escapees remained free for years by hiding in swamps or other remote areas and a fraction made it to freedom in the north or mexico.
some fugitives stowed away aboard ships heading to northern ports others traveled overland for hundreds of miles avoiding patrols and inquisitive whites by staying off the roads and moving only at night.
some were able to escape with the help of the underground railroad an informal network of sympathetic free blacks and a few whites who helped fugitives make their way north.
light skinned blacks sometimes made it to freedom by passing for white and one resourceful slave even had himself packed in a box and shipped to the north.
the world of southern blacks watch the video underground railroad between 1815 and 1860 it is estimated that 130 000 refugees out of 4 million slaves escaped the slave south on the underground railroad the railroad had as many as 3 200 active workers.
by the 1850s substantial numbers of northerners had been in open violation of federal law by hiding runaways for a night.
the typical fugitive was a young unmarried male from the upper south.
for the majority of slaves however flight was not a real option.
either they lived too deep in the south to have any chance of reaching free soil or they were reluctant to leave family and friends behind.
slaves who did not or could not leave the plantation had to register their opposition to the masters regime while remaining enslaved.
the normal way of expressing discontent was engaging in a kind of indirect or passive resistance.
many slaves worked slowly and inefficiently not because they were naturally lazy as whites supposed but as a gesture of protest or alienation as conveyed in the words of a popular slave song you may think im working but i aint others withheld labor by feigning illness or injury.
stealing provisions a very common activity on most plantations was another way to show contempt for authority.
according to the code of ethics prevailing in the slave quarters theft from the master was no sin it was simply a way for slaves to get a larger share of the fruits of their own labors.
substantial numbers of slaves committed acts of sabotage.
tools and agricultural implements were deliberately broken animals were willfully neglected or mistreated and barns or other outbuildings were set afire.
often masters could not identify the culprits because slaves did not readily inform on one another.
the ultimate act of clandestine resistance was poisoning the masters food.
some slaves especially the conjure men and women who practiced a combination of folk medicine and witchcraft knew how to mix rare virtually untraceable poisons and a suspiciously large number of plantation whites became suddenly and mysteriously ill.
sometimes whole families died from obscure diseases that did not infect the slave quarters.
the basic attitude behind such actions was revealed in the folktales that slaves passed down from generation to generation.
the famous brer rabbit stories showed how a small apparently defenseless animal could overcome a bigger and stronger one through cunning and deceit.
although these tales often had an african origin they also served as an allegory for the black view of the master slave relationship.
other stories which were not told in front of whites openly portrayed the slave as a clever trickster outwitting the master.
in one such tale a slave reports to his master that seven hogs have died of malitis thinking this is a dread disease the master agrees to let the slaves have all the meat.
what really happened so the story goes was this one of the strongest negroes got up early in chapter 11 slaves and masters the morning and skitted to the hog pen with a heavy mallet in his hand.
when he tapped mister hog tween the eyes with that mallet malitis set in mighty quick free blacks in the old south free blacks occupied an increasingly precarious position in the antebellum south.
white southerners fears of free blacks inciting slave revolts and their reaction to attacks by abolitionists led slaveholders after 1830 increasingly to defend slavery as a positive good rather than a necessary evil.
southerners articulated this defense of slavery in terms of race emphasizing a dual image of the black person under the domesticating influence of a white master the slave was a child a happy sambo outside of this influence he was a savage beast.
beginning in the 1830s all of the southern states passed a series of laws cracking down on free blacks.
these laws forced free people of color to register or have white guardians who were responsible for their behavior.
invariably free henry box brown emerges from the crate in which he escaped from slavery blacks were required to carry papers proving their free stain richmond virginia to freedom in philadelphia.
tus and in some states they had to obtain official permission to move from one county to another.
licensing laws were everything by taking the side of the slaves.
in southern louisiana invoked to exclude blacks from several occupations and attempts there was even a small group of mulatto planters who lived in luxury by blacks to hold meetings or form organizations were frequently supported by the labor of other african americans.
blocked by the authorities.
sometimes vagrancy and apprenticeship however although some free blacks were able to create niches laws were used to force free blacks into a state of economic depenof relative freedom their position in southern society became dency barely distinguishable from outright slavery.
increasingly precarious.
beginning in the 1830s southern whites although beset by special problems of their own most free sought to draw the line between free and unfree more firmly as a blacks identified with the suffering of the slaves when circumline between black and white.
free blacks were an anomaly in this stances allowed they protested against the peculiar institution system increasingly the southern answer was to exclude degrade and worked for its abolition.
many of them had once been slaves and even enslave those free people of color who remained within themselves or were the children of slaves often they had close relatheir borders.
just before the outbreak of the civil war a campaign tives who were still in bondage.
furthermore they knew that the developed in some southern states to carry the pattern of repression discrimination from which they suffered was rooted in slavery and and discrimination to its logical conclusion several state legislatures the racial attitudes that accompanied it.
so long as slavery existed proposed laws giving free people of color the choice of emigrating their own rights were likely to be denied and even their freedom from the state or being enslaved.
was at risk former slaves who could not prove they had been legally freed were subject to reenslavement.
this threat existed even in the north under federal fugitive slave laws escaped slaves could be returned to bondage.
even blacks who were born free were not white society in the perfectly safe.
kidnapping or fraudulent seizure by slave catchers antebellum south was always a possibility.
because of the elaborate system of control and surveillance free what divided and united white southern society.
blacks in the south were in a relatively weak position to work against those who know the old south only from modern novels films slavery.
the case of denmark vesey showed that a prosperous and and television programs are likely to envision a land filled with well situated free black might make a stand in the struggle for freemajestic plantations.
pillared mansions behind oak lined carriagedom but it also revealed the dangers of revolutionary activity and the ways are portrayed as scenes of aristocratic splendor where courtly odds against success.
the wave of repression against the free black gentlemen and elegant ladies attended by hordes of uniformed population that followed the vesey conspiracy heightened the danblack servants lived in refined luxury.
it is easy to conclude from gers and increased the odds.
consequently most free blacks found such images that the typical white southerner was an aristocrat who that survival depended on creating the impression of loyalty to the belonged to a family that owned large numbers of slaves.
planter regime.
in some parts of the lower south groups of relatively the great houses existed and some wealthy slaveholders did privileged free people of color mostly of racially mixed origin were maintain as aristocratic a lifestyle as was ever seen in the united sometimes persuaded that it was to their advantage to preserve the states.
but census returns indicate that this was the world of status quo.
as skilled artisans and small business owners depenonly a small percentage of slaveowners and a minuscule portion dent on white favors and patronage they had little incentive to risk white society in the antebellum south of the total white population.
the number of large planters who had the means to build great houses and entertain lavishly those who owned at least fifty slaves comprised fewer than 1 percent of all whites.
most southern whites were nonslaveholding yeoman farmers.
yet even those who owned no slaves grew to depend on slavery in other ways whether economically because they hired slaves or psychologically because having a degraded class of blacks below them made them feel better about their own place in society.
however the class divisions between slaveholders and nonslaveholders did contribute to the political rifts that became increasingly apparent on the eve of the civil war.
the planters world the great planters although few in number had a weighty influence on southern life.
they set the tone and values for much of the rest of society especially for the less wealthy slaveowners who sought to imitate the planters style of living to the extent that resources allowed.
although many of them were too busy tending to their plantations to become openly involved in politics wealthy planters held more than their share of high offices and often exerted a decisive influence on public policy.
within those regions of the south in which plantation agriculture predominated they were a ruling class in every sense of the term.
contrary to legend a majority of the great planters of the pre civil war period were self made rather than descendants of the old colonial gentry.
some were ambitious young men who married planters daughters.
others started as lawyers and used their fees and connections to acquire plantations.
as the cotton kingdom spread westward to alabama mississippi and louisiana a greater proportion of the largest slaveholders were men who began their careers in commerce land speculation banking and even slave trading.
stephen duncan of mississippi probably the most prosperous cotton planter in the south during the 1850s he owned eight plantations and 1018 slaves had invested the profits from his banking operations.
among the largest sugar planters of southern louisiana at this time were maunsel white and john burnside irish immigrants who had prospered as new orleans merchants and isaac franklin former king of the slave traders.
to be successful a planter had to be a shrewd entrepreneur who kept a careful eye on the market the prices of slaves and land and the extent of his indebtedness.
reliable factors the agents who marketed the crop and provided advances against future sales could assist him in making decisions but a planter who failed to spend a good deal of time with his account books could end up in serious trouble.
managing the slaves and plantation production was also difficult and time consuming even when overseers were available to supervise day to day activities.
hence few planters could be the men of leisure featured in the popular image of the old south.
likewise despite typical images of women in the old south full hoop skirts and wide front porches elaborate parties in plantation houses dripping with spanish moss elegant ladies gossiping over tea few women fit the stereotype of the southern belle.
not only were plantation mistresses a tiny minority of the women who lived and worked in the slave states before the civil war but even those who were part of the planter elite rarely lived lives of leisure.
see the feature essay harriet jacobs and maria norcom women of southern households pp.
some of the richest and most secure plantation families did aspire to live in the manner of a traditional landed aristocracy.
a few were so successful that they were accepted as equals by visiting english nobility.
big houses elegant carriages fancy dress balls and excessive numbers of house servants all reflected aristocratic aspirations.
the romantic cult of chivalry described in the popular novels of sir walter scott was in vogue in some circles and even led to the nonviolent reenactment of medieval tournaments.
dueling despite efforts to repress it remained the standard way to settle affairs of honor among gentlemen.
another sign of gentility was the tendency of planters sons to avoid trade as a primary or secondary career in favor of law or the military.
planters daughters were trained from girlhood to play the piano speak french dress in the latest fashions and sparkle in the drawing room or on the dance floor.
the aristocratic style originated among the older gentry of the seaboard slave states but by the 1840s and 1850s it had spread southwest as a second generation of wealthy planters began to displace the rough hewn pioneers of the cotton kingdom.
planters racism and paternalism no assessment of the planters outlook or worldview can be made without considering their relations with their slaves.
planters by the census definition owned more than half of all the slaves in the south and set standards for treatment and management.
it is clear from their private letters and journals as well as from proslavery propaganda that most planters liked to think of themselves as benevolent masters.
rather than seeing slavery as a brutal form of economic exploitation they argued that blacks needed the slave system to ensure that they were cared for and protected.
often they referred to their slaves as if they were members of an extended patriarchal family a favorite phrase was our people according to this ideology of paternalism blacks were a race of perpetual children requiring constant care and supervision by superior whites.
paternalistic rhetoric increased greatly after abolitionists began to charge that most slaveholders were sadistic monsters.
paternalism went hand in hand with racism.
in a typical proslavery apology georgia lawyer thomas reade cobb wrote that a state of bondage so far from doing violence to the law of the africans nature develops and perfects it and that in that state he enjoys the greatest amount of happiness and arrives at the greatest degree of perfection of which his nature is capable slaveholders justified slavery by the supposed mental and moral inferiority of africans.
it was only in the 1830s and 1840s that a full blown modern racism developed on both sides of the atlantic.
racial scientists developed theories relating skull size to mental ability and some proslavery apologists even developed religious theories of polygenesis arguing that blacks were not descended from adam and eve.
this racial ideology helped slaveholders believe that a benevolent christian could justly enslave another human being.
while some historians have argued that paternalism was part of a social system that was organized like a family hierarchy rather than a brutal profit making arrangement there was no inconsistency between planters paternalism and capitalism.
slaves were chapter 11 slaves and masters themselves a form of capital that is they were both the main tools of production for a booming economy as well as an asset in themselves valuable for their rising prices like shares in the stock market today.
the ban on the transatlantic slave trade in 1808 was effective enough to make it economically necessary to the continuation of slavery for the slave population to reproduce itself.
rising slave prices also inhibited extreme physical abuse and deprivation.
it was in the interest of masters to see that their slave property remained in good enough condition to work hard and produce large numbers of children.
furthermore a good return on their investment enabled southern planters to spend more on slave maintenance than could masters in less prosperous plantation economies.
much of the slaveholders paternalist writing discussed the coincidence of humanity and interest by which they meant that treating slaves well including firm discipline was in their best economic interest.
thus there was a grain of truth in the planters claim that their slaves were relatively well provided for.
recent comparative studies have suggested that north american slaves of the pre civil war period enjoyed a somewhat higher standard of living than those in other new world slave societies such as brazil and the west indian sugar islands.
their food clothing and shelter were normally sufficient to sustain life and labor at slightly above a bare subsistence level and the rapid increase of the slave population in the old south stands in sharp contrast to the usual failure of slave populations to reproduce themselves.
but some planters did not behave rationally.
they failed to control their tempers or tried to work more slaves than they could afford to maintain.
consequently there were more cases of physical abuse and undernourishment than a purely economic calculation would lead us to expect.
the testimony of slaves themselves and of some independent white observers suggests that masters of large plantations generally did not have close and intimate relationships with the mass of field slaves.
the kind of affection and concern associated with a father figure appears to have been limited mainly to relationships with a few favored house servants or other elite slaves such as drivers and highly skilled artisans.
the field hands on large estates dealt mostly with overseers who were hired or fired because of their ability to meet production quotas.
the limits of paternalism were revealed in the slave market.
planters who looked down on slave traders as less than respectable gentlemen nevertheless broke apart families by selling slaves down river when they found themselves in need of money.
even slaveholders who claimed not to participate in the slave market themselves often mortgaged slaves to secure debts as many as one third of all slave sales in the south were court ordered sheriff s auctions when such masters defaulted on their debts.
while paternalism may have moderated planters behavior to some extent especially when economic self interest reinforced humanity it is important to remember that most departures from unremitting labor and harsh conditions were concessions wrested from owners through slaves defiance and resistance at great personal risk.
furthermore when they were being most realistic planters conceded that the ultimate basis of their authority was the slaves fear of force and intimidation rather than the natural obedience resulting from a loving parent child relationship.
scattered among their statements are admissions that they relied on the principle of fear more and more on the power of fear or most graphically that it was necessary to make them stand in fear devices for inspiring fear included whipping and the threat of sale away from family and friends.
planters manuals and instructions to overseers reveal that certain and swift punishment for any infraction of the rules or even for a surly attitude was the preferred method for maintaining order and productivity.
when masters did abuse their power by torturing killing or raping their slaves the victims had little recourse.
slaves lacked legal protection against such cruelty because their testimony was not accepted in court.
abolitionists were correct in condemning slavery on principle because it gave one human being nearly absolute power over another.
this system was bound to result in atrocities and violence.
small slaveholders as we have seen the great majority of slaveholders were not planters.
some of the small slaveholders were urban merchants or professional men who needed slaves only for domestic service but more typical were farmers who used one or two slave families to ease the burden of their own labor.
relatively little is known about life on these small slaveholding farms unlike the planters the owners left few records behind.
we do know that life was relatively spartan.
masters lived in log cabins or small frame cottages and slaves lived in lofts or sheds that were not usually up to plantation housing standards.
for better or worse relations between owners and their slaves were more intimate than on larger estates.
these farmers often worked in the fields alongside their slaves and sometimes ate at the same table or slept under the same roof.
but such closeness did not necessarily result in better treatment.
slave testimony reveals that both the best and the worst of slavery could be found on these farms depending on the master.
given a choice most slaves preferred to live on plantations because they offered the sociability culture and kinship of the slave quarters as well as better prospects for adequate food clothing and shelter.
marginal slaveholders often sank into poverty and were forced either to sell their slaves or give them short rations.
yeoman farmers just below the small slaveholders on the social scale was a substantial class of yeoman farmers who owned land they worked themselves.
contrary to another myth about the old south most of these people did not fit the image of the degraded shiftless poor white.
while there were impoverished white squatters on stretches of barren or sandy soil that no one else wanted and a significant number of tenant farmers most were ambitious young men seeking to accumulate the capital to become landowners.
the majority of the nonslaveholding rural population were proud self reliant farmers.
if they were disadvantaged in comparison with farmers elsewhere in the united states it was because the lack of economic development and urban growth perpetuated frontier conditions and denied them the opportunity to produce a substantial surplus for market.
the yeomen were mostly concentrated in the backcountry where slaves and plantations were rarely seen.
in every southern white society in the antebellum south state white farmers without slaves populated hilly sections unsuitable for plantation agriculture like the foothills of the appalachians and the ozarks and long stretches of piney barrens along the gulf coast.
a somewhat distinct group were the genuine mountaineers who lived too high up to succeed at farming and relied heavily on hunting lumbering and distilling whiskey.
yeoman women much more than their wealthy counterparts participated in every dimension of household labor.
they worked in the garden made handicrafts and clothing and even labored in the fields when necessary.
women in the most dire economic circumstances even worked for wages in small businesses or on nearby farms.
they also raised much larger families than their wealthier neighbors because having many children supplied a valuable labor pool for the family farm.
there were also a greater number of lower class women who lived outside of male headed households.
despite the pressures of respectability there was a greater acceptance and sympathy in less affluent communities for women who bore illegitimate children or were abandoned by their husbands.
working women created a broader definition of proper households and navigated the challenges of holding families together in precarious economic conditions.
the lack of transportation facilities more than some failure of energy or character limited the prosperity of the yeomen.
a large part of their effort was devoted to growing subsistence crops mainly corn.
they raised a small percentage of the souths cotton and tobacco but production was severely limited by read the document the difficulty of marketing.
their main source of cash was livestock especially hogs.
hogs could be walked to market over long distances and massive droves from the backcountry to urban markets were commonplace.
but southern livestock which was generally allowed to forage in the woods rather than being fattened on grain was of poor quality and did not bring high prices or big profits to raisers.
although they did not benefit directly from the peculiar institution most yeomen and other nonslaveholders tolerated slavery and fiercely opposed abolitionism in any form.
a few antislavery southerners most notably hinton r helper of north carolina tried to convince the yeomen that they were victimized by planter dominance and should work for its overthrow but they made little headway.
most yeomen were staunch jacksonians who resented aristocratic pretensions and feared concentrations of power and wealth in the hands of the few.
when asked about the gentry they commonly voiced their disdain of cotton snobs and rich planters generally.
in state and local politics they sometimes expressed such feelings by voting against planter interests on issues involving representation banking and internal improvements.
why then did they fail to respond to antislavery appeals that called on them to strike at the real source of planter power and privilege.
one reason was that some nonslaveholders hoped to get ahead in the world and in the south this meant acquiring slaves of their own.
just enough of the more prosperous yeomen broke george fitzhugh the blessings of slavery 1857 this proslavery cartoon of 1841 contends that the slave in america had a better life than did the working class white in england.
supposedly the grateful slaves were clothed fed and cared for in their old age by kindly and sympathetic masters while starving english workers were mercilessly exploited by factory owners.
source collection of the new york historical society negative no.
chapter 11 slaves and masters into the slaveholding classes to make this dream seem believable.
planters anxious to ensure the loyalty of nonslaveholders strenuously encouraged the notion that every white man was a potential master.
even if they did not aspire to own slaves white farmers often viewed black servitude as providing a guarantee of their own liberty and independence.
a society that gave them the right to vote and the chance to be self sufficient on land of their own encouraged the feeling they were fundamentally equal to the largest slaveholders.
in part their anxieties were economic freed slaves would compete with them for land or jobs.
but an intense racism deepened their fears and made their opposition to black freedom implacable.
now suppose they was free a nonslaveholder told a northern traveler you see theyd think themselves just as good as we.
just suppose you had a family of children how would you like to hev a niggar feeling just as good as a white man.
howd you like to hev a niggar steppin up to your darter emancipation was unthinkable because it would remove the pride and status that automatically went along with a white skin in this acutely race conscious society.
slavery despite its drawbacks served to keep blacks in their place and to make all whites however poor and uneducated feel they were free and equal members of a master race.
a closed mind and a closed society institution was inherently sinful.
the message was carried in a host of books pamphlets and newspaper editorials published between the 1830s and the civil war.
partly the argument was aimed at the north as a way of bolstering the strong current of antiabolitionist sentiment.
but southerners themselves were a prime target the message was clearly calculated to resolve the kind of doubts and misgivings that had been freely expressed before the 1830s.
much of the message may have been over the heads of nonslaveholders many of whom were semiliterate but some of the arguments in popularized form were used to arouse racial anxieties that tended to neutralize antislavery sentiment among the lower classes.
the proslavery argument was based on three main propositions.
the first and foremost was that enslavement was the natural and proper status for people of african descent.
blacks it was alleged were innately inferior to whites and suited only for slavery.
biased scientific and historical evidence was presented to support this claim.
second slavery was held to be sanctioned by the bible and christianity a position made necessary by the abolitionist appeal to christian ethics.
ancient hebrew slavery was held up as a divinely sanctioned model and saint paul was quoted endlessly on the duty of servants to obey their masters.
southern churchmen took the lead in reconciling slavery with religion and also made renewed efforts to convert the slaves as a way of showing that enslavement could be a means for spreading the gospel.
finally efforts were made to show that slavery was consistent with the humanitarian spirit of the nineteenth century.
the premise that blacks were naturally dependent led to the notion that they despite the tacit assent of most nonslaveholders the dominant planters never lost their fear that lower class whites would turn against slavery.
they felt threatened from two sides from the slave quarters where a new nat turner might be gathering his forces and from the backcountry where yeomen and poor whites might heed the call of abolitionists and rise up against planter domination.
beginning in the read the document poem the slave auction 1830s the ruling element tightened the screws of slavery and used their control of government and communications to create a mood of impending catastrophe designed to ensure that all southern whites were of a single mind on the slavery issue.
before the 1830s open discussion of the rights or wrongs of slavery had been possible in many parts of the south.
apologists commonly described the institution as a necessary evil in the upper south as late as the 1820s there had been significant support for the american colonization society with its program of gradual voluntary emancipation accompanied by deportation of the freedmen.
in 1831 and 1832 in the wake of the nat turner uprising the virginia state legislature debated a gradual emancipation plan.
major support for ensuring white safety by getting rid of both slavery and blacks came from representatives of the yeoman farmers living west of the blue ridge mountains.
but the defeat of the proposal effectively ended the discussion.
the argument that slavery was a positive good rather than an evil slated for this illustration of a public auction of slaves in charleston south carolina in 1856 was representative gradual elimination won the day.
of the horrific treatment of slaves including the separation of the parents of slaves from their young the positive good defense of slavery was children.
literary and visual depictions of slave auctions were produced and widely disseminated to an answer to the abolitionist charge that the mobilize abolitionist sentiment among slavery opponents based in the north and in england.
slavery and the southern economy needed some kind of family government or special regime equivabove all slave revolt.
the persistent barrage of proslavery propaganda and the course of national events in the 1850s created a alent to the asylums that existed for the small numbers of whites mood of panic and desperation.
by this time an increasing number who were also incapable of caring for themselves.
the plantation of southerners had become convinced that safety from abolitionallegedly provided such an environment as benevolent masters ism and its associated terrors required a formal withdrawal from the guided and ruled this race of perpetual children union secession.
by the 1850s the proslavery argument had gone beyond mere apology for the south and its peculiar institution and featured an ingenious attack on the free labor system of the north.
according slavery and the southern economy to virginian george fitzhugh the master slave relationship was more humane than the one prevailing between employers and wage how was slavery related to economic success laborers in the north.
slaves had security against unemployment in the south.
and a guarantee of care in old age whereas free workers might face destitution and even starvation at any time.
worker insecurity in southern society transformed itself according to the needs of the free societies led inevitably to strikes bitter class conflicts and the slave system because slavery played such a crucial role in the ecorise of socialism slave societies on the other hand could more nomic life of the south.
despite the internal divisions of southern effectively protect property rights and maintain other traditional society white southerners from all regions and classes came to values because their laboring class was better treated and at the perceive their interests tied up with slavery whether because they same time more firmly controlled.
owned slaves themselves or because they believed in slavery as proslavery southerners attempted to seal off their region essential to the southern way of life or white mens democracy from antislavery ideas and influences.
whites who were bold and because slavery was the cornerstone of the southern economy enough to criticize slavery publicly were mobbed or perseit affected white southerners attitudes toward landholding and cuted.
one of the last and bravest of the southern abolitionists toward industrialization.
cassius m clay of kentucky armed himself with a brace of for the most part the expansion of slavery the number of pistols when he gave speeches until the threat of mob violence slaves in the south more than tripled between 1810 and 1860 to finally forced him across the ohio river.
in 1856 a university nearly four million can be attributed to the rise of king cotton of north carolina professor was fired because he admitted he the cotton growing areas of the south were becoming more and would vote for the moderately antislavery republican party if he more dependent on slavery at the same time that agriculture in had a chance.
clergymen who questioned the morality of slavthe upper south was actually moving away from the institution.
ery were driven from their pulpits and northern travelers susyet slavery continued to remain important to the economy of the pected of being abolitionist agents were tarred and feathered.
upper south in a different way through the slave trade.
when abolitionists tried to send their literature through the mail during the 1830s it was seized view the closer look slave auction in richmond virgina in southern post offices and publicly burned.
such flagrant denials of free speech and civil liberties were inspired in part by fears that nonslaveholding whites and slaves would get subversive ideas about slavery.
hinton r helpers book the impending crisis of the south an 1857 appeal to nonslaveholders to resist the planter regime was suppressed with particular vigor those found with copies were beaten up or even lynched.
but the deepest fear was that slaves would hear the abolitionist talk or read antislavery literature and be inspired to rebel.
such anxieties rose to panic pitch after the nat turner rebellion.
consequently new laws were passed making it a crime to teach slaves to read and write.
other repressive legislation aimed at slaves banned meetings unless a white man was present severely restricted the activities of black preachers and suppressed independent black churches.
free blacks thought to be possible instigators of slave revolt were denied basic civil liberties and were the object of growing surveillance and harassment.
all these efforts at thought control and interthe spectacle of a slave market was commonplace in the cities of the antebellum south.
here nal security did not allay planters fears of abolitionist subversion lower class white dissent and the correspondent has depicted a relaxed scene as if to evoke the prosaic nature of the event.
chapter 11 slaves and masters view the map slavery in the south british north america canada grea tl a s ke boston n y mass.
r i conn missouri territory pa new york philadelphia ill n j md.
d c cincinnati at l a n t i c ocean va ky n c tenn arkansas territory s c charleston miss.
ala ga more than 50 slave 10 to 50 slave new spain la.
less than 10 slave new orleans gulf of mexico no slaves or no statistics available 500 miles 500 kilometers slave concentration 1820 in 1820 most slaves lived in the eastern seaboard states of virginia and south carolina and in louisiana on the gulf of mexico.
the internal slave trade tobacco the original plantation crop of the colonial period continued to be the principal slave cultivated commodity of the upper tier of southern states during the pre civil war era.
but markets were often depressed and profitable tobacco cultivation was hard to sustain for very long in one place because the crop rapidly depleted the soil.
during the lengthy depression of the tobacco market that lasted from the 1820s to the 1850s tobacco farmers in virginia and maryland experimented with fertilizer use crop rotation and diversified farming all of which increased the need for capital but reduced the demand for labor.
as slave prices rose because of high demand in the lower south and demand for slaves in the upper south fell the internal slave trade took off.
increasingly the most profitable business for slaveholders in virginia kentucky maryland and the carolinas was selling surplus slaves from the upper south to regions of the lower south where staple crop production was more profitable.
this interstate slave trade sent an estimated six to seven hundred thousand slaves in a southwesterly direction between 1815 and 1860.
historian michael tadman estimates that the chances of a slave child in the upper south in the 1820s being sold south by 1860 were as high as 30 percent.
such sales were wrenching not only splitting families but making it especially unlikely that the slaves sold would ever see friends or family again.
some economic historians have concluded that the most important crop produced in the tobacco kingdom was not the stinking weed but human beings cultivated for the auction block.
respectable planters did not like to think of themselves as raising slaves for market but few would refuse to sell some of their people if they needed money to get out of debt or make expensive improvements.
for the region as a whole the slave trade provided a crucial source of capital in a period of transition and innovation.
nevertheless the fact that slave labor was declining in importance in the upper south meant the peculiar institution had a weaker hold on public loyalty there than in the cotton states.
diversification of agriculture was accompanied by a more rapid rate of urban and industrial development than was occurring elsewhere in the south.
as a result virginians marylanders and kentuckians were seriously divided on whether their ultimate future lay with the deep souths plantation economy or with the industrializing free labor system that was flourishing just north of their borders.
the rise of the cotton kingdom the warmer climate and good soils of the lower tier of southern states made it possible to raise crops more naturally suited than tobacco or cereals to the plantation form of agriculture and the heavy use of slave labor.
since the colonial or revolutionary slavery and the southern economy british north america canada grea minn mich nebraska terr.
milwaukee iowa chicago des moines n y mass.
r i buffalo pa cleveland fort wayne harrisburg conn pittsburgh columbus new york philadelphia ohio n j del.
atlantic ocean springfield indianapolis washington d c md.
cincinnati va richmond ill ind.
louisville st louis norfolk ky mo.
evansville new bern n c tenn unorganized terr.
boston detroit cairo new mexico terr.
n h portland toronto kansas topeka terr.
vt wis minneapolis utah terr.
montreal t l ak e s d ze ni.
r un or g te a r s c ark.
atlanta miss.
ala more than 50 slave charleston ga 10 to 50 slave jackson la.
mobile texas port arthur less than 10 slave jacksonville no slaves or no statistics available new orleans fla main routes of the underground railroad gulf of mexico 500 miles 500 kilometers slave concentration 1860 in 1860 slavery had extended throughout the southern states with the greatest concentrations of slaves in the states of the deep south.
there were also sizable slave populations in the new states of missouri arkansas texas and florida.
periods rice and a special long staple variety of fine cotton had been grown profitably on vast estates along the coast of south carolina and georgia.
in lower louisiana between new orleans and baton rouge sugar was the cash crop.
as in the west indies sugar production required a large investment and a great deal of backbreaking labor in other words large well financed plantations and small armies of slave laborers.
cultivation of rice longstaple cotton and sugar was limited by natural conditions to peripheral semitropical areas.
it was the rise of short staple cotton as the souths major crop that strengthened the hold of slavery and the plantation on the southern economy.
short staple cotton differed from the long staple variety in two important ways its bolls contained seeds that were much more difficult to extract by hand and it could be grown almost anywhere south of virginia and kentucky the main requirement was a guarantee of two hundred frost free days.
before the 1790s the seed extraction problem had prevented short staple cotton from becoming a major market crop.
the invention of the cotton gin in 1793 resolved that difficulty however and the subsequent westward expansion opened vast areas for cotton cultivation.
unlike rice and sugar cotton could be grown on small farms as well as on plantations.
but large planters enjoyed certain advantages that made them the main producers.
only relatively large operators could afford their own gins or possessed the capital to acquire the fertile bottomlands that brought the highest yields.
they also had lower transportation costs because they were able to monopolize land along rivers and streams that were the souths natural arteries of transportation.
the first major cotton producing regions were inland areas of georgia and south carolina but the center of production shifted rapidly westward during the nineteenth century.
by the 1830s alabama and mississippi had surpassed georgia and south carolina as cotton growing states.
by the 1850s arkansas northwest louisiana and east texas were the most prosperous and rapidly growing plantation regions.
the rise in total production that accompanied this geographic expansion was phenomenal.
between 1792 and 1817 the souths output of cotton rose from about 13 000 bales to 461 000 by 1840 it was 1 35 million and in 1860 production peaked at the colossal figure of 4 8 million bales.
most of the cotton went to supply the booming textile industry of great britain.
lesser proportions went to the manufacturers of continental europe and the northeastern united states.
cotton is king proclaimed a southern orator in the 1850s and he was right.
by that time three quarters of the worlds supply of cotton came from the american south and this single commodity accounted for more than half the total dollar value of american exports.
cotton growing and the network of commercial and industrial enterprises that marketed and processed the crop constituted the most important economic interest in the united states on the eve of the civil war.
since slavery and cotton seemed inextricably linked it appeared obvious to many southerners that their peculiar institution was the keystone of national wealth and economic progress.
chapter 11 slaves and masters however the rise of the cotton kingdom did not bring a uniform or steady prosperity to the lower south.
many planters worked the land until it was exhausted and then took their slaves westward to richer soils leaving depressed and ravaged areas in their wake.
planters were also beset and sometimes ruined by fluctuations in markets and prices.
boom periods and flush times were followed by falling prices and waves of bankruptcies.
the great periods of expansion and bonanza profits were 1815 1819 1832 1837 and 1849 1860.
the first two booms were deflated by a fall in cotton prices resulting from overproduction and depressed market conditions.
during the eleven years of rising output and high prices preceding the civil war however the planters gradually forgot their earlier troubles and began to imagine they were immune to future economic disasters.
despite the insecurities associated with cotton production most of the time the crop represented the old souths best chance for profitable investment.
prudent planters who had not borrowed too heavily during flush times could survive periods of depression by cutting costs making their plantations self sufficient by shifting acreage away from cotton and planting subsistence crops.
for those with worn out land two options existed they could sell their land and move west or they could sell their slaves to raise capital for fertilization crop rotation and other improvements that could help them survive where they were.
hence planters had little incentive to seek alternatives to slavery the plantation and dependence on a single cash crop.
from a purely economic point of view they had every reason to defend slavery and to insist on their right to expand it.
slavery and industrialization as the sectional quarrel with the north intensified southerners became increasingly alarmed by their regions lack of economic self sufficiency.
dependence on the north for capital marketing facilities and manufactured goods was seen as evidence of a dangerous subservience to external economic interests.
southern nationalists such as j d b debow editor of the influential debows review called during the 1850s for the south to develop its own industries commerce and shipping.
as a fervent defender of slavery debow did not believe such diversification would require a massive shift to free wage labor.
he saw no reason for slaves not to be used as the main workforce in an industrial revolution.
but his call for a diversified economy went unanswered.
men with capital were doing too well in plantation agriculture to risk their money in other ventures.
it is difficult to determine whether the main factor that kept most slaves working on plantations and farms was some inherent characteristic of slavery as a labor system or simply the strong market demand for cotton and the souths capacity to meet it.
a minority of slaves about 5 percent during the 1850s were in fact successfully employed in industrial tasks such as mining construction and mill work.
in the 1840s and 1850s a debate raged among white capitalists over whether the south should use free whites or enslaved blacks as the labor supply for industry.
william gregg of south carolina the foremost promoter of cotton mills in the old south defended a white labor policy arguing that factory work would provide new economic opportunities for a degraded class of poor whites.
but other advocates of industrialization feared that the growth of a free working class would lead to social conflict among whites and preferred using slaves for all supervised manual labor.
in practice some factories employed slaves others white workers and a few even experimented with integrated workforces.
it is clear however that the union of slavery and cotton that was central to the souths prosperity impeded industrialization and left the region dependent on a one crop agriculture and on the north for capital and marketing.
the profitability issue some southerners were making money and a great deal of it using slave labor to raise cotton.
the great mansions of the alabama black belt and the lower mississippi could not have been built if their owners had not been successful.
but did slavery yield a good return for the great majority of slaveholders who were not large planters.
did it provide the basis for general prosperity and a relatively high standard of living for the southern population in general or at least for the two thirds of it who were white and free.
these questions have been hotly debated by economic historians.
some knowledge of the main arguments regarding its profitability is helpful to an understanding of the souths attachment to slavery.
for many years historians believed that slave based agriculture was on the average not very lucrative.
planters account books seemed to show at best a modest return on investment.
in the 1850s the price of slaves rose at a faster rate than the price of cotton allegedly squeezing many operators.
some historians even concluded that slavery was a dying institution by the time of the civil war.
profitability they argued depended on access to new and fertile land suitable for plantation agriculture and virtually all such land within the limits of the united states had already been taken up by 1860.
hence slavery had allegedly reached its natural limits of expansion and was on the verge of becoming so unprofitable that it would fall of its own weight in the near future.
a more recent interpretation based on modern economic theory holds that slavery was in fact still an economically sound institution in 1860 and showed no signs of imminent decline.
a reexamination of planters records using modern accounting methods shows that during the 1850s planters could normally expect an annual return of 8 to 10 percent on capital invested.
this yield was roughly equivalent to the best that could then be obtained from the most lucrative sectors of northern industry and commerce.
furthermore it is no longer clear that plantation agriculture had reached its natural limits of expansion by 1860.
production in texas had not yet peaked and construction of railroads and levees was opening up new areas for cotton growing elsewhere in the south.
with the advantage of hindsight economic historians have pointed out that improvements in transportation and flood control would enable the post civil war south to double its cotton acreage.
those who now argue that slavery was profitable and had an expansive future have made a strong and convincing case.
but the larger question remains what sort of economic development did a slave plantation system foster.
the system may have made slaveholders wealthy but did the benefits trickle down to the rest of the population to the majority of whites who owned no slaves and to the slaves themselves.
did it promote conclusion worlds in conflict efficiency and progressive change.
economists robert fogel and stanley engerman have argued that the plantations success was due to an internally efficient enterprise with good managers and industrious well motivated workers.
other economic historians have attributed the profitability almost exclusively to favorable market conditions.
large plantation owners were the only segment of the population to enjoy the full benefits of the slave economy.
small slaveholders and nonslaveholders shared only to a very limited extent in the bonanza profits of the cotton economy.
because of various insecurities lack of credit high transportation costs and a greater vulnerability to market fluctuations they had to devote a larger share of their acreage to subsistence crops especially corn and hogs than did the planters.
they were thus able to survive but their standard of living was lower than that of most northern farmers.
slaves received sufficient food clothing and shelter for their subsistence and to make them capable of working well enough to keep the plantation afloat economically but their living standard was below that of the poorest free people in the united states.
it was proslavery propaganda rather than documented fact to maintain that slaves were better off than northern wage laborers.
the souths economic development was skewed in favor of a single route to wealth open only to the minority possessing both a white skin and access to capital.
the concentration of capital and business energies on cotton production foreclosed the kind of diversified industrial and commercial growth that would have provided wider opportunities.
thus in comparison to the industrializing north the south was an underdeveloped region in which much of the population had little incentive to work hard.
a lack of public education for whites and the denial of even minimal literacy to slaves represented a critical failure to develop human resources.
the souths economy was probably condemned so long as it was based on slavery.
conclusion worlds in conflict if slaves lived to some extent in a separate and distinctive world of their own so did planters less affluent whites and even free blacks.
the old south was thus a deeply divided society.
the northern traveler frederick law olmsted who made three journeys through the slave states in the 1850s provided a vivid sense of how diverse in outlook and circumstances southern people could be.
visiting a great plantation he watched the slaves stop working as soon as the overseer turned away on a small farm he saw a slave and his owner working in the fields together.
treatment of slaves he found ranged from humane paternalism to flagrant cruelty.
olmsted heard nonslaveholding whites damn the planters as cotton snobs but also talk about blacks as niggars and express fear of interracial marriages if slaves were freed.
he received hospitality from poor whites living in crowded one room cabins as well as from fabulously wealthy planters in pillared mansions and he found life in the backcountry radically different from that in the plantation belts.
he showed that the south was a kaleidoscope of groups divided by class race culture and geography.
what held it together and provided some measure of unity were a booming plantation economy and a web of customary relationships and loyalties that could obscure the underlying cleavages and antagonisms.
the fractured and fragile nature of this society would soon become apparent when it was subjected to the pressures of civil war.
chapter 11 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 11 slaves and masters on myhistorylab time line 1793 eli whitney invents the cotton gin 1800 gabriel prosser leads abortive slave rebellion in 1837 panic of 1837 is followed by major depression of the virginia 1811 slaves revolt in point coupe section of louisiana 1822 denmark vesey conspiracy uncovered in charleston south carolina 1829 david walker publishes appeal calling for slave insurrection 1830 first national negro convention meets 1831 slaves under nat turner rebel in virginia killing almost sixty whites 1832 virginia legislature votes against gradual emancipation 1835 1842 blacks fight alongside indians in the second seminole war cotton market frederick douglass publishes the north star a black antislavery newspaper cotton prices rise and a sustained boom commences group of free blacks rescues escaped slave shadrack from federal authorities in boston harriet beecher stowes antislavery novel uncle toms cabin is published and becomes a best seller hinton r helper attacks slavery on economic grounds in the impending crisis of the south the book is suppressed in the southern states cotton prices and production reach all time peak chapter review the divided society of the old south mich ukee hicago buff detroit cleveland fort wayne p harris pittsb columbus ohio what were the divisions within black society in the old south.
pringfield indianapolis washington d cincinnati va rich ill ind.
louisville most african americans in the old south were slaves who worked on plantations and farms as agricultural laborers domestic servants and skilled craftsmen.
although slave servants and craftsmen enjoyed higher status than field hands all southern blacks even the six percent who were free suffered from racial prejudice and severe legal inequality.
p 248 ky evansville n airo tenn n white society in the antebellum south what divided and united white southern society.
while great planters were a tiny minority of the population they set the tone for white southern society propagating the ideology of paternalism that slaves were children who required a stern but loving parent.
most whites owned few or no slaves but a political system of white mans democracy and the ideology of white supremacy united them with large slaveholders.
p 256 slavery and the southern economy the world of southern blacks what factors made living conditions for southern blacks more or less difficult.
living conditions were difficult because slaves performed many types of labor.
some worked from sunup to sundown in gangs others maintained more work control through the task system urban slaves and free blacks had more autonomy.
family and community helped ease slave life while some slaves resisted oppression by running away sabotage and even armed rebellion.
p 248 how was slavery related to economic success in the south.
slavery dominated the economy of the south tobacco gave way to the internal slave trade as the biggest business in the upper south while the cotton gin made large scale staple agriculture a booming economic machine in the deep south fueling the growth of a world textile industry and enriching the planter class.
p 261 study resources key terms and definitions old south the term refers to the slaveholding states between 1830 and 1860 when slave labor and cotton production dominated the economies of the southern states.
this period is also known as the antebellum era p 248 yeoman farmers southern small landholders who owned no slaves and who lived primarily in the foothills of the appalachian and ozark mountains.
they were self reliant and grew mixed crops although they usually did not produce a substantial amount to be sold on the market.
p 258 vesey conspiracy an unsuccessful 1822 plot to burn charleston south carolina and initiate a general slave revolt led by a free african american denmark vesey.
p 254 american colonization society founded in 1817 the society advocated the relocation of free blacks and freed slaves to the african colony of monrovia present day liberia.
p 260 underground railroad a network of safe houses organized by abolitionists usually free blacks to help slaves escape to the north or canada.
p 254 cotton gin invented by eli whitney in 1793 this device for separating the seeds from the fibers of short staple cotton enabled a slave to clean fifty times more cotton as by hand which reduced production costs and gave new life to slavery in the south.
p 263 critical thinking questions 1.
do you think the booming cotton economy benefited all members of southern society or only certain segments.
what difference did it make in a slaves life if he or she belonged to a 3.
what do you think is the connection between slavery and racism.
why did slaveholders begin defending slavery in racial terms in the 1830s.
great planter or to a small farmer.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 11 on myhistorylab the divided society of the old south white society in the antebellum south read the document p 247 confessions of nat turner 1831 read the document p 260 the world of southern blacks overseers report from chicora read the document wood plantation p 250 read the document mother p 251 listen to the audio file yonder p 254 view the closer look virginia p 261 when the roll is called up view the map underground railroad p 255 poem the slave auction slavery and the southern economy frances e w.
harper the slave complete the assignment harriet jacobs and maria norcom women of southern households p 252 watch the video george fitzhugh read the document the blessings of slavery 1857 p 259 slave auction in richmond slavery in the south p 262 indicates study plan media assignment the pursuit of perfection contents and learning objectives the rise of evangelicalism pg.
269 reform turns radical pg.
278 how did the evangelical revivalism of the early nineteenth century spur reform movements.
what were some of the major antebellum reform movements.
feature essay the war against demon drink domesticity and changes in the american family pg.
273 law and society the legal rights of married women reforming the law of coverture what was the doctrine of separate spheres and how did it change family life.
institutional reform pg.
276 how did horace mann change ideas about public schooling in america.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 13 an age of expansionism the spirit of young america in the 1840s and early 1850s politicians writers and entrepreneurs frequently proclaimed themselves champions of young america.
one of the first to use the phrase was the famous author and lecturer ralph waldo emerson who told an audience of merchants and manufacturers in 1844 that the nation was entering a new era of commercial development technological progress and territorial expansion.
emerson suggested that a progressive new generation the young americans would lead this surge of physical development.
more than a slogan and less than an organized movement young america stood for a positive attitude toward the market economy and industrial growth a more aggressive and belligerent foreign policy and a celebration of americas unique strengths and virtues.
young americans favored enlarging the national market by acquiring new territory.
they called for the annexation of texas asserted an american claim to all of oregon and urged the appropriation of vast new territories from mexico.
they also celebrated the technological advances that would knit this new empire together especially the telegraph and the railroad.
telegraphs according to one writer would flash sensation and volition.
to and from towns and provinces as if they were organs and limbs of a single organism railroads would provide a vast system of iron muscles which as it were move the limbs of the mighty organism young america was a cultural and intellectual movement as well as an economic and political one.
in 1845 a washington journal hailed the election of the 49 year old james k polk at that time the youngest man to have been elected president as a sign that youth will dare to take antiquity by the beard and tear the cloak from hoary headed hypocrisy.
too young to be corrupt.
it is young america awakened to a sense of her own intellectual greatness by her soaring spirit.
it stands in strength the voice of the majority during the polk administration young american writers and critics mostly based in new york city called for a new and distinctive national literature free of subservience to european themes or models and expressive of the democratic spirit.
their organ was the literary world founded in 1847 and its ideals influenced two of the greatest writers america has produced walt whitman and herman melville.
whitman captured much of the exuberance and expansionism of young america in his song of the open road from this hour i ordain myself loosd of limits and imaginary lines going where i list my own master total and absolute.
i inhale great draughts of space the east and the west are mine and the north and the south are mine.
i am larger better than i thought.
other things the dangers facing a nation that was overreaching itself by indulging its pride and exalted sense of destiny with too little concern for the moral and practical consequences.
he young american ideal the idea of a young country led by young men into new paths of prosperity and greatness appealed to many people and found support across political party lines.
but the attitude came to be identified primarily with young democrats who wanted to move their party away from its traditional fear of the expansion of commerce and industry.
unlike old line jeffersonians and jacksonians young americans had no qualms about the market economy and the speculative materialistic spirit it called forth.
before 1848 the young american impulse focused mainly on the great expanse of western lands that lay just beyond the nations borders.
after the mexican american war when territorial gains extended the nations boundaries from the atlantic to the pacific attention shifted to internal development.
new discoveries of gold in the nations western territories fostered economic growth technological advances spurred industrialization and increased immigration brought more people to populate the lands newly acquired by agreement or by force.
t movement to the far west what were some of the reasons for which americans headed into the western territories and what were some of the consequences of expansion.
in the 1830s and 1840s pioneers pursued fertile land and economic opportunity beyond the existing boundaries of the united states and thus helped set the stage for the annexations and international crises of the 1840s.
some went for material gain others went for adventure and a significant minority sought freedom from religious persecution.
walt whitman in the carpenter portrait that appeared in the first edition of his great work leaves of grass in 1855.
the poets rough clothes and slouch hat signify his identification with the common people.
in moby dick herman melville produced a novel sufficiently original in form and conception to more than fulfill the demand of young americans for a new literature to fit the new man in the new age but melville was too deep a thinker not to see the perils that underlay the soaring ambition and aggressiveness of the new age.
the whaling captain ahab who brings destruction to himself and his ship by his relentless pursuit of the white whale symbolized among borderlands of the 1830s since the birth of the republic there had been a major dispute over the boundary between maine and the canadian province of new brunswick.
in 1839 fighting broke out between canadian lumberjacks and the maine militia.
in 1842 secretary of state daniel webster concluded an agreement with the british government chapter 13 an age of expansionism view the map united states territorial expansion in the 1850s ceded by u s british north america canada wash oregon country ceded by great britain 1842 webster ashburton treaty maine ceded by great britain n dak.
vt n h minn ore s dak.
louisiana purchase n j iowa kans.
ky ariz pa c i f i c ocean dis put e untd with il 1 848 mex ic o calif w va d c va del.
united states n c tenn okla n mex.
texas annexation gadsden purchase md.
ohio ill colo r i conn pa utah mexican cession mass.
nev map shows present day state boundaries n y wis s c ark.
fla texas mexico at l a n t i c ocean ceded by spain 1819 0 1810 1812 annexed by u s.
ceded by spain 1819 ratified by u s 1821 400 miles 400 kilometers territorial expansion by the mid nineteenth century fervent nationalists identified the growth of america through territorial expansion as the divinely ordained manifest destiny of a chosen people.
represented by lord ashburton.
the webster ashburton treaty gave over half of the disputed territory to the united states and established a definite northeastern boundary with canada.
on the other side of the continent the united states and britain both laid claim to oregon a vast area that lay between the rockies and the pacific from the 42nd parallel the northern boundary of california to the latitude of 540 the southern boundary of alaska.
in 1818 the two nations agreed to joint occupation for ten years an agreement that was renewed indefinitely in 1827.
meanwhile the americans had strengthened their claim by acquiring spains rights to the pacific northwest in the adams ons treaty see chapter 9 and the british had gained effective control of the northern portion of the oregon country through the activities of the hudsons bay company a well financed fur trading concern.
blocking an equitable division was the reluctance on both sides to surrender access to the columbia river basin and the adjacent territory extending north to the 49th parallel the future northern border of the state of washington.
the oregon country was scarcely populated before 1840.
the same could not be said of the mexican borderlands that lay directly west of jacksonian america.
spanish settlements in present day new mexico date from the late sixteenth century.
by 1820 about forty thousand people of spanish descent populated this province engaging mainly in sheep raising and mining.
in 1821 spain granted independence to mexico which then embraced areas that currently make up the states of texas new mexico arizona california nevada utah and much of colorado.
the republic of mexico opted for a more open trade policy than its predecessor and in 1821 informed its northern neighbors of the changed laws encouraging trade.
california was the other major northward extension of mexico.
spanish missionaries and soldiers had taken control of the region in the late eighteenth century.
in the 1820s and 1830s this land of huge estates and enormous cattle herds was far less populous than new mexico only about four thousand mexicans of spanish origin lived in california in 1827.
of the regions thirty thousand indians many were forced to work on vast land tracts owned by spanish missions.
at the beginning of the 1830s a chain of twenty one mission stations stretching from san diego to sonoma north of san francisco controlled most of the provinces land and wealth.
the indian population may seem large yet the number represented only a small fraction of the original indigenous population there had been a catastrophic decline in indian population during the previous sixty years of spanish rule.
the stresses and strains of forced labor and exposure to european diseases had taken an enormous toll.
in 1833 the mexican congresss secularization act emancipated the indians from church control and opened the mission lands to settlement.
the government awarded immense tracts of the mission land to mexican citizens and left the indians landless.
movement to the far west a new class of large landowners or rancheros replaced the padres as rulers of old california and masters of the provinces indigenous population.
seven hundred grantees took possession of ranchos ranging up to nearly 50 000 acres and proceeded to subject the indians to a new and even harsher form of servitude.
during the fifteen years they held sway the rancheros created an american legend and aroused american envy through their lavish hospitality extravagant dress superb horsemanship and taste for violent and dangerous sports.
the americans who saw california in the 1830s were mostly merchants and sailors involved in the oceanic trade between boston and california ports.
new england clipper ships sailed around cape horn at the southern tip of south america to barter manufactured goods for cowhides.
by the mid 1830s several yankee merchants had taken up permanent residence in towns such as monterey and san diego in order to conduct the california end of the business.
the texas revolution at the same time as some americans were trading with california others were taking possession of texas.
in the early 1820s mexican officials encouraged settlers from the united states to settle in texas.
newly independent mexico granted stephen f austin son of a onetime spanish citizen a huge piece of land in hopes he would help attract and settle new colonists from the united states.
some fifteen other anglo american empresarios received land grants in the 1820s.
in 1823 three hundred american families were settled on the austin grant and within a year the colonys population had swelled to 2021.
friction soon developed between the mexican government and the anglo american colonists over the status of slavery and the authority of the catholic church.
at its core the dispute centered on the unwillingness of anglo american settlers to become mexicans.
under the terms of settlement all people living in texas had to become mexican citizens and adopt the roman catholic faith.
slavery presented another problem for in 1829 mexico freed all slaves under its jurisdiction.
slaveholders in texas were given a special exemption that allowed them to emancipate their slaves and then force them to sign lifelong contracts as indentured servants but many refused to limit their ownership rights in any way.
settlers either converted to catholicism only superficially or ignored the requirement entirely.
a mexican government commission reported in 1829 that americans were the great majority of the texas population and were flagrantly violating mexican law.
the following year the mexican congress prohibited further american immigration and importation of slaves to texas.
enforcement of the new law was feeble and the flow of settlers slaves and smuggled goods continued virtually unabated.
a longstanding complaint of the texans was the failure of the mexican constitution to grant them local self government.
under the mexican federal system texas was joined to the state of coahuila and texan representatives were outnumbered three to one in the state legislature.
in 1832 the colonists showed their displeasure with mexican rule by rioting in protest against the arrest of several anglo americans by a mexican commander.
battle of san jacinto by h a.
in this panorama of the texas revolutions decisive battle at san jacinto sam houston leads the charge against santa annas forces.
chapter 13 an age of expansionism the republic of texas meanwhile delegates from the american communities in texas convened and after some hesitation voted overwhelmingly to declare their independence on march 2 1836.
a constitution based closely on that of the united states was adopted for the new republic of texas and a temporary government was installed to carry on the military struggle.
although the ensuing conflict was largely one of americans against mexicans some texas mexicans or tejanos sided with the anglo rebels.
they too wanted to be free of santa annas heavy handed rule though they would later become victims of the same antimexican prejudice that spurred the revolt.
tejano leader juan seguin who served as a captain in the texas army and became a hero of the independence struggle was driven off his land by anglo texans in 1841.
within days after texas declared itself a republic rebels and mexican troops in san antonio fought the famous battle of the alamo.
myths about that battle have magnified the anglo rebels valor at the mexicans expense.
the folklore is based on fact only view the map a da ms o ns br az os texas revolution 1836 treaty of 1819 arkansas r republic of disputed area alamo march 6 1836 san antonio dec 10 1835 gonzales oct 2 1835 goliad massacre march 20 1836 eces r m e x i c o nu.
texas washingtonon the brazos san jacinto april 21 1836 anahuac san captured june 30 1835 felipe galveston de austin velasco gulf of mexico refugio march 14 texan victories mexican victories o ri in 1834 general antonio lpez de santa anna made himself dictator of mexico and abolished the federal system of government.
news of these developments reached texas late in the year accompanied by rumors of the impending disfranchisement and even expulsion of american immigrants threatening texans status as tolerated guests in 1835 some texans revolted against mexicos central government.
while the insurrectionists claimed they were fighting for freedom from oppression mexican rule had not been harsh the worst that can be said was that it was inefficient inconsistent and sometimes corrupt.
furthermore the texans devotion to liberty did not prevent them from defending slavery against mexicos attempt to abolish it.
the rebels aroused by the rumors of what the new mexican government had in store for them prepared to resist santa annas effort to enforce tariff regulations by military force.
when he learned that texans were resisting customs collections santa anna sent reinforcements.
the settlers first engaged mexican troops at gonzales in october and forced the retreat of a cavalry detachment.
shortly thereafter austin laid siege to san antonio with a force of five hundred men and after six weeks forced its surrender thereby capturing most of the mexican troops then in texas.
after entering texas to quell the unrest santa anna issued his message to the inhabitants of texas santa anna promised that his troops would respect the persons and property of those who were not implicated in such iniquitous rebellion but such a message really wasnt intended for all of the inhabitants of texas.
even before texas had won its independence santa anna recognized the driving presence of the united states in the territorys anglo american inhabitants and the difficulty of assimilating that population into mexico.
santa anna declared the root of the rebellion to be adventurers maliciously protected by some inhabitants of a neighboring republic who had planned to attack mexico city.
it was remarkable foreshadowing of the mexican american war that would begin 10 years later.
gr an de 100 miles 0 50 100 kilometers texas revolution major battles of the texas revolution.
the texans suffered severe losses at the alamo and goliad but they scored a stunning victory at san jacinto.
187 rebels fought off a far larger number of mexican soldiers for more than a week before eventually capitulating but it is not true that all rebels including the folk hero davy crockett fought to the death.
crockett and seven other survivors were captured and then executed.
nevertheless a tale that combined actual and mythical bravery inside the alamo gave the insurrection new inspiration moral sanction outside support and the rallying cry remember the alamo the revolt ended with an exchange of slaughters.
a few days after the alamo battle another texas detachment was surrounded and captured in an open plain near the san antonio river and was marched to the town of goliad where most of its three hundred and fifty members were executed.
the next month on april 21 1836 the main texas army under general sam houston assaulted santa annas troops at an encampment near the san jacinto river during the siesta hour.
the final count showed that six hundred and thirty mexicans and only a handful of texans had been killed.
santa anna was captured and marched to velasco the meeting place of the texas government where he was forced to sign treaties recognizing the independence of texas and its claim to territory all the way to the rio grande.
the mexican congress failed to repudiate the treaty although a strip of land between the nueces river and the rio grande would be disputed during the next decade mexico failed to impose its authority on the victorious texas rebels.
sam houston the hero of san jacinto became the first president of texas.
his platform sought annexation to the united states movement to the far west and one of his first acts in office was to send an emissary to washington to test the waters.
houstons agent found much sympathy for texas independence but was told by andrew jackson and others that domestic politics and fear of a war with mexico made immediate annexation impossible.
the most that he could win from congress and the jackson administration was formal recognition of texas sovereignty.
in its ten year existence as the lone star republic texas drew settlers from the united states at an accelerating rate the population growing from 30 000 to 142 000.
the panic of 1837 impelled many debt ridden and land hungry farmers to take advantage of the free grants of 1280 acres that texas offered to immigrating heads of white families.
most of the newcomers assumed as did the old settlers that they would soon be annexed and restored to american citizenship.
trails of trade and settlement after new mexico opened its trade to american merchants a thriving commerce developed between missouri and santa fe.
the first of the merchants to reach the new mexican capital was william becknell who arrived with his train of goods late in 1821.
others followed rapidly.
for protection from hostile indians traders traveled in large caravans one or two of which would arrive in santa fe every summer.
the federal government assisted them by providing troops when necessary and by appropriating money to purchase rights of passage from various tribes.
but profits from the exchange of textiles and other manufactured goods for furs mules and precious metals were substantial enough to make the risky trip worth taking.
relations between the united states and mexico soured following the texas revolution and further anglo american aggressions both having devastating effects on the santa fe trade.
an expedition of texas businessmen and soldiers to santa fe in 1841 alarmed the mexican authorities who arrested its members.
in retaliation a volunteer force of texas avengers attacked mexican troops along the santa fe trail.
the mexican government then moved to curtail the santa fe trade.
in april 1842 it passed a new tariff banning the importation of many of the goods sold by american merchants and prohibiting the export of gold and silver.
further restrictions in 1843 denied american traders full access to the santa fe market.
the famous oregon trail was the great overland route that brought the wagon trains of american migrants to the west coast during the 1840s.
extending for two thousand miles across the northern great plains and the mountains beyond it crossed the rockies at south pass and then forked the main northern route led to the willamette valley of oregon but alternative trails were opened during the decade for overlanders heading for california.
the journey from missouri to the west coast took about six months.
after small groups had made their way to both oregon and california in 1841 and 1842 a mass migration mostly to oregon began in 1843.
within two years five thousand americans living in the willamette valley south of the columbia river were demanding the extension of full american sovereignty over the oregon country.
the mormon trek an important and distinctive group of pioneers followed the oregon trail as far as south pass and then veered southwestward to establish a thriving colony in the region of the great salt lake.
these were mormons members of the largest religious denomination founded on american soil the church of jesus christ of latter day saints.
the background of the mormon trek was a history of persecution in the eastern states.
joseph smith of palmyra new york the founder of mormonism revealed in 1830 that he had received over many years a series of revelations that called upon him to establish christs pure church on earth.
as the prophet of this faith he published the book of mormon a new scripture that he claimed to have discovered and translated with the aid of an angel.
it was the record of a community of pious jews who left the holy land six centuries before the birth of christ and sailed to the american continent.
after his crucifixion and resurrection christ appeared to this community and proclaimed the gospel.
four hundred years later a fratricidal war annihilated the believing christians but not all of the descendents of the original jewish migrants.
mormons held that the survivors had contributed to the ancestry of the american indians.
smith and those he converted to his new faith were committed to restoring the pure religion that had once thrived on american soil by founding a western zion where they could practice their faith unmolested and carry out their special mission to convert the native americans.
in the 1830s the mormons established communities in ohio and missouri but the former went bankrupt in the panic of 1837 and the latter was the target of angry mobs and vigilante violence.
after the mormons lost the war they fought against the missourians in 1839 smith led his followers back across the mississippi to illinois where he received a liberal charter from the state legislature to found a town at nauvoo.
here the mormons had a temporary measure of security and self government but smith soon reported new revelations that engendered dissension among his followers and hostility from neighboring gentiles most controversial was his authorization of polygamy or plural marriage.
in 1844 smith was killed by a mob while being held in jail in carthage illinois on a charge stemming from his quarrels with dissident mormons who objected to his new policies.
the death of smith confirmed the growing conviction of the mormon leadership that they needed to move beyond the borders of the united states to establish their zion in the wilderness.
in late 1845 smiths successor brigham young decided to send a party of fifteen hundred men to assess the chances of a colony in the vicinity of the great salt lake then part of mexico.
nauvoo was quickly depopulated as twelve thousand mormons took to the trail in 1846.
the following year young himself arrived in utah and sent back word to the thousands encamped along the trail that he had found the promised land.
the mormon community that young established in utah is one of the great success stories of western settlement.
in contrast to the rugged individualism and disorder that often characterized mining camps and other new communities the state of deseret the name the mormons originally applied to utah was a model of discipline and cooperation.
because of its communitarian form of social organization its centralized government and the chapter 13 an age of expansionism tr ail trek nauvoo ind.
independence santa fe trail.
r santa fe n ri o e e n re aw l d c va s c ark.
atlantic ocean ga ala la.
an x fla terr.
de i c o map shows 1840 boundaries n j del.
n c texas r ohio md.
ky m g ohio tenn s ia pacific ocean pa mormo n ain fo san diego mich r.
pi r wis s s terr.
ip pl do mts li co a lor t salt lake city si ea o re go n r y il south pass is maine vt n h mass.
n y r i conn s g ck a tr l ai tr nia r o f i cal ca sutters fort san francisco monterey iowa terr.
k e ro on o re g willamette r m la c st columbia r oregon city gre at uri r misso r british north america canada oregon country r 500 miles 500 kilometers western trails among the greatest hazards faced by those migrating to the west was the rough and unfamiliar terrain over which their wagon trains traveled.
religious dedication of its inhabitants this frontier society was able to expand settlement in a planned and efficient way and develop a system of irrigation that made the desert bloom utahs main problem was the determination of its political status.
when the mormons first arrived they were encroaching illegally into mexican territory.
after utah came under american sovereignty in 1848 the state of deseret fought to maintain its autonomy and its custom of polygamy against the efforts of the federal government to extend american law and set up the usual type of territorial administration.
in 1857 president buchanan sent a military force to bring utah to heel and the mormons prepared to repel this invasion but after a heavy snow prevented the army from crossing the rockies buchanan offered an olive branch in the form of a general pardon for mormons who had violated federal law but agreed to cooperate with u s authorities in the future.
the mormons accepted and in return brigham young called off his plan to resist the army by force and accepted the nominal authority of an appointed territorial governor.
manifest destiny and the mexican american war why did the u s annex texas and the southwest.
the rush of settlers beyond the nations borders in the 1830s and 1840s inspired politicians and propagandists to call for annexation of those areas occupied by migrants.
some went further and proclaimed it was the manifest destiny of the united states to expand until it had absorbed all of north america including canada and mexico.
such ambitions led to a major diplomatic confrontation with great britain and a war with mexico.
tyler and texas president john tyler initiated the politics of manifest destiny.
he was vice president when william henry harrison died in office in 1841 after serving scarcely a month.
the first of americas accidental presidents tyler was a states rights proslavery virginian who had been picked as harrisons running mate to broaden the appeal of the whig ticket.
profoundly out of sympathy with the mainstream of his own party he soon broke with the whigs in congress who had united behind the latest version of henry clays american system although tyler lacked a base in either of the major parties he hoped to be elected president in his own right in 1844.
to accomplish this difficult feat he needed a new issue around which he could build a following that would cut across established party lines.
in 1843 tyler decided to put the full weight of his administration behind the annexation of texas.
he anticipated that its incorporation would be a popular move especially in the south where it would feed the appetite for additional slave states.
with the south solidly behind him tyler expected to have a good chance in the election of 1844.
to achieve his objective tyler enlisted the support of john c calhoun the leading political defender of slavery and state sovereignty.
calhoun saw the annexation issue as a way of uniting the south and taking the offensive against the abolitionists.
success or failure in this effort would constitute a decisive test of whether the north was willing to give the southern states a fair share of national power and adequate assurances for the future of their way of life.
if antislavery sentiment succeeded in blocking the acquisition of texas the southerners would at least know where they stood and could begin to calculate the value of the union to prepare the public for annexation the tyler administration launched a propaganda campaign in the summer of 1843 based on manifest destiny and the mexican american war the liberty party swings an election candidate polk clay birney party democratic whig liberty actual vote in new york 237 588 232 482 15 812 national electoral vote if liberty voters had voted whig 237 588 248 294 projected electoral vote reports of british designs on texas.
it is doubtful the british had party division seemed confirmed in 1844 when the dominant such intentions but the stories were believed and used to give party faction in van burens home state of new york came out urgency to the annexation cause.
against tylers texas policy.
in an effort to keep the issue out of secretary of state abel upshur a proslavery virginian and the campaign van buren struck a gentlemans agreement with protg of calhoun began negotiating an annexation treaty.
after henry clay the overwhelming favorite for the whig nomination upshur was killed in an accident calhoun replaced him and carried that both of them would publicly oppose immediate annexation.
the negotiations to a successful conclusion.
when the treaty was van burens letter opposing annexation appeared shortly brought before the senate in 1844 calhoun denounced the british before the democratic convention costing him the nomination.
for attempting to subvert the souths essential system of labor and angry southern delegates who secured a rule requiring approval racial control by using texas as a base for abolitionist operations.
by a two thirds vote blocked van burens nomination.
after sevaccording to the supporters of tyler and calhoun the souths secueral ballots a dark horse candidate james k polk of tennessee rity and well being and by extension that of the nation required emerged triumphant.
polk a protg of andrew jackson had been the immediate incorporation of texas into the union.
speaker of the house of representatives and governor of tennessee.
the strategy of linking annexation explicitly to the interests an avowed expansionist polk ran on a platform calling for the of the south and slavery led northern antislavery whigs to charge simultaneous annexation of texas and assertion of american claims that the whole scheme was a proslavery plot to advance the interto all of oregon.
he identified himself and his party with the popular est of the south.
the senate rejected the treaty by a decisive vote cause of turning the united states into a continental nation an of 35 to 16 in june 1844.
though tyler then attempted to bring aspiration that attracted support from all parts of the country.
his was texas into the union through a joint resolution of both houses of congress admitting it as a state congress adjourned before the issue watch the video the annexation of texas came to a vote and the whole question hung fire in anticipation of the election of 1844.
the triumph of polk and annexation tylers initiative made the future of texas the central issue in the 1844 campaign.
but party lines held firm and the president himself was unable to capitalize on the issue because his stand was not in line with the views of either party.
tyler tried to run as an independent but his failure to gain significant support eventually forced him to withdraw from the race.
if the democratic party convention had been held in 1843 as it was originally scheduled ex president martin van buren would have won the nomination.
but postponement of the democratic conclave until may 1844 weakened his chances.
in the meantime the annexation question came to the fore and van buren was forced to take a stand on it.
he persisted in the view he had held as president that incorporation of texas would risk war with mexico arouse sectional strife and destroy the unity of the democratic party.
fears of sectional and texans voted in favor of annexation to the united states in the first election following independence in 1836.
however throughout the republic period 1836 1845 no treaty of annexation negotiated between the republic and the united states was ratified by both nations.
chapter 13 an age of expansionism a much more astute political strategy than the overtly prosouthern expansionism advocated by tyler and calhoun.
the whig nominee henry clay was basically antiexpansionist but his sense of the growing popularity of texas annexation among southern whigs caused him to waffle on the issue during the campaign.
this vacillation in turn cost clay the support of a small but crucial group of northern antislavery whigs who defected to the abolitionist liberty party.
polk won the fall election by a relatively narrow popular margin.
his triumph in the electoral college 170 votes to 105 was secured by victories in new york and michigan where the liberty party candidate james g birney had taken away enough votes from clay to affect the outcome.
the closeness of the election meant the democrats had something less than a clear mandate to implement their expansionist policies but this did not prevent them from claiming that the people backed border expansion.
after the election congress reconvened to consider the annexation of texas.
the mood had changed as a result of polks victory and some leading senators from both parties who had initially opposed tylers scheme for annexation by joint resolution of congress now changed their position.
as a result annexation was approved a few days before polk took office.
read the document john osullivan was editor of the united states magazine and democratic review.
he advocated the view that the united states was destined to expand.
in the process he coined the phrase manifest destiny his vision caught the imagination of the immigrant nation searching for its identity and meaning as well as a definition of success.
the election of 1844 candidate polk clay birney john osullivan the great nation of futurity 1845 party popular vote electoral vote democratic 1 338 464 whig 1 300 097 liberty 62 300 the doctrine of manifest destiny the expansionist mood that accompanied polks election and the annexation of texas was given a name and a rationale in the summer of 1845.
john l osullivan a proponent of the young america movement and editor of the influential united states magazine and democratic review charged that foreign governments were conspiring to block the annexation of texas in an effort to thwart the fulfillment of our manifest destiny to overspread the continent allotted by providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions besides coining the phrase manifest destiny osullivan pointed to the three main ideas that lay behind it.
one was that god was on the side of american expansionism.
this notion came naturally out of the tradition going back to the new england puritans that identified the growth of america with the divinely ordained success of a chosen people.
a second idea implied in the phrase free development was that the spread of american rule meant what other propagandists for expansion described as extending the area of freedom democratic institutions and local self government would follow the flag if areas claimed by autocratic foreign governments were annexed to the united states.
osullivans third premise was that population growth required the outlet that territorial acquisitions would provide.
behind this notion lurked a fear that growing numbers would lead to diminished opportunity and a european type polarization of social classes if the restless and the ambitious were not given new lands to settle and exploit.
in its most extreme form the doctrine of manifest destiny meant that the united states would someday occupy the entire north american continent.
make way i say for the young american buffalo bellowed a democratic orator in 1844 he has not yet got land enough.
i tell you we will give him oregon for his summer shade and the region of texas as his winter pasture.
applause like all of his race he wants salt too.
well he shall have the use of two oceans the mighty pacific and the turbulent atlantic.
he shall not stop his career until he slakes his thirst in the frozen ocean.
cheers polk and the oregon question in 1845 and 1846 the united states came closer to armed conflict with great britain than at any time since the war of 1812.
the willingness of some americans to go to war over manifest destiny and the mexican american war alaska russ.
treaty of 1825 544 0 nt co ine a nt ld ivi de north r ve ou nc va 49 oregon treaty of i latitu de treaty of 1818 anglo american convention country puget sound pa c i f i c ocean british north america canada joint u s british occupation of disputed territory 1818 1846 columbia r united states willamette valley main area of u s settlement 42 300 miles 300 kilometers adams ons tre aty of 1819 mexico northwest boundary dispute president polks policy of bluff and bluster nearly involved the united states in a war with great britain over the disputed boundary in oregon.
oregon was expressed in the rallying cry fifty four forty or fight referring to the latitude of the northern boundary of the desired territory.
this slogan was actually coined by whigs seeking to ridicule democratic expansionists but democrats later took it over as a vivid expression of their demand for what is now british columbia.
polk fed this expansionist fever by laying claim in his inaugural address to all of the oregon country then jointly occupied by britain and the united states.
privately he was willing to accept the 49th parallel as a dividing line.
what made the situation so tense was that polk was dedicated to an aggressive diplomacy of bluff and bluster convinced that his foreign adversaries would only respond to a hard line approach.
in july 1845 polk authorized secretary of state james buchanan to reply to the latest british request for terms by offering a boundary along the 49th parallel.
when the british ambassador rejected this proposal polk angrily withdrew it and refused to renew it when the british sought to reopen negotiations.
in april 1846 congress terminated the agreement for joint occupation of the pacific northwest at polks request the british government then took the initiative submitting a new treaty proposal and dispatching warships at the same time.
when the draft treaty was received in june polk refused either to endorse or reject it and took the unusual step of submitting it directly to the senate for advice which recommended its acceptance almost without change.
it was ratified on june 15.
polk was prompted to settle the oregon question because he now had a war with mexico on his hands.
american policy makers got what they wanted from the oregon treaty namely puget sound a splendid natural harbor and the first u s deepwater port on the pacific.
polks initial demand for all of oregon was made partly for domestic political consumption and partly to bluff the british into making more concessions.
it was a dangerous game on both fronts.
when polk finally agreed to the solution he alienated expansionist advocates in the old northwest who had supported his call for all of oregon for many northerners the promise of new acquisitions in the pacific northwest was the only thing that made annexation of texas palatable.
they hoped new free states could be created to counterbalance the admission of slaveholding texas to the union.
as this prospect receded the charge of antislavery advocates that texas annexation was a southern plot became more believable to northerners polk began to look more and more like a president concerned mainly with furthering the interests of his native region.
war with mexico while the united states was avoiding a war with great britain it was getting into one with mexico.
although the mexicans had recognized texas independence in 1845 they rejected the lone star republics dubious claim to the unsettled territory between the nueces river and the rio grande.
when the united states annexed texas and assumed its claim to the disputed area mexico broke off diplomatic relations and prepared for armed conflict.
this 1846 cartoon titled this is the house that polk built shows president polk sitting forlornly in a house of cards which represents the delicately balanced issues facing him.
chapter 13 an age of expansionism polk responded by placing troops in louisiana on the alert because the mexicans refused to make peace despite a succession and by dispatching john slidell as an emissary to mexico city of military defeats.
in the first major campaign of the conin the hope he could resolve the boundary dispute and also perflict taylor followed up his victory in two battles fought north suade the mexicans to sell new mexico and california to the of the rio grande by crossing the river taking matamoros and united states.
the mexican government refused to receive slidell marching on monterrey.
in september his forces assaulted and because the nature of his appointment ignored the fact that captured this major city of northern mexico after overcoming regular diplomatic relations were suspended.
while slidell was fierce resistance.
cooling his heels in mexico city in january 1846 polk ordered taylors controversial decision to allow the mexican general zachary taylor commander of american forces in the garrison to go free and his unwillingness or inability to advance southwest to advance well beyond the nueces and proceed farther into mexico angered polk and led him to adopt a new toward the rio grande thus encroaching on territory claimed strategy for winning the war and a new commander to impleby both sides.
general winfield scott was ordered to prepare an by april taylor had taken up a position near matamoros amphibious attack on veracruz with the aim of placing an on the rio grande.
on the opposite bank of the river mexican american army within striking distance of mexico city itself.
forces had assembled and erected a fort.
on april 24 sixteen with half his forces detached for the new invasion taylor was hundred mexican soldiers crossed the river and the followleft to hold his position in northern mexico.
at buena vista ing day met and attacked a small american detachment killin february 1847 he claimed victory over a sizable mexican ing eleven and capturing the rest.
after learning of the incident army sent northward to dislodge him.
though unpopular with taylor sent word to the president hostilities he reported the administration taylor was hailed as a national hero and a may now be considered as commenced possible candidate for president.
the news was neither unexpected nor unwelcome.
polk in meanwhile the kearny expedition captured santa fe fact was already preparing his war message to congress when he proclaimed the annexation of new mexico by the united states learned of the fighting on the rio grande.
a short and decisive and set off for california.
there they found that american settlers war he had concluded would force the cession of california and new mexico to the united states.
when congress declared war on may 13 american agents and an exploring expedition under john c frmont were already in california stirring up dissension against mexican rule and ships of the u s navy lay waiting expectantly off the shore.
two days later polk ordered a force under colonel stephen kearny to march to santa fe and take possession of new mexico.
the war was fought almost entirely by volunteers including a number of recent immigrants from europe especially irish escaping the potato famine.
thousands of irish had joined the army by 1845 where they encountered significant prejudice.
some were punished for refusing to participate in protestant services.
they also witnessed the purposeful destruction of catholic churches and monuments during the invasion of mexico.
this led some of the immigrant soldiers to switch sides including the famous batallion of san patricio a group of irish deserters who fought for the mexican army.
in 1847 the u s army hanged 16 surviving memhandkerchief depicting major general zachary taylor in battle scenes from the mexican war.
when the bers of the san patricios as traitors.
they popular hero displeased president polk with his actions in the capture of monterrey winfield scott was are still considered heroes in mexico.
appointed to carry out polks plan for the attack on the port city of veracruz which led to the capture of the mexican american war mexico city.
lasted much longer than expected source collection of the new york historical society 1941 129.
manifest destiny and the mexican american war in cooperation with john c frmonts exploring expedition had revolted against mexican authorities and declared their independence as the bear flag republic.
the navy had also captured the port of monterey.
with the addition of kearnys troops a relatively small number of americans were able to take possession of california in early 1847 against scattered and disorganized mexican opposition.
the decisive veracruz campaign was slow to develop because of the massive and careful preparations required.
but in march 1847 the main american army under general scott finally landed near that crucial port city and laid siege to it.
veracruz fell after eighteen days and then scott began his advance on mexico city.
in the most important single battle of the war scott met forces under general santa anna at cerro gordo on april 17 and 18.
the mexicans occupied an apparently impregnable position on high ground blocking the way to mexico city.
a daring flanking maneuver that required soldiers to scramble up the mountainsides enabled scott to win the decisive victory that opened the road to the mexican capital.
by august american troops were drawn up in front of mexico city.
after a temporary armistice a brief respite that the mexicans used to regroup and improve their defenses scott ordered the massive assault that captured the city on september 14.
read the document thomas corwin against the mexican war 1847 settlement of the mexicanamerican war accompanying scotts army was a diplomat nicholas p trist who was authorized to negotiate a peace treaty whenever the mexicans decided they had had enough.
despite a sequence of american victories and the imminent fall of mexico city trist made little progress.
no mexican leader was willing to invite the wrath of an intensely proud and patriotic citizenry by agreeing to the kind of terms that polk wanted to impose.
even after the united states had achieved an overwhelming military victory trist found it difficult to exact an acceptable treaty from the mexican government.
in november polk ordered trist to return to washington.
radical adherents of manifest destiny were now clamoring for the annexation of all mexico and polk himself may have been momentarily tempted by the chance to move from military occupation to outright annexation.
trist ignored polks instructions and lingered in mexico city.
on february 2 1848 he signed a treaty that gained all the concessions he had been commissioned to obtain.
the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo ceded new mexico and california to the united states for 15 million established the rio grande as the border between texas and mexico and promised that the u s government would assume the substantial claims of american citizens against mexico.
the treaty also provided that the mexican residents of the new territories would become u s citizens.
when the agreement reached washington polk censured trist for disobeying orders but approved most of his treaty which he sent to the senate for ratification.
senate approval by a vote of 38 to 14 came on march 10.
the united states gained 500 000 square miles of territory from mexico.
the treaty of 1848 enlarged the size of the nation by about 20 percent adding to its domain the present states of richard caton woodvilles war news from mexico suggests the role of the newspaper in keeping the public informed of developments in the expanding nations quest for new territory.
source war news from mexico by richard caton woodville 1848.
board of trustees national gallery of art washington dc.
california utah new mexico nevada arizona and parts of colorado and wyoming.
soon those interested in a southern route for a transcontinental railroad pressed for even more territory along the southern border of the cession.
that pressure led in 1853 to the gadsden purchase of the southernmost parts of present day arizona and new mexico.
but one intriguing question remains.
why given the expansionist spirit of the age did the campaign to acquire all of mexico fail.
according to historian frederick merk a major factor was the peculiar combination of racism and anticolonialism that dominated american opinion.
it was one thing to acquire thinly populated areas that could be settled by anglo saxon pioneers.
it was something else again to incorporate a large population that was mainly of mixed spanish and indian origin.
these mongrels charged racist opponents of the all mexico movement could never be fit citizens of a self governing republic.
they would have to be ruled in the way the british governed india and the possession of colonial dependencies was contrary to american ideals and traditions.
chapter 13 an age of expansionism view the map mexican american war 1846 1848 ss mi oregon country ou ri r.
bear flag revolt june 14 1846 santa fe occupied aug 16 1846 m san diego kearny gila r el brazito dec 25 1846 wool taylor corpus christi palo alto may 8 1846 monterrey sept 21 24 1846 gulf of mexico matamoros o 5 kilometers n ha ip 5 miles scott on nueces r buena vista feb 22 23 1847 mexico city churubusco aug 20 1847 u s troop movements u s victories contreras aug 20 1847 new orleans de el molino del rey sept 8 1847 r n gra guadalupe hidalgo chapultepec sept 13 1847 c detail map ala la.
texas d 400 kilometers i ark.
io x ky miss.
chihuahua 400 miles.
io r tenn sr.
red r disputed area e ns a.
sacramento river feb 27 1847 mo.
miss san gabriel jan 8 1847 oh a ark n kto stoc co l.
or ad or san pasqual dec 6 1846 pacific ocean y arn ke ir.
monterey occupied july 7 1846 ind.
ill ft leavenworth san francisco occupied july 10 1846 iowa unorganized territory issipp tampico occupied nov 14 1846 cerro gordo april 17 18 1847 mexican victories boundary of territory ceded by mexico 1848 mexico city detail map veracruz occupied mar.
29 1847 the mexican american war the mexican american war added half a million square miles of territory to the united states but the cost was high 100 million and thirteen thousand lives.
merks thesis sheds light on why the general public had little appetite for swallowing all of mexico but those actually making policy had more mundane and practical reasons for being satisfied with what was obtained at guadalupe hidalgo.
what they had really wanted all along historian norman graebner contended were the great california harbors of san francisco and san diego.
from these ports americans could trade directly with the orient and dominate the commerce of the pacific.
once acquisition of california had been assured policy makers had little incentive to press for more mexican territory.
the war with mexico divided the american public and provoked political dissension.
a majority of the whig party opposed the war in principle arguing that the united states had no valid claims to the area south of the nueces.
whig congressmen voted for military appropriations while the conflict was going on but they constantly criticized the president for starting it.
more ominous was the charge of some northerners from both parties that the real purpose of the war was to spread the institution of slavery and increase the political power of the southern states.
while battles were being fought in mexico congress debated the wilmot proviso a proposal to prohibit slavery in any territories that might be acquired from mexico.
the mexican american war left a legacy of a bitter sectional quarrel over the status of slavery in new areas see chapter 14.
the domestic controversies aroused by the war and the propaganda of manifest destiny revealed the limits of mid nineteenthcentury american expansionism and put a damper on additional efforts to extend the nations boundaries.
concerns about slavery and race impeded acquisition of new territory in latin america and the caribbean.
resolution of the oregon dispute clearly indicated that the united states was not willing to go to war with a powerful adversary to obtain large chunks of british north america and the old ambition of incorporating canada faded.
from 1848 until the revival of expansionism in the late nineteenth century american growth usually took the form of populating and developing the vast territory already acquired.
although the internal expansionism rights of former inhabitants of mexico were supposedly guaranteed by treaty they in effect became second class citizens of the united states.
see the feature essay hispanic america after 1848 pp.
read the document senate report on the railroads 1852 internal expansionism british north america canada grea t l ak e how did developments in transportation foster industrialization and encourage immigration.
s young american expansionists saw a clear link between acquisition of new territory and other forms of material growth and development.
in 1844 samuel f b morse perfected and demonstrated his electric telegraph a device that would make it possible to communicate rapidly over the expanse of a continental nation.
simultaneously the railroad was becoming increasingly important as a means of moving people and goods over the same great distances.
improvements in manufacturing and agricultural methods led to an upsurge in the volume and range of internal trade and the beginnings of mass immigration were providing human resources for the exploitation of new areas and economic opportunities.
after gold was discovered in california in 1848 a flood of emigrants from the east and several foreign nations arrived by ship or wagon train their appetites whetted by the thought of striking it rich.
the gold they unearthed spurred the national economy and the rapid growth of population centers on the pacific coast inspired projects for transcontinental telegraph lines and railroad tracks.
despite the best efforts of the young americans the spirit of manifest destiny and the thirst for acquiring new territory waned after the mexican american war.
the expansionist impulse was channeled instead into internal development.
although the nation ceased to grow in size the technological advances and population increase of the 1840s continued during the 1850s resulting in an acceleration of economic growth a substantial increase in industrialization and urbanization and the emergence of a new american working class.
the triumph of the railroad more than anything else the rise of the railroad transformed the american economy during the 1840s and 1850s.
in 1830 and 1831 two american railroads began commercial operation the charleston and hamburg in south carolina and the baltimore and ohio in maryland.
after these pioneer lines had shown that steam locomotion was practical and profitable several other railroads were built and began to carry passengers and freight during the 1830s.
by 1840 railroads had 2 818 miles of track a figure almost equal to the combined length of all canals but the latter still carried a much larger volume of goods.
passengers might prefer the speed of trains but the lower unit cost of transporting freight on the canal boats prevented most shippers from changing their habits.
furthermore states such as new york and pennsylvania had invested heavily in canals and resisted chartering a competitive form of transportation.
most of the early railroads reached out from port cities such as boston and baltimore that did not have good canal routes to the interior.
steam locomotion provided them a chance to cut into the enormous commerce that flowed along the erie canal and gave new york an advantage in the scramble for western trade.
boston detroit new york pittsburgh philadelphia chicago washington d c cincinnati st joseph atlantic ocean st louis charleston railroads in 1850 railroads built between 1850 and 1860 new orleans gulf of mexico houston 400 miles 400 kilometers railroads 1850 and 1860 during the 1840s and 1850s railroad lines moved rapidly westward.
by 1860 more than 30 000 miles of track had been laid.
during the 1840s rails extended beyond the northeastern and middle atlantic states and mileage increased more than threefold reaching a total of more than 9 000 miles by 1850.
expansion fueled by massive european investment was even greater in the following decade when about 20 000 miles of additional track were laid.
by 1860 all the states east of the mississippi had rail service and a traveler could go by train from new york to chicago and return by way of memphis.
throughout the 1840s and 1850s railroads cut deeply into the freight business of the canals and succeeded in driving many of them out of business.
the cost of hauling goods by rail decreased dramatically because of improved track construction and the introduction of powerful locomotives that could haul more cars.
new york and pennsylvania were slow to encourage rail transportation because of their early commitment to canals but by the 1850s both states had accepted the inevitable and were promoting massive railroad building.
the development of railroads had an enormous effect on the economy as a whole.
although the burgeoning demand for iron rails was initially met mainly by importation from england it eventually spurred development of the domestic iron industry.
since railroads required an enormous outlay of capital their promoters pioneered new methods for financing business enterprise.
at a time when most manufacturing and mercantile concerns were still owned by families or partnerships the railroad companies sold stock to the general public and helped to set the pattern for the separation chapter 13 an age of expansionism pennsylvania iron was being forged and rolled in factories by 1850.
among the other induswatch the video mastering time and space how the railroads tries that adopted the factory system during this changed america period were those producing firearms clocks and sewing machines.
while small workshops continued to predominate in most industries and some relatively large factories were not yet mechanized mass production was clearly the wave of the future.
the essential features of the emerging mode of production were the gathering of a supervised workforce in a single place the payment of cash wages to workers the use of interchangeable parts and manufacture by continuous process within a factory setting standardized parts manufactured separately and in bulk could be efficiently and rapidly assembled into a final product by an ordered sequence of continuously repeated operations.
mass production which involved the division of labor into a series of relatively simple and repetitive tasks contrasted sharply with the traditional craft mode of production in which a single worker produced the entire product out of raw materials.
the transformation of a craft into a modern industry is well illustrated by the evolution railroads began to spread across the united states in the early 1830s slowly at first and then more rapidly growing from zero in 1830 to three thousand miles in 1840 to nine thousand miles of shoemaking.
the independent cobbler proof railroad track in 1850 ducing shoes for order was first challenged by a putting out system involving the assignment of of ownership and control that characterizes the modern corporation.
various tasks to physically separated workers and then was virtually they also developed new types of securities such as preferred displaced by the great shoe factories that by the 1860s were operatstock with no voting rights but the assurance of a fixed rate of ing in cities such as lynn massachusetts.
return and long term bonds at a set rate of interest.
new technology often played an important role in the transition the gathering and control of private capital did not fully meet to mass production.
elias howes invention of the sewing machine the desires of the early railroad barons.
state and local governments in 1846 laid the basis for the ready to wear clothing industry and convinced that railroads were the key to their future prosperity also contributed to the mechanization of shoemaking.
during the loaned the railroads money bought their stock and guaranteed 1840s iron manufacturers adopted the british practice of using coal their bonds.
the federal government helped the railroads by surrather than charcoal for smelting and thus produced a metal betveying the routes of projected lines by devolving significant powers ter suited to industrial needs.
charles goodyears discovery in 1839 of eminent domain onto the railroads to allow them to take lands of the process for the vulcanization of rubber made a new range that had been in private hands and by providing land grants.
in of manufactured items available to the american consumer most 1850 for example several million acres of public land were granted notably the overshoe.
perhaps the greatest triumph of american to the illinois central.
in all forty companies received such aid technology during the mid nineteenth century was the development before 1860 setting a precedent for the massive land grants of the of the worlds most sophisticated and reliable machine tools.
post civil war era.
yet the united states was still not an industrial society.
factory workers remained a small fraction of the workforce and nearly 60 percent of the gainfully employed still worked on the land.
but the industrial revolution takes off farming itself at least in the north was undergoing a technologiwhile railroads were initiating a revolution in transportation cal revolution of its own.
john deeres steel plow invented in 1837 american industry was entering a new phase of rapid and susand mass produced by the 1850s enabled midwestern farmers to tained growth.
the factory mode of production which had origicultivate the tough prairie soils that had resisted cast iron implenated before 1840 in the cotton mills of new england was extended ments.
the mechanical reaper patented by cyrus mccormick in to a variety of other products see chapter 9.
the weaving and 1834 offered an enormous saving in the labor required for harprocessing of wool instead of being carried on in different locavesting grain by 1851 mccormick was producing more than tions was concentrated in single production units beginning in the a thousand reapers a year in his chicago plant.
other new farm 1830s and by 1860 some of the largest textile mills in the country implements that came into widespread use before 1860 included were producing wool cloth.
in the coal and iron regions of eastern seed drills cultivators and threshing machines.
internal expansionism a dynamic interaction between advances in transportation industry and agriculture gave great strength and resiliency to the economy of the northern states during the 1850s.
railroads offered western farmers better access to eastern markets.
after chicago and new york were linked by rail in 1853 the flow of most midwestern farm commodities shifted from the north south direction based on river borne traffic which had still predominated in the 1830s and 1840s to an east west pattern.
the mechanization of agriculture provided an additional impetus to industrialization and its laborsaving features released workers for other economic activities.
the growth of industry and the modernization of agriculture can thus be seen as mutually reinforcing aspects of a single process of economic growth.
mass immigration begins the original incentive to mechanize northern industry and agriculture came in part from a shortage of cheap labor.
compared with that of industrializing nations of europe the economy of the united states in the early nineteenth century was labor scarce.
women and children made up a large percentage of the workers in the early textile mills and commercial farmers had to rely heavily on the labor of their family members.
in the face of such limited and uncertain labor supplies producers were greatly tempted to experiment with laborsaving machinery.
by the 1840s and 1850s however even the newly industrialized operations were ready to absorb a new influx of unskilled workers.
during the 1840s what had been a substantial flow of european immigrants to the united states suddenly became a flood.
no fewer than 4 2 million people crossed the atlantic between 1840 and 1860 with 3 million arriving in the single decade between 1845 and 1855.
this was the greatest influx in proportion to total population then about 20 million that the nation has ever experienced.
the largest single source of the new mass immigration was ireland but germany was not far behind.
smaller contingents came from switzerland norway sweden and the netherlands.
the massive transatlantic movement had many causes.
the great push factor that caused 1 5 million irish to forsake the emerald isle between 1845 and 1854 was the great potato blight which brought the age of practical invention year inventor john fitch eli whitney contribution steamboat cotton gin eli whitney oliver evans jig for guiding tools steam engine cast iron plow richard b chenaworth peter cooper cyrus mccormick samuel colt john deere charles goodyear vulcanization of rubber crawford w long samuel f b morse elias howe norbert rillieux first administered ether telegraph sewing machine vacuum evaporator richard m hoe william kelly rotary printing press air boiling process elisha g otis passenger elevator edwin l drake george m pullman first american oil well pullman passenger car railroad locomotive reaper revolver steel plow importance description first successful american steamboat simplified process of separating fiber from seeds helped make cotton a profitable staple of southern agriculture facilitated manufacture of interchangeable parts first american steam engine led to manufacture of high pressure engines used throughout eastern united states first iron plow to be made in three separate pieces thus making possible replacement of parts first steam locomotive built in america mechanized harvesting early model could cut six acres of grain a day first successful repeating pistol steel surface kept soil from sticking farming thus made easier on rich prairies of midwest made rubber much more useful by preventing it from sticking and melting in hot weather reduced pain and risk of shock during operations in surgery made long distance communication almost instantaneous first practical machine for automatic sewing improved method of removing water from sugar cane revolutionized sugar industry and was later applied to many other products printed an entire sheet in one motion vastly speeded up printing process improved method of converting iron into steel usually known as bessemer process because english inventor bessemer had more advantageous patent and financial arrangements improved movement in buildings when later electrified stimulated development of skyscrapers initiated oil industry in the united states first railroad sleeping car suitable for long distance travel dates refer to patent or first successful use.
source from freedom and crisis an american history 3rd ed by allen weinstein and frank otto gatell.
copyright 1974 1978 1981 by random house inc reprinted by permission of random house inc.
complete the assignment hispanic america after 1848 a case study in majority rule on myhistorylab feature essay w ith the discovery of gold in 1848 more than one thousand californians of mexican ancestry joined the frenetic rush to the sierras.
among them was don antonio franco coronel a los angeles schoolteacher who led a group of fellow californios into the rich goldfields.
just months before the expedition the united states and mexico had concluded the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo which transformed coronel and his companions from mexicans to americans.
at the insistence of the mexican government the treaty stipulated that mexicans living in the newly acquired territories would be granted all the rights of citizens of the united states.
according to the principles of the constitution coronels gold seeking enterprise would put that promise to the test.
upon arriving in gold country coronel and his men immediately hit pay dirt.
in the first day alone coronel pulled 45 ounces of gold from the ground within eight days one of his associates had amassed a pile of gold weighing a staggering 52 pounds.
the californios seemed to have a head start in the race for gold.
they understood the terrain cooperated among themselves and were familiar with the best mining techniques.
not surprisingly their dramatic successes stirred the envy of their anglo american competitors.
after a year of relatively peaceful competition anglo miners began to express their resentments.
lumping californios with all other foreigners they unleashed a barrage of physical and political attacks against their competitors.
lynch mobs camp riots and legal harassment were common forms hispanic america after 1848 a case study in majority rule of yankee intimidation.
despite their entitlements to the rights of citizenship the californios were badgered and bullied into retreat.
fearing for his life coronel returned to southern california where hispanics still outnumbered the newcomers.
earning prestige and prosperity in los angeles coronel went on to become mayor and state treasurer.
but to the end of his life he still painfully remembered his experiences in northern california where his rights as a u s citizen were so easily disregarded by his fellow americans.
coronels experiences exemplify two truths about the effect u s expansion had on the lives of mexicans who suddenly found themselves in american territory.
first in areas where anglo american settlement grew rapidly such as northern california the hispanic community typically faced discrimination intimidation and a denial of the very civil rights that guadalupe hidalgo had supposedly guaranteed.
second in areas where the hispanic population remained a majority such as southern california spanish speaking americans were able to exercise the rights of republican citizenship often wielding considerable political influence.
coronel had a taste of both experiences going from intimidated miner to powerful politician.
however as anglo settlers began to stream into southern california even that region ceased to be a safe haven for hispanic rights.
by the mid 1840s hispanics living in texas known as tejanos were outnumbered by anglos at a ratio of twenty to one.
true to the pattern described above this decided minority faced intense prejudice.
among the most notable victims of this prejudice was juan seguin a hero of the texas war for independence see p 296.
perhaps no tejano family fell further or faster than the posterity of don martin de leon.
the scion of an aristocratic family de leon had spearheaded spanish efforts to colonize texas and continued to organize settlements after mexican independence.
establishing extensive cattle ranches the de leons enjoyed prominence and wealth on their holdings.
as with most tejanos they fervently supported the struggle for texan independence fighting shoulder to shoulder with their anglo neighbors.
but when the war ended the de leon estate fell under siege from the surging wave of new settlers.
relying on the intricacies of anglo american law and the power of an electoral majority the newcomers quickly encroached on de leons lands.
with frightening rapidity the de leon family was reduced from its preeminent position to abject poverty.
the de leons were not alone.
a contemporary observed that many anglo settlers worked dark intrigues against the native families whose only crime was that they owned large tracts of land and desirable property even after u s annexation of the lone star republic hispanics continued to be pushed off their land.
in 1856 a texas newspaper reported that the people of matagorda county have held a meeting and ordered every mexican to leave the county.
to strangers this may seem wrong but we hold it to be perfectly right and highly necessary for many mexican americans life on u s soil taught the cruelest lesson in white mans democracy.
yet majority rule actually worked to the favor of hispanics living in new mexico where they enjoyed numerical dominance.
when u s troops entered blessing of the enrequita mine 1860 by alexander edouart.
spaniards and mexicans men and women surround the makeshift altar where the priest is saying the blessing to dedicate the enrequita mine in northern california.
the idyllic scene does not hint at the violent and rough treatment hispanic miners experienced during the california gold rush days.
santa fe in 1846 albino chacn a prominent city judge controlled his own future.
although he had been loyal to the mexican government throughout the war the u s army offered him the opportunity to retain his judgeship.
given similar offers other new mexicans who had initially opposed the u s invasion accepted positions of prominence such as donanciano vigil who served as interim governor of the territory.
but chacn lived by a strict code of honor and could not switch loyalties so easily.
opting for exile chacn moved out of santa fe left the practice of law and took up farming.
aside from such self imposed changes however american rule actually had little impact on most new mexicans lives.
hispanics still formed the demographic and political backbone of the territory and often served their new nation with distinction.
chacns own son rafael served as a union officer during the civil war winning acclaim in defending new mexico against a confederate invasion from texas and was eventually elected as territorial senator.
rafaels son studied law at notre dame and held several important positions in the department of justice.
majority status afforded new mexican hispanics opportunities in the american system that were denied their compatriots living in anglo dominated regions.
as settlement increased throughout the century such hispanic controlled communities dwindled.
the rise of the railroad acted as a funnel through which anglo americans poured into western territories and remaining pockets of hispanic dominance rapidly disappeared.
american majoritarianism and racism combined to place hispanics in positions subordinate to those of the anglo newcomers.
throughout the region the story was sadly similar as hispanic americans lost their majority status they also lost many of their basic rights.
questions for discussion 1.
how did the american citizenship granted them under the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo benefit persons of mexican ancestry in california and the southwest.
how did anglo prejudice and discrimination deny these benefits in subsequent years.
chapter 13 an age of expansionism immigration to the united states 1820 1860 thousands 427 833 371 603 369 980 total immigration for indicated year 200 877 153 640 114 371 84 066 8 385 23 322 famine to a population that subsisted on this single crop.
escape to america was made possible by the low fares then prevailing on sailing ships bound from england to north america.
ships involved in the timber trade carried their bulky cargoes from boston or halifax to liverpool as an alternative to returning to america partly in ballast they packed irish immigrants into their holds.
the squalor and misery in these steerage accommodations were almost beyond belief.
because of the ports involved in the lumber trade boston halifax saint johns and saint andrews the irish usually arrived in canada or the northeastern states.
immobilized by poverty and a lack of the skills required for pioneering in the west most of them remained in northeastern cities.
forced to subsist on low paid menial labor and crowded into festering urban slums they were looked down on by most native born americans.
their devotion to catholicism aroused protestant resentment and mob violence.
some race conscious people even doubted that the irish were white like other northern europeans.
see chapter 14 for a discussion of the growth of nativism and anti catholicism.
the million or so germans who also came in the late 1840s and early 1850s were somewhat more fortunate.
most of them were also peasants but they had fled hard times rather than outright catastrophe.
changes in german landholding patterns and a fluctuating market for grain crops put pressure on small operators.
unlike the irish they often escaped with a small amount of capital with which to make a fresh start in the new world.
many german immigrants were artisans and sought to ply their trades in cities such as new york st louis cincinnati and milwaukee.
but a large portion of those with peasant backgrounds went back to the land.
the possession of diversified agricultural skills and small amounts of capital enabled many germans to become successful midwestern farmers.
in general they encountered less prejudice and discrimination than the irish.
for germans who were protestant religious affinity with their american neighbors made for relative tolerance.
but even germans who were catholic normally escaped the virulent scorn heaped on the irish perhaps because they were not so poverty stricken and did not carry the added burden of being members of an ethnic group anglo americans had learned to despise from their english ancestors and cousins.
what attracted most of the irish german and other european immigrants to america was the promise of economic opportunity.
a minority like some of the german revolutionaries of 1848 chose the united states because they admired its democratic political system.
but most immigrants were more interested in the chance to make a decent living than in voting or running for office.
the arrival of large numbers of immigrants exacerbated the already serious problems of americas rapidly growing cities.
the old walking city in which rich and poor lived in close proximity near the center of town was changing to a more segregated environment.
the advent of railroads and horsedrawn streetcars enabled the affluent to move to the first american suburbs while areas nearer commercial and industrial centers became the congested abode of newcomers from europe.
emerging slums such as the notorious five points district in new york city were characterized by overcrowding poverty disease and crime.
recognizing that these conditions created potential dangers for the entire urban population middle class reformers worked for the professionalization of police forces introduction of sanitary water and sewage disposal systems and the upgrading of housing standards.
they made some progress in these endeavors in the period before the civil war but the lot of the urban poor mainly immigrants was not dramatically improved.
except to the extent that their own communal activities especially those sponsored by churches and mutual aid societies provided a sense of security and solidarity the existence of most urban immigrants remained unsafe unhealthy and unpleasant.
despite the increasing segregation of the city into ethnic neighborhoods the urban experience also produced a unifying effect on its mixed population.
individuals of all classes occupations and ethnicities met on the crowded streets and in the public squares of cities.
often the entire population or at least wide cross sections came together in colorful parades public celebrations and political contests.
many city residents met other citizens as members of political parties religious groups and civic organizations.
a single individual may have voted as a democrat worshiped as a baptist and served as a member of a volunteer fire department.
these different affiliations created relationships that existed outside of ethnic identity.
antebellum cities showed the dark side of urbanization in their crowded slums and growing poverty but they also became cauldrons of democracy in which different elements of nineteenth century america met face to face to create a wider definition of what it meant to be an american.
the new working class a majority of immigrants ended up as wage workers in factories mines and construction camps or as casual day laborers doing the many unskilled tasks required for urban and commercial growth.
during the 1850s factory production in boston and other port cities previously devoted to commerce grew partly because thousands of recent irish immigrants worked for the kind of low wages that almost guaranteed large profits for entrepreneurs.
in established industries and older mill towns of the northeast immigrants added to or in some cases displaced the conclusion the costs of expansion read the document samuel morse foreign immigration 1835 this 1854 cartoon titled the old world and the new shows a shabbily dressed man in ireland examining posters for trips to new york left.
at right he is shown later in america wearing finer clothes and looking at posters advertising trips for emigrants returning to dublin.
as was the case for many immigrants seeking economic opportunities in the new world his situation has apparently changed for the better.
native born workers who had predominated in the 1830s and 1840s.
the changing workforce of the textile mills in lowell massachusetts provided a striking example of this process.
in 1836 only 3 7 percent of the workers in one lowell mill were foreign born most members of the labor force at that time were young unmarried women from new england farms.
by 1860 immigrants constituted 61 7 percent of the workforce.
women still formed the majority but there had been a great proportional increase in the number of men who tended machines in textile factories.
irish males employers found were willing to perform tasks that nativeborn men had generally regarded as womens work.
this trend reveals much about the changing character of the american working class.
in the 1830s most male workers were artisans and factory work was still largely the province of native born american women and children.
in the 1840s the proportion of men engaged in factory work increased and work conditions in many mills deteriorated.
workdays of twelve to fourteen hours were not new but a more impersonal and cost conscious form of management replaced paternalism and cooperation.
during the depression that followed the panic of 1837 bosses attempted to reduce expenses and increase productivity by cutting wages increasing the speed of machinery and stretching out giving each worker more machinery to operate.
the result was a new upsurge of labor militancy involving female as well as male factory workers.
mill girls in lowell for example formed a union of their own the female labor reform association and agitated for shorter working hours.
on a broader front workers organizations petitioned state legislatures to pass laws limiting the workday to ten hours.
the laws that were actually passed turned out to be ineffective because employers could still require a prospective worker to sign a special contract agreeing to longer hours.
the employment of immigrants in increasing numbers between the mid 1840s and the late 1850s made it more difficult to organize industrial workers.
impoverished fugitives from the irish potato famine tended to have lower economic expectations and more conservative social attitudes than did native born workers.
consequently the irish immigrants were initially willing to work for less and were not so prone to protest bad working conditions.
by contrast some german immigrants brought labor radicalism with them from their native land and became leaders of union organization.
conclusion the costs of expansion by 1860 industrial expansion and immigration had created a working class of men and women who seemed destined for a life of low paid wage labor.
this reality stood in contrast to americas self image as a land of opportunity and upward mobility.
wage labor was popularly viewed as a temporary condition from which workers were supposed to extricate themselves by hard work and frugality.
according to abraham lincoln speaking in 1859 of the norths free labor society there is no such thing as a freeman being fatally fixed for life in the condition of a hired laborer this ideal still had some validity in rapidly developing regions of the western states but it was mostly myth when applied to the increasingly foreign born industrial workers of the northeast.
both internal and external expansion had come at a heavy cost.
tensions associated with class and ethnic rivalries were only one part of the price of rapid economic development.
the acquisition of new territories became politically divisive and would soon lead to a catastrophic sectional controversy.
the young america wing of chapter 13 chapter review the democratic party fought vainly to prevent this from happening.
its leader in the late 1840s and early 1850s was senator stephen a douglas of illinois called the little giant because of his small stature and large public presence.
more than anyone else of this period he sought political power for himself and his party by combining an expansionist foreign policy with the encouragement of economic development within the territories already acquired.
his youthful dynamism made him seem the very embodiment of the young america ideal.
recognizing that the slavery question was the main obstacle to his program he sought to neutralize it through compromise and evasion see chapter 14.
his failure to win the presidency or even the democratic nomination before 1860 showed that the young americans dream of a patriotic consensus supporting headlong expansion and economic development could not withstand the tensions and divisions that expansionist policies created or brought to light.
study y resources take the study plan for chapter 13 an age of expansionism on myhistorylab time line santa fe opened to american traders earliest american settlers arrive in texas mexico attempts to halt american migration to texas american railroads begin commercial operation cyrus mccormick patents mechanical reaper revolution breaks out in texas texas becomes independent republic john deere invents steel plow president john tyler inaugurated webster ashburton treaty fixes border between maine and new brunswick mass migration to oregon begins mexico closes santa fe trade to americans samuel f b morse demonstrates electric telegraph james k polk elected president on platform of expansionism 1845 mass immigration from europe begins united states annexes texas john l osullivan coins slogan manifest destiny war with mexico breaks out united states and great britain resolve diplomatic crisis over oregon american conquest of california completed mormons settle utah american forces under zachary taylor defeat mexicans at buena vista winfield scotts army captures veracruz and defeats mexicans at cerro gordo mexico city falls to american invaders treaty of guadalupe hidalgo consigns california and new mexico to united states gold discovered in california forty niners rush to california to dig for gold war between utah mormons and u s forces averted chapter review movement to the far west ceded wash oregon country mont ore what were some of the reasons for which americans headed into the western territories and what were some of the consequences of expansion.
americ ans believed that it was americas manifest destiny to expand across the continent.
this ideology was a useful rallying cry for politicians willing to go to war with mexico to gain new territory.
p 298 internal expansionism idaho wy in the 1820s and 1830s pioneers pursued fertile land in the west beyond the borders of the united states and thus helped set the stage for the annexations and international crises of the 1840s.
some went for adventure others for material gain or to escape religious persecution.
p 293 manifest destiny and the mexican american war why did the u s annex texas and the southwest.
the annexation of texas and the southwest had several causes.
early settlers of texas grew dissatisfied with the catholic antislavery mexican administration.
many how did developments in transportation foster industrialization and encourage immigration.
rail transportation allowed the swift movement of people and goods.
other advances in technology permitted the new mass production the new industries drew many immigrants from ireland and germany who were fleeing famine and persecution.
immigration made labor more plentiful and thus cheaper so working conditions declined.
p 305 study resources key terms and definitions young america in the 1840s and early 1850s many public figures especially younger members of the democratic party used this term to describe their program of territorial expansion and industrial growth.
p 292 mexican american war conflict 1846 1848 between the united states and mexico after the u s annexation of texas.
as victor the united states acquired vast new territories from mexico.
p 302 alamo in 1835 americans living in mexican ruled texas fomented a revolution.
mexico lost the resulting conflict but not before its troops defeated and killed a group of american rebels at the alamo a fortified mission in san antonio.
p 296 treaty of guadalupe hidalgo signed in 1848 this treaty ended the mexican american war.
mexico relinquished its claims to texas and ceded an additional 500 000 square miles to the united states for 15 million.
p 303 manifest destiny coined in 1845 this term referred to a doctrine in support of territorial expansion based on the belief that the united states should expand to encompass all of north america.
p 298 critical thinking questions 1.
why do you think americans turned from expansion beyond u s borders to internal expansion after the mexican american war.
what do you think was the most important force driving change in american life during the 1840s and 1850s technology politics or international movements of people.
once again in this period economic and material changes greatly influenced the makeup of american society.
what lessons can you draw from the ongoing interplay of social and material changes in u s history.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 13 on myhistorylab movement to the far west read the document 1852 p 305 view the map united states territorial expansion in the 1850s p 294 view the map texas revolution 1836 p 296 manifest destiny and the mexican american war watch the video the annexation of texas p 299 read the document john osullivan the great nation of futurity 1845 p 300 read the document thomas corwin against the mexican war 1847 p 303 internal expansionism view the map p 304 mexican american war 1846 1848 senate report on the railroads watch the video mastering time and space how the railroads changed america p 306 complete the assignment hispanic america after a case study in majority rule p 308 read the document samuel morse foreign immigration 1835 p 311 indicates study plan media assignment the sectional crisis contents and learning objectives the compromise of 1850 pg.
315 feature essay the enigma of john brown how did territorial expansion intensify the conflict over slavery.
law and society the case of dred and harriet scott blurring the borders of politics and justice political upheaval 1852 1856 pg.
319 how did the two party system change during this period.
the house divided 1857 1860 pg.
324 how did the institution of slavery go bey ond political and economic debates.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 12 the pursuit of perfection redeeming the middle class in the winter of 1830 to 1831 a wave of religious revivals swept the northern states.
the most dramatic and successful took place in rochester new york.
large audiences composed mostly of respectable and prosperous citizens heard presbyterian evangelist charles g finney preach that every man or woman had the power to choose christ and a godly life.
finney broke with his churchs traditional belief that it was gods inscrutable will that decided who would be saved when he preached that sinners ought to be made to feel that they have something to do and that something is to repent.
that is something that no other being can do for them neither god nor man and something they can do and do now for six months finney held prayer meetings almost daily putting intense pressure on those who had not experienced salvation.
hundreds came forth to declare their faith and church membership doubled during his stay.
the newly awakened christians of rochester were urged to convert relatives neighbors and employees.
if enough people enlisted in the evangelical crusade finney proclaimed the millennium would be achieved within months.
finneys call for religious and moral renewal fell on fertile ground in rochester.
the bustling boomtown on the erie canal was suffering from severe growing pains and tensions arising from rapid economic development.
leading families were divided into quarreling factions and workers were threatening to break free from the control their employers had previously exerted over their daily lives.
most of the early converts were from the middle class.
businessmen who had been heavy drinkers and irregular churchgoers now abstained from alcohol and went to church at least twice a week.
they also pressured the employees in their workshops mills and stores to do likewise.
more rigorous standards of proper behavior and religious conformity unified rochesters elite and increased its ability to control the rest of the community.
as in other cities swept by the revival evangelical protestantism provided the middle class with a stronger sense of identity and purpose.
ut the war on sin was not always so unifying.
among those converted in rochester and elsewhere were some who could not rest easy until the nation as a whole conformed to the pure christianity of the sermon on the mount.
finney expressed such a hope himself but he concentrated on religious conversion and moral uplift of the individual trusting that the purification of american society and politics would automatically follow.
other religious and moral reformers were inspired to crusade against those social and political institutions that failed to measure up to the standards of christian perfection.
they proceeded to attack such collective sins as the liquor traffic war slavery and even government.
b jeremiah paul revival meeting religiously inspired reformism cut two ways.
on the one hand it imposed a new order and cultural unity to previously divided and troubled communities like rochester.
but it also inspired a variety of more radical movements that threatened to undermine established institutions that failed to live up to the principles of the more idealistic reformers.
one of these movements abolitionism challenged the central social and economic institution of the southern states and helped trigger political upheaval and civil war.
the rise of evangelicalism how did the evangelical revivalism of the early nineteenth century spur reform movements.
american protestantism was in a state of constant ferment during the early nineteenth century.
the separation of church and state a process that began during the revolution was now complete.
government sponsorship and funding had ended or would soon end for the established churches of the colonial era such as the congregationalists of new england and the episcopalians of the south.
dissenting groups such as baptists and methodists welcomed full religious freedom because it offered a better chance to win new converts.
all pious protestants however worried about the spread of infidelity a term they applied to catholics freethinkers unitarians mormons and any nonevangelical christian.
but they faced opposition to their effort to make the nation officially protestant.
secular ideas drawn from the enlightenment of the late eighteenth century had achieved wide acceptance as a basis for the establishment of a democratic republic and opposition to mixing religion with public life remained strong during the age of jackson.
as deism the belief in a god who expressed himself through natural laws accessible to human reason declined in popularity in the early to mid nineteenth century catholic immigration increased and the spread of popery became the main focus of evangelical concern.
both catholics and unitarians who quietly carried forward the rationalistic traditions of the eighteenth century resented and resisted the evangelicals efforts to convert them to the christianity of the heart most of those who accepted christ as their personal savior in revival meetings previously had been indifferent to religion rather than adhering to an alternative set of beliefs.
revivalism proved to be a very effective means to extend religious values and build up church membership.
the great awakening of the mid eighteenth century had shown the wonders that evangelists could accomplish and new revivalists repeated this success by greatly increasing membership in protestant churches.
chapter 12 the pursuit of perfection they also capitalized on the growing willingness of americans to form voluntary organizations.
spiritual renewals were often followed by mobilization of the faithful into associations to spread the gospel and reform american morals.
according to some historians evangelical revival and the reform movements it inspired reflected the same spirit as the new democratic politics.
in a sense this is true jacksonian politicians and evangelists both sought popular favor and assumed that individuals were free agents capable of self direction and self improvement.
but leaders of the two types of movements made different kinds of demands on ordinary people.
jacksonians idealized common folk as they found them and saw no danger to the community if individuals pursued their worldly interests.
evangelical reformers who tended to support the whigs or to reject both parties believed that the common people and not just the elite needed to be redeemed and uplifted committed to a higher goal than self interest.
the republic would be safe they insisted only if a right minded minority preached taught and agitated until the mass of ordinary citizens was reborn into a higher life.
the second great awakening the frontier phase the second great awakening began on the southern frontier around the turn of the century.
in 1801 a crowd estimated at nearly fifty thousand gathered at cane ridge kentucky.
according to a contemporary observer the noise was like the roar of niagara.
the vast sea of human beings seemed to be agitated as if by a storm.
i counted seven ministers all preaching at once.
some of the people were singing others praying some crying for mercy.
while others were shouting most vociferously.
at one time i saw at least five hundred swept down in a moment as if a battery of a thousand guns had been opened upon them and then followed immediately shrieks and shouts that rent the heavens.
highly emotional camp meetings organized usually by methodists or baptists but sometimes by presbyterians became a regular feature of religious life in the south and the lower midwest.
on the frontier the camp meeting met social as well as religious needs.
in the sparsely settled southern backcountry it was difficult to sustain local churches with regular ministers.
methodists solved part of the problem by sending out circuit riders.
baptists licensed uneducated farmers to preach to their neighbors.
but for many people the only way to get baptized or married or to have a communal religious experience was to attend a camp meeting.
rowdies and scoffers also attended drinking whiskey carousing and fornicating on the fringes of the small city of tents and wagons.
sometimes they were struck down by a mighty blast from the pulpit.
evangelists loved to tell stories of such conversions or near conversions.
according to methodist preacher peter cartwright one scoffer was seized by the jerks a set of involuntary bodily movements often observed at camp meetings.
normally such an exercise would lead to conversion but this particular sinner was so hard hearted that he refused to surrender to god.
the result was that he kept jerking until his neck was broken.
camp meetings provided an emotional outlet for rural people whose everyday lives were often lonely and tedious.
they could also promote a sense of community and social discipline.
conversion at a camp meeting could be a rite of passage signifying that a young man or woman had outgrown wild or antisocial behavior and was now ready to become a respectable member of the community.
in the southern states baptists and presbyterians eventually deemphasized camp meetings in favor of protracted meetings in local churches which featured guest preachers holding forth day after day for up to two weeks.
southern evangelical churches especially baptist and methodist grew rapidly in membership and influence during the first half of the nineteenth century and became the focus of community life in rural areas.
although they fostered societies to improve morals to encourage temperance and discourage dueling for example they generally shied away from social reform.
the conservatism of a slaveholding society discouraged radical efforts to change the world.
the second great awakening in the north reformist tendencies were more evident in the distinctive kind of revivalism that originated in new england and western new york.
northern evangelists were mostly congregationalists and presbyterians strongly influenced by new england puritan traditions.
their greatest successes were not in rural or frontier areas but in small to medium sized towns and cities.
their revivals could be stirring affairs but were less extravagantly emotional than the camp meetings of the south.
northern evangelists formed societies devoted to the redemption of the human race in general and american society in particular.
the reform movement in new england began as an effort to defend calvinism against the liberal views of religion fostered by the enlightenment.
the reverend timothy dwight who became president of yale college in 1795 was alarmed by the younger generations growing acceptance of the belief that the deity was the benevolent master architect of a rational universe rather than an all powerful mysterious god.
dwight was particularly disturbed by those religious liberals whose rationalism reached the point of denying the doctrine of the trinity and who proclaimed themselves to be unitarians to dwights horror unitarians captured some fashionable and sophisticated new england congregations and even won control of the harvard divinity school.
he fought back by preaching to yale undergraduates that they were dead in sin and succeeded in provoking a series of campus revivals.
but the harshness and pessimism of orthodox calvinist doctrine with its stress on original sin and predestination had limited appeal in a republic committed to human freedom and progress.
a younger generation of congregational ministers reshaped new england puritanism to increase its appeal to people who shared the prevailing optimism about human capabilities.
the main theologian of early nineteenth century neo calvinism was nathaniel taylor a disciple of dwight who also held forth at yale.
taylor softened the doctrine of predestination almost out of existence by contending that every individual was a free agent who had the ability to overcome a natural inclination to sin.
the first great practitioner of the new evangelical calvinism was lyman beecher another of dwights pupils.
in the period just before and after the war of 1812 beecher helped promote a the rise of evangelicalism view the closer look methodist camp meeting 1819 the second great awakening swept across the united states in the early decades of the 19th century bringing religious camp meetings such as the one depicted here to rural and urban areas alike.
held outdoors these gatherings allowed huge audiences to share in a highly emotional experience as they expressed their faith.
series of revivals in the congregational churches of new england.
using his own homespun version of taylors doctrine of free agency beecher induced thousands to acknowledge their sinfulness and surrender to god.
during the late 1820s beecher was forced to confront the new and more radical form of revivalism being practiced in western new york by charles g finney.
upstate new york was a seedbed for religious enthusiasms of various kinds.
a majority of its population were transplanted new englanders who had left behind their close knit village communities and ancestral churches but not their puritan consciences.
troubled by rapid economic changes and the social dislocations that went with them they were ripe for a new faith and a fresh moral direction.
although he worked within congregational and presbyterian churches which were then cooperating under a plan of union established in 1804 finney departed radically from calvinist doctrines.
in his hands free agency became unqualified free will.
one of his sermons was titled sinners bound to change their own hearts finney was relatively indifferent to theological issues.
his appeal was to emotion rather than to doctrine or reason.
he wanted converts to feel the power of christ and become new men and women.
he eventually adopted the extreme view that redeemed christians could be totally free of sin as perfect as their father in heaven.
beginning in 1823 finney conducted a series of highly successful revivals in towns and cities of western new york culminating in the aforementioned triumph in rochester in 1830 1831.
finney sought instantaneous conversions through a variety of new and controversial methods.
these included holding protracted meetings that lasted all night or several days in a row placing an anxious bench in front of the congregation where those in the process of repentance could receive special attention and encouraging women to pray publicly for the souls of male relatives.
the results could be dramatic.
sometimes listeners fell to the floor in fits of excitement.
if i had had a sword in my hand finney recalled i could not have cut them off as fast as they fell although he appealed to emotion finney had a practical almost manipulative attitude toward the conversion process it is not a miracle or dependent on a miracle in any sense.
it is purely a philosophical result of the right use of constituted means chapter 12 the pursuit of perfection outgoing christianity was being advanced not one that called for withdrawal from a sinread the document lyman beecher six sermons on ful world.
most of the converts of northern intemperance 1828 revivalism were middle class citizens already active in the lives of their communities.
they were seeking to adjust to the bustling world of the market revolution without violating their traditional moral and social values.
their generally optimistic and forward looking attitudes led to hopes that a wave of conversions would save the nation and the world.
in new england beecher and his evangelical associates established a great network of missionary and benevolent societies.
in 1810 presbyterians and congregationalists founded a board of commissioners for foreign missions and soon dispatched two missionaries to india.
in 1816 the reverend samuel john mills took the leading role in organizing the american bible society.
by 1821 the society had distributed one hundred forty thousand bibles mostly in parts of the west where churches and clergymen were scarce.
another major effort went into publication and distribution of religious tracts mainly by the american tract society founded in 1825.
special societies targeted groups beyond the reach of regular churches such as seamen native americans and the beecher family shown here in a photograph by mathew brady contributed four influential memthe urban poor.
in 1816 to 1817 middlebers to the reform movement.
lyman beecher seated center was a successful preacher and a master class women in new york philadelphia strategist in the organized campaign against sin and infidelity his eldest daughter catharine on his right was a leader in the movement supporting higher education for women.
another daughter harriet charleston and boston formed societies seated far right wrote the novel uncle toms cabin.
lymans son henry ward beecher standing far to spread the gospel in lower class wards right was an ardent antislavery advocate and later became one of the most celebrated preachers of where as one of their missionaries put it the post civil war era.
he also became involved in a notorious scandal and trial.
there was a great mass of people beyond the restraints of religion lyman beecher and eastern evangelicals were disturbed by evangelicals founded moral reform societies as well as misfinneys new methods and by the emotionalism that accompasions.
some of these aimed at curbing irreligious activity on the nied them.
they were also upset because he violated long standing sabbath others sought to stamp out dueling gambling and prostichristian tradition by allowing women to pray aloud in church.
in new york in 1831 a zealous young clergyman published an evangelical summit meeting between beecher and finney held a sensational report claiming there were ten thousand prostitutes at new lebanon new york in 1827 failed to reach agreement on in the city.
as a result of this expos an asylum was established for this and other issues.
beecher even threatened to stand on the state the redemption of abandoned women when middle class women line if finney attempted to bring his crusade into connecticut.
but became involved in this crusade they shifted its focus to the men it soon became clear that finney was not merely stirring people who patronized prostitutes and they proposed that teams of observto temporary peaks of excitement he also was leaving strong and ers record and publish the names of men seen entering brothels.
the active churches behind him and eastern opposition gradually plan was abandoned because it offended those who thought the cause weakened.
finney eventually founded a tabernacle in new york of virtue would be better served by suppressing public discussion and city that became a rallying point for evangelical efforts to reach the investigation of sexual vices.
urban masses.
beecher was especially influential in the temperance movement the most successful reform crusade his published sermons were the most important and widely distributed of the early from revivalism to reform tracts calling for total abstinence from demon rum the temperance the northern wing of the second great awakening unlike the movement was directed at a real social evil.
since the revolution whissouthern inspired a great movement for social reform.
converts key had become the most popular american beverage.
made from were organized into voluntary associations that sought to stamp corn by individual farmers or by the 1820s in commercial distilleries out sin and social evil and win the world for christ.
an activist and it was cheaper than milk or beer and safer than water which was domesticity and changes in the american family watch the video drinking and the temperance movement in nineteenth century america their nurturing duties with great seriousness and self consciousness.
women regarded as particularly susceptible to religious and moral influences were increasingly confined to the domestic circle but they assumed a greater importance within it.
marriage for love in the early nineteenth century a new ideal of marriage for love arose among the american middle class.
many nineteenth century americans placed new value on ties of affection among family members especially a married couple joined by romantic love.
parents now exercised even less control over their childrens selection of mates than they had in the colonial period.
the desire to protect family property and maintain social status remained strong but mutual affection was now considered absolutely essential to a proper union.
beginning in the late eighteenth century romantic novels popularized the idea that marriage should be based exclusively on love.
it became easier for sons to marry while their fathers were still alive and for younger daughters to wed before their older sisters trends that reflected a weakening of the drinking alcohol was a regular part of daily life in nineteenth century america at work at home and at social gatherings.
but the anti alcohol or temperance movement gained steam in the traditional parental role.
1830s especially through portrayals of the negative effects of the demon drink on women and correspondence between spouses began to children as seen above.
reflect this new companionate ideal.
for the most part eighteenth century letters had been formal and distant in tone.
the husband often assumed a patriaroften contaminated.
in some parts of the country rum and brandy chal role even using such salutations as my dear child and rarely were also popular.
hard liquor was frequently consumed with food as confessing that he missed his wife or craved her company.
letters a table beverage even at breakfast and children sometimes imbibed from women to their husbands were highly deferential and did not along with adults.
many evangelical reformers regarded intemperusually give advice or express disapproval.
ance as the greatest single obstacle to a republic of god fearing selfby the early nineteenth century first names pet names and disciplined citizens.
for more on the temperance movement see terms of endearment such as honey or darling were increasingly the feature essay the war against demon drink pp.
used by both sexes and absent husbands frequently confessed they cooperating missionary and reform societies collectively known as felt lost without their mates.
in their replies wives assumed a more the benevolent empire were a major force in american culture egalitarian tone and offered counsel on a wide range of subjects.
by the early 1830s.
efforts to modify american attitudes and instituone wrote to a husband who had admitted to flirting with pretty tions seemed to be bearing fruit.
the middle class was embracing a women that she was more than a little jealous she asked him new ethic of self control and self discipline equipping individuals to angrily how he would feel if she made a similar confession would confront a new world of economic growth and social mobility withit be more immoral in me than in you out losing their cultural and moral bearings.
the change in middle and upper class marriage should not be exaggerated or romanticized.
in law and in cases of conflict between spouses the husband remained the unchallenged head domesticity and changes in the of the household.
true independence or equality for women was american family impossible at a time when men held exclusive legal authority over a couples property and children.
divorce was difficult for everyone what was the doctrine of separate spheres and but the double standard made it easier for husbands than wives to how did it change family life.
dissolve a marriage on grounds of adultery.
letters also reveal the strains spouses felt between their ideals of mutual love and the realthe evangelical culture of the 1820s and 1830s influenced the famity of very different gender roles and life paths husbands away ily as an institution and inspired new conceptions of its role in from home for long periods pursuing financial gain as self made american society.
many parents viewed childrens rearing as essenmen while women stayed at home in the domestic sphere.
tial preparation for self disciplined christian life and performed chapter 12 the pursuit of perfection the cult of domesticity the northeast.
in towns and cities the rise of factories and countinghouses severed the home from the workplace.
men went forth every the notion that women belonged in the home while the public morning to work leaving their wives at home to tend the house and sphere belonged to men has been called the ideology of separate the children.
married women were therefore increasingly deprived of spheres in particular the view that women had a special role to a productive economic role.
the cult of domesticity made a virtue of play in the domestic sphere as guardians of virtue and spiritual the fact that men were solely responsible for running the affairs of the heads of the home has been described as the cult of domesticity world and building up the economy.
or the cult of true womanhood in the view of most men a a new conception of gender roles justified and glorified this womans place was in the home and on a pedestal.
the ideal wife pattern.
the doctrine of separate spheres as set forth in novels and mother was an angel in the house a model of piety and virtue advice literature and the new womens magazines sentimentalized who exerted a wholesome moral and religious influence over memthe woman who kept a spotless house nurtured her children and bers of the coarser sex.
a poem published in 1846 expressed a masoffered her husband a refuge from the heartless world of commerce culine view of the true woman and industry.
from a modern point of view it is easy to condemn the cult of domesticity as a rationalization for male dominance to i would have her as pure as the snow on the mount a considerable extent it was.
yet the new norm of confinement to as true as the smile that to infancys given the home did not necessarily imply that women were inferior.
by the as pure as the wave of the crystalline fount standards of evangelical culture women in the domestic sphere yet as warm in the heart as the sunlight of heaven.
could be viewed as superior to men since women were in a good position to cultivate the feminine virtues of love and self sacrifice the sociological reality behind the cult of true womanhood was and thus act as official guardians of religious and moral values.
a growing division between the working lives of middle class men furthermore many women used domestic ideology to fashion and women.
in the eighteenth century and earlier most economic a role for themselves in the public sphere.
the evangelical moveactivity had been centered in and near the home and husbands and ment encouraged womens role as the keepers of moral virtue.
the wives often worked together in a common enterprise.
by the early to revivals not only gave women a role in converting men but premid nineteenth century this way of life was declining especially in sented as the main object of worship a christ with stereotypical feminine characteristics.
a nurturing loving merciful savior mediating between a stern father and his erring chilread the document catharine e beecher from a treatise dren provided the model for womans new role as spiritual on domestic economy head of the home.
membership in evangelical church based associations inspired and prepared women for new roles as civilizers of men and guardians of domestic culture and morality.
female reform societies taught women the strict ethical code they were to instill in other family members organized mothers groups gave instruction in how to build character and encourage piety in children.
while many working class women read about and aspired to the ideal of true womanhood domestic ideology only affected the daily lives of relatively affluent women.
working class wives were not usually employed outside the home during this period but they labored long and hard within the household.
besides cleaning cooking and taking care of large numbers of children they often took in washing or piecework to supplement a meager family income.
life was especially hard for african american women.
most of those who were free negroes rather than slaves did not have husbands who made enough to support them and they were obliged to serve in white households or work long hours at home doing other peoples washing and sewing.
in urban areas unmarried working class women often lived on their own and toiled as household servants in the sweatshops of the garment industry and in factories.
barely able to support themselves and at the mercy of male sexual predators they were in no position to identify with the middle class ideal of elevated protected womanhood.
for the sentiment on this sampler stitched in 1820 by ruth titus typifies beliefs about some of them the relatively well paid and gregarious life of womans proper role according to the cult of true womanhood.
the successful prostitute seemed to offer an attractive altersource collection of the new york historical society negative number 1941 910 native to a life of loneliness and privation.
domesticity and changes in the american family for middle class women whose husbands or fathers earned a good income freedom from industrial or farm labor offered some tangible benefits.
they now had the leisure to read extensively the new literature directed primarily at housewives to participate in female dominated charitable activities and to cultivate deep and lasting friendships with other women.
the result was a distinctively feminine subculture emphasizing sisterhood or sorority this growing sense of solidarity with other women and of the importance of sexual identity could transcend the private home and even the barriers of social class.
beginning in the 1820s urban women of the middle and upper classes organized societies for the relief and rehabilitation of poor or fallen women.
the aim of the organizations was not economic and political equality with men but the elevation of all women to true womanhood.
for some women the domestic ideal even sanctioned efforts to extend their sphere until it conquered the masculine world outside the home.
this domestic feminism was reflected in womens involvement in crusades to stamp out such masculine sins as intemperance gambling and sexual vice.
in the benevolent societies and reform movements of the jacksonian era especially those designated as womens organizations women handled money organized meetings and public appeals made contracts and sometimes even gave orders to male subordinates they could not usually perform in their own households.
the desire to extend the feminine sphere was the motivating force behind catharine beechers campaign to make school teaching a womans occupation.
a prolific and influential writer on the theory and practice of domesticity this unmarried daughter of lyman beecher saw the spinster teacher as equivalent to a mother.
by instilling in young males the virtues that only women could teach the schoolmarm could help liberate america from corruption and materialism.
but beecher and other domestic feminists continued to emphasize the role of married women who stayed home and did their part simply by being wives and mothers.
reforming husbands was difficult they were away much of the time and tended to be preoccupied with business.
but this very fact gave women primary responsibility for the rearing of children an activity to which nineteenth century americans attached almost cosmic significance.
since women were considered particularly well qualified to transmit piety and morality to future citizens of the republic the cult of domesticity exalted motherhood and encouraged a new concern with childhood as the time of life when character was formed.
the discovery of childhood the nineteenth century has been called the century of the child more than before childhood was seen as a distinct stage of life requiring the special and sustained attention of adults at least until the age of thirteen or fourteen.
the middle class family now became child centered which meant that the care nurture and rearing of children was viewed as the familys main function.
in earlier times adults treated children in a more casual way often sending them away from home for education or apprenticeship at a very early age.
among the well to do children spent more time with servants or tutors than with their parents.
by the early decades of the nineteenth century however children were staying at home longer and receiving much more attention from parents especially mothers.
much less common was the colonial custom nearly inconceivable today of naming a child after a sibling who had died in infancy.
each child was now looked on as a unique and irreplaceable individual.
new customs and fashions heralded the discovery of childhood.
books aimed specifically at juveniles began to roll off the presses.
parents became more self conscious about their responsibilities and sought help from a new literature providing expert advice on child rearing.
one early nineteenth century mother wrote there is scarcely any subject concerning which i feel more anxiety than the proper education of my children.
it is a difficult and delicate subject the more i feel how much is to be learnt by myself the new concern for children resulted in more intimate relations between parents and children.
the ideal family described in the advice manuals and sentimental literature was bound together by affection rather than authority.
firm discipline remained at the core of family government but there was a change in the preferred method of enforcing good behavior.
corporal punishment declined partially displaced by shaming or withholding of affection.
disobedient middle class children were now more likely to be confined to their rooms to reflect on their sins than to receive a good thrashing.
discipline could no longer be justified as the constant application of physical force over naturally wayward beings.
in an age of moral perfectionism the role of discipline was to induce repentance and change basic attitudes.
the intended result was often described as self government to achieve it parents used guilt rather than fear as their main source of leverage.
a mothers sorrow or a fathers stern and prolonged silence was deemed more effective in forming character than were blows or angry words.
some shared realities of childhood cut across class and ethnic lines.
for example there was a high rate of mortality for infants and young children throughout the nineteenth century.
even wealthy families could expect to lose one child out of five or six before the age of five.
but class and region made a big difference to childrens lives.
farm children tended livestock milked cows churned butter scrubbed laundry harvested crops and hauled water working class urban children did outwork in textiles worked in street markets and scavenged.
one important explanation for the growing focus on childhood is the smaller size of families.
for reasons that are still not completely understood the average number of children born to each woman during her fertile years dropped from 7 04 in 1800 to 5 42 in 1850.
as a result the average number of children per family declined about 25 percent beginning a long range trend lasting to the present day.
the practice of various forms of birth control undoubtedly contributed to this demographic revolution.
ancestors of the modern condom and diaphragm were openly advertised and sold during the pre civil war period but it is likely that most couples controlled family size by practicing the withdrawal method or limiting the frequency of intercourse.
abortion was also surprisingly common and was on the rise.
one historian has estimated that by 1850 there was one abortion for every five or six live births.
parents seemed to understand that having fewer children meant they could provide their offspring with a better start in life.
such attitudes were appropriate in a society that was beginning to shift from agriculture to commerce and industry.
for rural chapter 12 the pursuit of perfection households short of labor large families were an economic asset.
for urban couples who hoped to send their children into a competitive world that demanded special talents and training they were a financial liability.
institutional reform how did horace mann change ideas about public schooling in america.
the family could not carry the whole burden of socializing and reforming individuals.
children needed schooling as well as parental nurturing and many were thought to lack a proper home environment.
some adults too seemed to require special kinds of attention and treatment.
seeking to extend the advantages of family government beyond the domestic circle reformers worked to establish or improve public institutions that were designed to shape individual character and instill a capacity for self discipline.
the extension of education the period from 1820 to 1850 saw an enormous expansion of free public schools.
the new resolve to put more children in school for longer periods reflected many of the same values that exalted the child centered family.
up to a certain age children could be effectively nurtured and educated in the home.
but after that they needed formal training at a character molding institution that would prepare them to make a living and bear the burdens of republican citizenship.
intellectual training at school was regarded as less important than moral indoctrination.
sometimes the school served as a substitute for the family.
educational reformers were alarmed at the masses of poor and immigrant children who allegedly failed to get proper nurturing at home.
it was up to schools to make up for this disadvantage.
otherwise the republic would be in danger from masses of people incapable of self government before the 1820s schooling in the united states was a haphazard affair.
the wealthy sent their children to private schools and some of the poor sent their children to charity or pauper schools that were usually financed in part by local governments.
public education was most highly developed in the new england states where towns were required by law to support elementary schools.
it was weakest in the south where almost all education was private.
agitation for expanded public education began in the 1820s and early 1830s as a central demand of the workingmens movements in eastern cities.
these hard pressed artisans viewed free schools open to all as a way of countering the growing gap between rich and poor.
initially strong opposition came from more affluent taxpayers who did not see why they should pay for the education of other peoples children.
but middle class reformers soon seized the initiative shaped educational reform to their own end of social discipline and provided the momentum needed for legislative success.
the most influential supporter of the common school movement was horace mann of massachusetts.
as a lawyer and member of the state legislature mann worked tirelessly to establish a state board of education and adequate tax support for local schools.
in 1837 he persuaded the legislature to enact his proposals and he subsequently resigned his seat to become the first secretary of the new board an office he held with great distinction until 1848.
he believed children were clay in the hands of teachers and school officials and could be molded to a state of perfection.
like advocates of child rearing through moral influence rather than physical force he discouraged corporal punishment except as a last resort.
his position on this issue led to a bitter controversy with boston schoolmasters who retained a calvinist sense of original sin and favored a freer use of the rod.
against those who argued that school taxes violated property rights mann contended that private property was actually held in trust for the good of the community.
the property of this commonwealth he wrote is pledged for the education of all its youth up to such a point as will save them from poverty and vice and prepare them for the adequate performance of their social and civil duties manns conception of public education as a means of social discipline converted the middle and upper classes to the cause.
by teaching middle class morality and respect for order the schools could turn potential rowdies and revolutionaries into law abiding citizens.
they could also encourage social mobility by opening doors for lower class children who were determined to do better than their parents.
in practice new or improved public schools often alienated working class pupils and their families rather than reforming them.
compulsory attendance laws in massachusetts and other states deprived poor families of needed wage earners without guaranteeing new occupational opportunities for those with an elementary education.
as the laboring class became increasingly immigrant and catholic in the 1840s and 1850s dissatisfaction arose over the evangelical protestant tone of moral instruction in the schools.
quite consciously mann and his disciples were trying to impose a uniform culture on people who valued differing traditions.
in addition to the three rs reading riting and rithmetic the public schools of the mid nineteenth century taught the protestant ethic industry punctuality sobriety and frugality.
these were the virtues emphasized in the famous mcguffeys eclectic readers which first appeared in 1836.
millions of children learned to read by digesting mcguffeys parables about the terrible fate of those who gave in to sloth drunkenness or wastefulness.
such moral indoctrination helped produce generations of americans with personalities and beliefs adapted to the needs of an industrializing society people who could be depended on to adjust to the precise and regular routines of the factory or the office.
but as an education for self government in the sense of learning to think for oneself it left much to be desired.
fortunately however education was not limited to the schools nor devoted solely to children.
every city and almost every town or village had a lyceum debating society or mechanics institute where adults of all social classes could broaden their intellectual horizons.
lyceums featured discourses on such subjects as self reliance or the conduct of life by creative thinkers such as ralph waldo emerson explanations and demonstrations of the latest scientific discoveries and debates among members on controversial issues.
young abraham lincoln who had received less than two years of formal schooling as a child in backwoods indiana sharpened his intellect in the early 1830s as a member of the new salem illinois debating society.
in 1838 after moving to springfield he set forth institutional reform watch the video who was horace mann and why are so many schools named after him.
horace mann has been called the father of american public education.
he saw schools creating citizens for the new democratic society in the united states.
his political principles when he spoke at the local lyceum on the perpetuation of our political institutions more than the public schools the lyceums and debating societies fostered independent thought and encouraged new ideas.
discovering the asylum some segments of the population were obviously beyond the reach of family government and character training provided in homes and schools.
in the 1820s and 1830s reformers became acutely aware of the danger to society posed by an apparently increasing number of criminals lunatics and paupers.
their answer was to establish special institutions to house those deemed incapable of self discipline.
their goals were humanitarian they believed reform and rehabilitation were possible in a carefully controlled environment.
in earlier times the existence of paupers lawbreakers and insane persons had been taken for granted.
their presence was viewed as the consequence of divine judgment or original sin.
for the most part these people were not isolated from local communities.
the insane were allowed to wander about if harmless and were confined at home if they were dangerous the poor were supported by private charity or the dole provided by towns or counties convicted criminals were whipped held for limited periods in local jails or in the case of very serious offenses executed.
by the early nineteenth century these traditional methods had come to seem both inadequate and inhumane.
dealing with deviants in a neighborly way broke down as economic development and urbanization made communities less cohesive.
at the same time reformers were concluding that all defects of mind and character were correctable the insane could be cured criminals reformed and paupers taught to pull themselves out of destitution.
the result was what historian david rothman termed the discovery of the asylum the invention and establishment of special institutions for the confinement and reformation of deviants.
the 1820s and 1830s saw the emergence of state supported prisons insane asylums and poorhouses.
new york and pennsylvania led the way in prison reform.
institutions at auburn new york and philadelphia attracted international attention as model penitentiaries mainly because of their experiments in isolating inmates from one another.
solitary confinement was viewed as a humanitarian and therapeutic policy because it gave inmates a chance to reflect on their sins free from the corrupting influence of other convicts.
in theory prisons and asylums substituted for the family.
custodians were meant to act as parents providing moral advice and training.
in practice the institutions were far different from the affectionate families idealized by the cult of domesticity.
most accommodated only a single sex or maintained a strict segregation of male and female inmates.
their most prominent feature was the imposition of a rigid daily routine.
the early superintendents and wardens believed the enforcement of a rigorous set of rules and procedures would encourage self discipline.
the french observers alexis de tocqueville and gustave de beaumont summed up these practical expectations after a tour of american prisons in 1831 and 1832 the habits or order to which the prisoner is subjected for several years.
the obedience of every moment to inflexible rules the regularity of a uniform life.
are calculated to produce a deep impression upon his mind.
perhaps leaving the prison he is not an honest man but he has contracted honest habits prisons asylums and poorhouses did not achieve the aims of their founders.
public support was inadequate to meet the needs of a growing inmate population and the personnel of the institutions often lacked the training needed to help the incarcerated.
the results were overcrowding and the use of brutality to keep order.
for the most part prisons failed to reform hardened criminals and the primitive psychotherapy known as moral treatment failed to cure most asylum patients.
poorhouses rapidly degenerated into sinkholes of despair.
a combination of naive theories and poor performance doomed the institutions to a custodial rather than a reformatory role.
conditions would have been even worse had it not been for dorothea dix.
between 1838 and the civil war this remarkable woman devoted her energies and skills to publicizing the inhumane treatment prevailing in prisons almshouses and insane asylums and to lobbying for corrective action.
as a direct result of her activities fifteen states opened new hospitals for the insane and others improved their supervision of penitentiaries asylums and poorhouses.
dix ranks as one of the most practical and effective of all the reformers of the pre civil war era.
chapter 12 the pursuit of perfection reform turns radical what were some of the major antebellum reform movements.
during the 1830s internal dissension split the great reform movement spawned by the second great awakening.
efforts to promote evangelical piety improve personal and public morality and shape character through familial or institutional discipline continued and even flourished.
but bolder spirits went beyond such goals and set their sights on the total liberation and perfection of the individual.
divisions in the benevolent empire early nineteenth century reformers were for the most part committed to changing existing attitudes and practices gradually and in ways that would not invite conflict or disrupt society.
but by the mid1830s a new mood of impatience and perfectionism surfaced within the benevolent societies.
in 1836 for example the temperance society split over two issues whether the abstinence pledge should be extended to include beer and wine and whether pressure should be applied to producers and sellers of alcoholic beverages as well as to consumers.
radicals insisted on a total commitment to cold water and were prepared to clash head on with an important economic interest.
moderates held back from such goals and tactics because they wanted to avoid hostility from prominent citizens who drank wine or had money invested in the liquor industry.
read the document william lloyd garrison first issue of the liberator 1831 a similar rift occurred in the american peace society an antiwar organization founded in 1828 by clergymen seeking to promote christian concern for world peace.
most of the founders admitted the propriety of defensive wars and were shocked when some members of the society began to denounce all use of force as a violation of the sermon on the mount.
dissidents who called themselves nonresistants withdrew from the organization in 1838.
led by henry c wright they formed the new england non resistance society to promote an absolute pacifism which denied the right of self defense to nations or individuals and repudiated all forms of government coercion.
the new perfectionism realized its most dramatic and important success within the antislavery movement.
before the 1830s most people who expressed religious and moral concern over slavery were affiliated with the american colonization society a benevolent organization founded in 1817.
most colonizationists admitted that slavery was an evil but they also viewed it as a deeply rooted social and economic institution that could be eliminated only very gradually and with the cooperation of slaveholders.
reflecting the power of racial prejudice they proposed to provide transportation to africa for free blacks who chose to go or were emancipated for the purpose as a way of relieving southern fears that a race war would erupt if slaves were simply released from bondage and allowed to remain in america.
in 1821 the society established the colony of liberia in west africa and during the next decade a few thousand african americans were settled there.
colonization proved to be grossly inadequate as a step toward the elimination of slavery.
many of the blacks transported to africa were already free and those liberated by masters influenced by the movement represented only a tiny percentage of the natural increase of the southern slave population.
northern blacks denounced the enterprise because it denied the prospect of racial equality in america.
black opposition to colonizationism helped persuade william lloyd garrison and other white abolitionists to repudiate the colonization society and support immediate emancipation without emigration.
garrison launched a new and more radical antislavery movement in 1831 in boston when he began to publish a journal called the liberator.
besides calling for immediate and unconditional emancipation garrison denounced colonization as a slaveholders plot to remove troublesome free blacks and as an ignoble surrender to un christian prejudices.
his rhetoric was as severe as his proposals were radical.
as he wrote in the first issue of the liberator i will be as harsh as truth and as uncompromising as justice.
i am in earnest i will not equivocate i will not excuse i will not retreat a single inch and i will be heard heard he was.
in 1833 garrison and other abolitionists founded the american anti slavery society.
we shall send forth agents to lift up the voice of remonstrance of warning of entreaty and of rebuke its declaration of sentiments proclaimed.
the colonization movement was placed on the defensive and during the 1830s many of its most active northern supporters became abolitionists.
the abolitionist enterprise in the inaugural issue of his antislavery weekly the liberator william lloyd garrison announced that he was launching a militant battle against the evil and sin of slavery.
the stirring words that appeared in that first issue are repeated on the liberators banner.
the abolitionist movement like the temperance crusade was a direct outgrowth of the second great awakening.
many leading abolitionists had undergone conversion experiences in the 1820s reform turns radical and were already committed to a life of christian activism before they dedicated themselves to freeing the slaves.
several were ministers or divinity students seeking a mission in life that would fulfill spiritual and professional ambitions.
the career of theodore dwight weld exemplified the connection between revivalism and abolitionism.
weld came from a long line of new england ministers.
after dropping out of divinity school he migrated to western new york.
there he fell under the influence of charles g finney and after a long struggle underwent a conversion experience in 1826.
he then became an itinerant lecturer for various reform causes.
by the early 1830s he focused his attention on the moral issues raised by the institution of slavery.
after a brief flirtation with the colonization movement weld was converted to abolitionism in 1832 recognizing that colonizationists did not really accept blacks as equals or brothers in christ in 1834 he instigated what amounted to a series of abolitionist revivals at lane theological seminary in cincinnati.
when the trustees of the seminary attempted to suppress further discussion of the case for immediate emancipation weld led a mass walkout of most students.
the lane rebels subsequently founded oberlin college as a center for abolitionist activity.
in 1835 and 1836 weld toured ohio and western new york preaching abolitionism.
he also supervised and trained other agents and orators as part of a campaign to convert the entire region to immediate emancipation.
the tried and true methods of the revival fervent preaching protracted meetings and the call for individuals to come forth and announce their redemption were put at the service of the antislavery movement.
weld and his associates often had to face angry mobs but they left behind them tens of thousands of new abolitionists and hundreds of local antislavery societies.
as a result of their efforts northern ohio and western new york became hotbeds of abolitionist sentiment.
antislavery orators and organizers tended to have their greatest successes in the small to medium sized towns of the upper north.
the typical convert came from an upwardly mobile family engaged in small business the skilled trades or market farming.
in larger towns and cities or when they ventured close to the mason dixon line abolitionists were more likely to encounter fierce and effective opposition.
in 1835 garrison was mobbed in the streets of boston and almost lynched.
in new york city the tappan brothers lewis and arthur were frequent objects of threats and violence.
these two successful merchants were key figures in the movement because they used their substantial wealth to finance antislavery activities.
in 1835 1836 they supported a massive effort to print antislavery pamphlets and distribute them through the u s mail.
but they made relatively few converts in their own city most new yorkers regarded them as dangerous radicals.
abolitionists who thought of taking their message to the fringes of the south had reason to pause given the fate of the antislavery editor elijah lovejoy.
in 1837 while attempting to defend himself and his printing press from a mob in alton illinois just across the mississippi river from slaveholding missouri lovejoy was shot and killed.
racism was a major cause of antiabolitionist violence in the north.
rumors that abolitionists advocated or practiced interracial marriage could easily incite an urban crowd.
if it could not find white abolitionists the mob was likely to turn on local blacks.
working class whites tended to fear that economic and social competition with blacks would increase if abolitionists succeeded in freeing slaves and making them citizens.
but a striking feature of many of the mobs was that they were dominated by gentlemen of property and standing solid citizens resorted to violence it would appear because abolitionism threatened their conservative notions of social order and hierarchy.
by the end of the 1830s the abolitionist movement was under great stress.
besides the burden of external repression there was dissension within the movement.
becoming an abolitionist required an exacting conscience and an unwillingness to compromise on matters of principle.
these character traits also made it difficult for abolitionists to work together and maintain a united front.
during the late 1830s garrison the most visible proponent of the cause began to adopt positions that some other abolitionists found extreme and divisive.
he embraced the nonresistant or no government philosophy of henry c wright and urged abolitionists to abstain from voting or otherwise participating in a corrupt political system.
he also attacked the clergy and the churches for refusing to take a strong antislavery stand and encouraged his followers to come out of the established denominations rather than continuing to work within them.
these positions alienated those members of the anti slavery society who continued to hope that organized religion and the existing political system could be influenced or even taken over by abolitionists.
but it was garrisons stand on womens rights that led to an open break at the national convention of the american anti slavery society in 1840.
following their leaders principle that women should be equal partners in the crusade a garrison led majority elected a woman abolitionist to the societys executive committee.
a minority led by lewis tappan then withdrew to form a competing organization the american and foreign anti slavery society.
the new organization never amounted to much but the schism did weaken garrisons influence within the movement.
when he later repudiated the u s constitution as a proslavery document and called for northern secession from the union few antislavery people in the middle atlantic or midwestern states went along.
outside new england most abolitionists worked within the churches and avoided controversial side issues such as womens rights and nonresistant pacifism.
some antislavery advocates chose the path of political action.
the liberty party organized in 1840 was their first attempt to enter the electoral arena under their own banner it signaled a new effort to turn antislavery sentiment into political power.
black abolitionists from the beginning the abolitionist movement depended heavily on the support of the northern free black community.
most of the early subscribers to garrisons liberator were african americans.
black orators especially escaped slaves such as frederick douglass made northern audiences aware of the realities of bondage.
but relations between white and black abolitionists were often tense and uneasy.
blacks protested that they did not have their fair share of leadership positions or influence over policy.
eventually a black antislavery movement emerged that was largely independent of the white led crusade.
in addition to douglass prominent black male abolitionists were charles remond william wells brown robert purvis and henry highland garnet.
outspoken women such as sojourner truth maria stewart and frances harper also played a significant role in black antislavery activity.
the negro convention movement chapter 12 the pursuit of perfection which sponsored national meetings of black leaders beginning in 1830 provided an important forum for independent black expression.
their most eloquent statement came in 1854 when black leaders met in cleveland to declare their faith in a separate identity proclaiming we pledge our integrity to use all honorable means to unite us as one people on this continent black newspapers such as freedoms journal first published in 1827 and the north star founded by douglass in 1847 gave black writers a chance to preach their gospel of liberation to black readers.
african american authors also produced a stream of books and pamphlets attacking slavery refuting racism and advocating various forms of resistance.
one of the most influential publications was david walkers appeal.
to the colored citizens of the world which appeared in 1829.
walker denounced slavery in the most vigorous language possible and called for a black revolt against white tyranny.
free blacks in the north did more than make verbal protests against racial injustice.
they were also the main conductors on the fabled underground railroad that opened a path for fugitives from slavery.
it has been supposed that benevolent whites were primarily responsible for organized efforts to guide and assist fugitive slaves read the document david walker a black abolitionist speaks but modern research has shown that the underground railroad was largely a black operated enterprise.
courageous ex slaves such as harriet tubman and josiah henson made regular forays into the slave states to lead other blacks to freedom and many of the stations along the way were run by free blacks.
in northern towns and cities free blacks organized vigilance committees to protect fugitives and thwart the slave catchers.
groups of blacks even used force to rescue recaptured fugitives from the authorities.
in boston in 1851 one such group seized a slave named shadrack from a u s marshal who was in the process of returning him to bondage.
in deeds as well as words free blacks showed their unyielding hostility to slavery and racism.
historians have debated the question of whether the abolitionist movement of the 1830s and early 1840s was a success or a failure.
it obviously failed to convert a majority of americans to its position that slavery was a sinful institution that should be abolished immediately.
this position implied that blacks should be granted equality as american citizens so it ran up against the powerful commitment to white supremacy prevailing in all parts of the country.
in the south abolitionism caused a strong counteraction and helped inspire a more militant and uncompromising defense of slavery.
the belief that peaceful agitation or what abolitionists called moral suasion would convert slaveholders and their northern sympathizers to abolition was obviously unrealistic.
but in another sense the crusade was successful.
it brought the slavery issue to the forefront of public consciousness and convinced a substantial and growing segment of the northern population that the souths peculiar institution was morally wrong and potentially dangerous to the american way of life.
the south helped the antislavery cause in the north by responding hysterically and repressively to abolitionist agitation.
in 1836 southerners in congress forced adoption of a gag rule requiring that abolitionist petitions be tabled without being read at about the same time the post office refused to carry antislavery literature into the slave states.
prominent northerners who had not been moved to action by abolitionist depictions of slave suffering became more responsive to the movement when it appeared their own civil liberties might be threatened.
the politicians who later mobilized the north against the expansion of slavery into the territories drew strength from the antislavery and antisouthern sentiments that abolitionists had already called forth.
from abolitionism to womens rights david walker was a free african american who operated a second hand clothing shop in boston and spoke out on abolition.
unlike many abolitionists walker advocated violent action the rebellion of slaves and the killing of masters.
abolitionism also served as a catalyst for the womens rights movement.
from the beginning women were active participants in the abolitionist crusade.
between 1835 and 1838 the american antislavery society bombarded congress with petitions mostly calling for abolition of slavery in the district of columbia.
more than half of the thousands of antislavery petitions sent to washington had womens signatures on them.
some antislavery women went further and defied conventional ideas of their proper sphere by becoming public speakers and demanding an equal role in the leadership of antislavery societies.
the most famous of these were the grimk sisters sarah and angelina who attracted enormous attention being the rebellious daughters of a south carolina slaveholder.
when some reform turns radical male abolitionists objected to their speaking in public to mixed audiences of men and women garrison came to their defense and helped forge a link between blacks and womens struggles for equality.
the battle to participate equally in the antislavery crusade made a number of women abolitionists acutely aware of male dominance and oppression.
for them the same principles that justified the liberation of the slaves also applied to the emancipation of women from all restrictions on their rights as citizens.
in 1840 garrisons american followers withdrew from the first worlds anti slavery convention in london because the sponsors refused to seat the women in their delegation.
among the women thus excluded were lucretia mott and elizabeth cady stanton.
wounded by mens reluctance to extend the cause of emancipation to include women stanton and mott began discussing plans for a womens rights convention.
they returned to new york where a campaign was already under way to reform the states laws limiting the rights of married women spearheaded by a young jewish activist ernestine rose and judge thomas herttell the political radical and freethinker who had introduced the first bill to reform the states marriage laws to the new york state legislature.
see the law and society essay the legal rights of married women reforming the law of coverture pp.
the campaign for womens rights came to a head at the famous seneca falls convention that stanton and mott organized in upstate new york in 1848.
the declaration of sentiments issued by this first national gathering of feminists charged that the history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the part of man toward woman having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over her it went on to demand that all women be given the right to vote and that married women be freed from unjust laws giving husbands control of their property persons and children.
rejecting the cult of domesticity with its doctrine of separate spheres these women and their male supporters launched the modern movement for gender equality.
group of slaves at nashoba tennessee and set them to work earning their freedom in an atmosphere of rational cooperation the rapid demise of both of these model communities suggested that utopian socialism did not easily take root in american soil.
but the impulse survived.
in the 1840s a number of americans including the prominent editor horace greeley became interested in the ideas of the french utopian theorist charles fourier.
fourier called for cooperative communities in which everyone did a fair share of the work and tasks were allotted to make use of the natural abilities and instincts of the members.
between 1842 and 1852 about thirty fourierist phalanxes were established in the northeastern and midwestern states and approximately a hundred thousand people lived for a time in these communities or otherwise supported the movement.
the phalanxes were not purely socialistic in fact they were organized as joint stock companies.
but they did give the members an opportunity to live and work in a communal atmosphere.
like the owenite communities they were short lived surviving view the map utopian communities before the civil war oneida brook farm amana new harmony radical ideas and experiments hopes for individual or social perfection were not limited to reformers inspired by evangelicalism.
between the 1820s and 1850s a great variety of schemes for human redemption came from those who had rejected orthodox protestantism.
some were secular humanists carrying on the freethinking tradition of the enlightenment but most were seekers of new paths to spiritual or religious fulfillment.
a movement that achieved remarkable success or notoriety was spiritualism the belief that one could communicate with the dead.
these philosophical and religious radicals attacked established institutions prescribed new modes of living and founded utopian communities to put their ideas into practice.
a radical movement of foreign origin that gained a toehold in jacksonian america was utopian socialism.
in 1825 1826 the british manufacturer and reformer robert owen visited the united states and founded a community based on common and equal ownership of property at new harmony indiana.
about the same time owens associate frances wright gathered a nashoba at l a n t i c ocean icaria 400 miles 400 kilometers gulf of mexico utopian communities fourierists shakers owenites others utopian communities before the civil war the search for new paths to spiritual or religious fulfillment attracted many to utopian communitarian societies.
by far the largest of these societies during the period before the civil war was the shakers who by the 1830s had established twenty settlements in seven states with a combined membership of approximately six thousand.
their rule of celibacy meant that shaker communities gained members through adoption and conversion rather than by natural reproduction.
complete the assignment the war against demon drink on myhistorylab feature essay the war against demon drink mid charnels and pest houses though we may roam be it ever so frightful theres no plague like rum.
a charm from below seems to lead to the snare and leaves us in darkness and gloom and despair.
rum rum curst curst rum theres no plague like rum theres no plague like rum.
t unes like this one rang from the windows of american homes in the mid nineteenth century signaling the rise of one of the longest lasting social revolutions in american history the temperance movement.
the rise of this movement was especially astonishing because drinking was so widespread in early america.
americans in the new republic loved to drink.
they drank at weddings funerals and civic celebrations.
they drank at work during the day and at home at night.
not only did they enjoy wine and beer but rum whiskey and rye.
by 1830 the average american drank nearly ten gallons of distilled spirits per year nearly twice the average per person in 1790 and almost four times what americans drink today.
while drinking was not limited to men it was an important aspect of male bonding culture at work and in the tavern.
drinking together offered an opportunity for sociability across class lines in the early republic.
artisans drank in the workplace and during the revolution toasting was both a social and political ritual in workingmens revolutionary committees.
when george washingtons presidential home was built in 1792 1793 the laborers and craftsmen were treated to a drink when the cornerstone had been set again when each of three floors was completed and when they began work on the roof rafters.
in philadelphia paper mills it was customary for journeymen to receive a half pint of spirits at eleven oclock each morning and again in the afternoon.
because many journeymen and apprentices boarded in the masters home drinking together carried over into the household sphere as well.
in the 1820s household commodity production began to decline with masters separating their workshops from their homes.
as historian paul johnson explains by 1830 the doorway to a middle class home separated radically different kinds of space drunkenness and promiscuous sociability on the outside privacy and icy sobriety indoors master artisans who now headed growing manufactories began to realize that the new market values of efficiency and productivity were at odds with the sociability and drinking of the old workplace.
they were primed and ready for the message of evangelical temperance reformers.
the temperance reformers viewed indulgence in alcohol as a threat to public morality.
drunkenness was seen as a loss of self control and moral responsibility that spawned crime vice and disorder.
above all it threatened the family.
the main target of temperance propaganda was the husband and father who abused neglected or abandoned his wife and children because he was a slave to the bottle.
women played a vital role in the movement and were instrumental in making it a crusade for the protection of the home.
the drinking habits of the poor or laboring classes also aroused great concern.
particularly in urban areas the respectable and propertied elements lived in fear that lower class mobs crazed with drink would attack private property and create social chaos.
in 1826 a group of clergymen previously active in mission work organized the american temperance society to coordinate and extend the work already begun by local churches and moral reform societies.
the original aim was to encourage abstinence from ardent spirits or hard liquor there was no agreement on the evils of beer and wine.
the society sent out lecturers issued a flood of literature and sponsored essay contests.
its agents organized revival meetings and called on those in attendance to sign a pledge promising abstinence from spirits.
the campaign was enormously effective.
by 1834 there were five thousand local branches with more than a million members.
some workingmen defiantly insisted on their right to drink and built their own autonomous social life in grog halls and taverns with heavy drinking an important part of it.
as one workingclass letter writer angrily asked who are the most temperate men of modern times.
those who quaff the juice of the grape with their friends with the greatest good nature after the manner of the ancient patriarchs without any malice a pair of prints issued by a d fillmore in 1855 extolling the social and moral benefits of temperance and condemning the evils of alcohol.
on the tree of temperance the fruits are labeled with the names of virtues including industry philanthropy goodwill and charity on either side the church and the schoolhouse represent the twin ideals of religion and education that were believed to flourish in a temperance regime.
the tree of intemperance demonstrates the evils of drink using religious imagery of a serpent with an apple in its mouth and branches labeled with social and moral evils such as ignorance vice and crime as well as anarchy counterfeiting and dueling.
the men attempting to chop down the tree are temperance reformers celebrating the 1851 maine prohibition law.
in their hearts or the cold water palefaced money making men who make the necessities of their neighbors their opportunity for grinding the face of the poor but others joined temperance societies of their own.
the first washingtonian society was born in 1840 when four baltimore craftsmen attended a temperance lecture intending to mock the speaker but instead were converted to the cause.
they persuaded their friends to swear off liquor and quickly touched off a wave of temperance activity among journeymen apprentices and other members of the working class.
unlike middle class evangelicals who reserved their gospel for the sober washingtonian societies sought out the confirmed drunkard and offered him salvation.
they also offered more concrete mutual benefits such as soup kitchens for the poor.
the washingtonians held weekly experience meetings to testify and confess their own experiences with demon drink and to swear off the bottle.
the societies also tried to recreate the enjoyable community aspects of tavern life with temperance songs poems and theatrical shows.
t s arthurs ten nights in a bar room and what i saw there penned in 1854 was a huge best seller and the stage adaptation was one of the longest running and most popular plays of the antebellum era entertaining large crowds of teetotalers.
washingtonian societies spread like wildfire anyone could start one including women children and african americans.
in utica new york alone there was a martha washington union an irish hibernian association a workingmens temperance union youth clubs and even a black womens temperance association.
while most washingtonian societies presented themselves as young mens associations the average age of the men involved was between thirty and thirty five and the majority of members may have been women.
beginning in the 1840s the temperance movement like other reform movements of the period turned from evangelical hope in individual redemption to a drive for legal regulation.
it won some success in the 1850s maine enacted dry laws in 1851 followed by twelve more states by 1855.
beginning in the 1850s as new waves of immigration from ireland and germany brought a surge of beer and whiskey consumption temperance became entangled with the politics of nativism and like other reform efforts it was soon overshadowed by the sectional conflict over slavery.
but the mass movement of the cold water army did achieve some significant goals.
although it may be doubted whether huge numbers of confirmed drunkards were cured the movement did succeed in altering the drinking habits of middleclass american males by making temperance a mark of respectability.
per capita consumption of hard liquor declined more than 50 percent during the 1830s and by 1850 was down to one third of what it had been in 1830.
and the antebellum temperance movement set the stage for national prohibition one of the few major social reforms to take place by constitutional amendment on january 29 1920 when the eighteenth amendment outlawing the manufacture sale and transportation of liquor in the united states took effect.
with the enactment of national prohibition temperance at last became embedded temporarily in the law of the nation.
questions for discussion 1.
why was heavy drinking so prevalent in america in the early nineteenth century.
why did the temperance movement become so active in the 1820s and 1830s.
how did the temperance movement change the drinking habits of middle class american males.
chapter 12 the pursuit of perfection for an average of only two years.
the common complaint of the founders was that americans were too individualistic to cooperate in the ways that fouriers theories required.
two of the most successful and long lived manifestations of pre civil war utopianism were the shakers and the oneida community.
the shakers officially known as the millennial church or the united society of believers began as a religious movement in england.
in 1774 a shaker leader mother ann lee brought their radical beliefs to the united states.
lee believed herself to be the feminine incarnation of christ and advocated a new theology based squarely on the principle of sexual equality.
the shakers named for their expressions of religious fervor through vigorous dancelike movements believed in communal ownership and strict celibacy.
they lived simply and minimized their contact with the outside world because they expected christs second coming to occur momentarily.
the oneida community was established in 1848 read the document ralph waldo emerson self reliance 1841 ralph waldo emerson who was born in boston in 1803 was a famous essayist lecturer and poet.
he is perhaps best known as the leader of the transcendentalist movement.
at oneida new york and was inspired by an unorthodox brand of christian perfectionism.
its founder john humphrey noyes believed the second coming of christ had already occurred hence human beings were no longer obliged to follow the moral rules that their previously fallen state had required.
at oneida traditional marriage was outlawed and a carefully regulated form of free love was put into practice.
it was the literary and philosophical movement known as transcendentalism that inspired the eras most memorable experiments in thinking and living on a higher plane.
the main idea was that the individual could transcend material reality and ordinary understanding attaining through a higher form of reason or intuition a oneness with the universe as a whole and with the spiritual forces that lay behind it.
transcendentalism was the major american version of the romantic and idealist thought that emerged in the early nineteenth century.
throughout the western world and especially in germany romanticism was challenging the rationalism and materialism of the enlightenment in the name of exalted feeling and cosmic spirituality.
most american transcendentalists were unitarians or ex unitarians who were dissatisfied with the sober rationalism of their denomination and sought a more intense kind of spiritual experience.
unable to embrace evangelical christianity because of intellectual resistance to its doctrines they sought inspiration from a philosophical and literary idealism of german origin.
their prophet was ralph waldo emerson a brilliant essayist and lecturer who preached that each individual could commune directly with a benign spiritual force that animated nature and the universe which he called the oversoul emerson was a radical individualist committed to self culture and the sufficiency of the private man he carefully avoided all involvement in organized movements or associations because he believed they limited the freedom of the individual to develop inner resources and find a personal path to spiritual illumination.
in the vicinity of emersons home in concord massachusetts a group of like minded seekers of truth and spiritual fulfillment gathered during the 1830s and 1840s.
among them for a time was margaret fuller the leading woman intellectual of the age.
in woman in the nineteenth century 1845 she made a strong claim for the spiritual and artistic equality of women.
one group of transcendentalists led by the reverend george ripley rejected emersons radical individualism and founded a cooperative community at brook farm near roxbury massachusetts in 1841.
for the next four years group members worked the land in common conducted an excellent school on the principle that spontaneity rather than discipline was the key to education and allowed ample time for conversation meditation communion with nature and artistic activity of all kinds.
visitors and guest lecturers included such luminaries as emerson margaret fuller and theodore parker the unitarian theologian and radical reformer.
in 1845 brook farm was reconstituted as a fourierist phalanx but some of the original spirit persisted until its dissolution in 1849.
another experiment in transcendental living adhered more closely to the individualistic spirit of the movement.
between 1845 and 1847 henry david thoreau a young disciple of emerson lived by himself in the woods along the shore of walden pond and conclusion counterpoint on reform carefully recorded his thoughts and impressions.
in a sense he pushed the ideal of self culture to its logical outcome a utopia of one.
the result was walden published in 1854 one of the greatest achievements in american literature.
conclusion counterpoint on reform one great american writer observed at close quarters the perfectionist ferment of the age but held himself aloof suggesting in his novels and tales that pursuit of the ideal led to a distorted view of human nature and possibilities.
nathaniel hawthorne lived in concord knew emerson and margaret fuller and even spent time at brook farm.
but his sense of human frailty made him skeptical about the claims of transcendentalism and utopianism.
he satirized transcendentalism as unworldly and overoptimistic in his allegorical tale the celestial railroad and gently lampooned the denizens of brook farm in his novel the blithedale romance 1852.
his view of the dangers of pursuing perfection too avidly came out in his tale of a father who kills his beautiful daughter by trying to remove her one blemish a birthmark.
his greatest novels the scarlet letter 1850 and the house of the seven gables 1851 imaginatively probed new englands puritan past and the shadows it cast on the present.
by dwelling on original sin as a psychological reality hawthorne told his contemporaries that their efforts to escape from guilt and evil were futile.
one simply had to accept the world as an imperfect place.
although he did not engage in polemics against humanitarian reformers and cosmic optimists hawthorne wrote parables and allegories that implicitly questioned the fundamental assumptions of pre civil war reform.
one does not have to agree with hawthornes antiprogressive view of the human condition to acknowledge that the dreams of perfectionist reformers promised more than they could possibly deliver.
revivals could not make all men like christ temperance could not solve all social problems abolitionist agitation could not bring a peaceful end to slavery and transcendentalism as emerson himself sometimes conceded could not fully emancipate people from the limitations and frustrations of daily life.
the consequences of perfectionist efforts were often far different from what their proponents expected.
in defense of the reformers however one could argue that hawthornes skepticism and fatalism were a prescription for doing nothing in the face of intolerable evils.
if the reform impulse was long on inspirational rhetoric but somewhat short on durable practical achievements it did at least disturb the complacent and opportunistic surface of american life and open the way to necessary changes.
complete the assignment the legal rights of married women reforming the law of coverture on myhistorylab law and society b y the common law in effect in the united states in the early nineteenth century women lost their legal personality when they married.
the system of coverture governed the union of husband and wife married women were under the wing protection or cover of their husbands.
coverture was based on the english medieval feudal system in which lords and vassals owed allegiance to the king and commoners to lords and vassals.
under the common law of england husband and wife were referred to as baron and feme william blackstone the english jurist professor of common law and author of commentaries on the law of england explained the word baron or lord attributes to the husband not a very courteous superiority.
if the baron kills his feme it is the same as if he had killed a stranger or any other person but if the feme kills her baron it is regarded by the laws as a much more atrocious crime as she not only breaks through the restraints of humanity and conjugal affection but throws off all subjection to the authority of her husband.
and therefore the law denominates her crime a species of treason and condemns her to the same punishment as if she had killed the king as blackstone explained by marriage the husband and wife are one person in the law coverture denied married women their rights to own and manage property to form contracts to sue and be sued and to exercise legal control over children.
upon marriage all of a wifes personal property became her the legal rights of married women reforming the law of coverture husbands which he could give or will to someone else if he chose.
the husband could not sell his wifes real estate but he could control and manage it and any profits derived from the property belonged to him.
coverture had a few benefits for women.
husbands took legal responsibility for any crimes their wives committed and sometimes wives could avoid responsibility for unwise financial transactions because they had had no legal right to enter into them.
a widow had a right to onethird of her husbands property her dower if he died without a will.
and a husband had a limited obligation to provide for his wifes necessaries blackstone concluded his chapter on husband and wife with the observation that even the disabilities which the wife lies under are for the most part intended for her protection and benefit.
so great a favourite is the female sex of the laws of england in practice some women especially wealthy women were able to get around some of the laws of coverture by taking advantage of loopholes in the law.
first of all women could go to courts of equity or chancery in which a chancellor rather than a jury could decide the fair or just outcome based on the facts of the individual case rather than applying rules of law.
these two court systems of law and equity are merged into one in most states today.
an equity court had the power not only to assign money damages but to require a contract to be carried out.
for example a couple might specify in a prenuptial contract made before the marriage was entered into that the wife could keep her own property from before the womens rights activist ernestine rose began petitioning for married womens property rights in new york in 1836 marriage in a separate estate it was also possible for a husband to assign some of his property to his wife after the marriage in a marriage settlement and often they arranged for the wifes separate estate to be held in trust and managed by a third party trustee usually a man.
it was the legal arrangement of coverture into which harriet douglas a rich new york heiress resisted entering.
harriet douglas had very definite ideas about what she wanted in a husband.
if she married she intended to keep control over all of her property in obedience to and conformity with the opinions and precepts of her parents and she wanted her husband to renounce his own name his home and his profession to devote himself to her and her family property.
as historian hendrik hartog observed according to the norms of early america harriet douglas effectively wanted her husband to become her wife henry cruger a young lawyer who came to new york from south carolina and who courted harriet douglas at first chafed at the restrictions she proposed for a marriage arrangement.
henry argued that the husband ought always to possess an absolute control over the wifes property but a few years later henry rethought his position writing to harriet in 1829 that he would accept her terms however derogatory to proper pride.
and self respect after extensive negotiations they finally married in 1833.
henry took d for his middle initial without changing his last name and harriet was to be known as mrs.
douglas cruger harriet agreed to sign a property settlement agreement after rather than before the marriage ceremony because henry claimed that a premarital contract would become part of an embarrassing public record.
harriets and henrys marriage fell almost immediately on hard times largely over money matters.
henry repeatedly threatened to return to legal practice if harriet did not give him more freedom to control their property urging her take away this poignard of ice from between us.
i desire no interests separate from yours for i love you and we are married on several occasions harriet drew up new agency agreements giving henry more control of her estate as her agent her friends all urged her to relieve henry from a state of dependence that could only be galling to a man of honor after years of henrys haranguing and lobbying in 1841 harriet signed an order guaranteeing him one half of her income for life.
that same year their marriage fell apart completely.
it took eight more years in new york courts to work out henrys and harriets rights to her property.
henry argued that their marriage settlement was invalid because it came after rather than before the marriage.
harriet claimed the original settlement should be enforced but the 1841 gift was invalid because henry and his friends had coerced her into signing it.
in 1848 the case ended up in the new york supreme court where judge selah strong decreed that the original marriage settlement was valid giving harriet control over her own property but that the 1841 order was enforceable as well giving control over half of it to henry.
years later strong wrote she was mad and he was bad and the legal muddle they brought about between them was very deep and formidable at the end of their legal muddle henry emerged victorious with control over half of harriets separate estate.
despite her strenuous efforts to be an independent married woman she had failed.
in disgust she had her marriage bed cut in two transforming it into two slightly peculiar sofas the new york supreme court made its final decision in cruger v cruger just one year after the new york legislature passed its first married womens property act allowing women for the first time to maintain ownership and control over property they had inherited before they married.
over the course of the middle decades of the nineteenth century an increasingly vocal minority of women chafed against the laws of husband and wife that restricted the independence of women like harriet cruger.
they demanded the reform of the laws of coverture first through married womens property acts and then through earnings laws.
nowhere were they more vocal and successful than in new york.
at first womens rights reformers concentrated on changing peoples hearts and minds as had temperance reformers abolitionists and others who were part of the great wave of reform in the united states in the early nineteenth century.
in their private writings womens rights reformers were often more frank than in public discussion about how marriage kept women subjugated to their husbands.
they often compared the married woman to a slave with no right to own property sign a contract sue another or even keep her own name.
after 1840 as in so many of the reform movements sparked by the religious fervor of the second great awakening womens rights reformers began to turn to legal solutions.
the first group of advocates for womens rights took particular aim at the laws of marriage and divorce.
they also organized womens rights activity on a large scale for the first time.
on july 19 20 1848 the first womens rights convention in the world took place at seneca falls new york.
elizabeth cady stanton a womens rights activist and an organizer of the convention delivered the declaration of sentiments modeled on the declaration of independence we hold these truths to be selfevident that all men and women are created equal.
stanton declared further that the history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the part of man toward woman having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over her the declaration listed a series of wrongs followed by twelve resolutions.
while winning the right to vote was part of the womens aim their chief focus was reforming the laws of marriage.
eleven resolutions passed unanimously the twelfth calling for the extension of the vote to women passed narrowly only after abolitionist and former slave frederick douglass made a rousing speech in its favor.
the declaration of sentiments quickly became famous around the world sparking womens rights reform movements in england and across europe.
new yorks first married womens property act passed in 1848 the same year as the seneca falls convention was the product of a number of factors.
the persistent petition campaigns of feminist reformers had some influence on the legislators but several other forces were at work as well.
there was a strong movement in new york to codify the common law into written codes accessible to everyone thereby minimizing the power of judges and lawyers to shape decisions as they pleased.
the leaders of that movement especially took aim at equity courts which they saw as undemocratic institutions whose individually tailored settlements benefited only the propertied elite.
for these politicians reform of the laws governing married womens property was a way to democratize property law making available to everyone the separate estates that wealthy families had been able to arrange through equity courts.
finally wealthy dutch landowners in the hudson valley saw the acts as a way to protect family property.
thus the married womens property acts in new york and elsewhere were a good example of the way that legal reform comes about as a result of reformers efforts coming together with other circumstances and constituencies.
the 1848 act pronounced that the real and personal property of any female who may hereafter marry and which she shall own at the time of the marriage and the rents issues and profits thereof shall not be subject to the disposal of her husband nor be liable for his debts and shall continue her sole and separate property as if she were a single female it also provided that gifts to married women could remain their separate property and that marriage settlements and prenuptial agreements would be enforced.
the second act in 1849 made it possible for women to sell or transfer their separate property under certain conditions and for the trustees of their separate estates to deed property to them if a judge found them capable of managing it.
despite the married womens property acts women who did not have substantial property to inherit from their families still suffered severe legal constraints most importantly because they still did not control their earnings.
new yorker ernestine rose an early activist for womens rights observed here is some provision for the favored few but for the laboring many there is none.
the mass of people commence life with no other capital than the union of heads hearts and hands.
to the benefit of this best of capital the wife has no right.
if they are unsuccessful in married life who suffers more the bitter consequences of poverty than the wife.
but if successful she can not call a dollar her own in the summer of 1854 elizabeth cady stanton rose to address the joint judiciary committee of the new york state legislature the first time a woman had ever spoken before that body.
she began the thinking minds of all nations call for change.
there is a deep lying struggle in the whole fabric of society a boundless grinding collision of the new with the old stanton asked the legislators to consider the legal disabilities under which women labor on behalf of women stanton demanded the right to vote the right to sit on juries and the reform of the law of coverture.
look at the position of woman as wife she demanded.
the wife who inherits no property holds about the same legal position that does the slave on the southern plantation.
she can own nothing sell nothing.
she has no right even to the wages she earns her person her time her services are the property of another.
but the wife who is so fortunate as to have inherited property has by the new law in this state been redeemed from her lost condition stanton told the legislators that she spoke on behalf of the daughters of the revolutionary heroes of 76 and exhorted them to be true to the goals of the revolution mocking their claims to republicanism how like feudal barons you freemen hold your women at the same time that stanton spoke before the legislature she presented more than six thousand petitions from women across the state.
six years later in 1860 new york passed the first earnings act in the nation providing that a married woman could carry on any trade or business and perform any labor or services on her sole and separate account and the earnings of any married woman from her trade business labor or services shall be her sole and separate property and may be used or invested by her in her own name by the 1870s most states had passed some version of married womens property acts and many northern states passed earning acts as well.
by and large courts interpreted earnings acts narrowly.
for example in one 1876 case the new york supreme court ruled that a wife who kept a boardinghouse and nursed a very ill man for several years could not control her earnings because work done in the home was considered to be on the family account rather than her sole and separate account and was therefore the property of the husband.
repeatedly courts held that womens labor in the household belonged to the husband so that only wages earned outside the home although a minor part of most womens earnings were covered by the act.
in the iowa case of miller v miller a husband and wife attempted to create their own marriage contract in which both spouses promised to refrain from scolding faultfinding and anger mr miller promised to provide for family necessaries as well as a sum of 16 66 per month for mrs millers individual use and she promised to keep her home and family in a comfortable and reasonably good condition when mrs miller sued her husband to enforce this contract she was turned away by the court because she had promised to do only what she was already obligated to do but he had promised far more than marriage required from a husband which was only to provide necessaries new yorks 1860 earnings act was a limited victory for reformers they won a change in the law but courts limited its reach through narrow interpretation.
had courts interpreted the act more broadly to cover all forms of womens earnings it would have gone a long way to making women independent legally and economically.
although the 1860 earnings act gained some legal rights for women it failed to resolve completely the inequities that women faced.
in the later nineteenth century womens rights advocates became convinced that political power was the way to secure civil rights and they began to focus more specifically on winning the right to vote.
achieving that goal would take another sixty years.
questions for discussion 1.
what was the system of coverture.
how could couples avoid some of the legal disabilities of coverture.
could they avoid all of them.
what were the chief concerns of womens rights advocates in the mid nineteenth century.
how did their aims and tactics resemble those of other reform movements during this period.
how did the married womens property acts and earnings acts improve the legal status of married women and in what ways did they fall short of reformers aims.
why do you think these acts were passed.
chapter 12 chapter review study resources take the study plan for chapter 12 the pursuit of perfection on myhistorylab time line 1801 massive revival held at cane ridge kentucky 1826 american temperance society organized 1830 1831 charles g finney evangelizes rochester new york 1831 william lloyd garrison publishes first issue of the liberator 1833 abolitionists found american anti slavery society 1835 1836 theodore weld advocates abolition in ohio and upstate new york 1836 american temperance society splits into factions 1837 massachusetts establishes a state board of education abolitionist editor elijah lovejoy killed by a proslavery mob american anti slavery society splits over womens rights and other issues transcendentalists organize a model community at brook farm feminists gather at seneca falls new york and found the womens rights movement henry david thoreaus walden published chapter review the rise of evangelicalism institutional reform how did the evangelical revivalism of the early nineteenth century spur reform movements.
how did horace mann change ideas about public schooling in america.
evangelical revivalists preached the perfectibility of individual moral agents encouraging each person to choose his or her own moral and political destiny.
this perfectionism led evangelical christians to organize voluntary associations and benevolent societies that would teach people moral and social values.
the most important of these reform efforts was the temperance movement.
p 269 in 1837 horace mann persuaded the massachusetts legislature to establish a state board of education and allocate taxes to support free local public schools open to all.
mann believed that by teaching middle class morality and respect for order schools could produce law abiding citizens and encourage social mobility by enabling lower class children to do better than their parents.
p 276 domesticity and changes in the american family reform turns radical what was the doctrine of separate spheres and how did it change family life.
what were some of the major antebellum reform movements.
the doctrine of separate spheres glorified womens role in caring for the home and family guarding religious and moral values while men went into the public sphere to earn money and participate in politics.
smaller families and more leisure time for middle class families also emphasized childrens development including new public schools open to all.
p 273 religious revivalism inspired movements for temperance abolition of slavery and womens rights.
these movements grew more radical over time turning to the political sphere in the 1840s as they lost confidence that changing mens hearts could transform society.
the abolitionists organized the liberty party in 1840 and feminists held their first convention at seneca falls in 1848.
p 278 key terms and definitions second great awakening evangelical protestant revivals that swept over america in the early nineteenth century.
p 270 temperance movement temperance moderation or abstention in the consumption of alcoholic beverages attracted many advocates in the early nineteenth century.
p 272 benevolent empire collection of missionary and reform societies that sought to stamp out social evils in american society in the 1820s and 1830s.
p 273 study resources cult of domesticity term used to characterize the dominant gender role for white women in the antebellum period.
it stressed the virtue of women as guardians of the home which was considered their proper sphere.
p 274 perfectionism the doctrine that a state of freedom from sin is attainable on earth.
p 275 abolitionist movement reform movement dedicated to the immediate and unconditional end of slavery in the united states.
p 278 seneca falls convention an 1848 gathering of womens rights advocates that culminated in the adoption of a declaration of sentiments demanding voting and property rights for women.
p 281 critical thinking questions 1.
do you think it was healthy for american politics that religion played such a strong role in antebellum political movements.
in your view were women helped or harmed by the doctrine of separate spheres and why.
why do you think so many antebellum reform movements turned to politics in the 1840s.
what is the connection between womens influence in the public sphere and the influence of evangelical religion on society.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 12 on myhistorylab the rise of evangelicalism reform turns radical view the closer look methodist camp meeting 1819 p 271 read the document speaks p 280 read the document lyman beecher six sermons on intemperance 1828 p 272 view the map p 281 watch the video drinking and the temperance movement in nineteenth century america p 273 domesticity and changes in the american family read the document catharine e beecher from a treatise on domestic economy p 274 institutional reform watch the video who was horace mann and why are so many schools named after him.
p 277 read the document william lloyd garrison first issue of the liberator 1831 p 278 david walker a black abolitionist utopian communities before the civil war complete the assignment the war against demon drink p 282 read the document 1841 p 284 ralph waldo emerson self reliance complete the assignment the legal rights of married women reforming the law of coverture p 286 indicates study plan media assignment an age of expansionism contents and learning objectives movement to the far west pg.
293 internal expansionism pg.
305 what were some of the reasons for which americans headed into the western territories and what were some of the consequences of expansion.
how did developments in transportation foster industrialization and encourage immigration.
feature essay hispanic america after 1848 a case study in majority rule manifest destiny and the mexicanamerican war pg.
298 why did the u s annex texas and the southwest.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 8 republican ascendancy limits of equality british visitors often expressed contempt for jeffersonian society.
wherever they traveled in the young republic they met ill mannered people inspired with a ruling passion for liberty and equality.
charles william janson an englishman who lived in the united states for thirteen years recounted an exchange he found particularly unsettling that had occurred at the home of an american acquaintance.
on knocking at the door he reported it was opened by a servant maid whom i had never before seen the womans behavior astonished janson.
the following is the dialogue word for word which took place on this occasion is your master at home i have no master dont you live here i stay here and who are you then why i am mr s help.
id have you know man that i am no sarvant sic none but negers sic are sarvants standing on his friends doorstep janson encountered the authentic voice of jeffersonian republicanism self confident assertive blatantly racist and having no intention of being relegated to low social status.
the maid who answered the door believed she was her employers equal perhaps not in wealth but surely in character.
she may have even dreamed of someday owning a house staffed with help american society fostered such ambition.
in the early nineteenth century thousands of settlers poured across the appalachian mountains or moved to cities in search of opportunity.
thomas jefferson and individuals who stood for public office under the banner of the republican party claimed to speak for these people.
the limits of the jeffersonian vision were obvious even to contemporaries.
the people who spoke most eloquently about equal opportunity often owned slaves.
as early as the 1770s the famed english essayist samuel johnson had chided americans for their hypocrisy.
how is it he asked the indignant rebels that we hear the loudest yelps for liberty from the drivers of negroes little had changed since the revolution.
african americans who represented onefifth of the population of the united states were totally excluded from the new opportunities opening up in the cities and the west.
indeed the maid in the incident just described insisted with no apparent sense of inconsistency that her position was superior to that of blacks who were brought involuntarily to lifelong servitude.
t is not surprising that in this highly charged racial climate that leaders of the federalist party accused the republicans especially those who lived in the south of disingenuousness and in 1804 one massachusetts federalist sarcastically defined jeffersonian as an indian word signifying a great tobacco planter who had herds of black slaves the race issue was always i read the document charles william janson the stranger in america charles william janson published his book the stranger in america in 1807.
in it he offered a dim view of jeffersonian america and the passion for liberty and equality it represented.
chapter 8 republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision just beneath the surface of political maneuvering.
indeed the acquisition of the louisiana territory and the war of 1812 fanned fundamental disagreement about the spread of slavery to the western territories.
in other areas the jeffersonians did not fulfill even their own high expectations.
as members of an opposition party during the presidency of john adams they insisted on a strict interpretation of the constitution peaceful foreign relations and a reduction of the role of the federal government in the lives of the average citizens.
but following the election of 1800 jefferson and his supporters discovered that unanticipated pressures foreign and domestic forced them to moderate these goals.
before he retired from public office jefferson interpreted the constitution in a way that permitted the government to purchase the louisiana territory when the opportunity arose he regulated the national economy with a rigor that would have surprised alexander hamilton and he led the country to the brink of war.
some americans praised the presidents pragmatism others felt betrayed.
for a man who played a leading role in the revolt against george iii it must have been shocking in 1807 to find himself labeled a despot in a popular new england newspaper.
give ear no longer to the siren voice of democracy and jeffersonian liberty the editor shrieked.
it is a cursed delusion adopted by traitors and recommended by sycophants regional identities in a new republic how did the republics growth shape the market economy and relations with native americans.
during the early decades of the nineteenth century the population of the united states experienced substantial growth.
the 1810 census counted 7 240 000 americans a jump of almost two million in just ten years.
of this total approximately 20 percent were black slaves the majority of whom lived in the south.
the large population increase in the nation was the result primarily of natural reproduction since during jeffersons presidency few immigrants moved to the new world.
the largest single group in this society was children under the age of sixteen boys and girls who were born after washingtons election and who defined their own futures at a time when the nations boundaries were rapidly expanding.
for north america in 1800 st l lo aw w re er nc c e r.
an a da in the 1790s diplomatic agreements with britain and spain and defeat of the native americans at the battle of fallen timbers opened the way to u s settlement of the land beyond the appalachian mountains.
british north america canada c ol um b ia r br i ti sh n h r i conn pittsburgh ohio terr.
or o hi mass.
n y cincinnati st louis mass.
pa indiana terr.
louisiana maine vt battle of fallen timbers.
ceded by spain to france d c va ky do united states n c tenn e mi s siss n ippi r a lor co w s c ga mississippi terr.
s p a in pacific ocean ca na da es m iss ou ri r e e nc k la oregon country claimed by great britain spain and united states es pr up pe r gre at florida o ri de an gr mexico gulf of mexico 500 miles 500 kilometers atlantic ocean regional identities in a new republic white americans it was a time of heightened optimism and many people possessing entrepreneurial skills or engineering capabilities aggressively made their way in a society that seemed to rate personal merit higher than family background.
even as americans defended the rights of individual states they were forming strong regional identifications.
in commerce and politics they perceived themselves as representatives of distinct subcultures as southerners new englanders or westerners.
no doubt the broadening geographic horizons reflected improved transportation links that enabled people to travel more easily within the various sections.
but the growing regional mentality was also the product of defensiveness.
while local writers celebrated new englands cultural distinctiveness for example they were clearly uneasy about the regions rejection of the democratic values that were sweeping the rest of the nation.
moreover during this period people living south of the potomac river began describing themselves as southerners not as citizens of the chesapeake or the carolinas as they had done in colonial times.
this shifting focus of attention resulted not only from an awareness of shared economic interests but also from a sensitivity to outside attacks on slavery.
several times during the first fifteen years of the nineteenth century conspirators actually advocated secession and though the schemes failed they revealed the powerful sectional loyalties that threatened national unity.
westward the course of empire the most striking changes occurred in the west.
before the end of the american revolution only indian traders and a few hardy settlers had ventured across the appalachians.
after 1790 however a flood of people rushed west to stake out farms on the rich soil.
many settlers followed the so called northern route across pennsylvania or new york into the old northwest territory.
pittsburgh and cincinnati both strategically located on the ohio river became important commercial ports.
in 1803 ohio joined the union and territorial governments were formed in indiana 1800 louisiana 1805 michigan 1805 illinois 1809 and missouri 1812.
southerners poured into the new states of kentucky 1792 and tennessee 1796.
wherever they located westerners depended on water transportation.
because of the extraordinarily high cost of hauling goods overland riverboats represented the only economical means of carrying agricultural products to distant markets.
the mississippi river was the crucial commercial link for the entire region and westerners did not feel secure so long as new orleans the southern gate to the mississippi remained under spanish control.
families that moved west attempted to transplant familiar eastern customs to the frontier.
in some areas such as the western reserve a narrow strip of land along lake erie in northern ohio the influence of new england remained strong.
in general however a creative mixing of peoples of different backgrounds in a strange environment generated distinctive folkways.
westerners developed their own heroes such as mike fink the legendary keelboatman of the mississippi river daniel boone the famed trapper and indian fighter and the eye gouging alligatormen of kentucky and tennessee.
americans who crossed the mountains were ambitious and self confident excited by the challenge of almost unlimited geographic mobility.
a french traveler observed in 1802 that throughout the region he visited there was not a single farm where one cannot with confidence ask the owner from whence he had emigrated or according to the light manners of the americans what part of the world do you come from these rootless people he explained incline perpetually toward the most distant fringes of american settlement native american resistance at the beginning of the nineteenth century a substantial number of native americans lived in the greater ohio valley the land belonged to them.
the tragedy was that the indians many dependent on trade with the white people and ravaged by disease lacked unity.
small groups of native americans allegedly representing the interests of an entire tribe sold off huge pieces of land often for whiskey and trinkets.
such fraudulent transactions disgusted the shawnee leaders tenskwatawa known as the prophet and his brother tecumseh.
tecumseh rejected classification as a shawnee and may have been the first native leader to identify himself self consciously as indian these men desperately attempted to revitalize native cultures and against overwhelming odds they briefly persuaded native americans living in the indiana territory to avoid contact with whites to resist alcohol and most important to hold on to their land.
white intruders saw tecumseh as a threat to progress and during the war of 1812 they shattered the indians dream of cultural renaissance.
the populous creek nation located in the modern states of alabama and mississippi also resisted the settlers advance but its warriors were crushed by andrew jacksons tennessee militia at the battle of horseshoe bend march 1814.
well meaning jeffersonians disclaimed any intention to destroy the indians.
the president talked of creating a vast reservation beyond the mississippi river just as the british had talked before the revolution of a sanctuary beyond the appalachian mountains.
he sent federal agents to civilize the indians to transform them into yeoman farmers.
but even the most enlightened white thinkers of the day did not believe the indians possessed cultures worth preserving.
in fact in 1835 the democratic national convention selected a vice presidential candidate whose major qualification for high office seemed to be that he had killed tecumseh.
and as early as 1780 jefferson himself then serving as the governor of virginia instructed a military leader on the frontier if we are to wage a campaign against these indians the end proposed should be their extermination or their removal beyond the lakes of the illinois river.
the same world will scarcely do for them and us commercial life in the cities before 1820 the prosperity of the united states depended primarily on its agriculture and trade.
jeffersonian america was by no stretch of the imagination an industrial economy.
the overwhelming majority of the population 84 percent in 1810 was directly involved in agriculture.
southerners concentrated on the staple crops of tobacco rice and cotton which they sold on the european market.
in the north people generally produced livestock and cereal crops.
regardless of location however the nations chapter 8 republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision farmers followed a backbreaking work routine that did not differ substantially from that of their parents and grandparents.
except for the cotton gin important chemical and mechanical inventions did not appear in the fields for another generation.
the merchant marine represented an equally important element in americas preindustrial economy.
at the turn of the century ships flying the stars and stripes transported a large share of the worlds trade.
merchants in boston new york and philadelphia received handsome profits from such commerce.
their vessels provided essential links between european countries and their caribbean colonies.
france for example relied heavily on american transport for its sugar.
these lucrative transactions coupled with the export of domestic staples especially cotton generated impressive fortunes.
between 1793 and 1807 the year jefferson imposed the embargo against britain and france american commerce enjoyed a more than 300 percent increase in the value of exports and in net earnings.
unfortunately the boom did not last.
the success of the carrying trade depended in large measure on friendly relations between the united states and the major european powers.
when england and france began seizing american ships as they both did after 1805 national prosperity suffered.
the cities of jeffersonian america functioned chiefly as depots for international trade.
only about 7 percent of the nations population lived in urban centers and most of these people owed their livelihoods either directly or indirectly to the carrying trade.
recent studies revealed that several major port cities of the early republic new york philadelphia and baltimore for example had some of the highest population densities ever recorded in this countrys history.
in 1800 more than forty thousand new yorkers crowded into an area of only 1 5 square miles in philadelphia some forty six thousand people were packed into less than one square mile.
as one historian explained the cities contained disproportionate numbers of young white males free black men and women and white widows.
these people had below average incomes and also an increasing propensity to live on their own rather than as dependents as is common today many city dwellers rented living space and since the demand for housing exceeded the supply the rents were high.
the booming carrying trade may actually have retarded the industrialization of the united states.
the lure of large profits drew investment capital a scarce resource in a developing society into commerce.
by contrast manufacturing seemed too risky.
one contemporary complained the brilliant prospects held out by commerce caused our citizens to neglect the mechanical and manufacturing branches of industry this man may have exaggerated slightly to make his point.
samuel slater an english born designer of textile machinery did establish several cotton spinning mills in new england but until the 1820s these plants employed only a small number of workers.
in fact during this period far more cloth was produced in individual households than in factories.
another farsighted inventor robert fulton sailed the first american steamship up the hudson river in 1807.
in time this marvelous innovation opened new markets for before the industrial revolution national prosperity depended on commercial capitalism.
jonathan budingtons painting of cannon house and wharf 1792 the busy dock area of lower manhattan reflects the robust maritime trade of the new republic.
jefferson as president domestic manufacturers especially in the west.
at the end of the war of 1812 however few people anticipated how greatly power generated by fossil fuel would eventually transform the character of the american economy.
ordinary workers often felt threatened by the new machines.
skilled artisans who had spent years mastering a trade and who took pride in producing an object that expressed their own personalities found the industrial workplace alienating.
moreover they rightly feared that innovative technology designed to achieve greater efficiency might throw traditional craftspeople out of work or if not that transform independent entrepreneurs into dependent wage laborers.
one new yorker for example writing in the gazette and general advertiser in 1801 warned tradespeople to be on guard against those who will screw down the wages to the last thread.
and destroy the independent spirit so distinguished at present in our mechanics and so useful in republics read the document margaret bayard smith reflections upon meeting jefferson jefferson as president how did practical politics challenge jeffersons political principles.
the district of columbia seemed an appropriate capital for a republican president.
at the time of jeffersons first inauguration washington was still an isolated rural village a far cry from the crowded centers of philadelphia and new york.
jefferson fit comfortably into washington society.
he despised formal ceremony and sometimes shocked foreign dignitaries by meeting them in his slippers or a threadbare jacket.
he spent as much time as his official duties allowed in reading and reflection.
isaac one of jeffersons slaves recounted old master had abundance of books sometimes would have twenty of em down on the floor at once read fust one then tother the president was a poor public speaker.
he wisely refused to deliver annual addresses before congress.
in personal conversation however jefferson exuded considerable charm.
his dinner parties were major intellectual as well as social events and in this forum the president regaled politicians with his knowledge of literature philosophy and science.
according to margaret bayard smith the wife of a congressman the president has more ease than grace all the winning softness of politeness without the artificial polish of courts notwithstanding his commitment to the life of the mind jefferson was a politician to the core.
he ran for the presidency in order to achieve specific goals the reduction of the size and cost of federal government the repeal of obnoxious federalist legislation such as the alien and sedition acts and the maintenance of international peace.
to accomplish his program jefferson realized he needed the full cooperation of congressional republicans some of whom were fiercely independent men.
over such figures jefferson exercised political mastery.
he established close ties with the leaders of both houses of congress and while he seldom announced his plans in public he made certain his legislative lieutenants knew exactly what he desired.
contemporaries who described jefferson as a weak president and some federalists did just that did not read the scores of memoranda he sent to political friends or witness the margaret bayard smith wrote about life in washington d c during its early years as the nations capital.
she was a friend of thomas jefferson through her husband samuel harrison smith.
informal meetings he held at the executive mansion with important republicans.
in two terms as president jefferson never had to veto a single act of congress.
jefferson carefully selected the members of his cabinet.
during washingtons administration he had witnessed even provoked severe infighting as president he nominated only those who enthusiastically supported his programs.
james madison the leading figure at the constitutional convention became secretary of state.
for the treasury jefferson chose albert gallatin a swiss born financier who understood the complexities of the federal budget.
if i had the universe to choose from the president announced i could not change one of my associates to my better satisfaction jeffersonian reforms a top priority of the new government was cutting the national debt.
throughout american history presidents have advocated such reductions but such rhetoric has seldom yielded tangible chapter 8 republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision results.
jefferson succeeded.
he and gallatin regarded a large federal deficit as dangerous to the health of republican institutions.
in fact both men associated debt with alexander hamiltons federalist financial programs measures they considered harmful to republicanism.
jefferson claimed that legislators elected by the current generation did not have the right to mortgage the future of unborn americans.
jefferson also wanted to diminish the activities of the federal government.
he urged congress to repeal all direct taxes including the tax that had sparked the whiskey rebellion in 1794.
secretary gallatin linked federal income to the carrying trade.
he calculated that the entire cost of national government could be borne by customs receipts.
as long as commerce flourished revenues provided sufficient sums.
when international war closed foreign markets however the flow of funds dried up.
to help pay the debt inherited from the adams administration jefferson ordered substantial cuts in the national budget.
the president closed several american embassies in europe.
he also slashed military spending.
in his first term jefferson reduced the size of the u s army by 50 percent.
this decision left only three thousand soldiers to guard the entire frontier.
in addition he retired a majority of the navys warships.
when new englanders claimed the cuts left the country defenseless jefferson countered with a glib argument.
as ships of the u s navy sailed the worlds oceans he claimed they were liable to provoke hostilities perhaps even war hence by reducing the size of the fleet he promoted peace.
more than budgetary considerations prompted jeffersons military reductions.
he was deeply suspicious of standing armies.
in the event of foreign attack he reasoned the militia would rise in defense of the republic.
no doubt his experiences during the revolution influenced his thinking on military affairs for in 1776 an aroused populace had taken up arms against the british.
to ensure that the citizen soldiers would receive professional leadership in battle jefferson created the army corps of engineers and the military academy at west point in 1802.
political patronage was a great burden to the new president.
loyal republicans throughout the united states had worked hard for jeffersons victory and as soon as he took office they stormed the executive mansion seeking federal employment.
while the president controlled several hundred jobs he refused to dismiss all the federalists.
to be sure he acted quickly to remove the socalled midnight appointees highly partisan selections that adams had made after learning of jeffersons election.
but to transform federal hiring into an undisciplined spoils system especially at the highest levels of the federal bureaucracy seemed to jefferson to be shortsighted.
moderate federalists might be converted to the republican party and in any case there was a good chance they possessed the expertise needed to run the government.
at the end of his first term half of the people holding office were appointees of washington and adams.
jeffersons political moderation helped hasten the demise of the federalist party.
this loose organization had nearly destroyed itself during the election of 1800 and following adamss defeat prominent federalist spokesmen such as fisher ames and john jay withdrew from national affairs.
they refused to adopt the popular forms of campaigning that the republicans had developed so successfully during the late 1790s.
the mere prospect of flattering the common people was odious enough to drive some federalists into political retirement.
many of them also sensed that national expansion worked against their interests.
the creation of new states and congressional reapportionment inevitably seemed to increase the number of republican representatives in washington.
by 1805 the federalists retained only a few seats in new england and delaware.
the power of the jefferson administration confessed john quincy adams in 1802 rests upon the support of a much stronger majority of the people throughout the union than the former administrations ever possessed since the first establishment of the constitution the louisiana purchase when jefferson first took office he was confident that louisiana as well as florida would eventually become part of the united states.
after all spain owned the territory and jefferson assumed he could persuade the rulers of that notoriously weak nation to sell their colonies.
if that peaceful strategy failed the president was prepared to threaten forcible occupation.
in may 1801 however prospects for the easy or inevitable acquisition of louisiana suddenly darkened.
jefferson learned that spain had secretly transferred title to the entire region to france its powerful northern neighbor.
to make matters worse the french leader napoleon seemed intent on reestablishing an empire in north america.
even as jefferson sought additional information concerning the details of the transfer napoleon was dispatching a large army to put down a rebellion in frances sugar rich caribbean colony haiti.
from that island stronghold in the west indies french troops could occupy new orleans and close the mississippi river to american trade.
a sense of crisis enveloped washington.
some congressmen urged jefferson to prepare for war against france.
tensions increased when the spanish officials who still governed new orleans announced the closing of that port to american commerce october 1802.
jefferson and his advisers assumed that the spanish had acted on orders from france but despite this serious provocation the president preferred negotiations to war.
in january 1803 he asked james monroe a loyal republican from virginia to join the american minister robert livingston in paris.
the president instructed the two men to explore the possibility of purchasing the city of new orleans.
lest they underestimate the importance of their diplomatic mission jefferson reminded them there is on the globe one single spot the possessor of which is our natural and habitual enemy.
it is new orleans if livingston and monroe failed jefferson realized he would be forced to turn to great britain for military assistance.
dependence on that country seemed repellent but he recognized that as soon as french troops moved into louisiana we must marry ourselves to the british fleet and nation by the time monroe joined livingston in france napoleon had lost interest in establishing an american empire.
the army he sent to haiti succumbed to tropical diseases.
by the end of 1802 more than thirty thousand veteran troops had died.
in a fit of disgust napoleon announced damn sugar damn coffee damn colonies.
i renounce louisiana the diplomats from the united states knew nothing of these developments.
they were taken by complete jefferson as president view the closer look co lumbia r map of louisiana purchase 1803 ft mandan winter quarters 1804 1805 lewiss return ea t la ke pa na indiana terr.
ohio md m d d md.
ohio r siian ana louisiana h hase purchase mass.
r i conn n j n j del.
d c va st s t louis ky n c s p a mis siss ippi r r ad o o mis in natural bo und ary tenn s c mississippi terr.
ga new ne n ew orlea e orleans orleanss o ri atlantic ocean spa sp s pa p an nis ni iis sh spanish fl lori rid da florida gulf of mexico d an gr e louisiana purchase vt n h.
u ri r so w ns ntai mou e r part of mass.
n y y ck ro n l co maine s rn retu clark s oregon country pacific ocean gr st l aw re n ft clatsop winter quarters 1805 1806 ce r.
british north america canada clark route of lewis and clar rk 500 miles 500 kilometers the louisiana purchase and the route of lewis and clark not until lewis and clark had explored the far west did citizens of the united states realize just how much territory jefferson had acquired through the louisiana purchase.
surprise therefore when they learned that talleyrand the french minister for foreign relations had offered to sell the entire louisiana territory in april 1803.
for only 15 million the americans doubled the size of the united states with the louisiana purchase.
in fact livingston and monroe were not certain how much land they had actually purchased.
when they asked talleyrand whether the deal included florida he responded ambiguously you have made a noble bargain for yourselves and i suppose you will make the most of it even at that moment livingston realized that the transaction would alter the course of american history.
from this day he wrote the united states take their place among the powers of first rank the american people responded enthusiastically to news of the louisiana purchase.
the only criticism came from a few disgruntled federalists in new england who thought the united states was already too large.
jefferson of course was immensely relieved.
the nation had avoided war with france.
nevertheless he worried that the purchase might be unconstitutional.
the president pointed out that the constitution did not specifically authorize the acquisition of vast new territories and the incorporation of thousands of foreign citizens.
to escape this apparent legal dilemma jefferson proposed an amendment to the constitution.
few persons even his closest advisers shared the presidents scruples.
events in france soon forced jefferson to adopt a more pragmatic course.
when he heard that napoleon had become impatient for his money jefferson rushed the papers to a senate eager to ratify the agreement and nothing more was said about amending the constitution.
jeffersons fears about the incorporation of this new territory were not unwarranted.
the area that eventually became the state of louisiana 1812 contained many people of french and spanish background who possessed no familiarity with representative institutions.
their laws had been autocratic their local government corrupt.
to allow such persons to elect a representative assembly struck the president as dangerous.
he did not even know whether the population of louisiana would remain loyal to the united states.
chapter 8 republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision jefferson therefore recommended to congress a transitional government consisting entirely of appointed officials.
in march 1804 the louisiana government bill narrowly passed the house of representatives.
members of the presidents own party attacked the plan.
after all it imposed taxes on the citizens of louisiana without their consent.
according to one outspoken tennessee congressman the bill establishes a complete despotism most troubling perhaps was the fact that the legislation ran counter to jeffersons well known republican principles.
the lewis and clark expedition in the midst of the louisiana controversy jefferson dispatched a secret message to congress requesting 2 500 for the exploration of the far west january 1803.
how closely this decision was connected to the paris negotiations is not clear.
whatever the case may have been the president asked his talented private secretary meriwether lewis to discover whether the missouri river may offer the most direct practicable water communication across watch the video this continent for the purposes of commerce the president also regarded the expedition as a wonderful opportunity to collect precise data about flora and fauna.
he personally instructed lewis in the latest techniques of scientific observation.
while preparing for this great adventure lewiss second in command william clark assumed such a prominent role that the effort became known as the lewis and clark expedition.
the effort owed much of its success to a young shoshoni woman known as sacagawea.
she served as a translator and helped persuade suspicious native americans that the explorers meant no harm.
as clark explained a woman with a party of men is a token of peace the exploring party set out from st louis in may 1804 and after barely surviving crossing the snow covered rocky mountains with their food supply running dangerously low the americans reached the pacific ocean in november 1805.
the group returned safely the following september.
the results of the expedition not only fulfilled jeffersons scientific expectations but also reaffirmed his faith in the future economic prosperity of the united states.
lewis clark what were they trying to accomplish.
when thomas jefferson purchased louisiana from the french in 1803 americans knew very little about their vast new territory.
the president chose naturalist meriwether lewis and william clark a soldier and cartographer to lead a voyage of discovery to explore these new lands.
this stamp commemorates the expeditions 1804 departure up the missouri river and into the unknown west.
jeffersons critics conflict with the barbary states during this period jefferson dealt with another problem.
for several decades the north african states of tangier algiers tripoli and tunis the barbary states had preyed on commercial shipping.
see the feature essay barbary pirates and american captives the nations first hostage crisis pp.
most european nations paid the pirates tribute hoping thereby to protect merchants trading in the mediterranean.
in 1801 jefferson responding to tripolis increased demand for tribute decided the extortion had become intolerable and dispatched a small fleet to the barbary coast where according to one commander the americans intended to negotiate through the mouth of a cannon tripoli put up stiff resistance however and in one mismanaged engagement it captured the u s frigate philadelphia.
ransoming the crew cost jeffersons government another 60 000.
an american land assault across the libyan desert provided inspiration for the words of the marines hymn to the shores of tripoli but no smashing victory.
despite a generally unimpressive american military record a vigorous naval blockade brought hostilities to a conclusion.
in 1805 the president signed a treaty formally ending the barbary war.
one diplomat crowed it must be mortifying to some of the neighboring european powers to see that the barbary states have been taught their fi rst lessons of humiliation from the western world jefferson concluded his first term on a wave of popularity.
he had maintained the peace reduced taxes and expanded the boundaries of the united states.
not surprisingly he overwhelmed his federalist opponent in the presidential election of 1804.
in the electoral college jefferson received 162 votes to charles cotesworth pinckneys 14.
republicans controlled congress.
john randolph the most articulate member of the house of representatives exclaimed never was there an administration more brilliant than that of mr jefferson up to this period.
we were indeed in the full tide of successful experiment the election of 1804 candidate jefferson c pinckney party republican federalist electoral vote jeffersons critics how did jeffersonians deal with the difficult problems of party politics and slavery.
at the moment of jeffersons greatest electoral victory a perceptive person might have seen signs of serious division within the republican party and within the country.
the presidents heavyhanded attempts to reform the federal courts stirred deep animosities.
republicans had begun sniping at other republicans and one leading member of the party aaron burr became involved in a bizarre plot to separate the west from the rest of the nation.
congressional debates over the future of the slave trade revealed the existence of powerful sectional loyalties and profound disagreement on the issue.
the barbary states in 1801 president jefferson refused to continue paying the tribute that pirates of the barbary states had received for decades.
atlantic ocean kingdom of italy france black sea ottoman empire portugal spain kingdom of naples barbary raids strait of gibraltar tangier algiers morocco tunis u s s.
philadelphia captured oct 31 1803 burned by u s feb 16 1804 algeria mediterranean sea derna april 27 1805 tunisia tripoli bombarded summer 1804 barbary states egypt tripoli cairo chapter 8 republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision attack on the judges jeffersons controversy with the federal bench commenced the moment he became president.
the federalists realizing they would soon lose control over the executive branch had passed the judiciary act of 1801.
this bill created several circuit courts and sixteen new judgeships.
through his midnight appointments adams had quickly filled these positions with stalwarts of the federalist party.
such blatantly partisan behavior angered jefferson.
in the courts he explained the federalists hoped to preserve their political influence and from that battery all the works of republicanism are to be beaten down and erased even more infuriating was adamss appointment of john marshall as the new chief justice.
this shrewd largely self educated virginian of federalist background whose training in the law consisted of a series of lectures he attended at the college of william and mary in 1780 was clearly a man who could hold his own against the new president.
in january 1802 jeffersons congressional allies called for repeal of the judiciary act.
in public debate they studiously avoided the obvious political issue.
the new circuit courts should be closed not only because they were staffed by federalists but also as they argued because they were needlessly expensive.
the judges did not hear enough cases to warrant continuance.
the federalists mounted an able defense.
the constitution they observed provided for the removal of federal judges only when they were found guilty of high crimes and misdemeanors.
by repealing the judiciary act the legislative branch would in effect be dismissing judges without a trial a clear violation of their constitutional rights.
this argument made little impression on the republican party.
in march the house following the senate voted for repeal.
while congress debated the judiciary act another battle erupted.
one of adamss midnight appointees william marbury complained that the new administration would not give him his commission for the office of justice of the peace for the district of columbia.
he sought redress before the supreme court demanding that the federal justices compel james madison the secretary of state to deliver the necessary papers.
when they learned that marshall had agreed to hear this case the republicans were furious.
apparently the chief justice wanted to provoke a confrontation with the executive branch.
marshall was too clever to jeopardize the independence of the supreme court over such a relatively minor issue.
in his celebrated marbury v madison decision february 1803 marshall berated the secretary of state for withholding marburys commission.
nevertheless he concluded that the supreme court did not possess jurisdiction over such matters.
poor marbury was out of luck.
the republicans proclaimed victory.
in fact they were so pleased with the outcome that they failed to examine the logic of marshalls decision.
he had ruled that part of the earlier act of congress the one on which marbury based his appeal was unconstitutional.
this was the first time the supreme court asserted its right to judge the constitutionality of congressional acts and while contemporaries did not fully appreciate the significance of marshalls doctrine marbury v madison later served as an important precedent for judicial review of federal statutes.
neither marburys defeat nor repeal of the judiciary act placated extreme republicans.
they insisted that federal judges should be made more responsive to the will of the people.
one solution short of electing federal judges was impeachment.
this clumsy device provided the legislature with a way of removing particularly offensive individuals.
early in 1803 john pickering an incompetent judge from new hampshire presented the republicans with a curious test case.
this federalist appointee suffered from alcoholism as well as insanity.
while his outrageous behavior on the bench embarrassed everyone pickering had not committed any high crimes against the u s government.
ignoring such legal niceties jeffersons congressional allies pushed for impeachment.
although the senate convicted pickering march 1804 many senators refused to compromise the letter of the constitution and were conspicuously absent on the day of the final vote.
jefferson was apparently so eager to purge the courts of federalists that he failed to heed these warnings.
by the spring of 1803 he had set his sights on a target far more important than john pickering.
in a baltimore newspaper the president stumbled on the transcript of a speech allegedly delivered before a federal grand jury.
the words seemed almost treasonous.
the person responsible read the document opinion for the supreme court for marbury v madison william marbury 1760 1835 was an american lawyer politician and banker.
in marbury v madision marbury sued the jefferson administration to follow through on a judges commission promised him by former president john adams.
marbury lost but his case established the doctrine of judicial review the supreme courts authority to declare laws unconstitutional.
jeffersons critics was samuel chase a justice of the supreme court who had frequently attacked republican policies.
jefferson leapt at the chance to remove chase from office.
in a matter of weeks the republicancontrolled house of representatives indicted chase.
chases trial before the u s senate was one of the most dramatic events in american legal history.
aaron burr the vice president organized the proceedings.
for reasons known only to himself burr redecorated the senate chamber so that it looked more like the british house of lords than the meeting place of a republican legislature.
in this luxurious setting chase and his lawyers conducted a masterful defense.
by contrast john randolph the congressman who served as chief prosecutor behaved in an erratic manner betraying repeatedly his ignorance of relevant points of law.
while most republican senators personally disliked the arrogant chase they refused to expand the constitutional definition of impeachable offenses to suit randolphs argument and on march 1 1805 the senate acquitted the justice of all charges.
the experience apparently convinced chase of the need for greater moderation.
after returning to the federal bench he refrained from attacking republican policies.
his jeffersonian opponents also learned something important.
american politicians did not like tampering with the constitution in order to get rid of specific judges even an imprudent one like chase.
politics of desperation the collapse of the federalists on the national level encouraged dissension within the republican party.
extremists in congress insisted on monopolizing the presidents ear and when he listened to political moderates they rebelled.
the members of the most vociferous faction called themselves the good old republicans the newspapers labeled them the tertium quids loosely translated as nothings or no accounts during jeffersons second term the quids argued that the presidents policies foreign and domestic sacrificed virtue for pragmatism.
their chief spokesmen were two members from virginia john randolph and john taylor of caroline the name of his plantation both of whom were convinced that jefferson had betrayed the republican purity of the founders.
they both despised commercial capitalism.
taylor urged americans to return to a simple agrarian way of life.
randolphs attacks were particularly shrill.
he saved his sharpest barbs for gallatin and madison republican moderates who failed to appreciate the congressmans self righteous posturing.
the yazoo controversy raised the quids from political obscurity.
this complex legal battle began in 1795 when a thoroughly corrupt georgia assembly sold 35 million acres of western land known as the yazoo claims to private companies at bargain prices.
it soon became apparent that every member of the legislature had been bribed and in 1796 state lawmakers rescinded the entire agreement.
unfortunately some land had already changed hands.
when jefferson became president a specially appointed federal commission attempted to clean up the mess.
it recommended that congress set aside 5 million acres for buyers who had unwittingly purchased land from the discredited companies.
randolph immediately cried foul.
such a compromise however well meaning condoned fraud.
republican virtue hung in the balance.
for months the quids harangued congress about the yazoo business but in the end their impassioned oratory accomplished nothing.
the marshall supreme court upheld the rights of the original purchasers in fletcher v peck 1810.
the justices unanimously declared that legislative fraud did not impair private contracts and that the georgia assembly of 1796 did not have authority to take away lands already sold to innocent buyers.
this important case upheld the supreme courts authority to rule on the constitutionality of state laws.
murder and conspiracy the curious career of aaron burr vice president aaron burr created far more serious difficulties for the president.
the two men had never been close.
burrs strange behavior during the election of 1800 raised suspicions that he had conspired to deprive jefferson of the presidency.
whatever the truth may have been the vice president entered the new administration under a cloud.
he played only a marginal role in shaping policy a situation extremely frustrating for a person as ambitious as burr.
in the spring of 1804 burr decided to run for the governorship of new york.
although he was a republican he entered into political negotiations with high federalists who were plotting the secession of new england and new york from the union.
in a particularly scurrilous contest and new york politics were always abusive alexander hamilton described burr as.
a dangerous man.
who ought not to be trusted with the reins of government and urged federalists in the state to vote for another candidate.
whether hamiltons appeals influenced the voters is not clear.
burr however blamed hamilton for his subsequent defeat and challenged him to a duel.
even though hamilton condemned this form of violence his own son had recently been killed in a duel he accepted burrs invitation describing the foolishness as a matter of personal honor.
on july 11 1804 at weehawken new jersey the vice president shot and killed the former secretary of the treasury.
both new york and new jersey indicted burr for murder.
if he returned to either state he would immediately be arrested.
his political career lay in shambles.
in his final weeks as vice president burr hatched an audacious scheme.
on a trip down the ohio river in april 1805 after his term as vice president was over he hinted broadly that he was planning a private military adventure against a spanish colony perhaps mexico.
burr also suggested that he envisioned separating the western states and territories from the union.
the region certainly seemed ripe for secession.
the citizens of new orleans acted as if they wanted no part of the united states.
general james wilkinson commander of the u s army in the mississippi valley accepted an important role in this vaguely defined conspiracy.
the general was a thoroughly corrupt opportunist.
randolph described him as the only man that i ever saw who was from bark to the very core a villain in the late summer of 1806 burr put his ill defined plan into action.
a small group of volunteers constructed riverboats on a small island in the ohio river.
by the time this armed band set out to join wilkinsons forces however the general had experienced a change of heart.
he frantically dispatched letters to jefferson denouncing burr.
wilkinsons betrayal destroyed any chance of success.
facing certain defeat burr tried to escape to spanish florida.
it was already too late.
federal authorities arrested burr in february 1807 and took him to richmond to stand trial for treason.
complete the assignment barbary pirates and american captives on myhistorylab feature essay barbary pirates and american captives the nations first hostage crisis print depicting the bombardment of tripoli by u s naval vessels in 1804.
f or more than a quartercentury after independence terror haunted american sailors and challenged the new republics influence throughout the world.
pirates from north africa preyed on commercial vessels in the mediterranean sea and along the european coast.
those unlucky enough to be captured faced enslavement or death.
although such piracy had been going on for a very long time american entrepreneurs were always willing to risk the dangers to make a profit.
the crew of one ship the polly left a record of the horrors awaiting those who encountered the barbary pirates north african muslims based in algiers morocco tunis and tripoli.
sailing out of baltimore in autumn 1793 the polly was on its way to a spanish port when a sailor on watch reported a strange sail no one seems to have anticipated trouble.
they were in for a dreadful surprise.
when the strange vessel drew alongside the polly someone dressed in the christian habit hailed the americans from the deck.
then without warning a great number of men dressed in the turkish habit poured over the railings brandishing scimitars and pistols.
pikes spears lances and knives the americans had no defense.
the pirates plundered the ship then stripped the americans of all clothing except a shirt and a pair of drawers and chained them in preparation for the voyage to algiers reputed to be the cruelest of any state in all barbary the pollys crew had become casualties of the young republics first prolonged hostage crisis involving muslim states.
by the end of the year barbary pirates had seized the crews of at least ten other vessels.
the captives were thrown into prisons where they labored in terrible conditions alongside sailors who had been in algiers for as long as a decade.
algerian guards beat their captives.
the enslaved americans were driven in chains each day to a quarry outside the city of algiers.
their masters forced them to drag twenty ton rocks to construction sites.
anyone who attempted escape faced execution.
news of the captives ordeal offended american pride.
outraged american citizens organized charitable societies pledged to oppose the pirates send relief to the captives and lobby congress to take effective action for their release.
some americans advocated paying ransom to liberate the prisoners but others pointed out that such a policy would only encourage more attacks on the nations merchant marine.
the outpouring of private action and nationalist sentiment forced the u s government which had championed a policy of free trade throughout the world to adjust to the changing realities of international relations.
if the united states allowed itself to be humiliated by the barbary states places where bribery treachery rapine murder and all the hideous offspring of accursed tyranny have often drenched the streets with blood then it could not expect other more powerful states to respect its hard won independence.
u s military power frightened no one especially not the rulers of barbary states.
neither the french nor the british showed interest in helping the americans.
after all they viewed them as commercial competitors in the region.
in 1795 the federal government finally recognized the seriousness of the problem.
president washington ordered u s envoy joseph donaldson jr to negotiate release of the captives and to sign treaties ensuring that algiers would no longer molest american shipping.
for these alleged favors the united states had to promise a humiliating sum totaling nearly 1 million.
the combination of debt payments and annual tribute represented about one sixth of each years federal budget.
treaties with tripoli and tunis also included yearly payments for peace raising the total even higher.
a policy that essentially condoned blackmail continued until thomas jefferson won election as president in 1800.
hoping to extort a larger share of the annual ransom monies the pasha of tripoli forced jeffersons hand by declaring war on the united states.
this preemptive move confirmed belief that attempts to buy off extortionists only generated further greed.
it also compelled the united states to back up its world commerce with military might a decision congressional budget cutters had tried to avoid.
vowing not to pay one penny in tribute jefferson dispatched u s naval vessels to blockade tripolis harbor.
despite brave talk american intervention proved a failure at least initially.
one battleship went aground and had to be destroyed by marines.
eventually commodore edward preble and captain stephen decatur showed fighting spirit sufficient to turn defeat into a draw.
the american consul at tunis william eaton even attempted an early form of regime change leading a company of mediterranean mercenaries in an unauthorized effort to depose the pasha and install his brother.
eatons mission to the shores of tripoli failed.
in 1805 the pasha whose power was unshaken decided that war was becoming too expensive and he negotiated a peace with the united states that included a payment of 60 000 to ransom the last prisoners.
during the long ordeal with the barbary pirates american nationalists portrayed north african states as the opposite of their free republic.
survivors of captivity published narratives containing lurid descriptions of the despotism and cruelty they had endured under their muslim masters.
the popular press castigated muslims as enemies of civilized society and devoid of human compassion.
propaganda against muslim pirates generated its own embarrassing backlash.
shrill nationalist rhetoric reminded many americans of the uncomfortable similarities between the white slavery of the barbary states and the african slavery that flourished throughout the southern united states.
the african american abolitionist absalom jones could discern no real difference between the unconstitutional bondage in which multitudes of our fellows in complexion are held and the deplorable.
situation of citizens of the united states captured and enslaved.
in algiers americas first hostage crisis produced a complex legacy.
it forced ordinary citizens of the new republic to take stock of themselves within a larger international framework.
the war in tripoli encouraged jefferson who had always disfavored a permanent military establishment to accept a professional navy.
preparedness he concluded was the price of maintaining free trade throughout the world.
war provided a stark contrast between liberty and tyranny and stimulated the loud celebration of american freedom.
in doing so it also intensified debate over the republics most glaring domestic contradiction the persistence of slavery within a nation that was prepared to fight in distant places in the name of liberty.
questions for discussion 1.
why did the european powers not eliminate the barbary pirates.
could u s leaders have ignored the challenge of the pirates.
how did american nationalists condemnation of white slavery in north africa affect the debate over the enslavement of africanamericans in the u s.
chapter 8 republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision the trial judge was john marshall a strong federalist not likely to do the republican administration any favors.
he refused to hear testimony regarding burrs supposed intentions.
troops must be embodied marshall thundered men must be actually assembled he demanded two witnesses to each overt act of treason.
burr of course had been too clever to leave this sort of evidence.
while jefferson complained bitterly about the miscarriage of justice the jurors declared on september 1 1807 that the defendant was not proved guilty by any evidence submitted to us the public was outraged and burr prudently went into exile in europe.
the president threatened to introduce an amendment to the constitution calling for the election of federal judges.
nothing came of his proposal.
and marshall inadvertently helped protect the civil rights of all americans.
if the chief justice had allowed circumstantial evidence into the richmond courtroom if he had listened to rumor and hearsay he would have made it much easier for later presidents to use trumped up conspiracy charges to silence legitimate political opposition.
read the document the slave trade slavery sparked angry debate at the constitutional convention of 1787 see chapter 6.
if delegates from the northern states had refused to compromise on this issue southerners would not have supported the new government.
the slave states demanded a great deal in return for cooperation.
according to an agreement that determined the size of a states congressional delegation a slave counted as three fifths of a free white male.
this political formula meant that while blacks did not vote they helped increase the number of southern representatives.
the south in turn gave up very little agreeing only that after 1808 congress might consider banning the importation of slaves into the united states.
slaves even influenced the outcome of national elections.
had the threefifths rule not been in effect in 1800 for example adams would surely have had the votes to defeat jefferson in the electoral college.
in an annual message sent to congress in december 1806 jefferson urged the representatives to prepare legislation outlawing the slave trade.
during the early months of 1807 congressmen debated various ways of ending the embarrassing commerce.
it was clear that the issue cut across party lines.
northern representatives congress prohibits importation of slaves 1807 although the external slave trade was officially outlawed in 1808 the commerce in humans persisted.
an estimated two hundred fifty thousand african slaves were brought illicitly to the united states between 1808 and 1860.
the internal slave trade continued as well.
folk artist lewis miller sketched this slave coffle marching from virginia to new owners in tennessee under the watchful eyes of mounted white overseers.
embarrassments overseas generally favored a strong bill some even wanted to make smuggling slaves into the country a capital offense.
but there was a serious problem.
the northern congressmen could not figure out what to do with black people captured by the customs agents who would enforce the legislation.
to sell these africans would involve the federal government in slavery which many northerners found morally repugnant.
nor was there much sympathy for freeing them.
ignorant of the english language and lacking personal possessions these blacks seemed unlikely to long survive free in the american south.
southern congressmen responded with threats and ridicule.
they explained to their northern colleagues that no one in the south regarded slavery as evil.
it appeared naive therefore to expect local planters to enforce a ban on the slave trade or to inform federal agents when they spotted a smuggler.
the notion that these culprits deserved capital punishment seemed viciously inappropriate.
at one point in the debate peter early a congressman from georgia announced that the south wanted no civil wars no rebellions no insurrections no resistance to the authority of government all he demanded in fact was to let the states regulate slavery.
to this a republican congressman from western pennsylvania retorted that americans who hated slavery would not be terrified by the threat of civil war the bill that jefferson finally signed in march 1807 probably pleased no one.
the law prohibited the importation of slaves into the united states after the new year.
whenever customs officials captured a smuggler the slaves were to be turned over to state authorities and disposed of according to local custom.
southerners did not cooperate and for many years african slaves continued to pour into southern ports.
even more blacks would have been imported had great britain not outlawed the slave trade in 1807.
as part of their ban of the slave trade ships of the royal navy captured american slave smugglers off the coast of africa and when anyone complained the british explained that they were merely enforcing the laws of the united states.
slavery was both a political and a personal issue for jefferson.
as a political leader during the revolution he criticized the institution.
but jefferson also believed that african americans were inherently inferior to whites.
in notes on the state of virginia 1785 jefferson insisted as a matter of science that african americans were not equal to white people in the endowments both of body and mind and he worried that the mixture of whites and blacks would stain the blood of the master it came as a surprise to his admirers when in 1802 a newspaper editor accused jefferson of having an affair with one of his own slaves.
most historians now agree that jefferson did indeed have a long term relationship with sally hemings a slave living at monticello.
hemings bore jefferson six children four of whom survived to adulthood.
jeffersons own life and writings illustrate dramatically the moral contradictions that lay at the heart of slavery in america.
embarrassments overseas why did the united states find it difficult to avoid military conflict during this period.
during jeffersons second term 1805 1809 the united states found itself in the midst of a world at war.
a brief peace in europe ended abruptly in 1803 and the two military giants of the age france and great britain fought for supremacy on land and sea.
during the early stages of the war the united states profited from european adversity.
as neutral carriers american ships transported goods to any port in the world where they could find a buyer and american merchants grew wealthy serving britain and france.
since the royal navy did not allow direct trade between france and its colonies american captains conducted broken voyages american vessels sailing out of french ports in the caribbean would put in briefly in the united states pay nominal customs and then leave for france.
for several years the british did little to halt this obvious subterfuge.
napoleons successes on the battlefield however quickly strained britains economic resources.
in july 1805 a british admiralty court announced in the essex decision that henceforth broken voyages were illegal.
the royal navy began seizing american ships in record number.
moreover as the war continued the british stepped up the impressment of sailors on ships flying the u s flag.
estimates of the number of men impressed ranged as high as nine thousand.
beginning in 1806 the british government issued a series of trade regulations known as the orders in council.
these proclamations forbade neutral commerce with the continent and threatened seizure of any ship that violated these orders.
the declarations created what were in effect paper blockades for even the powerful british navy could not monitor the activities of every continental port.
napoleon responded to britains commercial regulations with his own paper blockade called the continental system.
in the berlin decree of november 1806 and the milan decree of december 1807 he announced the closing of all continental ports to british trade.
since french armies occupied most of the territory between spain and germany the decrees obviously cut the british out of a large market.
the french emperor also declared that neutral vessels carrying british goods were liable to seizure.
for the americans there was no escape.
they were caught between two conflicting systems.
the british ordered american ships to stop off to pay duties and secure clearances in england on the way to the continent napoleon was determined to seize any vessel that obeyed the british.
this unhappy turn of international events baffled jefferson.
he had assumed that civilized countries would respect neutral rights justice obliged them to do so.
appeals to reason however made little impression on states at war.
as for france and england the president growled.
the one is a den of robbers the other of pirates in a desperate attempt to avoid hostilities for which the united states was ill prepared jefferson ordered james monroe and william pinckney to negotiate a commercial treaty with great britain.
the document they signed on december 31 1806 said nothing about impressment and an angry president refused to submit the treaty to the senate for ratification.
the united states soon suffered an even greater humiliation.
a ship of the royal navy the leopard sailing off the coast of virginia commanded an american warship to submit to a search for deserters june 22 1807.
when the captain of the chesapeake refused to cooperate the leopard opened fire killing three men and wounding eighteen.
the attack clearly violated the sovereignty of the united states.
official protests received only a perfunctory apology from the british government and the american people demanded revenge.
despite the pressure of public opinion however jefferson played for time.
he recognized that the united states was unprepared for war against a powerful nation such as great britain.
the president chapter 8 republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision worried that an expensive conflict with great britain would quickly undo the fiscal reforms of his first term.
as gallatin explained in the event of war the united states will be poorer both as a nation and as a government our debt and taxes will increase and our progress in every respect be interrupted embargo divides the nation jefferson found what he regarded as a satisfactory way to deal with european predators with a policy he called peaceable coercion if britain and france refused to respect the rights of neutral carriers then the united states would keep its ships at home.
not only would this action protect them from seizure but it would also deprive the european powers of much needed american goods especially food.
the president predicted that a total embargo of american commerce would soon force britain and france to negotiate with the united states in good faith.
our commerce is so valuable to them he declared that they will be glad to purchase it when the only price we ask is to do us justice congress passed the embargo act by large majorities and it became law on december 22 1807.
peaceable coercion turned into a jeffersonian nightmare.
the president apparently believed the american people would enthusiastically support the embargo.
that was a naive assumption.
compliance required a series of enforcement acts that over fourteen months became increasingly harsh.
by the middle of 1808 jefferson and gallatin were involved in the regulation of the smallest details of american economic life.
indeed in the words of one of jeffersons biographers the president assumed the role of commissar of the nations economy the federal government supervised the coastal trade lest a ship sailing between two states slip away to europe or the west indies.
overland trade with canada was proscribed.
when violations still occurred congress gave customs collectors the right to seize a vessel merely on suspicion of wrongdoing.
a final desperate act passed in january 1809 prohibited the loading of any u s vessel regardless of size without authorization from a customs officer who was supported by the army navy and local militia.
jeffersons eagerness to pursue a reasonable foreign policy blinded him to the fact that he and a republican congress would have had to establish a police state to make it work.
northerners hated the embargo.
persons living near lake champlain in upper new york state simply ignored the regulations and they roughed up collectors who interfered with the canadian trade.
the administration was determined to stop the smugglers.
in a decision that hamilton might have applauded jefferson dispatched federal troops led by the conspiratorial general wilkinson to overawe the citizens of new york.
new englanders regarded the embargo as lunacy.
merchants of the region were willing to take their chances on the high seas but for reasons that few people understood the president insisted that it was better to preserve ships from possible seizure than to make profits.
sailors and artisans were thrown out of work.
the popular press maintained a constant howl of protest.
one writer observed that embargo in reverse spelled o grab me not surprisingly the federalist party experienced a brief revival in new england and a few extremists suggested the possibility of state assemblies nullifying federal law.
by 1809 the bankruptcy of jeffersons foreign policy was obvious.
the embargo never seriously damaged the british economy.
in fact british merchants rushed to take over the lucrative markets that the americans had been forced to abandon.
napoleon liked the embargo since it seemed to harm great britain more than it did france.
faced with growing popular opposition the republicans in congress panicked.
one newly elected representative declared that peaceful coercion was a miserable and mischievous failure and joined his colleagues in repealing the embargo a few days before james madisons inauguration.
relations between the united states and the great european powers were much worse in 1809 than they had been in 1805.
during his second term the pressures of office weighed heavily on jefferson and after so many years of public service he welcomed retirement to monticello.
a new administration goes to war as president james madison suffered from several personal and political handicaps.
although his intellectual abilities were great he lacked the qualities necessary for effective leadership.
in public gatherings he impressed people as being exceedingly modest and one foreign visitor claimed that the new president always seems to grant that the one with whom he talks is his superior in mind and training critics argued that madisons humility revealed a weak vacillating character.
during the election of 1808 randolph and the quids tried unsuccessfully to persuade james monroe to challenge madisons candidacy.
jefferson favored his old friend madison.
in the end a caucus of republican congressmen gave the official nod to madison the first time in american history that such a congressional group controlled a presidential nomination.
the former secretary of state defeated his federalist rival charles cotesworth pinckney in the electoral college by a vote of 122 to 47 with new yorker george clinton receiving 6 ballots.
the margin of victory was substantially lower than jeffersons had been in 1804 a warning of political troubles ahead.
the federalists also made impressive gains in the house of representatives raising their delegation from 24 to 48.
the election of 1808 candidate madison c pinckney party republican federalist electoral vote the new president confronted the same foreign policy problems that had occupied his predecessor.
neither britain nor france showed the slightest interest in respecting american neutral rights.
threats against either nation rang hollow so long as the united states failed to develop its military strength.
out of weakness therefore madison was compelled to put the non intercourse act into effect.
congress passed this clumsy piece of legislation at the same time as it repealed the embargo march 1 1809.
the new bill authorized the resumption of trade between the united states and all nations of the world except britain and france.
either of these countries could restore full commercial relations simply by promising to observe the rights of neutral carriers.
the british immediately took advantage of this offer.
their minister to the united states david m erskine informed madison that the british government had modified its position on a number embarrassments overseas read the document james madison first inaugural address 1809 milan decrees.
again madison acted impulsively.
without waiting for further information from paris he announced that unless britain repealed the orders in council by november the united states would cut off commercial relations.
only later did the president learn that napoleon had no intention of living up to his side of the bargain his agents continued to seize american ships.
madison who had been humiliated by the erskine experience decided to ignore the french provocations to pretend the emperor was behaving in an honest manner.
the british could not explain why the united states tolerated such obvious deception.
no one in london would have suspected that the president really had no other options left.
events unrelated to international commerce fueled antibritish sentiment in the newly conquered parts of the united states.
westerners believed incorrectly as it turned out that british agents operating out of canada had persuaded tecumsehs warriors to resist the spread of american settlement.
according to the rumors that ran through the region the british dreamed of monopolizing the fur trade.
in any case general william henry harrison governor of the indiana territory marched an army to the edge of a large shawnee village at the mouth of tippecanoe creek near the banks of the wabash river.
on the morning of november 7 1811 the american troops routed the indians at the battle of tippecanoe.
harrison immediately became a national hero and several decades later the american people rewarded tippecanoe by electing him president.
this incident forced tecumseh a brilliant leader who was trying to restore the confidence and revitalize tribal cultures of the indians of the indiana territory to seek british military assistance in battling the americans something he probably would not have done had harrison left him alone.
fumbling toward conflict james madison was a plantation owner and statesman from virginia.
a political protg of thomas jefferson madison became the fourth president of the united states and is commonly remembered as the father of the united states constitution of sensitive commercial issues.
the president was so encouraged by these talks that he publicly announced that trade with great britain could resume in june 1809.
unfortunately erskine had not conferred with his superiors on the details of these negotiations.
george canning the british foreign secretary rejected the agreement out of hand and while an embarrassed madison fumed in washington the royal navy seized the american ships that had already put to sea.
cannings apparent betrayal led the artless madison straight into a french trap.
in may 1810 congress passed macons bill number two an act sponsored by nathaniel macon of north carolina.
in a complete reversal of strategy this poorly drafted legislation reestablished trade with both england and france.
it also contained a curious carrot and stick provision.
as soon as either of these european states repealed restrictions upon neutral shipping the u s government promised to halt all commerce with the other.
napoleon spotted a rare opportunity.
he informed the u s minister in paris that france would no longer enforce the hated berlin and in 1811 the anti british mood of congress intensified.
a group of militant representatives some of them elected to congress for the first time in the election of 1810 announced they would no longer tolerate national humiliation.
they called for action for resistance to great britain for any course that promised to achieve respect for the united states and security for its republican institutions.
these aggressive nationalists many of them elected in the south and west have sometimes been labeled the war hawks.
the group included henry clay an earthy kentucky congressman who served as speaker of the house and john c calhoun a brilliant south carolinian.
these fiery orators spoke of honor and pride as if foreign relations were a sort of duel between gentlemen.
while the war hawks were republicans they repudiated jeffersons policy of peaceful coercion.
madison surrendered to the war hawks.
on june 1 1812 he sent congress a declaration of war against great britain.
the timing of his action was peculiar.
over the preceding months tensions between the two nations had relaxed.
no new attacks had occurred.
indeed at the very moment madison called for war the british government was suspending the orders in council a conciliatory gesture that in all likelihood would have preserved the peace.
however inadequately madison communicated his goals he did seem to have had a plan.
his major aim was to force the british to respect american maritime rights especially in caribbean waters.
the presidents problem was to figure out how a small militarily weak nation like the united states could bring effective pressure on great britain.
madisons answer seemed to be canada.
republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision this colony supplied britains caribbean possessions with much needed foodstuffs.
the president reasoned therefore that by threatening to seize canada the americans might compel the british to make concessions on maritime issues.
it was this logic that secretary of state james monroe had in mind when he explained in june 1812 that it might be necessary to invade canada not as an object of the war but as a means to bring it to a satisfactory conclusion view the map party republican republican antiwar faction.
chteauguay oct 25 1813 york toronto burned apr.
27 1813 michilimackinac captured july 17 1812 electoral vote maine part of mass.
crysler s farm nov 11 1813 lake champlain plattsburg sept 11 1814 vt mich terr.
clinton was nominated by a convention of antiwar republicans and endorsed by the federalists.
detroit surrendered aug 16 1812 ill terr.
ft dearborn n y k la ee r i rie niagara r pa put in bay sept 10 1813 tippecanoe ind.
nov 7 1811 terr.
o ohi r va ohio washington d c burned aug 24 1814 conn n j ft mchenry baltimore sept 13 14 1814 del.
ky n c sipp i r n h mass.
thames river oct 5 1813 atlantic ocean mi ssis tenn s c.
horseshoe bend mar.
27 1814 ga miss.
ft mims massacre aug 30 1813 new orleans jan 8 1815 spanish f la.
gulf of mexico da ri lo congressional war hawks of course may have had other goals in mind.
some expansionists were probably more concerned about conquering canada than they were about the impressment of american seamen.
for others the whole affair may have truly been a matter of national pride.
andrew jackson wrote for what are we going to fight.
we are going to fight for the reestablishment of our national character misunderstood and vilified at home and abroad new englanders in whose commercial interests the war would supposedly be waged ridiculed such chauvinism.
the vote in congress was close 79 to 49 in the house 19 to 13 in the senate.
with this doubtful mandate the country marched to war against the most powerful maritime nation in europe.
division over the war question was reflected in the election of 1812.
a faction of antiwar republicans nominated de witt clinton of new york who was endorsed by the federalists.
nevertheless madison the republican won narrowly gaining 128 electoral votes to clintons 89 ce r british north america canada the election of 1812 candidate madison clinton the war of 1812 wre n chapter 8 st l a american offensives 1812 1813 american victories british offensives the strange war of 1812 british victories why is the war of 1812 sometimes thought of as a second war of independence.
optimism for the war of 1812 ran high.
the war hawks apparently believed that even though the united states possessed only a small army and navy it could easily sweep the british out of canada.
such predictions flew in the face of political and military realities.
not only did the republicans fail to appreciate how unprepared the country was for war but they also refused to mobilize needed resources.
the house rejected proposals for direct taxes and authorized naval appropriations only with the greatest reluctance.
indeed even as they planned for battle the republican members of congress were haunted by the consequences of their political and economic convictions.
they did not seem to understand that a weak highly decentralized government the one that jeffersonians championed was incapable of waging an expensive war against the worlds greatest sea power.
new englanders refused to cooperate with the war effort.
in july 1812 one clergyman in massachusetts urged the people of the region to proclaim an honourable neutrality many persons did just that.
new englanders carried on a lucrative though illegal 200 miles british naval blockade indian battles 100 200 kilometers the war of 1812 major battles of the war of 1812 brought few lasting gains to either the british or the americans.
commerce with the enemy.
when the u s treasury appealed for loans to finance the war wealthy northern merchants failed to respond.
the british government apparently believed the new england states might negotiate a separate peace and during the first year of war the royal navy did not bother to blockade the major northern ports.
american military operations focused initially on the western forts.
the results were discouraging.
on august 16 1812 major general william hull surrendered an entire army to a smaller british force at detroit.
michilimackinac was lost.
poorly coordinated marches against the enemy at niagara and montreal achieved nothing.
these experiences demonstrated that the militia led by aging officers with little military aptitude no matter how the strange war of 1812 enthusiastic was no match for well trained european veterans.
on the sea the united states did much better.
in august captain isaac hulls constitution defeated the hms guerrire in a fierce battle and american privateers destroyed or captured a number of british merchant ships.
these successes were somewhat deceptive however.
so long as napoleon threatened the continent great britain could spare few warships for service in america.
as soon as peace returned to europe in the spring of 1814 britain redeployed its fleet and easily blockaded the tiny u s navy.
the campaigns of 1813 revealed that conquering canada would be more difficult than the war hawks ever imagined.
both sides in this war recognized that whoever controlled the great lakes controlled the west.
on lake erie the americans won the race for naval superiority.
on september 10 1813 oliver hazard perry listen to the audio file destroyed a british fleet at put in bay and in a much quoted letter written immediately after the battle perry exclaimed we have met the enemy and they are ours on october 5 general harrison overran an army of british troops and indian warriors at the battle of thames river.
during this engagement tecumseh was killed.
on the other fronts however the war went badly for the americans.
general wilkinson suffered an embarrassing defeat near montreal battle of chryslers farm november 11 and the british navy held its own on lake ontario.
in 1814 the british took the offensive.
following their victory over napoleon british strategists planned to increase pressure on three separate american fronts the canadian frontier chesapeake coastal settlements and new orleans.
sir george prevost commander of the british forces in canada marched his army south star spangled banner baltimore lawyer francis scott key viewed the battle of ft mchenry from the deck of a british ship of war.
the british bombarded the fort through the night but in the morning key was thrilled to see that the american flag was still there the scene inspired key to pen a song celebrating this important american victory in the war of 1812 a song that has become americas national anthem.
this picture shows that original star spangled banner that flew over ft mchenry during the battle.
chapter 8 republican ascendancy the jeffersonian vision into upper new york state.
a hastily assembled american fleet led by captain thomas macdonough turned back a british flotilla off plattsburgh on lake champlain september 11 1814.
when prevost learned of this setback he retreated quickly into canada.
although the americans did not realize the full significance of this battle the triumph accelerated peace negotiations for after news of plattsburgh reached london the british government concluded that major land operations along the canadian border were futile.
throughout the year british warships harassed the chesapeake coast.
to their surprise the british found the region almost totally undefended and on august 24 1814 in retaliation for the americans destruction of the capital of upper canada york ontario a small force of british marines burned the american capital a victory more symbolic than strategic.
encouraged by their easy success and contemptuous of americas ragtag soldiers the british launched a full scale attack on baltimore september 13 14.
to everyones surprise the fort guarding the harbor held out against a heavy naval bombardment and the british gave up the operation.
the survival of fort mchenry inspired francis scott key to write the star spangled banner the battle of new orleans should never have occurred.
the british landed a large assault force under general edward pakenham at precisely the same time as diplomats in europe were preparing the final drafts of a peace treaty.
the combatants of course knew nothing of these distant developments and on january 8 1815 pakenham foolishly ordered a frontal attack against general andrew jacksons well defended positions.
in a short time the entire british force had been destroyed.
the americans suffered only light casualties.
the victory not only transformed jackson into a national folk hero but it also provided the people of the united states with a much needed source of pride.
even in military terms the battle was significant for if the british had managed to occupy new orleans they would have been difficult to dislodge regardless of the specific provisions of the peace treaty.
hartford convention the demise of the federalists in the fall of 1814 a group of leading new england politicians most of them moderate federalists gathered in hartford to discuss relations between the people of their region and the federal government.
the hartford convention delegates were angry and hurt by the madison administrations seeming insensitivity to the economic interests of the new england states.
the embargo had soured new englanders on republican foreign policy but the events of the war of 1812 added insult to injury.
when british troops occupied the coastal villages of maine then part of massachusetts the president did nothing to drive out the enemy.
of course the self righteous complaints of convention organizers overlooked new englands tepid support for the war effort.
the men who met at hartford on december 15 did not advocate secession from the union.
although people living in other sections of the country cried treason the convention delegates only recommended changes in the constitution.
they drafted a number of amendments that reflected the new englanders growing frustration.
one proposal suggested that congressional representation be calculated on the basis of the number of white males living in a state.
new england congressmen were tired of the three fifths rule that gave southern slaveholders a disproportionately large voice in the house.
the convention also wanted to limit each president to a single term in office a reform that new englanders hoped might end virginias monopoly of the executive mansion.
and finally the delegates insisted that a two thirds majority was necessary before congress could declare war pass commercial regulations or admit new states to the union.
the moderate federalists of new england were confident these changes would protect their region from the tyranny of southern republicans.
the convention dispatched its resolutions to washington but soon after an official delegation reached the federal capital the situation became extremely awkward.
everyone was celebrating the victory of new orleans and the announcement of peace.
republican leaders in congress accused the hapless new englanders of disloyalty and people throughout the country were persuaded that a group of wild secessionists had attempted to destroy the union.
the hartford convention accelerated the final demise of the federalist party.
treaty of ghent ends the war in august 1814 the united states dispatched a distinguished negotiating team to ghent a belgian city where the americans opened talks with their british counterparts.
during the early weeks of discussion the british made impossible demands.
they insisted on territorial concessions from the united states the right to navigate the mississippi river and the creation of a large indian buffer state in the northwest territory.
the americans listened to this presentation more or less politely and then rejected the entire package.
in turn they lectured their british counterparts about maritime rights and impressment.
fatigue finally broke the diplomatic deadlock.
the british government realized that no amount of military force could significantly alter the outcome of hostilities in the united states.
weary negotiators signed the treaty of ghent on christmas eve 1814.
the document dealt with virtually none of the topics contained in madisons original war message.
neither side surrendered territory great britain refused even to discuss the topic of impressment.
in fact after more than two years of hostilities the adversaries merely agreed to end the fighting postponing the vexing issues of neutral rights until a later date.
the senate apparently concluded that stalemate was preferable to continued conflict and ratified the treaty 35 to 0.
most americans except perhaps the diehard federalists of new england viewed the war of 1812 as an important success.
even though the countrys military accomplishments had been unimpressive the people of the united states had been swept up in a contagion of nationalism.
the hartford debacle served to discredit secessionist fantasies for several decades.
americans had waged a second war of independence and in the process transformed the union into a symbol of national destiny.
the war reflected gallatin had made americans feel and act more as a nation and i hope that the permanency of the union is thereby better secured that nationalism had flourished in times of war was an irony that gallatins contemporaries did not fully appreciate.
after the treaty of ghent however americans came gradually to realize they had nothing further to fear from europe and in an era of peace the process of sectional divergence began to quicken threatening to destroy the republic that jefferson and madison had worked so hard to preserve.
conclusion republican legacy read the document the treaty of ghent 1814 the treaty of ghent ended the war of 1812 but resolved none of the issues rival territorial claims impressments the trading rights of neutral nations that had led to the war.
still it presented americans with a symbolic victory that drew the nation together in its celebration of this second war of independence in the center of this painting u s.
ambassador and future president john q adams shakes hands with members of the british treaty delegation.
conclusion republican legacy during the 1820s it became fashionable to visit retired presidents.
these were not of course ordinary leaders.
jefferson adams and madison linked a generation of younger men and women to the heroic moments of the early republic.
when they spoke about the declaration of independence or the constitution of the united states their opinions carried symbolic weight for a burgeoning society anxious about its political future.
a remarkable coincidence occurred on july 4 1826 the fiftieth anniversary of the declaration of independence.
on that day thomas jefferson died at monticello.
his last words were is it the fourth on the same day several hundred miles to the north john adams also passed his last day on earth.
his mind was on his old friend and sometimes adversary and during his final moments adams found comfort in the assurance that thomas jefferson still survives james madison lived on at his virginia plantation the last of the founders.
throughout a long and productive career he had fought for republican values.
he championed a jeffersonian vision of a prosperous nation in which virtuous independent citizens pursued their own economic interests.
he tolerated no aristocratic pretensions.
leaders of a jeffersonian persuasion and during his last years that probably included john adams brought forth a democratic egalitarian society.
although they sometimes worried that the obsessive grubbing for wealth might destroy public virtue they were justly proud of the republic they had helped to create.
but many visitors who journeyed to madisons home at montpelier before he died in 1836 were worried about another legacy of the founding generation.
why they asked the aging president had the early leaders of this nation allowed slavery to endure.
how did african americans fit into the republican scheme.
try as they would neither madison nor the politicians who claimed the jeffersonian mantle could provide satisfactory answers.
in an open egalitarian society there seemed no place for slaves and a few months before madison died a visitor reported sadly with regard to slavery he owned himself almost to be in despair chapter 8 chapter review study resources take the study plan for chapter 8 republican ascendancy on myhistorylab time line 1800 thomas jefferson elected president 1801 adams makes midnight appointments of federal judges judiciary act is repealed march 1803 chief justice john marshall rules on marbury v madison february sets precedent for judicial review louisiana purchase concluded with france may 1803 1806 lewis and clark explore the northwest 1804 aaron burr kills alexander hamilton in a duel july 1809 embargo is repealed non intercourse act passed march harrison defeats indians at tippecanoe november 1812 declaration of war against great britain june jefferson elected to second term justice samuel chase acquitted by senate march 1807 burr is tried for conspiracy august september embargo act passed december slave trade is ended january madison elected president madison elected to second term defeating de witt clinton of new york perry destroys british fleet at battle of put in bay september jackson crushes creek indians at horseshoe bend march british marines burn washington d c august hartford convention meets to recommend constitutional changes december treaty of ghent ends war of 1812 december jackson routs british at battle of new orleans january chapter review regional identities in a new republic how did the republics growth shape the market economy and relations with native americans.
during jeffersons administration a rapidly growing population flooded into the ohio and mississippi valleys.
family farms produced crops for a robust international market.
cities served as centers not of industry but of commerce.
when native americans such as tecumseh resisted expansion the united states government and ordinary white settlers pushed them aside.
p 180 jefferson as president how did practical politics challenge jeffersons political principles.
jefferson brought to the presidency a commitment to a small less expensive federal government.
in office however he discovered that practical politics demanded compromises with republican principles.
he needed a government capable of responding to unexpected challenges and opportunities throughout the world.
although he worried that the louisiana purchase 1803 might exceed his authority under the constitution jefferson accepted the french offer and sent lewis and clark to explore this vast territory.
p 183 jeffersons critics how did jeffersonians deal with the difficult problems of party politics and slavery.
to end federalist control of the judiciary jefferson denied commissions to judges appointed at the end of the adams administration and attempted to remove others from office.
that failed and the impeachment of supreme court justice samuel chase embarrassed the administration.
in 1807 after considerable debate and compromise jefferson signed into law a bill outlawing the international slave trade.
p 187 embarrassments overseas why did the united states find it difficult to avoid military conflict during this period.
during jeffersons second term britain and france waged a world war.
both nations tried to manipulate the united states into taking sides.
recognizing that his country possessed only a weak navy and small army jefferson supported the embargo act 1807 which closed american ports to foreign commerce.
this angered new englanders who regarded open trade as the key to their regions prosperity.
p 193 the strange war of 1812 why is the war of 1812 sometimes thought of as a second war of independence.
prior to the war britain treated the united states as though it were still a colonial possession and regularly seized sailors on american ships.
in 1813 american troops failed to conquer canada.
in 1814 british troops burned washington d c in retaliation.
in 1815 general andrew jackson won a stunning victory in the battle of new orleans.
the resolutions of the hartford convention criticizing the war and the constitution proved an embarrassment for the federalists and accelerated their demise as a political party.
p 196 study resources key terms and definitions louisiana purchase u s acquisition of the louisiana territory from france in 1803 for 15 million.
the purchase secured american control of the mississippi river and doubled the size of the nation.
p 185 lewis and clark expedition overland expedition to the pacific coast 1804 1906 let by meriwether lewis and william clark.
commissioned by president thomas jefferson it collected scientific data about the country and its resources.
p 186 marbury v madison in this 1803 landmark decision the supreme court first asserted the power of judicial review by declaring an act of congress unconstitutional.
p 188 judicial review the authority of the supreme court to determine the constitutionality of the statutes.
p 188 war of 1812 war between britain and the united states.
u s justifications for war included british violations of american maritime rights impressment of seamen provocation of the indians and defense of national honor.
p 196 battle of new orleans battle that occurred in 1815 at the end of the war of 1812 when u s forces defeated a british attempt to seize new orleans.
p 198 hartford convention an assembly of new england federalists who met in hartford connecticut in december 1814 to protest president james madisons foreign policy in the war of 1812 which had undermined commercial interests in the north.
they proposed amending the constitution to prevent future presidents from declaring war without a two thirds majority in congress.
p 198 embargo act in response to a british attack on an american warship off the coast of virginia this 1807 law prohibited foreign commerce.
p 194 war hawks congressional leaders who in 1811 and 1812 called for war against britain.
p 195 critical thinking questions 1.
during a period of international instability and conflict how was the nations economy able to expand so impressively.
was jefferson a weak president as some federalists at the time 3.
was jefferson justified in his attacks on the federal courts.
in what way did the resolves of the hartford convention contribute to the demise of the federalist party.
provide reasons to support your position.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 8 on myhistorylab regional identities in a new republic embarrassments overseas read the document read the document charles william janson the stranger in america p 179 read the document margaret bayard smith reflections upon meeting jefferson p 183 jefferson as president view the closer look map of louisiana purchase 1803 p 185 watch the video view the map the war of 1812 p 196 listen to the audio file star spangled banner p 197 the treaty of ghent 1814 p 199 indicates study plan media assignment read the document opinion for the supreme court for marbury v madison p 188 complete the assignment barbary pirates and american captives p 190 read the document slaves 1807 p 192 read the document jeffersons critics the strange war of 1812 lewis clark what were they trying to accomplish.
p 186 james madison inaugural address 1809 p 195 congress prohibits importation of nation building and nationalism contents and learning objectives expansion and migration pg.
203 the politics of nation building after the war of 1812 pg.
215 what key forces drove american expansion westward during this period.
a revolution in transportation pg.
210 what decisions did the federal government face as the country expanded.
how did transportation networks change and improve after the war of 1812.
feature essay confronting a new environment emergence of a market economy pg.
212 how did developments in transportation support the growth of agriculture banking and industry.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 9 nation building and nationalism a revolutionary war hero revisits america in 1824 when the marquis de lafayette returned to the united states in 1824 he found a peaceful and prosperous nation.
for more than a year the great french hero of the american revolution toured the country that he had helped to bring into being and he marveled at how much had changed since he had fought beside george washington more than forty years before.
he was greeted by adoring crowds in places that had been unsettled or beyond the nations borders four decades earlier.
besides covering the eastern seaboard lafayette went west to new orleans then up the mississippi and ohio rivers by steamboat.
he thus sampled a new mode of transportation that was helping to bring the far flung outposts and settlements of a much enlarged nation into regular contact with each other.
everywhere lafayette was greeted with patriotic oratory celebrating the liberty prosperity and progress of the new nation.
speaking before a joint session of both houses of congress the old hero responded in kind telling his hosts exactly what they wanted to hear.
he hailed the immense improvements and admirable communications that he had witnessed and declared himself deeply moved by all the grandeur and prosperity of these happy united states which.
reflect on every part of the world the light of a far superior political civilization americans had good reasons to make lafayettes return the occasion for patriotic celebration and reaffirmation.
since the war of 1812 the nation had been free from serious foreign threats to its independence and way of life.
it was growing rapidly in population size and wealth.
its republican form of government which many had considered a risky experiment at the time of its origin was apparently working well.
james monroe the current president had proclaimed in his first inaugural address that the united states have flourished beyond example.
their citizens individually have been happy and the nation prosperous expansion to the great lakes and beyond the sources of the great rivers which communicate through our whole interior meant that no country was ever happier with respect to its domain as for the government it was so near to perfection that in respect to it we have no essential improvement to make eneath the optimism and self confidence however lay undercurrents of doubt and anxiety about the future.
the visit of the aged lafayette signified the passing of the founders.
less than a year after his departure jefferson and adams died b expansion and migration an exuberant crowd celebrates in the square outside independence hall in this painting election day in philadelphia 1815 by german american artist john lewis krimmel.
source courtesy the winterthur library printed book and periodical collection.
within hours of each other on the fiftieth anniversary of the declaration of independence leaving madison as the last of the great founders.
some americans asked whether the founders example of republican virtue and self sacrifice could be maintained in an increasingly prosperous and materialistic society.
in fact many believed public virtue had declined since the heroic age of the revolution.
and what about the place of black slavery in a perfect democratic republic.
lafayette himself noted with disappointment that the united states had not yet extended freedom to southern slaves.
but the peace following the war of 1812 did open the way for a great surge of nation building.
as new lands were acquired or opened up for settlement hordes of pioneers often rushed in.
improvements in transportation soon gave many of them access to distant markets and advances in the processing of raw materials led to the first stirrings of industrialization.
politicians looked for ways to encourage the process of growth and expansion and an active judiciary handed down decisions that served to promote economic development and assert the priority of national over state and local interests.
to guarantee the peace and security essential for internal progress statesmen proclaimed a foreign policy designed to insulate america from external involvements.
a new nation of great potential wealth and power was emerging.
expansion and migration what key forces drove american expansion westward during this period.
the peace concluded with great britain in 1815 allowed americans to shift their attention from europe and the atlantic to the vast lands of north america.
the rush bagot agreement 1817 limited u s and british naval forces on the great lakes and lake champlain and guaranteed that the british would never try to invade the united states from canada and that the united states would never try to take canada from the british.
the anglo american convention of 1818 set the border between the lands of the louisiana purchase and canada at the 49th parallel and provided for joint u s and british occupation of oregon.
meanwhile in the lower mississippi valley the former french colony of louisiana had been admitted as a state in 1812 and chapter 9 nation building and nationalism a thriving settlement existed around natchez in the mississippi territory.
elsewhere in the trans appalachian west white settlement was sparse and much land remained in indian hands.
u s citizens eager to expand into lands held by indian nations as well as spain used diplomacy military action force and fraud to open lands for u s settlement and westward migration.
general andrew jackson provided such an opening.
in 1816 u s troops first crossed into east florida in pursuit of hostile seminole indians.
this raid touched off a wider conflict and after taking command in late 1817 jackson went beyond his official orders and occupied east florida in april and may of 1818.
this operation became known as the first seminole war.
except for adams all the members of monroes cabinet privately condemned this aggressive action so did a report of the house of representatives.
but no disciplinary action was taken mainly because public opinion rallied behind the hero of new orleans.
in november 1818 secretary adams informed the spanish government that the united states had acted in self defense and that further conflict would be avoided only if east florida were ceded to the united states.
the madrid government weakened by latin american revolutions and the breaking up of its empire was in no position to resist american bullying.
as part of the adams ons treaty signed on february 22 1819 spain relinquished florida to the united states.
in return the united states assumed 5 million of the financial claims of american citizens against spain.
extending the boundaries postwar expansionists turned their attention first to spanish holdings which included florida and much of the present day american west.
their first goal was to obtain florida from spain.
between 1810 and 1812 the united states had annexed part of what is now alabama claiming that it was part of the louisiana purchase.
the remainder known as east florida became a prime object of territorial ambition for president james monroe and his energetic secretary of state john quincy adams.
adams was looking for opportunities to confront spain for control of the region and put into effect his grand design for continental expansion.
north america 1819 treaties with britain following the war of 1812 setting the border between the united states and canada british north america made this border the longest unfortified boundary line in the world.
greenland russian america danish settlements oregon country joint u s british occupation british north america con ven tion a tre dam aty s o lin ns e 1 of 1 st pierre and miquelon fr.
united states s new pa c i f i c ocean at l a n t i c ocean n pai gulf of mexico santo domingo cuba belize jamaica puerto rico sp.
guadeloupe fr.
haiti indep.
1804 martinique fr.
united states british possessions spanish possessions russian possessions 1000 miles 1000 kilometers gran colombia brazil port.
expansion and migration a strong believer that the united states had a continental destiny adams also used the confrontation over florida to make spain give up its claim to the pacific coast north of california thus opening a path for future american expansion.
taking advantage of spains desire to keep its title to texas a portion of which the united states had previously claimed as part of the louisiana purchase adams induced the spanish minister luis de ons to agree to the creation of a new boundary between american and spanish territory that ran north of texas but extended all the way to the pacific.
great britain and russia still had competing claims to the pacific northwest but the united states was now in a better position to acquire frontage on a second ocean.
interest in exploitation of the far west continued to grow during the second and third decades of the nineteenth century.
in 1811 a new york merchant john jacob astor founded the fur trading post of astoria at the mouth of the columbia river in the oregon country.
astors american fur company operated out of st louis in the 1820s and 1830s with fur traders working their way up the missouri to the northern rockies and beyond.
first they limited themselves to trading for furs with the indians but later businesses such as the rocky mountain fur company founded in 1822 relied on trappers or mountain men who went after game on their own and sold the furs to agents of the company at an annual meeting or rendezvous these colorful characters who included such legendary figures as jedediah smith jim bridger kit carson and jim beckwourth one of the many african americans who contributed to the opening of the west as fur traders scouts or settlers accomplished prodigious feats of survival under harsh natural conditions.
following indian trails they explored many parts of the rockies and the great basin.
many of them married indian women and assimilated much of the culture and technology of the native americans.
the mountain men were portrayed in american literature and popular mythology as exemplars of a romantic ideal of lonely self reliance in harmony with unspoiled nature.
the far west however remained beyond american dreams of agrarian expansion.
the real focus of attention between 1815 and the 1840s was the nearer west the rich agricultural lands between the appalachians and the mississippi that were inhabited by numerous indian tribes.
native american societies under pressure five indian nations with a combined population of nearly sixty thousand occupied much of what later became mississippi alabama georgia and florida.
these nations the cherokee chickasaw choctaw creek and seminole became known as the five civilized tribes because by 1815 they had adopted many of the features of the surrounding white southern society an agricultural economy a republican form of government and the institution of slavery.
though these southeastern indians consciously strategized to respond to jeffersonian exhortations toward civilization and the promise of citizenship that came with it between 1815 and 1833 it became increasingly clear that most white americans were not interested in incorporating them into u s society whether as nations or as individuals.
the five nations varied in their responses to white encroachment on their lands.
so called mixed blood leaders such as john ross convinced the cherokee to adopt a strategy of accommodation to increase their chances of survival the creek and seminole by contrast took up arms in resistance.
the cherokee were the largest of the five nations.
traditional cherokee society had combined hunting by men and subsistence farming by women.
in the early nineteenth century the shift to a more agrarian market based economy led to an erosion of the traditional matrilineal kinship system in which a person belonged to his mothers clan.
the new order replaced matrilineal inheritance with the u s system of patriarchy in which fathers headed the household and property passed from father to son.
an emphasis on the nuclear family with the husband as producer and the wife as domestic caretaker diminished the role of the clan.
the shift toward agriculture also helped introduce americanstyle slavery to cherokee society.
as the cherokee adopted plantation style agriculture they also began to adopt white attitudes toward blacks.
by the time of indian removal a few cherokeeowned plantations with hundreds of slaves and there were more than fifteen hundred slaves in the cherokee nation.
discrimination against africans in all five nations grew under pressure of contact with whites.
beginning in the 1820s the cherokee council adopted rules regulating slaves.
whereas a few africans in the eighteenth century had been adopted into the tribe and become citizens under the new laws slaves could not intermarry with cherokee citizens engage in trade or barter or hold property.
in an effort to head off encroachments by southern states the cherokee attempted to centralize power in a republican government in the 1820s as well.
cherokee historian william mcloughlin has described a series of eleven laws passed between 1820 and 1823.
constituted a political revolution in the structure of cherokee government.
under these laws the national council created a bicameral legislature a district and superior court system an elective system of representation by geographical district rather than by town and a salaried government bureaucracy this process culminated in the 1827 adoption of a formal written constitution modeled on the u s constitution.
at the same time a renaissance of cherokee culture was spurred by sequoyahs invention of a written cherokee language in 1821 1822.
while the alphabet was complicated and lacked punctuation sequoyan provided the cherokee a new means of selfexpression and a reinvigorated sense of cherokee identity.
the first american indian newspaper the cherokee phoenix was published in sequoyan in 1828.
by the time of indian removal cherokee leaders like john ross and elias boudinot could point with pride to high levels of cherokee acculturation education and economic success at american style civilization the seminole nation the smallest of the five nations presents perhaps the starkest cultural contrast to the cherokee both because the seminole reacted to pressure from white settlers with armed resistance rather than accommodation and because their multicultural history gave them a very different relationship to slavery.
the seminole nation in florida formed after the european conquest of america from the disparate groups of creek indians migrating from georgia and alabama in the wake of war and disease who mingled with the remnants of native floridians to form the new chapter 9 nation building and nationalism tribe.
at the same time spain had granted asylum to runaway african american slaves from the carolinas who created maroon communities in florida striking up alliances with the seminole to ward off slave catchers.
african americans and native americans intermingled and by the late eighteenth century some african americans were already known as seminole negroes or estelusti the word seminole itself meant wild or runaway in the creek language.
although the seminoles adopted african slavery at some point in the first decades of the nineteenth century it was very different from slavery as it existed among whites or even among the cherokee and creek.
seminole slaves lived in separate towns planted and cultivated fields in common owned large herds of livestock and paid their owners only an annual tribute similar to that paid by seminole towns to the micco or chief.
during the 1820s and 1830s the estelusti and the seminoles were allies in a series of wars against the americans however their alliance came under increasing strain.
in 1823 six seminole leaders including one of some african ancestry known as mulatto king signed the treaty of moultrie creek removing the tribe from their fertile lands in northern florida to swampland south of tampa.
the signers took bribes and believed unfulfilled promises that they would be allowed to stay on their lands.
another provision of the treaty required the seminoles to return runaway slaves and turn away any future runaways.
during the 1830s black seminoles were some of the staunchest opponents of indian removal and played read the document.
