chapter 10 democracyinthe age of andrew jackson 273 nullification a constitutional doctrine holding that a state has a legal right to declare a national law null and void within its borders.
martin van buren architect of jacksons 1828 campaign for president became secretary of state.
but jacksons other cabinet officers were less talented and jackson often ignored them.
instead he surrounded himself with informal advisors who came to be known as his kitchen cabinet longtime friends and advisors who worked closely with the president particularly to accomplish removing indians from wanted lands revoking the charter for the second bank of the united states and preserving the authority of the federal union against radical supporters of states rights.
jackson s presidential agenda jackson had several interlocking but not entirely consistent priorities.
he distrusted government at all levels but had unbounded trust in his own ability to govern.
he meant not only to be an activist president john quincy adams and other presidents had also followed strong agendas but also to make the presidency the center of the american government.
he would not defer to congress in ways that all of his predecessors had done.
he vetoed more congressional bills than all of his predecessors combined and made it clear that congress would have to reckon with him.
as he had announced before the election he was determined to force the indians who lived in northern georgia alabama and mississippi to move west to clear the land for white settlement.
although he supported a modified tariff he meant to scale back the size of the federal government.
he hated the bank of the united states and was determined to destroy it.
he saw its charter as an inappropriate use of federal authority and was convinced probably rightly that the bank had contributed to adamss campaign.
and perhaps most of all jackson was determined to preserve the union at a time when southern leaders were insisting that each state had the right of nullification the right to declare that specific federal legislation was null and void within its borders.
jackson was a slaveholder and a defender of slavery but if slaveholders threatened national unity they would have to deal with him.
in his two terms as president jackson realized most of his goals despite fierce opposition.
he established permanent precedents for presidential authority.
he was a hero to some and an evil genius to others.
for most historians he remains one of the most complex american leaders expanding the roles of poor and working class whites in the political process and of the presidency in american life while reducing the rights of indians slaves federal employees bankers and indeed anyone who disagreed with him.
five civilized tribes the cherokees chickasaws choctaws creeks and seminoles who had established treaty agreements with the united states in the late 1700s or early 1800s lived in peace with their neighbors and adopted more of the ways of the whites than most native americans.
the indian removal act the trail of tears and the settlement of oklahoma for some white americans indian removal jacksons policy of forcing the cherokee nation and other tribes to move to reservations in distant oklahoma or indian territory as it was called was a great achievement.
for the tribes caught in jacksons web the policy led to war within the tribes terrible losses resistance resignation and reinvention.
their white supporters though passionate were ineffective against jackson.
known as the five civilized tribes the cherokees chickasaws choctaws creeks and seminoles had for generations lived in the region known as the old southwest georgia alabama mississippi as well as in arkansas and florida.
these tribes had traded and fought with spanish french and english settlers and had sold or ceded much of their land but based on treaties with the u s government they still owned huge tracts of land in the heart of the cotton growing south.
far more than the indians of the northwest or the west the five civilized tribes had adopted many white ways and customs intermarried with whites and created a unique culture based on farming and trade.
of the five tribes the cherokee nation had the most sophisticated political economic and cultural institutions.
stretching over northwest georgia alabama tennessee and north carolina 274 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 the cherokees expected to be treated as a sovereign country.
the cherokees who had supported the british during the revolution had signed a treaty with the new united states government in 1785 and never again waged war against the united states.
they supported jackson in his battle with the creeks and lived at peace with their neighbors but that did them little good once jackson determined his course of action.
after making peace with the united states in the 1780s the cherokees took well to the european style of communication and farming.
in 1821 a cherokee warrior sequoyah intrigued by what he called the markings of written english invented an 86 character alphabet that represented the syllables of spoken cherokee.
the new alphabet caught on quickly not only in handwritten form but also in typeface for printing.
the cherokee phoenix published in both english and cherokee became an important means of communication.
sequoyah who never learned english created a similar alphabet for the choctaw language.
his achievement to invent a written language while being illiterate in all languages had never before been done.
in addition the cherokees set up a large and effective trading network with other tribes and the white community.
in 1827 they adopted a written constitution for the cherokee republic.
beginning in the 1790s christian missionaries came to live among the cherokees.
the cherokees welcomed them though most never became christians.
using sequoyahs alphabet the missionaries translated the bible into cherokee and later became some of the most heroic defenders of cherokee rights.
cherokees also cultivated cotton as their white neighbors did and some owned african slaves.
an 1825 census counted 13 563 cherokees 220 whites some of whom were married to cherokees and 1 277 african slaves in the cherokee republic.
of all the american indian tribes the cherokees were the model of assimilation that presidents from washington to jefferson claimed to want.
but white settlers and president jackson decided to ignore the assimilation.
they wanted the land.
georgia took the lead in seizing indian land.
in 1824 governor george troup announced that he was ending treaty rights for the cherokee and creek tribes.
when president john quincy adams opposed him citing the tribes treaties with the u s government troup and his successor john forsyth campaigned for jackson in 1828.
in december 1828 the georgia legislature declared that starting in june 1830 georgia state laws would extend to all parts of the cherokee republic despite federal treaty agreements to the contrary.
white georgians then began moving onto cherokee lands and jackson withdrew u s troops that had been protecting the cherokees.
it was in this context that jackson addressed congress advocating an indian removal act to protect the cherokees from georgia laws.
the president gave the tribes what seemed like a choice voluntarily move west to new lands where their independence would be honored or choose to stay where they were.
but if they chose to stay they would be subject to the laws of georgia laws that said indians could not vote own property testify against a white person in court or obtain credit.
it was not much of a choice as jackson himself said in private.
the land that the government offered the tribes was completely unfamiliar to the tribes of the old southwest.
most people thought of it as simply a desert where farming would be impossible.
indian territory which eventually became the state of oklahoma was a portion of the louisiana purchase just north of texas.
the land was not empty though the government tended to treat it that way.
some of the plains tribes the wichitas kiowas kiowa apaches and especially osages had lived there for generations.
some tribes from the ohio illinois area shawnees delawares lenapes miamis kickapoos sacs and fox had been relocated to that territory after defeats by the u s army.
in addition there were a few white settlers and some slaves and former slaves seeking refuge in the region.
nevertheless under jacksons plan the government was now offering the territory to the cherokees and others of the five civilized tribes see map 10 1.
while cherokee creek chickasaw choctaw and seminole leaders had long feared just such a move and had been protesting against it many whites now rallied to their side.
in congress and the national press indian removal became a major fight.
chapter 10 sequoyah was intrigued with the way reading seemed to give whites power.
he created an alphabet for the cherokee language and later a similar one for the choctaw language.
indian removal act legislation passed by congress in 1830 which provided funds for removing and resettling eastern indians in the west.
it granted the president the authority to use force if necessary and resulted in the involuntary transfer of thousands of native americans to new homes in oklahoma.
democracy in the age of andrew jackson 275 10 1 land granted to indians west of the mississippi river date and route of removal map 10 1 indian removal.
while indian removal began with the forced relocation of the sac and fox tribes from illinois and iowa by far the largest relocation of tribes took place when the five indian nations who were living in large territories in georgia alabama florida and mississippi were forced far to the west to the newly created indian territory.
catharine beecher a reformer associated with many causes organized women across the northwest to defend indian rights and flooded congress with petitions.
missionaries campaigned against the bill so vigorously that georgia sentenced two of them to prison at hard labor for refusing to abandon the indians.
in the senate theodore frelinghuysen of new jersey long a supporter of protestant missionaries and reform efforts led the opposition to the indian removal bill.
frelinghuysen insisted that the government was bound by its treaties and that if need be should use the u s army to force georgia to retract its claims to the indian lands.
henry clay who had not previously spoken in favor of indian rights joined the antiremoval forces.
in the end the removal bill passed the senate 28 to 19 but passed the house by only a 102 98 vote.
among those voting no was congressman davy crockett of tennessee who called the bill oppression with a vengeance but jackson signed the law may 28 1830 making half a century of treaties void.
the tribes would have to move.
while all of the tribes resisted negotiated and ultimately had to surrender the cherokees went to u s courts to assert their claims to their lands.
initially 276 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 10 1 american voices perspectives on indian removal 1818 1829 10 j mericans responded differently to president andrew jackson s plan to remove american indians from the old southwest to reservations west of the mississippi.
most whites in georgia and many elsewhere applauded.
in the north many opposed indian removal and catharine beecher organized a petition campaign in which women petitioned congress to stop what they saw as an immoral process.
not surprisingly most cherokees t like the other tribes involved also opposed removal.
writing a s decade before jackson s speech cherokee women demanded that the tribal elders not cede land to the united states.
the following i three documents represent three different american voices.
andrew jackson message to congress december8 1829 statements of residents of steubenville ohio february 15 1830 cherokee women s petition june 30 1818 the condition and ulterior destiny of the indian tribes within the limits of some of our states have become objects of much interest and importance.
it has long been the policy of government to introduce among them the arts of civilization in the hope of gradually reclaiming them from a wandering life.
this policy has however been coupled with another wholly incompatible with its success.
professing a desire to civilize and settle them we have at the same time lost no opportunity to purchase their lands and thrust them farther into the wilderness.
by this means they have not only been kept in a wandering state but been led to look upon us as unjust and indifferent to their fate our ancestors found them the uncontrolled possessors of these vast regions.
by persuasion and force they have been made to retire from river to river and from mountain to mountain until some of the tribes have become extinct and others have left but remnants to preserve for awhile their once terrible names.
humanity and national honor demand that every effort should be made to avert so great a calamity as a means of effecting this end 1 suggest for your consideration the propriety of setting apart an ample district west of the mississippi and without the limits of any state or territory now formed to be guaranteed to the indian tribes as long as they shall occupy it each tribe having a distinct control over the portion designated for its use.
there they may be secured in the enjoyment of governments of their own choice subject to no other control from the united states than such as may be necessary to preserve peace on the frontier and between the several tribes that your memorialists are deeply impressed with the belief that the present crisis in the affairs of the indian nations calls loudly on all who can feel for the woes of humanity.
it is readily acknowledged that the wise and venerated founders of our country s free institutions have committed the powers of government to those whom nature and reason declare the best fitted to exercise them and your memorialists would sincerely deprecate any presumptuous interference on the part of their own sex with the ordinary political affairs of the country as wholly unbecoming the character of american females yet all admit that there are times when duty and affection call on us to advise and persuade as well as to cheer or to console.
and if we approach the public representatives of our husbands and brothers only in the humble character of suppliants in the cause of mercy and humanity may we not hope that even the small voice of female sympathy will be heard.
in despite of the undoubted natural right which the indians have to the land of their forefathers and in the face of solemn treaties pledging the faith of the nation for their secure possession of those lands it is intended we are told to force them from their native soil and to compel them to seek new homes in a distant and dreary wilderness.
to you then as the constitutional protectors of the indians within our territory and as the peculiar guardians of our national character and our country s welfare we solemnly and earnestly appeal to save this remnant of a much injured people from annihilation to shield our country from the curses denounced on the cruel and ungrateful and to shelter the american character from lasting dishonor.
we have called a meeting among ourselves to consult on the different points now before the council relating to our national affairs.
we have heard with painful feelings that the bounds of the land we now possess are to be drawn into very narrow limits.
the land was given to us by the great spirit above as our common right to raise our children upon to make support for our rising generations.
we therefore humbly petition our beloved children the head men warriors to hold out to the last in support of our common right as the cherokee nation have been the first settlers of this land we therefore claim the right to the soil.
we well remember that our country was formerly very extensive but by repeated sales it has become circumscribed to the very narrow limits we have at present.
our father the president advised us to become farmers to manufacture our own clothes to have our children instructed.
to this advice we have attended in everything as far as we were able.
now the thought of being compelled to remove to the other side of the mississippi is dreadful to us because it appears to us that we by this removal shall be brought to a savage state again for we have by the endeavor of our father the president become too much enlightened to throw aside the privileges of a civilized life.
we therefore unanimously join in our meeting to hold our country in common as hitherto.
some of our children have become christians.
we have missionary schools among us.
we have h e ard the gospel in our nation.
we have become civilized enlightened are in hopes that in a few years our nation will be prepared for instruction in other branches of sciences arts which are both useful necessary in civilized society sources andrew jackson annual message to congress december 8 1829 messages and papers of the presidents ed.
j d richardson national archives and records administration 1896 ii 456 459 dec 8 1829 ladies of steubenville ohio petition against indian removal february 15 1830 ellen skinner women and the national experience sources in women s history third edition boston prentice hall 1996 pp 42 143 petition of nancy ward and other cherokee women to the united states congress 19 818 in karen l kilcup editor native american women s writings 1800 1924 an anthology malden ma blackwell 2000 pp.
continued chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 277 y r b 10 1 10 j 103 continued thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how did jackson attempt to argue that indian removal was in the indians best interest.
how might opponents of indian removal have responded to his position.
contextualization how might the fact that two petitions in opposition to indian removal were written by women have affected their reception.
how might it have helped the authors cause.
how might it have hurt.
contextualization the cherokee women say that they hope that soon their people will be prepared for instruction in other branches of sciences arts which are both useful necessary in civilized society.
what does this statement mean.
what do you think is the strongest reason they give for asking not to be moved west.
in cherokee nation v georgia 1831 and worcester v georgia 1832 the u s supreme court under chief justice john marshall ruled that the cherokees were a domestic dependent nation and could not be forced by the state of georgia to give up land that treaty rights agreed to by the united states government had given them.
jackson simply ignored the court.
jackson is supposed to have said john marshall has made his decision now let him enforce it no one actually heard jackson say that but jackson controlled the army and he was not about to enforce the courts decision.
no other president before or after ignored the supreme court in that way.
the indian removal act and the implementation that followed was a disaster for the five civilized tribes.
the government had seized their homes and offered in return land that was thousands of miles away and completely foreign to them.
moreover the tribes were divided about how to respond.
while most of the country was focused on the cherokees jackson sent secretary of war john eaton to negotiate with the choctaws.
by excluding those he considered troublemakers and bribing others eaton got a small group of choctaw leaders to agree for the tribe to leave its homes in mississippi but most in the tribe considered those who negotiated the removal treaty to be nonrepresentative and refused to abide by it.
the federal troops enforced it anyway.
the french observer alexis de tocqueville who became famous for his analysis of american life in the jacksonian era described the day the choctaws crossed the mississippi river on their way west at the end of 1831 1 stood on the left bank of the mississippi it was then the depths of winter and the cold was exceptionally severe the snow had frozen hard on the ground the river was drifting with huge ice floes.
the indians had brought their families with them and hauled along the wounded the sick newborn babies and old men on the verge of death.
they had neither tents nor wagons i saw them embark to cross the wide river and that solemn spectacle will never be erased from my memory.
not a sob or complaint could be heard they stood silent.
their afflictions were of long standing and they considered them beyond remedy.
already the indians had all embarked upon the boat which was to carry them their dogs still remained upon the bank.
when these animals finally saw they were being left behind forever they raised all together a terrible howl and plunged into the icy mississippi to swim after their masters.
within the decade most members of the cherokee chickasaw creek tribes had made the same crossing.
only the seminoles avoided their fate.
alabama and mississippi followed georgias lead and voted to end tribal rights for the creeks.
in march 1832 the creeks surrendered all land east of the mississippi and most of them moved to oklahoma.
those that took advantage of a promise that they could stay in the east as private citizens soon lost their lands.
some of the remain ing creeks began violent resistance to state and federal authorities but the so called second creek war of 1836 37 ended quickly when jacksons secretary of war ordered federal troops to expel all creeks from lands east of the mississippi.
the creeks who 8 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 10 1 were deported after the second creek war suffered higher mortality rates than the cherokees perhaps half lived to see oklahoma.
among the cherokees a civil conflict broke out about how to respond to the demand that they move to oklahoma.
principal chief john ross and most of the cherokees were determined to fight for their lands.
a minority some of whom were among the rising middle class and slave holders within the tribe decided that a compromise was better than forced expulsion.
john ridge and elias boudinot publisher of the cherokee phoenix signed the treaty of new echota in december 1835 trading land in georgia for new land in oklahoma and 5 million.
the u s senate barely ratified the treaty after daniel webster and henry clay pointed out how fraudulent it was since the majority of the cherokees opposed it.
after ridge and boudinot and their followers departed for oklahoma or indian territory as it was called the u s army put most of the remaining members of the tribe in detention camps.
a few were able to flee into the wilderness and remained in their homelands but without their land.
others fought but in the end chief ross and general winfield scott negotiated a settlement to avoid further bloodshed.
even though jackson had left office by then his successor martin van buren was determined to enforce his predecessors policy.
from the detention camps soldiers forced 12 000 cherokee men women and children to march west in the fall and winter of 1838 39.
it was an especially cold winter and a terrible time to make a march of over a thousand miles into the unknown.
the cherokees never had enough food blankets or warm clothing and as they moved in large groups disease and exposure took a terrible toll.
on what became known as the trail of tears perhaps a quarter to a third of the marchers including rosss wife died before they reached oklahoma.
seeing what was happening to other tribes the chickasaws moved west quickly on their own.
the seminoles of florida territory had no intention of moving however.
although a minority of seminoles agreed to move most stayed in florida disappearing into the swamps and hiding places they knew well.
when soldiers tried to force them to move the seminoles annihilated them.
the second seminole war was not resolved until 1842.
fewer seminoles than members of any other tribe ever moved to oklahoma.
102 103 trail of tears the forced march in 1838 of the cherokee indians from their homelands in georgia to the indian territory in the west thousands of cherokees died along the way.
cherokee men women and children and their u s army guards rode or walked on the long march from their ancestral homes across a thousand miles to new territory in oklahoma.
chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 279 10 1 10 j 10 j in the meantime the sac and fox tribes which had already been exiled to the indian territory as a result of earlier removals from the old northwest were not too happy about life there.
in april 1832 a chief named black hawk led 1 000 2 000 sac and fox people back east across the mississippi closer to their old homelands.
the sac and fox indians were moving mostly to escape from hostile sioux groups on the great plains and iowa territory.
the illinois governor took the tribes move into illinois as an attack called out the militia and asked for federal troops.
in black hawk s war federal and state troops on the east side of the mississippi and sioux warriors on the west virtually annihilated the fox and sac tribes to the delight of whites who were happy to see these tribes completely out of their way.
in fact jackson had meant to use the removal law for georgia to force all indians east of the mississippi out of their lands.
when the forced exile finally reached its goal by the end of the 1830s only the iroquois in new york a few cherokees in north carolina and scattered small communities remained legally east of the mississippi although others like the seminoles simply melted into the woods and could not be found by the government.
all in all 46 000 indians were forcibly removed during the jackson administration and subsequent administrations removed as many more.
the cherokees and other tribes tend to disappear from the history books after the trail of tears.
but the cherokees choctaws and creeks were resilient people.
forced onto an inhospitable and alien land they sought to reestablish their communities and culture.
to a surprising degree they succeeded.
as the last cherokees arrived in indian territory in 1839 the tribe adopted a new constitution and established tahlequah as their capital.
in 1844 they began publishing the cherokee advocate in both english and cherokee.
they also set up a school system with elementary schools as well as higher education institutes and seminaries to prepare teachers european and cherokee for their schools.
in the u s civil war parts of the tribe favored each side and the divided tribe fought internally.
but again they rebuilt after the war.
today there are some 200 000 to 300 000 cherokees of whom 70 000 live within the cherokee nation in northeast oklahoma and the rest are scattered around the country making them the largest federally recognized tribe today.
jacksonian economics the war on the bank of the united states the second bank of the united states a national bank chartered by congress in 1816 with extensive regulatory powers over currency and credit.
in his campaign for president jackson pledged to do something about the bank of the united states which he and many others blamed for the panic of 1819 and saw as an elitist threat to a democracy.
the second bank of the united states was patterned on the first bank of the united states that had been a cornerstone of alexander hamiltons economic plans for the new nation see chapter 7.
the first bank had been chartered in 1791 for a period of 20 years.
in 1811 the jeffersonian republicans refused to extend its charter and it closed.
henceforth it seemed state banks would issue currency in the form of banknotes backed by gold or silver federal funds would be deposited in state banks and the federal government like everyone else would borrow money from these banks when needed.
then came the war of 1812.
as the war of 1812 threatened to bankrupt the country some of the nations richest men led by john jacob astor met with treasury secretary albert gallatin and offered to loan the nation the funds it needed if the bank of the united states were rechartered.
they believed that only a national bank could build long term prosperity and ensure that their loan would be repaid.
as a result a charter for a second bank of the united states passed congress in 1816.
the madison monroe and john quincy adams administrations were strong advocates for a unified national market economy that could foster prosperity and stability and they had used the bank to support that economy.
jackson wanted prosperity but he disagreed about the governments role in the nations economy.
the second bank of the united states was never without enemies.
the constitution never mentioned a bank and strict constructionists who thought the government 2i crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 10 1 should limit its role to things specifically included in the constitution always opposed it.
the bank was also seen by many as a way to expand the power of the commercial elite based in new york and philadelphia and thus was seen as an enemy by farmers whether they lived on small out of the way farms in the still very rural country or on the bourgeoning plantations of the cotton growing south.
in the opinion of many farmers whether small or large scale jackson was the defender of their interests against threatening commercial elites.
particularly since the supreme courts ruling on mcculloch v maryland that congress had the right to charter a bank if it thought it was in the national interest popular support for the bank had weakened see chapter 9.
many farmers did not believe the national interest that congress saw was in their interests.
during his first months in office jackson did not say a lot about the bank but in december 1829 he told congress both the constitutionality and the expediency of the law creating this bank are well questioned i t has failed in the great end of establishing a uniform and sound currency in spite of jacksons challenge the banks charter ensured that it could continue for 7 more years but jackson had fired a warning shot.
before long he would do much more.
many of jacksons strongest supporters disagreed with him about the bank.
the country was prospering credit was solid and the soundness of the currency despite jacksons words seemed secure.
the federal banks policies of calling in loans may have helped start the panic of 1819 but nicholas biddle the banks president had done as much as anyone in the country to end the hard times after the panic of 1819.
nevertheless jackson was a populist intending to represent the common people politically.
and although the nations elite supported the bank many citizens did not like any banks.
in a meeting at the white house he told biddle i do not dislike your bank any more than all banks but the federal bank was the only one jackson could do something about.
his attack on the bank was as emotional as it was calculated.
for the next few years biddle led the bank in continued efforts to stabilize the currency help state banks through difficult times and expand the nations credit something that both northern mill owners and western land promoters liked.
the bank also concentrated wealth and power within the economy in the hands of a commercial elite and strengthened the nations unified market economy based on currency and trade.
that uneven concentration of wealth and power was something jackson would not forgive.
in 1832 jackson launched his campaign for reelection.
for the first time something resembling modern political parties played a role.
under jacksons leadership the democratic republicans had become simply the democrats.
they easily nominated jackson for a second term and his handpicked running mate secretary of state martin van buren for vice president.
the opposition to jackson sometimes known as the national republicans because they had supported a strong national government now became known simply as the whig party.
they nominated henry clay for president and john sergeant of pennsylvania as vice president.
unlike the jacksonian democrats the whig party was committed to alexander hamiltons vision of a federal government that took an active role in shaping the economy so they strongly supported the second bank of the united states.
the whig nominee henry clay urged biddle to secure the banks future as well as that of the pro bank whig party.
if biddle were to request an extension of the banks charter even though the original charter would not expire for 4 years clay would promise to make the bank an issue in the campaign.
either biddle would win the recharter fight immediately or he would provide clay a weapon with which to attack jackson.
biddle who was astute at counting votes in congress took clays advice and applied for a new charter.
the charter bill passed both houses of congress easily.
but jackson vetoed it.
he told martin van buren who was now his running mate the bank mr van buren is trying to kill me but i will kill it 102 103 chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 281 by the time jackson became president political cartoons were becoming popular including this one that shows jackson using his order to withdraw government funds to topple the pillars of the bank as nicholas biddle the bank s devil president and investors run.
in november 1832 jackson defeated clay 219 electoral votes to 49.
congress refused to override the presidents veto.
biddle still tried to rally support in congress.
he made arguments offered congressmen loans and ensured that the banks lead attorney was elected to congress from philadelphia.
when massachusetts senator daniel webster complained that his annual retainer from the bank had not been refreshed as usual biddle promised quick action.
biddle also loosened credit across the country ensuring short term prosperity but provoking an eventual reckoning.
he was desperate to save his bank.
jackson then made his move.
he ordered his treasury secretary to remove federal deposits from the bank and place them in 23 state banks that he selected banks that were quickly called jacksons pet banks by his opponents.
the move was meant to destroy the second bank of the united states.
but the law said that federal funds could be withdrawn only if there was clear evidence that the deposits were not secure.
even jacksons handpicked auditors could find no such evidence.
when treasury secretary mclane refused the presidents order to move the funds jackson promoted him to secretary of state.
when another treasury secretary also refused jackson fired him.
finally jacksons third treasury secretary roger b taney who also had doubts about the legality of removing federal funds hit on a compromise.
he would not actually remove federal deposits from the bank but he would do something just as effective to undermine the bank.
going forward taney regularly paid the governments bills with funds from the accounts that the government had in the bank of the united states but he stopped depositing new federal revenue in the bank.
instead the governments income went to the state banks.
it was a mortal blow.
the federal governments accounts slowly shrunk to zero and the second bank of the united states was dead though it took a few years to die.
led by clay the senate censured the president saying he had assumed upon himself authority and power not conferred by the constitution and laws but the censure did not hurt jackson or save the bank.
biddles politically motivated loans and payments sapped support for the bank.
the second bank of the united states became a wholly private bank and soon went bankrupt.
the combination of inflation caused by biddles too easy credit and the loss of a national bank that could stabilize the currency caused financial distress.
by 1837 just after jackson left office the nation experienced another financial panic and there was no national entity to help stabilize the economy.
nevertheless efforts to revive the bank failed.
for decades all of the paper currency in circulation would be issued by state banks some of less than solid credit.
only in 1863 during the civil war did the u s government again issue paper money and not until the creation of the federal reserve bank in 1913 did the nation again have a central bank to regulate the economy.
the tariff the union and the nullification crisis the battle over the tariff began as a modest disagreement over federal tax policy.
before it ended that battle was the greatest constitutional crisis the nation faced between the adoption of the constitution in 1789 and the civil war in 1861.
to a degree it was a personal battle between two proud and stubborn men andrew jackson and john c calhoun.
in another sense it was a battle about the fundamental nature of the u s government.
andrew jackson vs john c calhoun john c calhoun of south carolina had been elected vice president when john quincy adams won the presidency in 1824 irt iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 10 1 and he was reelected to that office in 1828 to serve with jackson.
because separate ballots were cast for presidential and vice presidential candidates after the passage of the twelfth amendment in 1804 and before the rise of party nominating conventions in 1832 no one thought it strange that two leaders as hostile to each other as adams and jackson would have the same vice president.
as a congressman and as secretary of war under president james monroe calhoun had been a nationalist who favored internal improvements as much as henry clay or john quincy adams.
he sought a strong national government and had supported the bank of the united states.
although his views differed from jacksons on some issues everyone expected calhoun and jackson as proslavery southerners to have a close partnership.
it was not to be.
one of the first wedges between them was purely social.
jacksons secretary of war john eaton had married the recently widowed margaret oneale timberlake but rumors swirled that she was a widow only because her first husband a naval officer had committed suicide when he learned of her long adulterous relationship with eaton.
jackson who had been deeply hurt by attacks on his own marriage defended the eatons.
others in washington led by mrs calhoun snubbed peggy eaton.
when emily donelson jacksons official white house hostess joined with mrs calhoun jackson temporarily banished her from the white house.
he never forgave the calhouns.
another reason for the growing split between jackson and calhoun centered on the fact that calhouns political beliefs were changing.
by 1828 calhoun who had previously advocated for a strong federal role in the life of the nation far stronger than anything jackson ever advocated was becoming the nations strongest defender of states rights against federal authority.
this new stance may have reflected an honest change of heart but it also served a political purpose.
regardless it guaranteed a clash with jackson since no matter how much jackson might have favored states rights in the past he would not tolerate any challenge to his authority as president.
many of the leaders in south carolina calhouns home state were becoming very fearful of the federal government and south carolina was developing the strongest anti federal stance in the union.
the south carolina radicals as they were called dominated state government.
they advocated the right of states to declare any federal law null and void or even to secede from the union.
the reason was clear south carolinians feared for the future of slavery more than people in any other state.
most residents of south carolina 54 percent were enslaved people of african descent.
in some rice growing regions of the state that figure was closer to 90 percent.
a wealthy but deeply fearful white elite governed these slaves and depended on their labor to generate continuing wealth.
in 1827 a pamphlet called the crisis or essays on the usurpations of the federal government argued that federal tariffs internal improvements and other federal activities were all means to enable the national government if it chose to abolish slavery.
as word spread that parliament was about to abolish slavery throughout the british empire in the 1830s the fear grew that congress might try to do the same.
calhoun had to decide whether he was with his states planter elite or against them.
he might have dreamed about becoming president someday but in the meantime he would have to win elections in south carolina.
he made his choice.
nullification and the future of the republic in 1828 calhoun wrote a pamphlet arguing that a state could declare a tariff or any other federal law null and void.
calhoun claimed that since state by state conventions had ratified the constitution state conventions not the supreme court had the authority to decide what was constitutional.
in his view once a state convention declared a federal law void other states would have to weigh in and only a new amendment to the constitution could force the law on the dissenting state.
calhoun did not advocate secession as many of the south carolina radicals did.
instead he hoped nullification in response to a tariff or to restrictions on slavery would make secession unnecessary.
he was thus more moderate than many south carolinians but that moderation would not continue to be the case.
j 10 2 i chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 283 l 10 1 io j j 10.
5 tariff of abominations a revised federal tariff or tax on imports that lowered the tax on cotton products but raised it on many of the products made in the mid atlantic states.
the tariff not the issue of slavery brought the issue of nullification to the fore.
the tariff or tax on imported goods had been the major source of financial support since the washington administration and it had been an issue in the 1828 election in which jackson defeated adams.
as jacksons supporters prepared for that election jacksons chief advisor martin van buren realized that even though he and jackson opposed a high tariff in part because they thought the federal government needed less money and in part because the tax raised the cost of foreign made consumer products in the united states the adams clay tariff was popular in many parts of the country because it protected local industries from foreign competition and because many people liked the internal improvements like roads and canals that the tariff helped finance.
adams and clay might want to fight the 1828 election on the issue of tariffs but van buren did not.
when the adams administration suggested a new tariff van buren and his congressional allies decided to reshape it rather than oppose it.
they knew they could not win new england in the next election so they did not hesitate to modify the proposed tariff by reducing the protection for the cotton produced by new england mill owners thus allowing foreign made cotton to be sold more cheaply than might otherwise have been the case.
they also raised tariffs to protect export of products like molasses hemp iron and wool which were produced in the mid atlantic states especially in pennsylvania to woo voters there by protecting their industries and jobs from foreign competition.
the result was a tariff that raised the price of products that many americans bought from foreign sources and that angered the cotton mill owners who originally wanted the tariff but now saw the protection of their industry disappear.
the new tariff also infuriated rural interests especially southern plantation owners who saw the cost of everything they needed go up while no protection was provided to the price of the goods they produced and sold on the international market.
the 1828 tariff came to be known as the tariff of abominations because it was so uneven and obviously unfair in the industries and regions it protected but it passed congress and set the stage for a confusing presidential campaign and the crisis that followed.
planters in south carolina saw the tariff as a terrible hardship and an unfair use of federal power.
to a degree they were right.
a tax on imports raised the cost of virtually everything the planters needed.
planters claimed that 40 out of every 100 bales of cotton they produced went to pay the tariff.
this claim was an exaggeration but the tariff may have raised the cost of living in south carolina by 20 percent.
in addition planters worried that a tariff on imported goods might cause other nations to purchase less cotton either in retaliation or because with americans buying less from abroad other nations might not have had the funds to purchase american grown cotton.
with their states economy hurting public opinion in south carolina supported nullification of the tariff.
the issue of states rights versus the rights of the federal government was argued on the floor of the u s senate in january 1830.
it was a debate that would be remembered for generations.
south carolina senator robert y hayne a protege of calhouns claimed that the federal government was making the north the winner and the south the loser and that the pro northern policy has invaded the state of south carolina is making war upon her citizens and endeavoring to overthrow her principles and institutions everyone understood that hayne was talking about the tariff but also the issue of slavery.
he was determined to defend the right of south carolina to nullify federal law and if still dissatisfied to secede from the union if congress ever made a move against slavery.
massachusetts senator daniel websters second reply to hayne staked out a different position.
webster pleaded for a strong federal union that no state should be allowed to undermine.
his closing line liberty and union now and forever one and inseparable became part of american lore.
hayne congratulated webster on winning the war of words though hayne never changed his mind.
14 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 in january 1830 as tensions were building over the right claimed by south carolina to nullify federal law massachusetts senator daniel webster shown here defended the priority of the federal government and the cause of the national union.
at first people wondered how the president would respond to the debate.
jackson had campaigned for reducing the federal role in peoples lives but he did not like to be crossed.
he was not elected to see the government over which he presided pushed aside.
as a military man he would not countenance mutiny.
as a politician he despised calhoun s self serving strategic maneuvering.
to the surprise of some jackson the president elected with virtually no support from new england embraced websters speech in spite of the fact that it was given by the senator from massachusetts.
four months after the hayne webster debate political leaders were asked to make toasts at a banquet.
looking directly at his vice president jackson offered a simple toast our union it must be preserved calhoun responded the union.
next to our liberty the most dear.
may we always remember that it can only be preserved by respecting the rights of the states it marked the final break between the two men.
nevertheless as strongly as jackson believed in asserting federal authority he was still prepared to compromise about the tariff itself.
the actual rate charged in the tariff mattered far less to jackson than the principle that no state had a right to nullify federal law.
a compromise seemed possible when congress convened in 1831.
former president john quincy adams had been elected to the house of representatives from massachusetts the only former president in history to return to congress and the congressional leaders asked him to write a new tariff to replace the tariff of abominations.
adams took the job seriously.
he reduced the duty on goods not produced in the united states and therefore not in need of protection but retained tariffs to protect growing u s industries especially iron and cotton textiles.
he also reduced the tariff on cheap woolens which slaves wore from 45 percent to 5 percent a significant concession to the slave states.
most of the south found adamss tariff reasonable.
besides much of the cottongrowing south was prospering despite the tariff because of other jacksonian policies especially from the new land that indian removal had made available for growing cotton.
other states were in no mood to press the nullification issue.
but south carolina was different.
much of the states farmland had been exhausted by decades of overuse and its dependency on slave labor made its leaders more fearful of federal intervention in the institution of slavery than those of any other state.
led by calhoun the states leaders believed that they had to win the right to nullify the tariff to establish the larger principal that states could nullify any law.
for them the adams tariff was not enough.
in november 1832 a south carolina state convention declared that both the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 were unconstitutional and that it shall not be lawful to enforce payment of duties imposed by the said acts within the limits of this state after february 1833.
they also said that the state would secede if the federal government tried to force it to back down.
the south carolina legislature elected robert hayne who had debated with webster as the governor to lead the state through these difficult times and elected calhoun to replace hayne in the senate.
calhoun would essentially be south carolinas ambassador to the federal government for the next 2 decades.
calhoun resigned as vice president in december 1832 a little more than 2 months before his term ended and returned to the senate as a member a very belligerent member.
the stage was set for a major confrontation.
in november 1832 the south carolina legislature also raised a state militia of25 000 volunteers.
jackson responded with a proclamation stating that the states vote was in direct violation of their duty as citizens of the united states according to jackson they had no right to nullify federal law and certainly not to raise their own army and chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 285 he said disunion by armed force is treason he told a south carolina congressman i will hang the first man of them i can get my hands on to the first tree i can find he backed his words with action reinforcing federal garrisons and sending armed revenue ships to charleston harbor.
he also shifted the collection of customs duties in charleston to warships offshore.
when governor hayne told senator thomas hart benton of missouri that he did not think jackson would really hang anyone benton who knew jackson better replied i tell you hayne when jackson begins to talk about hanging they can begin to look out for ropes jackson also lobbied to ensure no other southern state supported south carolina and pushed congress to keep the tariffs low.
in the end no shots were fired.
on march 1 1833 congress passed a compromise tariff that henry clay had crafted based on adamss proposals and gave the president the authority to put down the rebellion.
wiser heads in south carolina decided to compromise.
the state convention reconvened and declared victory based on the new clay tariff.
for spite they also nullified the congressional vote of new military authority which they called the force bill but that action was now meaningless since south carolina was no longer resisting federal authority.
jackson won the nullification battle but it was an incomplete victory.
he made it clear in words and actions which abraham lincoln would use as precedent that no state could nullify federal law and that the u s government would use force to assert its authority.
he was treated as a hero in many parts of the country and even thinking historically the nullification crisis the 1832 south carolina convention that passed the ordinance of nullification said whereas the congress of the united states by various acts purporting to be acts laying duties and imposts taxes on foreign imports but in reality intended for the protection of domestic manufacturers and giving the bounties to classes and individuals engaged in particular employments at the expense and to the injury and oppression of other classes and individuals hath exceeded it just powers under the constitution we therefore the people of the state of south carolina in convention assembled do declare and ordain that the several acts and parts of acts of the congress of the united states purporting to be laws for the imposing of duties and imposts on the importation of foreign commodities are unauthorized by the constitution of the united states and violate the true meaning and intent thereof and are null void and no law nor binding upon this state its officers or citizens.
this declaration was not the first time in u s history that a state had taken such a stand.
the kentucky and virginia resolves of 1798 and 1799 written by thomas jefferson and james madison had said the same thing about the alien and sedition acts.
the hartford convention that met in 1814 said the much the same thing about congress having declared war on great britain in 1812.
yet unlike the response to earlier challenges president jackson declared the south carolina ordinance incompatible with the existence of the union and prepared for a military response.
source statues at large of south carolina vol.
columbia south carolina a s johnston 1836.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis why did the authors of the ordinance of nullification believe that the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 were unconstitutional.
craft an argument defend or refute the following statement as the nullification crisis demonstrates the ratification of the constitution in 1788 was only a first tentative step towards defining the relationship between the federal government and the states what events and developments between 1788 and 1832 support your position.
i6 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 given an honorary degree by harvard university.
even so neither calhoun nor the south carolina legislature admitted defeat.
in fact that legislature passed a new law in 1834 requiring anyone holding state office to swear primary loyalty to south carolina and only conditional loyalty to the federal government.
this law effectively barred unionists those moderates who disagreed with nullification perhaps a third of the states voters from state office for the next 30 years.
alexis de tocqueville was in the united states during the nullification crisis.
he took a dim view of the compromise on the tariff and the decision of south carolina to nullify the force bill either i am mistaken or the federal government of the unites states is daily losing its power it is gradually withdrawing from public affairs and is increasingly narrowing its sphere of action 1 think i have seen a more lively feeling of independence and a more evident affection for regional government developing in the individual states of the union.
the outcome of this movement tocqueville said was hidden in the future and i do not claim the ability to lift the veil but he remained worried for the future of the country.
10j 10 2 10 j 10 1 quick review was andrew jackson s presidency democratic.
which of his actions and policies support your argument.
democratized religion the second great awakening analyze the diversity of american religious experience and how the freedom of the era gave rise to diverse religious expressions.
10 2 most americans had strong opinions about andrew jackson.
they might love or hate him but they followed his career.
however politics was far from the only interest of most people.
many things closer to home and sometimes closer to their own souls mattered more.
for many americans in the 1820s and 1830s the growth of a more popular democracy and popular social movements led by ordinary citizens was far more important than presidents jacksons policies or opinions.
no popular movement was more powerful than the upsurge in religious activity that took place in jacksonian america.
once again de tocqueville understood the country well there is no country in the whole world in which the christian religion retains a greater influence over the souls of men than in america he described the christianity he saw as a democratic and republican religion when de tocqueville wrote these words in the early 1830s the second great awakening was in full swing.
it had begun around 1800 see chapter 8 but gathered new strength in jacksonian america.
contrary to what tocqueville implied not all americans were protestant christians and many of those who were christians did not fit into traditional protestantism.
but for a large numbekof those who lived from the 1820s to the 1840s religion was important even if formal membership in a specific religious congregation was not.
charles g finney and new york s burner over district in 1821 charles grandison finney a 29 year old lawyer in adams new york not far from the erie canal was struggling with the question of whether true religious belief was consistent with his legal career.
he decided to leave his law practice and began to preach in churches in upstate new york eventually becoming one of thejnost influential preachers in the united states.
chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 287 103 in july 1824 finney was ordained a presbyterian minister in spite of his lack of formal training.
in 1826 the spirit of revivalism hit upstate new york and in 1830 finney led the largest religious revival ever seen in rochester new york.
six hundred people joined one of the towns three presbyterian churches and the other denominations were also strengthened.
finney did not seek an emotional catharsis from his congregants but like an attorney argued his case logically using wit and wisdom.
nevertheless in his preaching the rigid religious orthodoxy that dominated congregational and presbyterian churches gave way to a more egalitarian spirit.
finney called people to change their lives not necessarily to agreement with specific creeds.
because of his preaching hundreds then thousands took religion more seriously joined churches participated in reform movements and changed new york and american society.
by the late 1830s the area along the erie canal where finney preached had become known as the burned over district because of the fires of religious enthusiasm that rolled over the region.
finney was far from the only revivalist in new york.
however he gave the new york revivals a distinct tone different not only from the emotionalism of frontier revivals but also from the staid life of many established churches.
ihe erie canal also made communications easier and faster than before so word of the revivals traveled fast.
lyman beecher and the growth of voluntary societies as a young minister lyman beecher had been one of the staunchest defenders of state support for the congregational churches in connecticut see chapter 8.
once the connecticut churches lost their government support beecher embraced the new situation and supported revivals and voluntary associations for moral reform in new england and the nation.
beecher described his goal a bible for every family a school for every district and a pastor for every 1000 souls must be the motto upon the standard round which the millions who enjoy these blessings must rally for the purpose of extending them to those who do not.
lyman beecher one of the leaders of the second great awakening is shown here with his numerous children including petitioner and educator catharine to the left of her father harriet beecher stowe far right and one of the most famous ministers of the next generation henry ward beecher standing on the right.
288 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 as the second great awakening grew in force in the 1820s and 1830s a series of voluntary societies or interdenominational organizations that beecher helped launch grew in their influence.
these societies were not owned by any one religious body but rather depended on the voluntary contributions of members of several different religious bodies.
they represented a new form of cooperation across traditional religious lines in the service of a larger goal to change the culture of the united states.
the american bible society distributed bibles the american sunday school union provided curriculum materials for church based sunday schools and the american education society supported the education of ministers.
in addition the american board of commissioners for foreign missions sent missionaries around the world including adoniram judson and his wife ann hasseltine judson whose efforts in burma became role models for generations of foreign missionaries to convert the world to christianity.
beecher included prominent members of the congregational presbyterian and episcopal churches in the leadership of these societies.
the underlying mission of all of these societies was moral reform the creation of a sober god fearing american public.
by the early 1830s beecher had become convinced that the key to transforming the nation lay in the mississippi valley.
he became president of lane theological seminary in cincinnati to fulfill this goal.
beecher helped prepare future ministers strengthened religious colleges and placed protestant pastors in hundreds of midwestern churches.
he also helped create the public school system of ohio and supported schools and teachers across the midwest.
the goal of all of this activity was to strengthen the moral sway of congregational presbyterian protestantism against the individualism of jacksonian democrats catholics and other protestants who disagreed with them.
in the world that beecher and his fellow protestant evangelists were creating the separating of church and state meant that specific denominations would not wield political power but together these protestants would help build a culture in which the churches voluntary societies and public schools would reinforce common beliefs and practices.
revivalism and moral reform movements most converts in the revivals that preachers like finney and beecher led perhaps three fourths of them were women who then prayed and lobbied for their husbands and families to convert.
finney and his closest lieutenant theodore dwight weld encouraged women to be active in their religious communities.
where new england churches had urged women to keep silent except at home the new generation of revivalists welcomed them as prayer leaders and preachers.
such speaking in promiscuous assemblies may have been familiar in baptist and even methodist churches but it was new in the more middle class presbyterian and congregational churches.
women who became religious leaders in the revivals often also became leaders in their communities.
the movement demanding womens rights that swept the united states in the 1840s sprang from the same areas of upstate new york that revivalists called the burned over district see chapter 12.
the link was not surprising.
for finney conversion meant that one needed to show ones new faith in ethical behavior and no ethical behavior was more important to him than opposing slavery.
upstate new yorks churches sent revivalist preachers into the rest of the country to preach for the abolition of slavery.
for the next 30 years the finney weld brand of revivalism spread across the country and was one of the streams of abolitionism that inspired northerners to fight a war to end slavery.
the rights of women and opposition to slavery were not the only reform causes to spring from the revivalism of the second great awakening.
other reformers inspired by the same forces began to advocate for important changes in the way prisoners were treated.
too often they said overcrowded prisons were simply schools for crime and the focus on punishment whatever the original crime did little to redeem or reclaim prisoners to reenter society.
at first reformers advocated the building of prisons in which each prisoner would be confined to a solitary cell where they would have time to reflect on their past be taught new habits and prepare to reenter society.
but too often the solitary confinement led to insanity rather than reform.
in response prison reformers built a new kind of prison in which each prisoner had a separate cell but also had access to common dining quarters workshops and a chapel.
in all of these spaces the authorities sought to teach prisoners a new way of behaving as preparation for reclaiming them.
in the 1830s the new york state penitentiary at auburn was redesigned to foster the new approach and soon thereafter a large new penitentiary at sing sing on the hudson river was built with 1 000 cells plus the common areas.
reformers hoped that the new more humane approach would change lives and ultimately society.
other states quickly followed in adopting the new models.
many mentally ill people were treated very much like prisoners before the reforms and they often found themselves in similar circumstances.
reformers quickly took up the cause of those they said were insane.
perhaps no one equaled dorothea dix as a reformer in the treatment of the mentally ill.
in 1843 dix told the massachusetts fegislature that she was calling their attention to the present state of insane persons confined within this commonwealth in cages closets cellars stalls pens.
chained naked beaten with rods and lashed into obedience moreover she had the facts to chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 289 this illustration from an anti alcohol publication makes the claim that drunkenness was the cause of many problems in society especially the abuse of women.
prove her point.
the result beginning in massachusetts was that a system of state hospitals for the insane replaced the earlier prisons.
many other reforms also blossomed.
although the campaign against alcohol would reach its peek many decades later it began during the second great awakening.
lyman beecher preached temperance sermons that were widely reprinted including one in which he said what then is this universal natural and national remedy for intemperance.
it is the banishment of ardent spirits from the list of lawful objects of commerce many including members of congress took the pledge to stop drinking the u s army stopped the old tradition of a ration of alcohol and refusing to drink became a mark of religious observance in many circles.
at the same time the american peace society advocated an end to all wars.
the american sunday school union distributed not only bible stories but also basic reading books in places where there were no schools.
schools were opened for those who were deaf and blind.
efforts were made to rescue prostitutes.
countless reforms designed to create a better more humane and sometimes more tightly controlled society emerged from the enthusiasm of the awakening.
utopian religious communities the religious enthusiasm of the early 1800s also inspired untraditional ways of thinking about religious matters.
large american spaces that allowed people to develop their own communities relatively undisturbed and the american emphasis on liberty even the liberty to be eccentric made the united states fertile ground for radical experiments and utopian religious communities.
some of these religious experiments were short lived.
others lasted for generations.
a few most of all the mormons have continued to the present.
mother ann lee and the shakers the founder of the united society of believers in christs second appearing or the shakers was ann lee known as mother ann lee who before the american revolution gathered a few supporters in england and came to america in 1774.
lee was convinced that she was receivings special revelation from god that human sexuality was the basis of all sin and celibacy was the only way to live a godly life.
lee inspired shaker communities in new york and new england.
shaker worship reflected lees spirituality and according to observers included shaking and singing hopping and turning smoking and running groaning and laughing shaker communities at new lebanon new hampshire sabbath day lake maine and elsewhere thrived and the shakers became one of the largest and most successful of the pre civil communitarian movements.
290 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 sblsglmkbiiamsibb in shaker worship and community life women and men were kept separate but all participated in lively music and dance designed to shake sin out of their bodies.
shaker theology placed ann lee on a par with jesus and committed the society to the equal leadership of women with men.
but shakers were united by their community life more than by theology.
they demanded celibacy a requirement that limited the communitys appeal and prevented increasing membership by means of childbirth.
instead all new members had to be converts who were attracted to shaker life.
the revivals produced many such converts who sought a deeper spiritual life than they found in traditional churches.
shaker beliefs were reflected in their commitment to making things of beauty and shaker furniture remains a reminder of their beliefs.
american voices the shaker community tis the gift to be simple 1830s rhe simplicity and joyfulness of the shakers have infiltrated american culture in many ways.
shaker furniture now so popular was not just a product for them.
mildred barker leader of a shaker community in maine who died in 1990 once reflected i almost expect to be remembered as a chair or a table.
but barker reminded those who came to interview her that behind oil of the shakers physical artifacts there s the religion.
and while many of their complex theological ideas have largely been forgotten the basic joy humility and playfulness of the shakers continue to be remembered in this familiar hymn that dates to the 1830s tis the gift to be simple tis the gift to be free tis the gift to come down where we ought to be and when we find ourselves in the place just right twill be in the valley of love and delight.
when true simplicity is gaind to bow and to bend we shan t be asham d to turn turn will be our delight till by turning turning we come round right.
source stephen j stein the shaker experience in america new haven yale university press 1992 p 191.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what values and priorities are extolled in the hymn.
historical interpretation why might simplicity certainty and humility have been particularly appealing to 1830s americans.
what aspects of the larger society might shakers have found most disturbing and unwelcome.
chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 291 10 2 the things they created whether furniture houses or art were owned in common not individually a requirement that some found as difficult to accept as celibacy.
john humphrey noyes and the oneida community the oneida community also had its roots in the second great awakening and flourished in oneida new york between 1848 and 1879.
its founder and spiritual guide was john humphrey noyes who was born in vermont in 1811.
as a student for the ministry he became convinced that repentance from sin was not enough and that people should simply stop sinning.
noyes became convinced that all christians could achieve a state in which all the affections of the heart are given to god and in which there is no sin gathering a small community in putney vermont he expanded his definition of christian perfectionism to include what he called complex marriage an arrangement in which monogamy was replaced with many sexual companions.
noyes argued that sexual pleasure was a gift from god and that christianity demanded the sharing of that gift without any exclusive or jealous reservations.
vermont authorities however took a dim view of these sexual practices and beliefs and noyes and his followers moved to oneida new york where the community thrived for decades supported ultimately by producing and selling silverware.
oneida eventually fell victim to victorian morality and to its dependence on noyes as its single charismatic leader.
between 1875 and 1879 oneida was torn by debates as new york authorities began threatening arrests for oneidas flouting of the marriage laws.
noyes fled to canada and the community dissolved although the silver business supported former members for generations.
robert owen and the new harmony community after making a fortune in london robert owen founded a model factory town at new lanark scotland in which he sought to put the spirit of universal welfare into practice.
in the early 1820s owen decided to relocate his utopian vision of a community designed to benefit all of it members and establish it in the united states.
in early 1825 900 people arrived at new harmony indiana where owen had purchased land.
but new harmony failed within a year.
the community could not attract enough skilled workers to make it economically successful.
there was tension between those who ran new harmony and the rest of the community.
as one disaffected resident recalled the aristocrats quarreled and the fields went to ruin.
owen lost most of his fortune which he had invested in new harmony but returned to england to continue to advocate his version of social reform.
f joseph smith and the church of jesus christ of the latter day saints joseph smith 1805 1844 was as much a product of new yorks burned over district as charles g finney.
smith was born in 1805 and moved with his family to a farm in palmyra new york when he was age 11.
in 1827 word spread along the erie canal that smith had found a treasure that would unlock the indian history of the area.
he had he said found golden plates and magical stones known as urim and thummim with which to read and translate what was written on the plates by an ancient prophet historian named mormon.
he published the result the book of mormon in 1830.
with that book a uniquely american religious tradition was born one that its followers believed represented a rebirth of true christianity.
smith however did much more than publish a new book he organized a community.
within a month of the books publication the first mormon community began to form near palmyra new york with smith as its leader.
some responded with hos tility to his efforts even tarring and feathering smith at one point.
but converts seeking religious truth poured in a temple was built and the community grew.
in response to the hostility smith and the mormon community moved first to missouri and then in the late 1830s to nauvoo illinois which became the largest and fastest growing city in illinois because of mormonism.
the citys 15 000 residents part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 became a virtually autonomous state and their militia was recognized by state law.
but smith s political involvements and religious teaching especially his suggestion that all members participate in marriages involving one husband and multiple wives brought renewed hostility.
on june 27 1844 a mob killed smith and his brother hyrum.
with smiths death brigham young became the new leader of the mormons in 1847 and led them on a cross continent trek to the shores of the great salt lake in what is now utah.
salt lake was then on the northern edge of the republic of mexico which was soon to be annexed by the united states.
there far from any governmental authority they set up settlements in a tight church regulated community.
they also embraced smith s revelation that a man could take as many wives as he could support.
but the treaty of guadalupe hildago which marked the end of the u s war with mexico from 1846 to 1848 brought salt lake city and the mormon community under the control of the u s government.
for a while the u s government left the mormons alone but in 1857 president james buchanan replaced young with a non mormon territorial governor and the mormon war broke out as federal authorities tried to enforce monogamy on the mormons and the mormons fought back.
in one well publicized incident mormons massacred a group of non mormon settlers.
only in 1890 after an intense time of prayer and a new revelation did the mormon leadership abandon plural marriage.
relations with the government improved and utah became a state in 1896.
of all the new religious communities spawned during the second great awakening the church of jesus christ of the latter day saints has been the most successful.
mormons like those shown in this wagon train crossed the plains and mountains to get to new homes in utah.
transcendentalism in 1838 far from salt lake city or the revivals of new york ralph waldo emerson gave a speech at harvard divinity school in cambridge massachusetts that had as much impact as any revival sermon.
emerson had been ordained as a unitarian minister but had resigned when he came to believe that the lords supper and public prayer were barriers to direct experience of the divine.
in the divinity school address emerson told an audience of future unitarian ministers that too often in formal worship the soul is not preached and he said the true preacher can be known by this that he deals out to the people his life life passed through the fire of thought emersons call to preach throbs of desire and hope rather than formal theology offended most of his audience and he was never invited back to the divinity school but the speech represented a new approach to religious life that was developing in america in the 1830s.
while emerson continued to develop his ideas for another 40 years the transcendentalist movement with which he is most associated blossomed in the 1830s.
in 1836 a group that came to call themselves the transcendental club met at the boston home of george ripley another unitarian minister to discuss ideas.
the members of the club created a theology that reflected a powerful personal experience of life.
in 1841 under ripleys leadership members of the transcendental club founded brook farm a utopian community in west roxbury massachusetts where the residents sought to support themselves through manual labor.
women and men shared work equally and an effort was made at true gender equity.
but few of the residents of brook farm actually knew much about farming the farm did not prosper and the community disbanded in 1847.
nevertheless emersons writings and the transcendental movement he helped launch reflected an impatience with old ways and a desire for direct and immediate experience of the divine that continued to impact american religious life.
10 2 quick review how did the increasing diversity of religion in america reflect other political and social changes in the nation.
chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 293 democratized education the birth of the common school explain thg dgvgloprnent of public education as a result of and in response to the cultural currents of the 1820s and 1830s.
103 the years during which andrew jackson dominated american politics were also years in which the nations public school system was radically transformed though the transformation was mostly the work of jacksons staunch opponents.
many of the most prominent education reformers were whigs who did not share jacksons vision for american society.
they often sought to change the ways schools were organized and conducted for the same reasons they opposed jackson politically.
schools whig educators believed could build a new american culture more to their liking than the jacksonian brand of democracy that most school reformers found too individualistic and unlikely to transmit the kind of moral code they thought was essential to a well regulated national life.
various individuals with their own agendas contributed to what came to be known as the common school crusade.
catherine beecher sought to empower women by opening the doors for them to become school teachers.
horace mann a whig party leader helped launch a new and more tightly organized school system in massachusetts a system that came to serve as a model for much of the nation.
ihe transformation of the nations schools in this period was a key dynamic of the changing culture of the united states between the 1820s and the 1840s.
women become teachers in 1835 catharine beecher daughter of the religious leader lyman beecher was already well known for founding the hartford female seminary to help educate women and for her petitions seeking to stop jacksons indian removal.
in her essay on the education of female teachers published in that year beecher argued that women were much better equipped than men to be teachers but she also wanted to educate them for the work.
she saw teaching as an extension of motherhood a nurturing role what is the most important and peculiar duty of the female sex.
it is the physical n i0 u very yun9 women taught school most often in one room schools like this one where ch dren of 311 ages learned to read write count and then advance through more complex assignments.
no all the schools were as comfortable as the one shown here and not all the children were as well behaved.
part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 intellectual and moral education of children.
she continued woman whatever are her relations in life is necessarily the guardian of the nursery the companion of child hood and the constant model of imitation.
it is her hand that first stamps impressions on the immortal spirit that must remain forever at a time when most teachers were still men beecher argued not only that women actually made better teachers than men but also that including women as teachers would expand the supply of teachers for the country and open the door to a professional life for middle class women who had few employment options.
beechers impassioned views reflected those of emma willard who had founded the troy female seminary in 1821 in upstate new york to prepare women to be teachers.
like beecher willard had argued there are many females of ability to whom the business of instructing children is highly acceptable she also believed that women should get the same education as men and modeled the curriculum at troy on what men studied at college though she added courses on how to teach.
in 1837 mary lyon founded mount holyoke female seminary in massachusetts to give future female teachers a college education.
new structures for schooling while catharine beecher and her colleagues were transforming the gender of the teaching profession other reformers sought to transform the structure of schools.
none of these leaders was more important than horace mann.
in 1836 mann a rising star in the massachusetts whig party helped shepherd a bill through the massachusetts legislature that created a state board of education.
he then became the boards full time paid secretary.
mann spent the next 12 years advocating tighter state standards for education more money for schools and teacher salaries and a better education for children.
he became the best known spokesperson for public education of his generation.
mann believed in state standards for the schools.
he described the schools of massachusetts as so many distinct independent communities mann meant to change that.
he also believed that it was the responsibility of all citizens to pay taxes to support schools looking at the conditions of the states schools when he took office he did not think that they paid nearly enough at the time in such taxes.
like beecher and willard mann wanted educated teachers and created a system of state sponsored teacher preparation schools called normal schools that offered 1 year of state funded preparation to any young woman or man who wanted to be a teacher.
manns greatest concern however was the moral education of the states citizens.
he believed that there needed to be a public guardian of morality and since the united states had no state church that guardian had to be the public school.
while mann was the best known educational reformer almost all whigs also came to advocate the same changes he did state systems of education state support for teacher preparation and state efforts to ensure a common morality.
like many reformers mann and his allies could not understand why anyone would oppose them.
yet even in massachusetts there was opposition.
jacksonian democrats in the legislature tried to abolish the board of education and the office of secretary.
they saw the state control that mann advocated as expensive unnecessary and an unwarranted interference by the state in local affairs which would undermine local support for each towns school.
roman catholics were especially unhappy with the growing influence and cost of the public school system.
catholics saw the public schools as essentially a protestant venture something protestants like mann could never understand.
mann advocated teaching the protestant bible in school without note or comment leaving it to churches or parents to interpret it.
but catholics believed that the bible should be read in light of the teachings of the church and not left to individual interpretation.
chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 295 10 3 they found anti catholic bias in many of the textbooks the public schools used to pay taxes only to have their children read such material outraged them.
citing examples from textbooks that spoke of deceitful catholics catholics in new york city wrote that they could not in conscience and consistently with their sense of duty to god and to their offspring send them to the citys public schools and requested public funds so that they could operate their own schools.
when such funds were denied catholics in new york and around the country started their own parochial system at their own expense.
the nation s textbook mcguffey s reader claws catch harks scratch j l the j ler.
p teeth she will she will i in 1836 the small cincinnati publishing house of truman and smith brought out a new textbook for schools.
the first mcguffeys reader became part of a series the mcguffey s primer mcguffey s speller and the first through the sixth mcguffey s eclectic readers.
by 1920 when most school districts had turned to other materials 122 million copies of the books had been sold.
the mcguffey reader offered lessons in reading and public speaking designed to create a unified literate and patriotic society.
the readers reflected the same morality that mann and beecher wanted the schools to teach.
they included patriotic speeches by patrick henry and stories of george washington as well as tales of the poor boy and his faithful dog or the poor boy who worked hard and made good.
the texts also included ethical instruction for example dont steal apples from someone elsestree and instruction in how to speak and present oneself.
the goal was a citizenry that could speak well participate in a common democratic dialogue and use a common national language instead of regional dialects.
a story in the second eclectic reader is illustrative of the mcguffey approach.
henry the bootblack begins with the story of henry a kind good boy henrys father was dead and his mother was very poor.
he had a little sister about two years old one day henry found a pocketbook.
he could have kept all the money in it but he found the owner and returned it.
the owner then gave him a dollar for doing so.
henry used the dollar to set himself up as a bootblack and he was so polite that gentlemen soon began to notice him and to let him black their boots when henry brought home his first fifty cents in earnings his mother responded you are a dear good boy henry.
i did not know how i could earn enough to buy bread with but now i think we can manage to get along quite well this account is not the kind of success story that would appear fifty years later.
in the story henry does not go on to own a factory or make a fortune.
he is simply a dutiful child who makes his mother happy.
the students who read the mcguffey texts were urged to do the same.
they were also urged to learn the correct pronunciation and spelling for support boots notice money and other words in the story.
mcguffey was teaching a common morality but also a common american english to all students.
the united states that the readers portrayed was white middle class hard working and willing to sacrifice for the common good.
the readers also demanded a high standard of reading ability and moved students step by step to attain it.
in one room schoolhouses often staffed by teachers with little training which was the national norm throughout the 1800s a teacher could encourage different stu dents to move from reader to reader in careful order and be confident that by the time the student had mastered the sixth eclectic reader he or she would be fluent in the english language and in the nation s of the eclectic heheis.
see how this dog stands on his feet.
he wants to play with john.
a dog has four feet.
a dog and a cat can see in the dark.
hogs keep watch at night and hark lliey bark most when the moon shines.
a dog will chase a sheep or a hog or a co5v.
an j bjte it.
if you are kind to dog he will not bite you.
ike riders were filled with patriotic speeches and stories ictr e.
ne s wr here designed to teach morality in addition to istruction on ummon ways of pronouncing key terms.
296 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 ethical norms.
not everyone agreed with the specific values the readers taught and reformers were often tone deaf to complaints but the public schools and their teachers shaped american culture as significantly as any of the religious political or commercial ventures of the age of jackson.
quick review why might education be increasingly important in an expanding country.
conclusion andrew jackson was like no other president before him.
he had no connection to the founding fathers either by blood class or any similar privilege.
jackson was determined to make the presidency the center of american government believing that the government should be an expression of his agenda and of his party.
in his two terms as president jackson successfully prodded congress to bend to his will or used executive power to realize his goals despite fierce opposition.
a complex american leader with a long standing distrust of centralized government his views were reflected in his actions an indian removal policy that forced thousands of native americans out of their ancestral homes in illinois georgia mississippi alabama and florida and on to new lands in present day oklahoma opposition to the second bank of the united states because he thought the federal government should have no role in banking issuing paper currency or expanding credit and the nullification crisis in which jackson successfully challenged south carolinas efforts to declare federal law null and void in that state.
those actions would have long lasting effects on the nation.
for many americans in the decades between 1820 and 1850 the growth of a more popular democracy and popular social movements led by ordinary citizens were far more important than president jacksons policies or opinions.
along with the market revolution that was transforming the physical commercial and political landscapes of the united states the age of jackson as his years in the white house were called was also a period of social and religious revival and reform.
it was the peak of a long running series of religious revivals known as the second great awakening.
this upsurge in religious activity resulted in greater rights for women stronger opposition to slavery and radical transformation of the nations public schools whose teachers and moral teachings shaped american culture as significantly as any of the religious political or commercial ventures of the age of jackson.
chi r e considering the political economic and social aspects of the age of jackson to what extent was the united states in that period different from the beginning of the 1800s.
chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson chapter 10 chapter review 10 1 jacksonian democracy analyze jackson s advocacy for indian removal his opposition to the bank of the united states his support for a tariff and the impact of these policies on other americans.
review questions 1.
comparison how did jacksons vision of the presidency differ from that of his predecessors.
crafting arguments what were jacksons most important political priorities.
what connections can you make between his policies and his vision of the presidency.
historical interpretation what does the debate over indian removal tell you about political divisions in the united states in the 1830s.
what groups were most likely to support removal.
what groups were most likely to oppose it.
synthesis in what ways was the nullification crisis part of a longstanding disagreement about the nature of american government that went at least as far back as the debate over ratification of the constitution.
democratized religion the second great awaken i ng analyze the diversity of american religious experience and how the freedom of the era gave rise to diverse religious expressions.
review questions 5.
synthesis how did the role of religion in american society and culture change between 1800 and 1840.
what explains the changes you note.
historical interpretation what might explain the close connection between calls for religious revival and campaigns for social reform in the 1830s and 1840s.
comparison compare and contrast the various utopian religious com.
munities of the early 1800s.
what common features die they share.
what common forces might have contributes to their emergence.
democratized education the birth of the common school i 103 explain the development of public education as a result of in response to the cultural currents of the 1820s and 1830s.
i review questions 8.
contextualization why did reformers like catherine beecher believe women had a natural aptitude for teaching.
in what ways did beecher see teaching as a natural extension of womens role in the home.
crafting arguments is it fair to describe manns system of public education as some of his opponents did as nothing more than a vehicle for imposing mainstream protestantism on all americans.
why or why not.
historical interpretation how did textbooks in the mcguffey reader series shape the society and culture of the united states in the first half of the 1800s.
298 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 1830 1853 in this painting emigrants at kanesville by william henry jackson a backlog of wagons waits to be ferried across the missouri river at council bluffs iowa.
in the summer of 1845 the democratic review a new york city paper edited by john l osullivan urged the nation to annex the independent republic of texas it is time now for opposition to the annexation of texas to cease sullivan wrote.
texas was a hot topic and many newspapers were taking the same position.
but the review claimed that including texas in the united states was an essential part of the fulfillment of our manifest destiny to overspread the continent allotted by providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions.
manifest destiny quickly became a core american belief.
it was a mindset that justified the louisiana purchase of 1803 the hoped for u s acquisition of the oregon territory along with the northern half of mexico including texas and california and a significant influence across the pacific ocean.
manifest destiny gave a new name to an old idea.
even before the american revolution and in growing numbers in the 1790s white americans had crossed the allegheny mountains in spite of government prohibitions and had established colonies in kentucky and in the ohio river valley.
soon after 1800 others were crossing into florida and missouri both then under spanish control.
in both cases the settlers were confident that the american army and american government would soon follow.
while the first americans to cross into texas spoke of loyalty to the chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of how the idea of manifest destiny and the policies of the polk administration almost doubled the size of the united states in 12 years in spite of opposition from many people in the country.
manifest destiny the importance of an idea explain what manifest destiny meant and how it led the united states to involvement in texas california and oregon.
the u s war with mexico 1846 1848 analyze the causes strategies and outcomes of the u s war with mexico.
west to the pacific analyze the causes and outcomes of u s expansion in california and into the pacific region including establishing new relationships with hawaii china and japan.
chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 299 113 significant dates 1821 mexico gains independence from spain first american colony established in texas 1829 mexico abolishes slavery including in texas 1830 revolts against mexican authority begin in texas 1835 americans in texas capture the alamo drive out mexican army 1836 narcissa and marcus whitman help found the first protestant mission in oregon texas declares independence from mexico fall of the american forces in the alamo to mexican army treaty of velasco recognizes independent republic of texas congress passes gag rule forbidding discussion of slavery 1837 financial panic of 1837 1842 webster ashburton treaty resolves u s canadian border dispute 1844 treaty of wang hsia gives united states open trading rights in china 1845 the term manifest destiny becomes popular james k polk inaugurated as president u s annexation of texas 1846 beginning of u s war with mexico 1848 treaty of guadalupe hidalgo ends war with mexico gold rush in california 1849 thoreau s civil disobedience published 1851 herman melville s moby dick published 1853 commodore perry enters tokyo harbor begins opening japan to united states gadsden purchase last acquisition of land in continental united states manifest destiny the doctrine first expressed in 1845 that the expansion of white americans across the continent was inevitable and ordained by god and was a means to spread protestant christianity and jacksonian democracy to more people.
republic of mexico by 1830 they too were seeking protection from the american government.
in all these cases many in the government were happy to oblige seeing the movement of colonists as a first step in expanding the nation.
being aware of the nations long term expansion the power of the idea of manifest destiny and the political and military actions that the nations leaders took in the name of that idea is essential to understanding how the nation expanded into the shape it has today.
this chapter will explore the political diplomatic and military issues involved in turning the idea of manifest destiny into a geographic reality.
it is also important to understand how the acquisition of so much new territory in the 1830s and 1840s as well as other developments in peoples thinking changed the lives of those who lived in the united states.
the population of the country was expanding as dramatically as its geographical borders.
migrants from around the world especially flocked to california to find their fortunes in the gold.
citizens of the republic of mexico suddenly found themselves living in the united states because the border had moved as did american indians who rejected the claims of all nations to their lands.
other immigrants came to the already established parts of the nation.
in addition amid the many changes slaves supporters and opponents of slavery and women became increasingly vocal about the issue of freedom and equality.
these issues will be explored in chapter 12.
the great territorial expansion of these years and dramatic changes in the makeup and the thinking of people in the united states during the same time period transformed the country and its future.
manifest destiny the importance of an idea explain what manifest destiny meant and how it led the united states to involvement in texas california and oregon.
11 1 the idea that the united states had a manifest destiny led to more than simply acquiring land though between 1845 and 1848 the united states would almost double in size from 1 8 million square miles to almost 3 million.
advocates of manifest destiny claimed that the united states with gods blessing should rule the heart of north america from the atlantic ocean to the pacific and from a still to be defined border with british canada to an even more undefined border with the republic of mexico.
for o sullivan and other supporters of manifest destiny it was the nations appointed role to spread not only democracy in its jacksonian form but also to spread protestant christianity in place of the catholicism of mexico or the native beliefs of american indians.
the same year that osullivan coined the term manifest destiny illinois representative john wentworth told congress that he did not believe the god of heaven designed that the original states should be the only abode of liberty on earth.
on the contrary he only designed them as the great center from which civilization religion and liberty should radiate and radiate until the whole continent shall bask in their blessing.
that belief held by many beyond wentworth that the united states was specially chosen by divine will to bring liberty and democracy to the planet and especially north america was a driving force in the push for new lands in the 1840s.
many americans supported versions of manifest destiny for their own reasons.
land speculators and those promoting the extension of the nations railroads wanted to exploit the vast lands in the west.
farmers dreamed of starting over in rich and cheap new lands.
workers believed that rapid national expansion would guarantee industrial profits and thus their jobs or give them a chance to start over if necessary.
protestant leaders and missionaries saw u s control of the new lands as an opportunity to ensure that a protestant united states not a catholic mexico controlled the continent.
manifest destiny also referred to a patriotic belief that the nation had a divine mission to become a world power.
and a national identity 1800 1848 ifllli at the mythical level manifest destiny was seen as the spirit hovering over the westward movement of white settlers leading them and urging them on whether they came by foot covered wagon or stage coach.
in contrast many other americans opposed the whole idea of a manifest destiny democrats tended to support expansion but most whigs led by henry clay had grave reservations.
clays goal was not necessarily a larger country but a better developed one with roads canals railroads and industries knitting it together and ensuring its prosperity.
antislavery advocates opposed the acquisition of more land especially texas since they were certain that new lands meant new slave states.
however some proslavery advocates notably south carolina senator john c calhoun wanted texas but worried that other incorporated lands especially california and oregon might become free states peopled by darker skinned citizens which would shift power away from the white slaveholding regions.
some americans also saw the violence associated with expansion as simply wrong.
many residents of the lands from texas to california did not want to become part of the united states at all.
antonio maria osio spoke for those who did not want to become u s residents when he described himself as a californio who loves his country and a mexican on all four sides and in my heart he opposed the annexation of california to the united states and when it happened he left eventually settling in baja california so that he could to remain a citizen of mexico.
while many americans debated manifest destiny in the congress the press and the pulpits other americans especially trappers and farmers moved into the regions just as a generation before the same types of people had expanded beyond the mississippi.
regardless of whether the united states mexico or britain claimed the land these frontiersmen and women were confident that in time their government would follow them.
most of all they moved into texas see map 11 1.
the birth of the texas republic the tensions between americans living in texas and the mexican government that governed it had been building even before mexico gained its independence from spain in 1821.
when the united states purchased louisiana from france in 1803 the western chapter 11 californio person of spanish descent and after 1821 citizen of mexico living in california.
manifest destiny expanding the nation 301 300 part iv crafting a nation people land t saltillo map 11 1 trade networks between mexico texas and the united states.
mexico and before it spain had established settlements and trade networks throughout its sparsely populated northern territories.
texas trade ran not only south from san antonio and goliad in texas to monterrey and other trading centers in mexico but also east into the united states.
separate networks connected the heartland of mexico with its settlements in santa fe and taos in new mexico with tucson in the future arizona and with the missions and presidios along the coast of california.
san francisco n san jose santa cruz branciforte san carlos de monterey pacific ocean f mission b presidio town present day political boundaries principal road present state names and boundaries provided for orientation indian communities including the new mexico pueblos are not shown tejanos people of spanish or mexican descent born in texas.
border of the territory was disputed.
spain insisted it was the sabine river the current border between louisiana and texas but french officials hinted that the united states might claim territory further west.
jefferson had wanted louisiana to include all of the land from modern day texas to the rio grande river but he was not prepared to fight spain over it.
in the adams onis treaty of 1819 spain ceded florida to the united states along with spanish claims to oregon in exchange for u s recognition of the sabine river as the border between u s louisiana and spanish texas though some in congress criticized the treaty for that reason.
despite treaties however americans still crossed the sabine in the early 19th century settling in texas.
soon after the adams onis treaty was signed a revolutionary uprising began in mexico.
like the people of the united states most mexican citizens wanted to be free of control by a european power.
the mexican revolution against spanish rule which lasted from 1810 to 1821 was long and bloody and decimated the mexican economy in texas the mexican population people known as tejanos fell from 4 000 in 1800 to 2 500 in 1821.
comanche and apache tribes dominated large parts of texas and much of the desert was vacant of any human habitation.
nevertheless after 1821 mexico had won its independence.
part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 with the establishment of the republic of mexico two independent republics the english speaking overwhelmingly protestant united states in the north and the spanish speaking and mostly catholic republic of mexico to the south bordered each other at the sabine river with settlers from one living in the territory of the other.
even before mexican independence the spanish government had given missouri merchant moses austin permission to start a colony in texas believing that more settlers whatever their origin would help stabilize a border area that was far from the population centers of either mexico or the united states.
in 1821 mosess son stephen f austin along with erasmo seguin a tejano with liberal political views rode into texas to build the new settlement.
a month later austin and his party learned that mexico had won its independence.
austin then went to mexico city where he met with mexicos new leader agustin de iturbide and announced i make a tender of my services my loyalty and my fidelity to the constitutional emperor of mexico austins physical presence in mexico city and willingness to make an oath of allegiance to the new nation impressed the new government.
in april 1823 austin received confirmation of his claims to a huge swath of land in texas and his right to act as an empresario or colonizing agent for this land.
he was the only american to get such rights.
at first the new american colony grew slowly but austin continued to recruit settlers.
the mexican government aware that it could do little to stop settlement and anxious for a buffer against indian tribes and the united states hoped that settlers in texas would create a stable population of loyal citizens.
few europeans and even fewer mexicans moved into texas but americans came in large numbers.
the tejano community was overwhelmed by the newly arrived americans.
by 1830 20 000 american colonists had arrived and had brought 2 000 slaves with them.
the americans generally ignored the requirement that they convert to catholicism though they did not build protestant churches and most absolutely refused to free their slaves in spite of the fact that mexico had abolished slavery in 1829 and expected the residents of texas to obey that decree.
one american visitor to texas amos parker wrote a person may travel all day and day after day and find americans only those in the tejano community were also divided.
many tejanos profited from trade with the americans and identified with their independent streak.
others clung to their connection to mexico.
distance difficult travel conditions and an unstable government in mexico city with more pressing concerns closer to home allowed an american community to develop in texas that was officially governed by one set of laws but lived by its own rules see map 11 2.
the mexican governments benign neglect of the american community in texas ended in 1830 when the mexican congress closed texas to further american immigration and the importation of slaves.
mexico also insisted that trade be routed through established ports further south in mexico rather than directly between texas and the united states.
the government stationed more soldiers in texas to enforce the new rules.
austin was stunned and revolts broke out in the english speaking colonies a few of which drew tejano support.
in 1832 mexican troops defeated an american effort to take control of an army garrison but in october american colonists met at san felipe and called for autonomy for texas within the republic of mexico.
in 1833 they organized an army under the command of sam houston and sent austin to mexico city to negotiate for them.
tejanos were not represented in these meetings and most of the 5 000 tejanos probably opposed these actions.
but by now there were 30 000 americans in texas and the tejanos were greatly outnumbered.
austin had little success in mexico city.
he was arrested in the fall of 1833 and at the time of his release from jail in the summer of 1835 he wrote war is our only recourse.
there is no other remedy most americans in texas seemed to agree.
empresario an agent who received a land grant from the spanish or mexican government in return for organizing settlements.
chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 303 san francisco san jose santa cruz branciforte pacific ocean map 11 1 trade networks between mexico texas and the united states.
mexico and before it spain had established settlements and trade networks throughout its sparsely populated northern territories.
texas trade ran not only south from san antonio and goliad in texas to monterrey and other trading centers in mexico but also east into the united states.
separate networks connected the heartland of mexico with its settlements in santa fe and taos in new mexico with tucson in the future arizona and with the missions and presidios along the coast of california.
f mission h presidio town present day political boundaries principal road present state names and boundaries provided for orientation indian communities including the new mexico pueblos are not shown border of the territory was disputed.
spain insisted it was the sabine river the current border between louisiana and texas but french officials hinted that the united states might claim territory further west.
jefferson had wanted louisiana to include all of the land from modern day texas to the rio grande river but he was not prepared to fight spain over it.
in the adams onis treaty of 1819 spain ceded florida to the united states along with spanish claims to oregon in exchange for u s recognition of the sabine river as the border between u s louisiana and spanish texas though some in congress criticized the treaty for that reason.
despite treaties however americans still crossed the sabine in the early 19th century settling in texas.
soon after the adams onis treaty was signed a revolutionary uprising began in mexico.
like the people of the united states most mexican citizens wanted to be free of control by a european power.
the mexican revolution against spanish rule which lasted from 1810 to 1821 was long and bloody and decimated the mexican economy.
tejanos in texas the mexican population people known as tejanos fell from 4 000 in 1800 people of spanish or mexican descent born to 2 500 in 1821.
comanche and apache tribes dominated large parts of texas and intexas much of the desert was vacant of any human habitation.
nevertheless after 1821 mexico had won its independence.
302 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 with the establishment of the republic of mexico two independent republics the english speaking overwhelmingly protestant united states in the north and the spanish speaking and mostly catholic republic of mexico to the south bordered each other at the sabine river with settlers from one living in the territory of the other.
even before mexican independence the spanish government had given missouri merchant moses austin permission to start a colony in texas believing that more settlers whatever their origin would help stabilize a border area that was far from the population centers of either mexico or the united states.
in 1821 mosess son stephen f austin along with erasmo seguin a tejano with liberal political views rode into texas to build the new settlement.
a month later austin and his party learned that mexico had won its independence.
austin then went to mexico city where he met with mexicos new leader agustin de iturbide and announced i make a tender of my services my loyalty and my fidelity to the constitutional emperor of mexico austins physical presence in mexico city and willingness to make an oath of allegiance to the new nation impressed the new government.
in april 1823 austin received confirmation of his claims to a huge swath of land in texas and his right to act as an empresario or colonizing agent for this land.
he was the only american to get such rights.
at first the new american colony grew slowly but austin continued to recruit settlers.
the mexican government aware that it could do little to stop settlement and anxious for a buffer against indian tribes and the united states hoped that settlers in texas would create a stable population of loyal citizens.
few europeans and even fewer mexicans moved into texas but americans came in large numbers.
the tejano community was overwhelmed by the newly arrived americans.
by 1830 20 000 american colonists had arrived and had brought 2 000 slaves with them.
the americans generally ignored the requirement that they convert to catholicism though they did not build protestant churches and most absolutely refused to free their slaves in spite of the fact that mexico had abolished slavery in 1829 and expected the residents of texas to obey that decree.
one american visitor to texas amos parker wrote a person may travel all day and day after day and find americans only those in the tejano community were also divided.
many tejanos profited from trade with the americans and identified with their independent streak.
others clung to their connection to mexico.
distance difficult travel conditions and an unstable government in mexico city with more pressing concerns closer to home allowed an american community to develop in texas that was officially governed by one set of laws but lived by its own rules see map 11 2.
the mexican governments benign neglect of the american community in texas ended in 1830 when the mexican congress closed texas to further american immigration and the importation of slaves.
mexico also insisted that trade be routed through established ports further south in mexico rather than directly between texas and the united states.
the government stationed more soldiers in texas to enforce the new rules.
austin was stunned and revolts broke out in the english speaking colonies a few of which drew tejano support.
in 1832 mexican troops defeated an american effort to take control of an army garrison but in october american colonists met at san felipe and called for autonomy for texas within the republic of mexico.
in 1833 they organized an army under the command of sam houston and sent austin to mexico city to negotiate for them.
tejanos were not represented in these meetings and most of the 5 000 tejanos probably opposed these actions.
but by now there were 30 000 americans in texas and the tejanos were greatly outnumbered.
austin had little success in mexico city.
he was arrested in the fall of 1833 and at the time of his release from jail in the summer of 1835 he wrote war is our only recourse.
there is no other remedy.
most americans in texas seemed to agree.
empresario an agent who received a land grant from the spanish or mexican government in return for organizing settlements.
chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 303 map 11 2 contested boundaries between texas and mexico.
the borders of texas were highly contested in the 1830s and 1840s.
the adams onis treaty of 1819 had fixed the border between the two nations as the sabine river the border between modern louisiana and texas.
austin s land grant from the mexican government allowed him to settle to the west of that line.
most people considered the nueces river to be the western border of the republic of texas in the 1830s and 1840s but at president polk s insistence the rio grande river became the border as a result of the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo in 1848 which tripled the total size of texas.
although revolt had been brewing since 1830 the campaign for the independence of texas became a full fledged war late in 1835 when american volunteers captured the alamo fortress at san antonio de bexar from its mexican garrison.
in january and february 1836 james bowie and william travis took joint command of the alamo while another texian as the americans in texas were called force remained in the town of goliad under the command of james fannin.
austin went to washington d c to try to secure american support for the insurrection while sam houston took command of a volunteer army based at the texians temporary capital of washington on the brazos.
in response to these military actions mexican president santa anna ordered the mexican army north capturing the alamo and killing its defenders in march 1836.
after a furious fight the nearly 200 defenders of the alamo including former tennessee congressman davy crockett adventurer jim bowie and the garrisons commander william b travis were killed.
it is estimated that 600 mexican soldiers were also killed in the assault.
ihe defeat and grisly deaths of the alamos outnumbered defenders entered texas and american legend.
remember the alamo became a rallying cry for the independence of texas and later in the war with mexico.
after his victory at the alamo santa anna marched his army to the second texan garrison at goliad which surrendered in late march.
santa anna ordered his soldiers to execute all of the goliad troops and some 341 including the garrisons commander james fannin died on the spot.
for some the phrase quickly became remember the alamo and goliad while texian volunteers fought against the mexican army political leaders in the american colony met in convention at washington on the brazos and on march 2 1836 declared the independence of the republic of texas and adopted a constitution.
having defeated the insurgent forces at the alamo and at goliad santa anna had little use for the texas declaration.
he turned on sam houstons army the only remaining defenders of the republic of texas and its new constitution.
houston mindful of santa annas strength began a slow retreat.
then after santa annas troops had been marching for days with an increasingly thin supply line houston suddenly turned on them.
on april 21 1836 houston defeated santa anna at the battle of san jacinto.
houstons troops showed no more mercy than santa anna had and executed hundreds of mexican prisoners.
the next day santa anna himself was captured and forced to sign the treaty of velasco promising to withdraw all mexican troops from texas end the war and recognize the independence of texas.
the mexican congress refused to recognize the treaty but neither the mexican government nor the texians were in the mood for more fighting.
in the early fall of 1836 sam houston the hero of the battle of san jacinto was elected president of the new republic defeating austin who became secretary of state.
both men and most of their followers did not want long term independence but rather annexation by the united states.
however the united states was a reluctant partner.
texas would be a new huge slave state and many in washington worried about the destabilizing impact on the nation of having such a powerful addition to the slave states in the u s senate.
in addition u s trade with mexico was too important to trifle with.
even andrew jackson did not want to risk the political cost of annexing texas especially in 1836 when martin van buren his handpicked successor was in the midst of the presidential election.
after the election jackson a good friend of alamo a franciscan mission at san antonio texas that was the site in 1836 of a siege and massacre of texans by mexican troops.
304 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 sam houston officially recognized the republic of texas but that was as far as its neighbor to the north would go.
the texas republic would stand on its own for the immediate future.
distant california while texas was declaring its independence from mexico alta california as it was known to distinguish it from baja california to the south was a sleepy and distant outpost of the republic of mexico and most people in mexico and the united states were content to leave it that way.
california had wonderful harbors large and prosperous rancheros and a string of missions but it was a long way from the heart of either nation.
in the 1830s the population there included not only mexicans most of whom valued self government in local matters and cared little for the authorities in mexico city but also a much smaller number of americans.
neither group was thinking seriously about independence.
a majority among the declining number of american indians in california were doing their best to maintain their tribal ways and keep their distance from both mexican and american settlers though some of them were living under the supervision of the missions.
although spanish explorers had sailed the coast of california and claimed the lands in the 16th century meaningful european settlements in california began only in the mid 18th century just before the american revolution.
in 1769 a franciscan priest father junipero serra was sent to alta california with instructions to found a chain of missions that would aid in converting the california indians to catholic christianity put them to work for the spanish and establish a stronger spanish presence to protect against possible russian expansion.
father serra and his franciscan successors succeeded in establishing a chain of missions stretching from san diego to san francisco.
the franciscan friars meant to save the indian souls and bring them the gifts of spanish culture but they also worked them hard to ensure a good economic return for the missions maintaining tight control and a tough discipline.
one of the franciscan friars noted however that the indians live well free but as soon as we reduce them to a christian and community life they fatten sicken and die when serra arrived in california there were probably 300 000 indians in the area but by the time spanish rule ended in 1821 that number had been reduced to 200 000.
from the spanish governments perspective however the missions were significant in asserting sovereignty as they controlled the indian work force and managed the colonys cattle grain and trade.
the franciscans administered the california missions until 1833 when the mexican government which had seized power from spain in 1821 transferred ownership of the missions from church to state and eventually to private hands.
mexicos revolution was partly a rejection not only of spanish royal authority but also of the power of the catholic church and seizing the missions was a means to that end.
missions were sold off or awarded to powerful ranchers.
as late as 1821 californias total mexican population was about 3 000 though it grew to between 10 000 and 15 000 by 1846.
the majority lived on large ranches spread along the coast.
some few immigrants from the united states also moved to california in these years.
most of the americans arriving before 1840 learned spanish converted to catholicism took on mexican citizenship and became part of the local culture of alta california.
beginning in the 1840s however a different group of immigrants from the united states began to arrive who were more interested in making california part of the united states.
even before the war with mexico began president polk well aware of the interests of these recent immigrants to california told congress that california s harbors would afford shelter for our navy for our numerous whale ships and other merchant vessels employed in the pacific ocean and would in a short period become the marts of an extensive and profitable commerce with china and other countries of chapter 11 11 1 112 an early photograph of a young mexican american woman illustrates some of the comfort and confidence that the californios had before their homes became part of the united states.
manifest destiny expanding the nation 305 american voices eulalia perez memories of mexican california ca.
1830s ulalia perez was born about 1768 in baja california.
she and her husband first moved to the alta california mission of san diego and then to san gabriel near los angeles.
at san gabriel the priests selected her as cook for the mission where she also served as a midwife and eventually keeper of the keys or mayordoma head of the mission household.
perez lived a long life and in 1877 a historian at the university of california interviewed her on her memories of a much earlier era in california history.
her account provides a rare glimpse of mission life in california before that area s acquisition by the united states.
when we arrived here father jose sanchez lodged me and my family temporarily in a small house until work could be found for me he as well as his companion father jose maria zalvidea treated the indians very well and the two were much loved by the spanish speaking people and by the neophytes indians recently converted to christianity and other indians.
father zalvidea introduced many improvements in the mission of san gabriel and made it progress a very great deal in every way.
not content with providing abundantly for the neophytes he planted fruit trees in the mountains far away from the mission in order that the untamed indians might have food when they passed by those spots.
in the morning the girls were let out.
first they went to father zalvidea s mass for he spoke the indian language afterwards they went to the mess hut to have breakfast which sometimes consisted of corn gruel with chocolate and on holidays with sweets and bread.
on other days ordinarily they had boiled barley and beans and meat.
after breakfast each girl began the task that had been assigned to her beforehand sometimes it was at the looms or unloading or sewing or whatever there was to be done.
the indians were taught the various jobs for which they showed an aptitude.
others worked in the fields or took care of the horses cattle etc.
still others were carters oxherds etc.
the indians also were taught to pray.
a few of the more intelligent ones were taught to read and write.
father zalvidea taught the indians to pray in their indian tongue some indians learned music and played instruments and sang at mass.
the sextons and pages who helped with mass were indians of the mission.
the punishments that were meted out were the stocks and confinement.
when the misdemeanor was serious the delinquent was taken to the guard where they tied him to a pipe or a post and gave him twenty five or more lashes depending on his crime.
sometimes they put them in the head stocks other times they passed a musket from one leg to the other and fastened it there and also they tied their hands.
that punishment called the law of bayone was very painful.
but fathers sanchez and zalvidea were always very considerate with the indians.
i would not want to say what others did because they did not live in the mission.
source eulalia perez from an original manuscript in spanish in the bancroft library university of california berkeley originally written in 1877 and published in nancy f cott et al roots of bitterness documents of the social history of american women boston northeastern university press 1996 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how would you characterize perez s view of the mission system.
how did she respond to its coercive elements.
historical interpretation what assumptions about indian peoples underlie perez s account.
what to her were the signs of progress in california.
polks secretary of the navy george bancroft anticipated the coming of war with mexico and ordered commodore john d sloat commander of the u s pacific squadron based in the nation of hawaii to land in san francisco if war came.
at the same time u s army captain john c fremont led what he claimed was a military map making expedition overland from st louis arriving in monterey california in late december 1845.
fremont told the mexican authorities he was simply exploring.
they had their doubts that he was just making maps doubts that later turned out to be well founded but allowed him to remain.
then in april 1846 a u s warship arrived at monterey with orders for fremont and the u s counsel in california thomas oliver larkin to stir up a pro american revolt in california.
the once distant outpost was quickly becoming an important focus of attention in the growing tensions between the united states and mexico.
manifest destiny and american presidential politics the creation of the democratic party as a vehicle to continue his political philosophy and support his handpicked successors was one of jacksons most significant achievements.
1116 twin pillars on which the party rested were a small federal government and the idea of 306 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 manifest destiny.
the political parties that had emerged from the john adams thomas jefferson presidential election the federalists and the democratic republicans were long gone.
americas founding generation including all presidents up to john quincy adams disliked party spirit even if they accepted that spirit when it helped them.
martin van buren who had built on the base of the older democratic republican organizations to create the new democratic party that elected jackson and who followed him as its candidate had no such reservations.
he thought it best to deal with the subject of political parties in a sincerer and wiser spirit to recognize their necessity and to give them the credit they deserve as part of their effort to build a strong political party jackson and van buren called the first national political convention to be held by a major party.
the event was held in baltimore in 1835 a year before the presidential election.
the small anti masonic party actually held the first national political convention modeled on a religious revival in 1831 but it won only seven electoral votes in the 1832 election and faded from national prominence thereafter.
the democrats borrowed the idea of a national convention as part of their preparation for the 1836 election and their tight political organization allowed the democrats to win most presidential contests until the civil war when the party splintered.
at the 1835 convention jackson stage managed van burens nomination as the democratic partys candidate for what some said was basically a third term for jackson.
the outgoing president also managed to ensure the nomination of his hand picked candidate for vice president richard mentor johnson of kentucky in spite of an effort by virginias delegates to derail his nomination.
ihe core principle of the emerging whig party was opposition to jackson though it also wanted a larger federal government that could manage internal improvements.
the whigs continued to support a bank of the united states.
but the whigs disliked van burens ideas of political parties and continued to distrust the growing sense of party spirit or at least said that they did.
given this distrust the whigs were not well enough organized to have a national convention in preparation for the 1836 election relying instead on state conventions.
they reasoned that even if the various states did not nominate the same candidate for president they might use a number of popular candidates to gain enough electoral votes to throw the election into the house of representatives where they were confident they could control the outcome.
having lost decisively with henry clay in 1832 most whig leaders wanted a different candidate.
one choice popular in the north and west was william henry harrison who had won as many battles as jackson during the war of 1812.
some states duly nominated harrison and clay reluctantly supported him.
southern whigs nominated hugh lawson white of tennessee who agreed with jackson on many issues but had broken with him over what he saw as jacksons abuse of power.
whigs in massachusetts went their own way with senator daniel webster.
the whig effort to appeal to diverse constituencies with different candidates failed.
in november 1836 the jackson magic stuck to van buren and he received 50 79 percent of the popular vote and 170 electoral votes against 124 votes scattered among the three whig candidates.
van buren faced several challenges as he began to govern.
he pledged to continue jacksons policies and did so in particular presiding over the final removal of the cherokees to oklahoma and a long and bloody war against seminoles in florida.
given his difficulties with the seminoles van buren decided against removing iroquois tribes from new york.
he avoided a war with britain when rebels in canada recruited volunteers along the american side of the great lakes.
in spite of his ties to the party of manifest destiny he had no inclination to deal with texas or oregon.
in addition issues of nullification and abolitionism continued unresolved.
like jackson van buren opposed nullification or any effort to disrupt the union.
he also opposed abolitionism which despite his northern roots he saw as another attack on the union along with nullification.
southerners supported van buren and he repaid them by supporting a gag rule in congress.
the constitution gave all citizens the chapter 11 gag rule a procedural rule passed in the house of representatives that prevented discussion of antislavery petitions from 1836 to 1844.
manifest destiny expanding the nation 307 panic of 1837 a major economic downturn brought on by temporary excesses in international trade and the inability of the united states to control the currency or make credit available after the closing of the second bank of the united states.
specie circular a proclamation issued by president andrew jackson in 1836 stipulating that only gold or silver could be used as payment for public land.
right to petition the government for a redress of grievances and abolitionists had begun flooding the house and senate with antislavery petitions.
ihe gag rule was a promise by congressional leaders in the house of representatives to ignore the abolitionist petitions.
in the end the gag rule only highlighted the divisions over slavery.
as a member of the house john quincy adams took it upon himself to undermine the rule in every possible way.
he saw it as a limitation on the constitutional rights of abolitionists and they came to view him as old man eloquent through the 1830s and 1840s adams and a handful of like minded whigs began to introduce antislavery petitions at each session of congress before the house adopted its rules including the gag rule.
then during sessions he regularly interrupted other debates to ask the speaker whether this or that petition ran afoul of the gag rule while knowing full well that it did but using the occasion to describe both the petition and the gag rule.
perhaps more effectively than if there had been no rule adams used these manipulations of the gag rule to change public opinion on slavery even if he could not get the votes he wanted from the house.
most challenging for van burens political fortunes however was the fact that some of the economic policies jackson had advocated had their greatest impact during van burens term and it was not a good one.
only 2 months after van burens inauguration the panic of 1837 hit the country.
the initial cause of the panic was a sudden drying up of credit.
without the ability to borrow money cotton brokers failed banks failed and the great new york mercantile house of arthur tappan and company failed.
in his hatred of banks and distrust of debt jackson had paid off the national debt sending a great deal of u s currency to bond holders in britain and reducing the currency available in the united states.
jackson also had closed the second bank of the united states which had held the ability to expand credit when it was needed.
in addition he had issued a specie circular in 1836 requiring speculators to pay for federal land in silver or gold coinage not bank notes.
the specie circular reflected jacksons distrust of banks but once the economy began to decline in 1837 many americans started to think that if the u s government would not trust bank notes then they should not either.
there was a run on banks and few banks had sufficient reserves of silver and gold to redeem all of the bank notes they had issued.
banks failed and credit became even scarcer crippling the economy.
soon after jackson left office the panic of 1837 which many blamed on him wracked the nation.
in this political cartoon the results of jackson s economic policies are shown as drunkenness women begging a rich banker for money and long lines of the unemployed.
308 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 a second panic hit in 1839 this one the result of overspeculation in cotton and cotton producing land.
when british investments and international trade stalled the value of cotton land and slaves all plummeted.
the sale of public lands and federal revenue from these sales virtually stopped.
northern textile and shoe industries laid off thousands of workers.
more banks closed.
the panic lasted until 1843 and was arguably as severe as any economic downturn before the great depression of the 1930s.
given his jacksonian commitment to small government there was little that van buren could or would do about the economy.
his position enabled the whigs in the 1840 election to describe him as cold and heartless the whigs had also learned from the democrats.
in 1840 they held a single national convention that unified them behind one candidate.
for a second time they pinned their hopes on the aging war hero william henry harrison despite clays effort to secure the nomination for himself.
they nominated john tyler of virginia who had served as governor and senator for vice president an ill fated choice.
tyler brought balance to the ticket he was from the south while harrison was from the north and at age 50 he was much younger than the 68 year old harrison.
but tyler was a whig only because he found jackson high handed not because he disagreed with most of his policies.
the 1840 political campaign pitted martin van buren running for a second term against tippecanoe and tyler too a reference to harrisons victory at the battle of tippecanoe in 1811.
this time the whigs won with 52 8 percent of the popular votes and 234 electoral votes against only 60 for van buren.
but the high expectations for the whig presidency would not last long.
at his inauguration in march 1841 harrison delivered a long address laying out the whig agenda in fact it was the longest inaugural address in american presidential history.
the day was cold and blustery and harrison did not wear a coat.
he caught a bad cold that turned to pneumonia.
a month later president harrison was dead and tyler was president.
this instance marked the first time a president had died in office and tyler made it clear that he was not just an acting president but that he had inherited the presidency for the full term.
a worse disaster for the whig party was hard to imagine.
the election of 1840 was the only time when the country elected a whig president and whig majorities in both houses of congress.
after only a month into the new administration tyler too who shared little of the whig agenda beyond an intense dislike of andrew jackson and an interest in holding office was president.
before he became seriously ill president harrison had called a special session of congress to deal with the economic crisis.
when the whig dominated congress convened it re created the bank of the united states so that there could be federal control of the currency and credit thus easing economic conditions that had been created when the bank had been abolished.
president tyler a believer in small government every bit as much as jackson or van buren vetoed the bill.
congress then created a fiscal corporation that would have more limited powers.
tyler vetoed that too.
tyler did sign the land act of 1841 which made it much easier for homesteaders to buy federal land or keep land on which they were squatters and he signed the first federal bankruptcy act.
but the whigs were furious at tyler.
in september 1841 the entire cabinet except for secretary of state daniel webster resigned in protest over the veto of the bank bills and the whig congressional caucus expelled tyler from the party marking the only time in u s history that a president was expelled from his own political party.
expanding the size of the united states remained an issue throughout the tyler presidency.
webster had refused to resign as secretary of state primarily because he was negotiating with britain to resolve a dispute that came dangerously close to war over where to locate the border between maine and canada.
the webster ashburton treaty of 1842 resolved the border with canada as far west as minnesota.
tyler supported webster because he did not want problems with britain when he turned to his real priority texas.
11 1 1 n 2 j 11 3 webster ashburton treaty the treaty signed by the united states and britain in 1842 that settled a boundary dispute between the united states and canada and provided for closer cooperation in suppressing the african slave trade.
chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 309 tyler had two paramount goals the annexation of texas and his own reelection.
he failed at the latter but not the former.
in september 1843 tyler began secret negotiations with texas over annexation.
in april 1844 tylers new secretary of state john c calhoun who was also a whig only because of his hatred for jackson over the nullification issue presented a treaty to the senate for the annexation of texas.
calhoun justified the treaty in explicitly proslavery terms insisting that if the united states did not annex texas as a slave state britain would take it over and end slavery there blocking the expansion of u s slavery.
but the nations leading whig henry clay and former democratic president martin van buren both announced their opposition to annexation largely because of slavery.
the senate rejected the treaty by an overwhelming vote of 35 to 16.
ihe link between texas and slavery doomed the presidential hopes of both tyler and calhoun since both were seen as using a political gimmick to gain their way.
the whigs nominated their old hero henry clay.
having been expelled by the whigs tyler tried for the democratic nomination but the party spurned him.
jackson still dominated the democratic party.
he would not allow tyler to be their candidate and jackson was furious at van buren over van burens opposition to the annexation of texas.
as a result the democrats ended up nominating jacksons choice a political unknown james k polk of tennessee instead of their own former president martin van buren.
james k polk was a true dark horse in american presidential politics.
he had served as speaker of the house from 1835 to 1839 but had twice been defeated for governor of tennessee.
few besides jackson thought he would be president.
his whig opponent henry clay was one of the best known political leaders in the united states.
if van buren had been the democratic nominee the election would have been fought over clays support for federally financed internal improvements and his advocacy for the bank of the united states both of which van buren opposed.
polks nomination changed everything.
the democratic party platform called for the reoccupation of oregon and the reannexation of texas with polk as their nominee the democrats planned to focus the election on manifest destiny claiming that they were the party of national expansion while painting the whigs as timid defenders of the status quo.
this focus on manifest destiny especially as it applied to texas assured polk the support not only of jackson but also of president tyler and of calhouns pro slavery partners who included both whigs and democrats in the south.
many catholics also saw the whigs as a protestant party while the democrats courted catholic voters especially recent immigrants.
most of the countrys catholics voted democratic especially in pennsylvania and new york.
in the end polk won 170 electoral votes to 105 for clay.
expansion in oregon and texas was going to be at the top of polks agenda.
because the new president would not take office until march 4 the practice from the countrys beginning until passage of the twentieth amendment in 1933 tyler still had 4 months to serve in office.
he did not waste them.
when the senate had rejected the annexation of texas in 1844 it had rejected a treaty with the republic of texas.
but the constitution provided that while treaties had to be ratified by two thirds of the senate a new state could be admitted by a majority vote in each house of congress.
up to this point all new states had been u s territories not separate sovereign countries.
there was no precedent for incorporating another country into the united states.
now tyler with jacksons advice and polks support tried a new approach simply admit texas as a state.
the idea worked.
instead of a treaty with texas which required a two thirds vote in the senate that tyler could not get both houses of congress passed a resolution admitting texas as a state in february 1845 leaving it to the president to negotiate the texas border with mexico see map 11 2.
five senators led by missouri s thomas hart benton who had opposed annexation now supported the statehood resolution based on a promise that president polk would conduct the negotiations about the texas border.
tyler did not feel bound by the promise.
on march 1 1845 with 4 days left in office tyler signed the resolution admitting texas sent envoys to texas 310 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 offering immediate statehood without any negotiations and held a gala white house party to celebrate the admission of the new state to the union.
benton was furious and most whigs were equally distraught.
three days later on march 4 1845 james k polk was inaugurated as president of a nation that considered texas to be one of its states even if mexico did not agree.
54 40 or fight the united states and oregon until the mid 1830s few americans had followed the route of the lewis and clark expedition and explored or settled in oregon.
the canadian hudsons bay company dominated the fur business in oregon and indian tribes traded furs to the company for rifles and other goods.
while american political debates seemed fixated on texas oregon was generally ignored by the press or in congress.
the lack of interest in oregon began to change in july 1836 when some 70 people traveled through a pass in the rocky mountains into what is now wyoming.
some of the group including four protestant missionaries settled in the fertile farming areas of the willamette valley south of the columbia river in present day oregon.
two of those missionaries marcus and narcissa whitman also became first rate publicists for beauties of the oregon territory see map 11 3.
11 1 oregon trail southern overland trail bozeman trail old spanish trail california trail taos trail mormon trail santa fe trail map 11 3 westward trails.
beginning at places like st louis or independence missouri or council bluffs iowa a variety of trails were used by early american migrants seeking new homes in not only oregon but also territory claimed by the republic of mexico from texas to california.
chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 311 american voices the letters of narcissa whitman 1836 1847 arcissa whitman and her physician husband marcus were sent by the american board of commissioners for foreign missions to establish a mission to the cayuse indians near what is now walla walla washington in 1836.
the mission converted few cayuse.
but narcissa s letters home and her husband s speaking tours encouraged white settlement in the oregon territory settlement that alienated indians but led to a strong american presence in the area.
although the letters were filled with descriptions of the hardships of the journey across the rocky mountains and the difficulty of life in oregon narcissa s praise of the beauty and fertility of the land made the greatest impact.
september 12.
1836 what a delightful place this is what a contrast to the rough barren sand plains through which we had so recently passed.
here we find fruit of every description apples peaches grapes pears plums and fig trees in abundance also cucumbers melons beans peas beets cabbage tomatoes and every kind of vegetable too numerous to be mentioned.
every part is very neat and tastefully arranged with fine walks lined on each side with strawberry vines.
at the opposite end of the garden is a good summer house covered with grape vines.
1836 it is indeed a lovely situation.
we are on a beautiful level a peninsula formed by the branches of the walla walla river upon the base of which our house stands on the southeast corner near the shore of the main river.
to run a fence across to the opposite river on the north from our house this with the river would enclose 300 acres of good land for cultivation all directly under the eye.
the rivers are barely skirted with timber.
this is all the woodland we can see beyond them as far as the eye can reach plains and mountains appear.
on the east a few rods from the house is a range of small hills covered with bunchgrass a very excellent food for animals and upon which they subsist during winter even digging it from under the snow.
waiilatpu oregon territory the whitman mission near walla walla august 23.
1847 for the last two weeks immigrants have been passing probably 80 or 100 wagons have already passed and 1 000 are said to be on the road besides the mormons the poor indians are amazed at the overwhelming numbers of americans coming into the country.
they seem not to know what to make of it.
very many of the principal ones are dying and t he remaining ones seem attached to us and cling to us the closer cultivate their farms quite extensively and do not wish to see any sniapus americans settle among them here.
the cayuse indians who were the focus of the whitman mission were indeed amazed at the overwhelming numbers of americans coming into the country.
when as a result of the immigration a measles epidemic struck in 1847 the amazement turned to anger.
the whitmans provided medical care to indian and white children but many cayuse still died.
in november 1847 the cayuse chief tiloukaikt led a party that killed both whitmans and burned the mission.
in response a white militia attacked the cayuse.
two years later tiloukaikt was executed for the murder of the whitmans.
from the gallows he said did not your missionaries teach us that christ died to save his people.
so we die to save our people.
disease and white raids so weakened the cayuse that they could not continue as an independent nation and they merged into the nez perce and yakima tribes.
source 1 htm 120536 the letters of narcissa whitman 1836 1847 fairfield wa yegalleon press 1986.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis on what aspects of the land did narcissa focus.
comparison how might the cayuse indians have seen the land.
how might their view have differed from that of narcissa.
the whitmans letters about oregon did much to attract further american settlement but the claim to the oregon territory had been shared by the united states and britain since a series of treaties negotiated by then secretary of state john quincy adams between 1818 and 1824 created the joint american british governance of oregon see chapter 8.
the oregon territory stretched along the pacific coast from the northern border of spanish mexican california to the southern border of what was then russian america now alaska and included the present u s states of oregon washington and idaho as well as the canadian province of british columbia and the yukon territory.
by the 1840s both governments wanted to resolve the border and end the joint ownership of the territory.
in the webster ashburton treaty of 1842 the united states and britain had already negotiated a u s canadian border at the 49th parallel from the great lakes west to the beginning of oregon.
continuing that border west would split the oregon territory 312 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 114 fort vancouver on the north shore of the columbia river in present day washington state was a beautiful site shown in this 1848 lithograph after an 1845 drawing by lieutenant henry j warre of native americans gathered in front of the fort.
pictures like this along with narcissa whitman s letters did much to popularize the oregon washington region.
between the two countries.
tylers ambassador in london proposed making the 49th parallel the boundary all the way to the pacific but giving the british the southern tip of vancouver island sliced by the 49th parallel and giving both countries the right to navigate the juan de fuca strait between vancouver and the mainland.
it seemed like a straightforward compromise.
polk however wanted more or pretended to.
in his 1844 campaign polk promised to win all of oregon up to the alaskan border or 5440 in terms of latitude.
but polk needed his army for the war that he expected to have with mexico and did not want to fight britain too.
the coalition that elected him was divided about oregon.
calhoun and the southern planters would have happily given all of oregon to britain.
they did not want a war or even tension to interrupt the cotton trade with britain that was making the south wealthy.
in addition from calhouns perspective any future states carved out of the oregon territory would most likely be free states tipping the balance in the senate against southern interests.
but missouris powerful senator thomas hart benton was growing fond of oregon because the trail from independence missouri to oregon was adding wealth to his state.
polk had promised 5440 and benton meant to hold him to it.
john quincy adams now a power in the house of representatives agreed with benton.
although he was opposed to annexing texas because of slavery adams was still an american expansionist he liked the region for all the reasons calhoun disliked it and he wanted oregon in the union.
the british government led by prime minister sir robert peel also wanted compromise that would support the hudsons bay company but guarantee an uninterrupted flow of american cotton to british mills and avoid war with the united states.
peel also faced other issues that were more pressing than oregon.
but others in london wanted more of oregon and insisted that the southern border of british oregon should be the columbia river which created the so called disputed triangle f land that both nations claimed.
chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 313 11 1 n 2 ihe peel and polk administrations eventually compromised along the 49th parallel the current border in spring 1846.
the agreement was an obvious compromise particularly for the united states but it meant that the united states was free to pursue actions that polk considered more important.
as the democratic new york herald said we can now thrash mexico into decency at our leisure 113 11 1 quick review why was annexing texas more controversial than dividing the oregon territory.
discuss at least two major factors.
the u s war with mexico 1846 1848 n 2 analyze the causes strategies and outcomes of the u s war with mexico.
two years before presidents tyler and polk had managed the u s annexation of texas mexico had warned the united states that such a move would mean war because mexico still claimed the territory.
one week after tyler signed the annexation legislation the mexican ambassador in washington declared the move an act of aggression and mexico severed diplomatic relations with the united states.
although the vote to make texas a state of the united states was passed and celebrated in washington in march of 1845 texas did not ratify the agreement until july 1845 and congress did not ratify the texas decision until december.
meanwhile mexican president jose joaquin herrera a political moderate agreed to negotiate with the united states.
he knew his country did not have the resources to fight a war but he also knew that public opinion in his country would never accept the loss of texas particularly the larger area of texas going all the way to the rio grande that the united states now claimed.
polk sent former louisiana congressman john slidell to mexico city to negotiate.
fighting the war in texas and mexico responding to resistance although there were tensions between americans and the government of mexico from texas to california the heart of the concerns in 1846 had to do with texas.
while leaders in both countries negotiated about whether the united states could annex texas another question loomed just what constituted texas.
the republic of texas had never governed any land west of the nueces river.
many in the united states and mexico considered that river to be the western boundary of texas.
but polk and many texans claimed that the rio grande was the border a claim that made texas a much bigger state see map 11 2.
herrera would never accept that claim.
moreover polk really wanted not only texas as far as the rio grande but also new mexico and california.
he would purchase it if he could but he also considered a war as a viable way to secure that land.
while the negotiations continued polk ordered general zachary taylor to cross the louisiana texas border at the sabine river in june 1845 and from there continue to approach as near the boundary line the rio grande as prudence will dictate taylor was indeed a prudent general and he initially moved only as far as the nueces where he halted at corpus christi to train his 4 000 troops.
but his orders were clear any mexican movement across the rio grande would be considered an act of war.
it took almost a year for polk to get his war but in april 1846 taylors army moved to the northern edge of the rio grande.
on april 25 1846 11 americans were killed in a battle with mexican troops who had crossed the rio grande.
polk was delighted when taylor reported that hostilities may now be considered as commenced in his war message to congress on may 11 1846 polk said mexico has invaded our territory and shed american blood upon the american soil war exists by the act of mexico herself 314 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 the artist richard caton woodville s painting war news from mexico captured the interest and in some cases surprise that came as news of the war reached people in most parts of the united states much more quickly than ever before thanks primarily to the spread of telegraph lines that transmitted information faster than ever previously possible.
not everyone in congress agreed.
most whigs opposed war though they wanted to support the american troops who might be in harms way and worried about being seen as unpatriotic.
kentucky whig garrett david said it is our own president who began this war.
he has been carrying it on for months ihe key vote on the war passed the house 123 to 67 though many democrats did not want to be seen as opposing their partys president and a subsequent vote formalizing the declaration of war carried the house by 174 to 14 with 35 abstentions.
in the senate the key test of strength carried only by 26 to 20 but a subsequent vote that included funds financing the war carried 40 to 2 with 3 abstentions.
president polk declared that a state ofwar existed between the united states and mexico on may 13 1846.
the war that a divided congress declared was fought by a divided nation.
polk and his supporters expected a quick victory.
senator thomas hart benton wrote that the president wanted a small war just large enough to require a treaty of peace and not large enough to make military reputations dangerous for the presidency polk got a longer and more costly war than he bargained for one that also produced more military heroes.
the war provoked strong opposition.
a decade before it began john quincy adams warned congress that the annexation of texas would bring on a war in which the united states would be in the wrong saying sirs the banners of freedom will be the banners of mexico and your banners i blush to speak the word will be the banners of slavery a decade later adams voted against the war in the house of representatives.
once the war began others including congressman abraham lincoln of illinois joined adams in opposition.
an aspiring whig politician from illinois lincoln voiced his suspicions about the war.
he thought that president polk is deeply conscious of being in the wrong that he ordered general taylor into the midst of a peaceful mexican settlement purposely to bring on a war some of those in the field agreed.
in texas a young lieutenant colonel ethan hitchcock noted in his diary that it looks as if the government sent a small force on purpose to bring on a war so as to have a pretext fort taking california and as much of this country as it chooses perhaps the most influential response to the war with mexico came from a poet rather than a politician.
while he is remembered today mostly for his reflective stay at walden pond henry david thoreau also believed that the war with mexico was immoral.
in a pamphlet titled civil disobedience thoreau wrote i meet this american government or its representative the state government directly and face to face once a year no more in the person of its tax gatherer thoreau saw the demand for his tax money as the opportunity to resist what he saw as the government s injustice and refused to pay his tax a portion of which would go to support what he considered to be an unjust and immoral war.
he was arrested and spent a night in the town jail in concord before someone to his frustration paid the tax for him.
but his willingness to face arrest for his convictions and the pamphlet that he wrote explaining his actions made thoreau not only one of the most famous opponents of the war with mexico but a model of civil disobedience for generations to come in the united states and elsewhere.
in the first battles of the war taylor defeated a larger mexican force and occupied ihe mexican town of matamoros in may 1846.
the mexican army fought bravely but the americans had superior technology rifles that shot farther and better artillery.
the u s navy blockaded mexican ports on the gulf and pacific coasts so mexico could not import supplies from abroad.
taylors army moved slowly into mexico but heat and disease took a heavier toll than battles.
one in eight u s soldiers died in a 6 week encampment in the mexican city of camargo even though no battles took place there.
if the troops especially the volunteers had learned to fill canteens upstream from where horses were washed the death toll would have been far lower.
then in chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 315 rti thinking historically considering henry david thoreau henry david thoreau 1817 1862 published on the duty of civil disobedience in 1849.
the essay has at least two themes thoreau s opposition to most if not all government and his belief that civil disobedience in this case breaking an immoral law was the right thing to do.
thoreau s belief in civil disobedience refusing to obey an unjust law and a willingness to face the consequences have made thoreau a model for others who advocated civil disobedience including martin luther king jr 1929 1968 in the united states and mohandas gandhi 1869 1948 who led the nonviolent protests that eventually won india independence from great britain both of whom cited thoreau.
but thoreau s arguments are complex and many who may agree with some of what he might say would reject other aspects of his essay.
in the essay he begins by arguing heartily accept the motto that government is best which governs least and i should like to see it acted up to more rapidly and systematically.
carried out it finally amounts to this which also i believe that government is best which governs not at all and when men are prepared for it that will be the kind of government which they will have.
government is at best but an expedient but most governments are usually and all governments are sometimes inexpedient.
the objections which have been brought against a standing army and they are many and weighty and deserve to prevail may also at last be brought against a standing government.
he then moves on to his specific critique of the war with mexico and his appeal for resistance how does it become a man to behave toward the american government today.
i answer that he cannot without disgrace be associated with it.
i cannot for an instant recognize that political organization as my government which is the slave s government also.
under a government which imprisons unjustly the true place for a just man is also a prison.
the proper place today the only place which massachusetts has provided for her freer and less despondent spirits is in her prisons to be put out and locked out of the state by her own act as they have already put themselves out by their principles.
it is there that the fugitive slave and the mexican prisoner on parole and the indian come to plead the wrongs of his race should find them on that separate but more aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaam free and honorable ground where the state places those who are not with her but against her the only house in a slave state in which a free man can abide with honor.
finally he says he is not willing to be like the thousands who are in opinion opposed to slavery and to the war who yet in effect do nothing.
thoreau refused to pay taxes to support the war and was jailed for his crime of conscience.
while thoreau s words and actions were widely praised by some and condemned by others the arguments also involved significant internal differences some who agreed with thoreau in his opposition to the war were not willing to risk jail as he was and did not think it was necessary to do so or indeed proper to break the law as he did.
some who agreed with thoreau in his opposition to the war also disagreed with his critique of all government and would never echo thoreau s words the objections which have been brought against a standing army and they are many and weighty and deserve to prevail may also at last be brought against a standing government.
indeed many have criticized thoreau for being a philosopher of excessive individualism advocating the moral worth of the individual over the state or a social group a stance that observers from tocqueville to the present have criticized the united states for representing.
source henry david thoreau on the duty of civil disobedience new york houghton mifflin 1893.
thinking critically 1.
contextualization how would you explain thoreau s decision to use a fugitive slave a mexican prisoner and an indian as examples of those wronged by his government.
what connections might he make between the plight of all three.
what was happening in the united states that might lead an author to link these different groups of people in 1849.
chronological reasoning what are the implications of his rejection of all government when he says that government is best which governs not at all.
is it necessary to agree with thoreau in his rejection of government to agree with his critique of the war with mexico or his decision to go to jail as a matter of conscience rather than pay taxes to support the war.
september 1846 taylor defeated another larger mexican force and captured the crucial mexican town of monterrey.
with both armies now exhausted taylor allowed the mexicans to withdraw peacefully and declared a truce which infuriated polk.
after the victory at monterrey polk tried to open peace negotiations but the mexican government was not interested.
this lack of interest came as a surprise because the united states had secretly helped the former mexican dictator santa anna 316 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 11 1 11 2 113 map 11 4 battles in the u s war with mexico.
once war was declared between the united states and mexico general taylor led his armies into the disputed territory and further south to battles in monterrey and buena vista in northern mexico while general kearney led forces across the continent to take control of santa fe new mexico and then parts of california.
the navy played a major role in the takeover of california but also blockaded pacific and gulf ports in mexico while general winfield scott landed at veracruz and soon thereafter won control of mexico city itself.
seize power in mexico city based on his promise to u s negotiators that he would conclude a peace treaty.
but once in office santa anna shifted his position and pre pared to fight rather than bargain see map 11 4.
santa anna marched north to engage taylor whom he knew was now short of troops.
in february 1847 the two armies met at what americans called the battle of buena vista.
it was the largest single engagement of the war and it was a draw which meant that santa anna had failed to defeat the americans on mexican soil.
taylors army remained intact.
many of taylors best troops had been moved further south.
as polk realized he was in for a long fight he also knew that taylor could not march across the deserts to mexico city.
the distance was too long to supply an invading army.
polk also worried chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 317 11 2 e3 explore the war with mexico on what did the texas revolution and mexican american war mean for american expansion.
in the 1830s the mexican government faced problems in its northern state of texas.
the area was home to many anglo american settlers and they were growing increasingly unhappy under mexican governance.
texans successfully rebelled forming the independent republic of texas in 1836.
during the next decade the united states annexed texas as a new state but disputed land claims quickly led to war between the united states and mexico in 1846.
the u s victory over the mexican forces in 1848 after a series of consecutive u s battle successes led to huge territorial losses for its southern neighbor as the united states acquired the territory that today is the modern southwest.
u s general winfield scott led his troops into mexico city to accept the official mexican surrender in 1847.
this popular picture shows the clean ending of the war but not the bloody battles that led to it.
major battles of the mexican american war battle date victor j battle of palo alto j may 8 1846 u s battle of resaca de la palma i may 9 1846 u s.
i battle of monterrey i sept 21 24 1846 u s battleof san pasqual dec 6 1846 mexico battle of rio san gabriel jan 8 1847 u s i battleof buena vista feb 22 23 1847 u s battle of sacramento rier feb 27 1847 u s battle of veracruz march 29 1847 u s battle of cerro gordo april 18 1847.
u s key questions use myhistorylabxp orer to answer these questions context what was the political situation in mexico leading up to its war with the united states.
map the nation s transformations between the 1820s and 1840s.
response how did the texas revolution unfold.
understand the progress troop movements and major battles.
consequence what did the acquisition of mexican territory mean for the slavery in the united states.
consider the potential implications for the extension of slavery.
318 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 about making taylor a war hero and political rival.
so he turned to the experienced professional soldier winfield scott to plan an invasion of the mexican heartland.
in march 1847 after careful planning scott landed troops at the port of veracruz.
it was the largest amphibious operation of u s troops before d day during world war ii.
scott s army then marched to mexico city taking the same invasion route that hernan cortes had used against the aztecs 328 years before see chapter 2.
after hard fighting mexico city surrendered in september 1847.
polk still worried about military heroes then removed scott from command in early 1848.
the united states had lost 12 518 soldiers and spent almost 100 million in the war.
mexico had lost many more lives soldiers and civilians and its economy was devastated.
from new mexico to alta california and the bear flag revolt while the major focus of the fighting in the u s war with mexico took place on the texas border and in the heartland of mexico new mexico and california were not exempt from battles though they were of smaller scale than anything seen elsewhere.
the initial u s conquest of new mexico was easy.
in the summer of 1846 general stephen watts kearny marched 850 miles from fort leavenworth kansas to santa fe.
the mexican governor had already fled and kearny took silence and sullenness among the people for support or at least acceptance of the american takeover.
he raised the u s flag in santa fe and promised that the government would respect the residents property and religious freedom as well as protect them from indian raids.
kearny appointed charles bent an american already living in taos as territorial governor.
then in september 1846 a month after he had arrived kearny marched most of his troops off to secure the us.
victory in california.
although a bloody rebellion against u s rule by hispanics and indians broke out later that year and bent himself was killed by the rebels u s troops soon suppressed it and most armed resistance to annexation ended.
emboldened by this show of support a group of armed american immigrants in the inland town of sonoma arrested general mariano vallejo the man they considered the symbol of mexican authority in sonoma and jailed him at fort sutter near sacramento.
vallejo had retired from active duty with the mexican government and was quite friendly to a possible american takeover.
but to the americans vallejo symbolized mexican authority.
with no other mexican leader in sight the rebels organized what they called the bear flag revolt by declaring california to be an independent republic.
they also designed a flag and raised it in the town square in sonoma.
the flag displayed a large star next to a grizzly bear atop a bottom border stripe and the words california republic to the mexicans like vallejo the bear flag was a symbol that these new immigrants were the bears who came as a thief to take their cattle and their land.
soon after vallejos arrest sloats u s navy squadron sailed into monterey bay and proclaimed u s conquest of california as a victory in the war with mexico.
the independent california republic was a short lived convenience.
the rebels replaced the bear flag now the state flag of california with the stars and stripes.
the american conquest of california was much easier than the war along the rio grande in texas.
the mexican government was much less interested in california than in texas a reality that had allowed a unique californian culture to develop in the early decades of the 19th century.
mexican citizens of california the products of this culture had a decidedly ambivalent attitude toward annexation by the united states.
nevertheless some native californians opposed the american takeover and fought against the bear flag rebels and the american forces led by navy commodore robert stockton who had replaced sloat and captain fremont.
those californians saw themselves as citizens of the republic of mexico even if sometimes disgruntled citizens and they saw the americans as an invading army.
in a series of skirmishes between 1846 and 1847 35 of those fighting on the american side died in battle while an estimated eight californios those fighting for the mexican cause were killed.
later the californios suffered much greater losses in property and indeed their way of life.
chapter 11 111 11 2 113 bear flag revolt a revolt led by recent american immigrants who temporarily declared california to be an independent republic until u s forces took control of the territory.
manifest destiny expanding the nation 319 ill i i n 2 i there were many reasons for the limited nature of the warfare in california.
the total non indian population of california was very small and most of the regular mexican forces had abandoned the region before hostilities began.
probably even more significant most of the mexican leaders in california were really hoping for an american takeover to replace the distant and inept mexican administration and the lawlessness of the american bear flag frontiersmen.
in 1847 the final skirmishes between californio defenders under andres pico and the american troops took place in southern california.
as it became increasingly clear that no support could be expected from mexico pico negotiated the terms of what he saw as an honorable surrender.
in january 1847 picos troops marched into los angeles and disbanded.
the american control of the region was complete.
treaty of guadalupe hidalgo the treaty signed in 1848 ended the u s war with mexico and granted the united states control of all of texas new mexico and california.
gadsden purchase the final acquisition of land in the continental united states was completed in 1853 when the united states paid mexico 10 million for a strip of land in what is now southern new mexico and arizona.
negotiating the peace defining the borders in april 1847 polk had sent nicholas trist an experienced diplomat to accompany scott and negotiate a treaty with the mexican government.
after the fighting in mexico city had ended trist began serious negotiations.
with mexico city new mexico and california already in the hands of the u s army however polk decided that trist was not being tough enough and recalled him.
instead of returning to washington trist warned the mexican authorities that he had been recalled and that his replacement would demand much more.
perhaps they might want to conclude a treaty quickly with him.
the mexicans were anxious to end the u s occupation of mexico city and the countrys key ports and trist was right after the conquest of mexico city polk wanted even more mexican territory.
on february 2 1848 trist and the mexican commissioners signed the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo.
trist told his wife that he had asked mexico for the minimum that polk would accept because he was ashamed of the iniquity of the war as an abuse of power on our part but his minimum included all of polks original demands all of texas to the rio grande and land further west to california as far south as san diego.
mexico was paid 15 million which went to its creditors.
the treaty may have been for less land than polk wanted but it reshaped both the united states and mexico.
a furious president polk realizing that he was stuck with the treaty that trist had negotiated submitted it to the senate which ratified it.
but polk refused to pay trist for his services.
trist was not paid until 1871.
the whig affiliated editor horace greeley wrote in his new york tribune let us have peace no matter if the adjuncts are revolting the abolitionist frederick douglass was harsher they have succeeded in robbing mexico of her territory and are rejoicing over their success under the hypocritical pretense of a regard for peace nevertheless with the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo peace had come.
the united states was much larger as a result of the war now including 90 000 new citizens who had been citizens of mexico and even more indians who preferred to stay independent of both countries.
it was a different country from when polk took office.
in 1853 one of polks successors president franklin pierce sent james gadsden to mexico city with instructions to buy a strip of land south of arizona and new mexico for a southern transcontinental railroad from new orleans to el paso to los angeles which needed to be located south of the rocky mountains.
gadsden was also told to purchase as much additional land as possible including perhaps all of baja california.
mexican authorities suspected that the united states was after much more than a railroad route.
in the end mexico sold only the minimum that the united states wanted.
for 10 million money its government badly needed mexico ceded 39 000 sparsely populated square miles to the united states.
this area known as the gadsden purchase was the final extension of u s territory within what would be the contiguous 48 states see map 11 5.
in his own eyes polk had an amazingly successful term.
he had made the united states a continental nation.
he had completed the job he had promised to do and did not seek a second term.
for the election of 1848 polks democrats nominated lewis 320 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 territorial expansion in the nineteenth century date of terntor ht acquisition i e.
1850 date of statehood ie wm a original thirteen states 1783 great britain cession 1783 louisiana purchase 1803 florida purchase 1819 l un texas annexation 1845.
i mexican cession 1848 acquired from great britainl818 i j acquired from great britain 1842 ezz3 oregon country 1846 gadsen purchase 1853 map 11 5 an expanded union.
with the treaty setting the oregon border in 1846 and the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo in 1848 the territory of the continental united states was almost set.
the small gadsden purchase in 1853 made it easier to build a railroad south of the rocky mountains.
cass of michigan.
the whigs having won once with a general and having lost three limes h then hero henry clay turned to a new war hero and nominated genera zachary taylor known as old rough and ready and former congressman millard fillmore from new york as taylors running mate.
while taydor was as strong a eiovroirnlher and cass like polk was an expan nationahst as jackson he was also a slaveno i.
m i km cbvprv could not stomach either of them and some siomst.
northerners opposed to slavery couiu treated the free soil party which was committed to ensunng that all new terr torre would be free of slavery fhe free soilers did not propose abolishing slavery where r already existed but did oppose any extension of slavery into any new terrrtor es.
using that platform they nominated former p ironic qutcome for president three way race taylor won a solid vie y.
ciauy on the issue of the polk.
the whigs had opposed polk creating military heroes throughout the ar with mexico and the presi en tg on war.
in the end a whig war hero succeeded him.
a lime o y chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 321 a hot july 4th of 1850 taylor suddenly died and vice president fillmore ascended to the presidency.
this time however unlike tyler s accession with the death of harrison there were no major policy shifts when fillmore took office.
11 2 quick review considering u s actions in texas and california was the mexican american war a land grab.
why or why not.
113 california gold rush the rush to find gold that brought thousands of new residents to california and produced millions of dollars in new wealth for the region and the united states.
west into the pacific describe the causes and outcomes of u s expansion in california and into the pacific region including establishing new relationships with hawaii china and japan.
early in his term of office president polk had told congress that he was interested in acquiring californias harbors from mexico because he said these ports would shelter american ships and allow the pacific ocean to provide the basis for an extensive and profitable commerce with china and other countries of the east he had no idea how quickly his dream would come true.
even before the negotiations with mexico were complete gold was discovered in california and the resulting gold rush made into thriving commercial centers not only the gold camps but also the cities around harbors that polk wanted.
these same pacific coast harbors quickly became home to american ships that had been dominating much of the pacific ocean for a decade before polk spoke.
in the 1840s american whaling ships led all other nations in the whale trade in the pacific and the u s navy led the way to american negotiations for a role in trade with hawaii and china.
after the acquisition of california the navy also established a trading relationship with japan.
after 1848 the profits of the pacific trade poured into the united states through the newly acquired pacific ports.
the acquisition of oregon and california not only expanded the united states to the pacific coast but also allowed the nation to become a dominant player all across the pacific ocean.
the gold rush to california another 1848 development was perhaps even more important to californias history than the shift in political authority from mexico to the united states.
on january 24 1848 while american and mexican negotiators were still meeting in the mexican town of guadalupe hidalgo james marshall a carpenter at the fort and mill owned by swiss native johann sutter on the american river in northern california was deepening the channel going into the mills water wheel when he noticed some odd material in the water.
he reported boys i believe i have found a gold mine his was the first discovery of gold that would quickly lead to the california gold rush.
sutter and marshall tried to keep the discovery a secret but word spread all too quickly.
by may 1848 everyone in san francisco seemed to know that gold had been discovered.
and while communications were still slow prospective miners from all over california indians long time mexican residents and american settlers as well as immigrants from oregon hawaii mexico and as far away as chile peru australia france and parts of china moved into the gold fields of the sierra nevada mountains.
the rush was on.
two thirds of the white men in oregon came south to california.
recently discharged soldiers from the mexican and american armies joined them there.
in the earliest days california indians who knew the land best made excellent gold prospectors.
newcomers expressed surprise that in the first year of the gold rush miwok indian women panned for gold alongside of miwok men and the newcomers from around the globe.
the diversity in the fields did not last.
in august 1848 an article in the new york herald included a brief mention that gold worth in value 30 was picked up in the bed of a stream of the sacramento.
president polk determined to show the value of the newly acquired territory 322 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 113 included a mention in l s annual message to congress.
ten million dollars in gold produced in california in 1848 and within 3 years the revenue had grown to s22o million.
so much gold changed the economic calculations of the united states and much of the world from china to south america to europe.
suddenly there was a great deal of gold in circulation everywhere.
thousands of people wanted to get rich quickly by coming to california to find the gold.
californias non indian population was around 7 000 in 1845.
it had grown to almost 93 000 in the first u s census of 1850.
while the first prospectors had come from the south mexico and south america and the east from pacific whaling ships hawaii and china by 1849 the largest numbers were coming from the eastern united states and europe.
getting to california from other parts of the united states or europe could mean a long slow and expensive trip by ocean around the southern tip of south america.
it could also involve a shorter sea voyage to nicaragua then an overland trek by pack mule across the isthmus and another voyage from there up to san francisco.
still for others it could mean traveling overland by walking and on ox drawn wagons across the continent.
sea travel around south america was certainly the most comfortable and perhaps safest but it cost a lot from 300 to 700 and it was slow taking 4 to 8 months.
the trip via nicaragua or panama was almost as expensive perhaps 600 and dangerous but it was certainly the fastest taking 5 to 8 weeks.
coming by land across the continent was by far the cheapest costing not more than 200 but it also took at least 3 months and had to be timed just right to avoid winter on the rocky mountains.
the majority opted for the cheapest way.
small numbers of people had been coming west for decades but in 1849 50 many thousands of prospective californians traveled along the platte and humboldt rivers and then the oregon and california trails into the gold fields see map 11 3.
the gold camps themselves were harsh places.
fortunes were made and lost not only in the fields but also at gambling tables and through theft and intimidation.
white americans some of them very recent americans resented the competition of miners from south america and elsewhere especially those who came from china or who were indians or californios.
within a short time most chinese and indians miners had been driven from the gold fields through violence and intimidation though some indians were retained to work for subsistence wages mining gold for others while the chinese found other kinds of work eventually building the western railroads and developing service industries for miners and others.
the incredible jump in californias immigrant population came at a terrible cost for the california indians.
their population already declining in the face of the missions declined much more rapidly after the beginnings of the gold rush because of disease and outright murder decreasing by almost 85 percent between 1848 and 1880 to 23 000.
african slaves were rare both because slave owners knew it was all too easy for a slave to escape in california and because other miners hated all competition.
few women were able to succeed as miners indeed far fewer women than men even came to california in the gold rush.
mining camps were overwhelmingly male communities.
some women who did come to california were forced or tricked into prostitution to pay for their passage from europe china and latin america.
the most freewheeling era of the gold camps was very short lived.
by 1851 the chances of finding gold by simply looking in a stream bed as marshall and sutter had done in 1848 or even finding gold with a pan had pretty much ended except in the more southerly tuolumne and merced gold regions.
some miners began using a rocker or cradle that washed dirt out more quickly.
soon enough gold mining was transformed into large scale hydraulic mining which required large corporate investments and reduced most miners to hired labor.
even for hired laborers though mining paid much better than most east coast jobs the possibility of making r z nntimied and fortunes were still made in the gold a fortune evaporated.
gold mining continued ano ioi iu fields but the gold rush was over.
chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 323 11 3 whaling in the pacific ocean in february 1849 the owners of the whaling ship minerva from new bedford massachusetts received a letter from its captain.
the communication reported that after hunting whales in the pacific he had stopped in san francisco for supplies and to recruit more sailors but the excitement there in relation to the discovery of gold made it impossible to prevent the crew from running away.
three of the crew in attempting to swim ashore were drowned and the ships company soon became too much reduced to continue the whaling voyage the minerva thus joined dozens of other whaling ships abandoned in san francisco harbor while their crews sought wealth in the california gold fields.
some sailors no doubt found fortunes in the gold fields that had eluded them at sea and some ship owners lost substantial sums when their ships were abandoned but in general the whaling industry was a source of wealth to some americans while supporting many others and contributing to the growth of the american economy.
the golden age of the american whaling industry began after the war of 1812 and continued until the outbreak of the civil war in 1861.
during these years hundreds of american ships moved from their earlier and safer whale hunts in the atlantic to 2 3 and 4 year voyages to the pacific ocean.
whale oil which burned brighter than any other fuel available at the time was used for lamps across the globe.
whale products provided oil for the industrial revolution as well as the bone for the hoop dresses and corsets that were the height of womens fashion.
despite british efforts to launch their own whaling fleets by the 1830s four fifths of all the whaling ships in the world were american.
the owners and captains of most american whaling ships were mostly men of old new england english stock many of them quakers but there were exceptions.
a few african americans including paul cuffee and absalom f boston became captains clipper ships like the famous flying cloud made the trip from new york to san francisco in record speed 89 days in one case while slower whaling ships traveling from new bedford and other atlantic ports into the pacific often took 2 or 3 years.
during the 1830s and 1840s american sailing ships projected american influence into the pacific ocean region as never before.
324 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 and cuffee became a ship owner.
the crews white and black came from almost every corner of the globe pacific islanders west indians south americans or portuguese.
whaling was one of the few occupations in which blacks were paid the same as whites.
even a runaway slave could admit as john thompson did in 1840 i am a fugitive slave from maryland 1 thought i would go on a whaling voyage as being a place where i stood least chance of being arrested by slave hunters by some estimates 10 percent of those who worked on whaling ships were black.
nevertheless most sailors in the whaling business were white men like ishmael the fictional narrator of herman melville s 1851 novel moby dick though like the fictional ishmael the real world whites served as part of racially diverse crews.
few women served on whaling ships.
there were occasional stories of women who hid their gender and embarked with the crew not easy in the close quarters of a small ship on a long voyage.
some captains also took along their wives and children and some crew members said they appreciated having a woman on board who might know more medicine than the men and who could soothe an angry captain.
whaling ships also explored parts of the world unknown to previous generations of americans.
the first americans to enter japan were whaling sailors.
almost a decade before commodore perrys famous voyage to open up japan in 1853 54 the manhattan entered tokyo harbor in 1845 to return shipwrecked japanese sailors.
the superior was the first whaling ship to enter the arctic ocean off the coast of alaska in 1848.
u s whaling ships explored much of the south pacific sailed off the coast of australia and explored antarctica.
as a result of the many whaling ships that anchored there honolulu and san francisco became major american ports rivaling new bedford boston and nantucket.
the navy and diplomacy across the pacific while many american whaling ships had been sailing the pacific since 1815 the 1848 treaty of guadalupe hidalgo added a string of pacific ports especially san francisco to the united states.
indeed the push for pacific ocean ports had been part of the driving force behind president polks push for war.
the acquisition of those ports expanded u s interest in the pacific and beyond.
by 1851 daniel webster who had become secretary of state again under president fillmore proclaimed that the united states should command the oceans both oceans all the oceans.
central to the command of the pacific ocean was securing u s influence in hawaii.
in 1778 the british explorer captain james cook was the first european to reach the hawaiian islands but by the mid 19th century the united states had a much larger presence in hawaii.
many protestant missionaries and merchants began arriving in hawaii in the 1820s where they built churches schools and businesses.
missionaries merchants and whalers boosted the hawaiian economy but they also brought alcohol gambling prostitution and disease including venereal diseases that killed many hawaiians and reduced the islanders ability to maintain their independence.
on occasion the united states did protect the native hawaiians.
an american missionary william richards advised king kamehameha ii r 1819 1824 on ways to maneuver among the great powers and play the united states britain and france against each other.
in 1842 secretary of state daniel webster added hawaii to the protections of the monroe doctrine and made it clear that the united states would not tolerate a british or french takeover.
in 1851 webster negotiated a secret treaty with king kamehameha iii that in the event of war hawaii would become a u s protectorate websters priority was securing trading rights and the use of honolulu as a coaling station for u s steamships merchant vessels and warships on their way to trade with china and japan.
just as the united states gained san francisco and influence in hawaii britain was forcing china to open to the west.
china saw itself as the center of the world.
foreigners were barbarians who might be allowed to trade in a limited way through chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 325 a japanese artist captured a u s navy commanded by commodore mathew perry landing in tokyo and demanding that japan open itself to trade with the united states.
kanagawa treaty an 1854 agreement the first between the united states and japan it opened two japanese ports to american commerce protected shipwrecked american sailors and ended japan s 200 years of isolation.
the port of guangzhou but would never be treated as equals.
despite the restrictions american merchants wanted access to more trade with china and american missionaries wanted access to its people.
regardless both were mostly shut out.
losing patience with the chinese the british turned to violence.
in the so called opium war 1839 1842 the british forced china to open its ports to british products including opium from british india and cede hong kong island as a british colony.
following in the footsteps of the british u s.
ambassador caleb cushing negotiated the treaty of wang hsia in 1844 which gained the united states the same trade rights as the british.
while britain took the lead in china the united states forced the even more isolated empire of japan to open to the west.
the united states wanted japan as another coaling station beyond hawaii on the route to china and wanted to trade with japan for its own sake.
president fillmore sent commodore mathew perry to open up japan and force a weak and semi barbarous people to deal with the united states.
in july 1853 perry led four large warships with nearly 1 000 sailors into tokyo bay and began negotiations.
he returned in march 1854 with an even larger fleet.
perry did everything he could to impress the japanese providing japanese officials with champagne kentucky bourbon and a history of the war with mexico to let them know what happened to those who opposed united states might.
in return the japanese grudgingly agreed to the kanagawa treaty that opened two relatively iso lated ports to the united states.
only in 1858 did japan open more ports and establish formal diplomatic relations with other countries.
britain quickly became a larger economic and military force in japan than the united states.
nevertheless the united states had established a solid presence in japan and china by the late 1850s.
as a result of expansion in the 1840s the nations border was extended to the pacific and u s ships sailed everywhere on that ocean.
the pacific and every nation on its shores including china japan and russian siberia were in much closer contact with the united states than they had been a short time before.
after 1848 the united states was an emerging force in the world.
113 quick review was expansion to other nations hawaii china japan a logical extension of manifest destiny.
how were u s intentions across the pacific different than u s goals in north america.
326 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 conclusion from the late 1830s through the 1840s the united states became a continental power whose territory spanned from the atlantic to the pacific oceans.
a strong belief in the manifest destiny of the united states justified the louisiana purchase of 1803 though the term was not yet in use and supported hoped for territory acquisitions from oregon to texas to california.
manifest destiny reflected the larger belief that the united states was specially chosen by divine will to bring liberty and democracy usually in its jacksonian form to the planet.
while americans discussed manifest destiny the nation experienced hard times in the 1830s.
the financial panic of 1837 brought on by a worldwide glut in trade created economic uncertainty in the cotton growing south and the industrial north.
it took several years for the nations economy to recover.
many americans supported versions of manifest destiny for varied political or economic reasons while others had grave reservations.
whether one supported or opposed slavery played directly into views about expansion which new territories one wanted and how new territories would be used.
military actions that leaders took in the name of manifest destiny led to territorial expansion that spanned the continent to the pacific coast.
during the presidency of james polk texas entered the union as a slave state and after a bloody war from 1846 to 1848 mexico ceded much of what became the american west to the united states including new mexico and aided by the local bear flag revolt california.
while many americans from politicians like john quincy adams to philosophers like henry david thoreau opposed the war with mexico many other americans celebrated the victory and the acquisition of so much new territory.
the united states also ended the joint ownership of the oregon territory with britain and both countries resolved borders that allowed each country to have full control of its share.
the gold rush accelerated the settlement of california with diverse people and it produced enormous amounts of gold but decimated the american indian population in the far west.
winning california from mexico dramatically changed the u s economy not only in terms of gold but also in terms of increased ventures throughout the pacific involving whaling and trade.
the united states now projected manifest destiny across an ocean where it had few rivals.
the united states became the world leader in the production of whale oil established a relationship with hawaii increased its trade with china and forced japan to open itself up to the west.
the intensification of american interest in asia in the 1840s and 1850s reflected the desire of american policy makers to successfully compete with europe for new markets and coincided with the realization of the long standing desire among many americans to create a continental nation that could become a world power.
chapter review how did u s reliance on the idea of manifest destiny permanently alter the geographical social and political complexion of the united states.
chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 327 chapter 11 chapter review manifest destiny the importance of an idea explain what manifest destiny meant and how it led the united states to involvement in texas california and oregon.
review questions 1.
crafting arguments was the war that broke out in 1835 between the mexican government and american settlers in texas inevitable.
why or why not.
contextualization why was the status of texas such a divisive political issue in the early 1840s.
historical interpretation what light do the letters of narcissa whitman see the american voice feature on page 312 shed on the motives behind american settlement in the oregon territory in the 1830s.
contextualization what connections did opponents of the u s war with mexico make between the war and slavery.
historical interpretation what changes did incorporation into the united states bring to the society and economy of the former mexican provinces of new mexico and california.
west into the pacific analyze the causes and outcomes of u s expansion into the pacific region including establishing new relationships with hawaii china and japan.
review questions 7.
historical interpretation what role did the whaling industry play in american expansion in the pacific in the first half of the 19th century.
crafting arguments how would you explain the intensification of american interest in asia in the 1840s and 1850s.
i 11j the u s war with mexico 1846 1848 1m analyze the causes strategies and outcomes of the u s war with mexico.
review questions 4.
crafting arguments is it fair to describe the u s war with mexico as a war of conquest.
why or why not.
328 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 part part outline.
chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 1831 1854 the changing face of the american people in the 1840s and 1850s slavery in the united states 1840s and 1850s new strength for american women chapter 13 the politics of separation 1850 1861 from union to disunion bleeding kansas and dredscott v sandford the economy the panic of 1857 and the lincoln douglas debates the election of 1860 and the secession of the south chapter 14 and the war came the civil war 1861 1865 fort sumter to antietam 1861 1862 the road to emancipation the home front shortages opposition riots and battles from gettysburg to appomattox and beyond chapter 15 reconstruction 1865 1877 federal reconstruction policy the impact of reconstruction terror apathy and the creation of the segregated south 12 1831 1854 chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of how immigration new debates over slavery and an activist generation of women shaped the lives of americans.
the changing face of the american people in the 1840s and 1850s analyze how immigration from china ireland and germany as well as the incorporation of mexican citizens in the southwest changed the united states.
slavery in the united states 1840s and 1850s explain how the lives of slaves slaveholders and abolitionists evolved in the decades before the civil war.
new strength for american women describe how the women s rights movement developed in the united states in the 1830s and 1840s.
living in a nation ing lands in the 1830s 1840s and 1850s the united states became increasingly divided as immigran and native born americans flocked to industrial cities of the north while in the south cotton generated wealth created a life of ease for a few based on misery for the many.
in 1848 as word of the discovery of gold in california traveled across pacific a young man in canton the capital of guangdong provinc china wrote good many americans speak of california they gold very quickly so i hear 1 think i shall go to california next sumn halfway around the world in a thatched roof cottage in ireland a mol was facing the crisis caused by the rotting potato crop and a typhus i demic that had claimed one of her daughters.
she told her two remain daughters theres a curse on ould old green ireland and well get ou it she saved enough money to send one girl tilly to america and as sister remembered she came to philadelphia and got a place for gent housework at mrs bents tilly saved her money sent for her sister i eventually they were able to bring the rest of their family from ireland.
b sisters worked as housekeepers for decades before retiring comfortably al a lifetime of scrimping and saving.
the wave of immigration that brou people of diverse ethnic backgrounds changed the face of the united sta dramatically in the 1840s and 1850s.
during the same years many who had lived in the united states for erations were also going through their own significant changes.
residents the newly expanded country in the southwest became u s citizens as a res of the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo without moving at all.
slaves and at litionists were challenging the institution of slavery with a vehemence r 1844 1877 330 part v expansion separation and a new union seen before.
slaves rebelled and ran away.
abolitionists white and black became more determined to end slavery not just stop its expansion.
in response slaveholders became more defiant and defensive than ever before.
when abraham lincoln looked at a nation that was half slave and half free and wondered if it could survive he was not alone.
women who had struggled for rights since the revolutionary era found new voice in the 1830s and 1840s.
the seneca falls womens rights convention of 1848 helped to launch a new political movement for womens rights including the right to vote.
while the right to vote was a key demand of the growing womens right movement other women also demanded a broader equality in all aspects of society insisting that whatever it is morally right for a man to do it is morally right for a woman to do this chapter takes a look at the changing nature of the countrys racial and ethnic makeup and the thinking of its people especially about slavery and womens rights that took place during the 1840s and 1850s.
the changing face of the american people in the 1840s and 1850s 12 1 analyze how immigration from china ireland and germany as well as the incorporation of mexican citizens in the southwest changed the united states.
immigration and the nations expanding borders increased the population of the united states in the 1830s 1840s and 1850s.
a nation of a little fewer than 13 million people in 1830 included 17 million people in 1840 and the united states had 23 million inhabitants in 1850.
births to native born americans accounted for the largest part of this increase but many people also crossed oceans to come to the united states especially from ireland germany and china.
by 1860 the united states had about 1 5 million irish born inhabitants about 1 million german born inhabitants and perhaps 35 000 chinese born inhabitants a number that would grow dramatically in the next few years as more immigrants from china arrived especially to build the railroads.
desperately poor people in europe and china fled famines in their home countries.
the california gold rush and growing u s industrialization beckoned with new economic opportunities.
both the push of hunger and oppression and the pull of a better future brought many to the united states.
the extraordinary increase in the area of the united states also incorporated many people who did not move at all.
in 1840 the united states included 1 8 million square miles.
less than 10 years later the country included almost 3 million square miles.
some of the land acquired through the war with mexico was sparsely populated.
however many people mexican americans in texas new mexico and california mormons in utah and the many tribes of plains and pueblo indians found themselves residing within the united states.
as a result the nature of the u s population shifted significantly in the late 1840s.
the united states of 1840 could accurately be described as including three major ethnic groups europeans mostly of english stock africans of different backgrounds and american indians of diverse tribes.
most of the europeans and many of the africans were protestants.
by 1850 the nation was much more ethnically diverse with many asians mostly chinese irish germans and mexican americans of mixed european and indian ancestry.
with the growth of these immigrant groups the united states was also a more catholic country and with the coming of so many white immigrants the percentage of african americans in the population shrank even though their actual number grew.
while the governing elite was still of european protestant background the people who made up the country were more diverse than ever before and increasingly making their presence felt.
political and military changes traced in the previous chapter changed the borders of the united states in the 1830s and 1840s.
this chapter traces the parallel changes in the lives of many people who were by 1850 residents of the united states whether or not they had been so 20 years before.
1831 william lloyd garrison launches h the liberator t nat turner leads slave revolt in virginia.
1833 american anti slavery society founded in boston r i 1836 american anti slavery society launches i campaign to send antislavery agents to j every state of the union 1838 sarah grimke s letters on the equality of the sexes and the condition of women 1843 henry highland garnet s address to the slaves of the united states of america 1845 1850 the great famine in ireland 1847 rebellion against american authorities in taos new mexico 1848 discovery of gold in california lures immigrants from around the world including china women s rights convention at seneca falls new york 1849 harriett tubman escapes from slavery 1851 sojourner truth s ain t i a woman.
speech 1854 william lloyd garrison burns a copy of the constitution as source and parent of the other atrocities of slavery in the united states chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 331 chinese immigration across the pacific many young people in china were fascinated by the stories from across the pacific.
lee chew described his neighbor s return to china from the country of the american wizards explaining that the man had earned enough in a short stay in the united states to build a magnificent house and invite his fellow villagers who lived mostly on rice to a grand feast with roast pig chicken and duck.
soon after lee was on his way to california which became known as gam saan gold mountain on both sides of the pacific.
before 1840 only a few hundred chinese lived in the united states but in the 1840s and 1850s chinese immigrants came to california and to the then independent kingdom of hawaii because of a push from china and also a pull from the united states and hawaii.
those years were hard in china especially in guangdong province where most immigrants originated.
under chinese law it was illegal for anyone to leave china but in desperate times thousands did.
california was one of many destinations.
the opium wars that began in 1839 spawned great violence as british and chinese forces battled and as violent feuds erupted between chinese communities.
one chinese migrant remembered the results of a revolt we were left with nothing and in disillusion we went to hong kong to sell ourselves as contract laborers the government of the qing dynasty in beijing was rapidly losing control of events.
it was not strong enough to suppress the civil wars or to prevent the british imposition of the opium trade on china.
in addition the population of china had also grown from some 200 million in 1762 to 421 million in 1846.
with this huge population land became scarce rents soared and many peasants could not maintain their meager land holdings.
for all its ancient expertise in rice cultivation china simply did not have enough land to grow rice for 421 million people.
beginning in 1810 there were terrible famines in china with some of the worst coming in the 1840s.
in those four decades 45 million people may have starved to death.
poor people begged for admission to soup kitchens or simply died on the doorsteps of the rich.
as one immigrant from guangdong remembered sometimes we went hungry for days we had only salt and water to eat with the rice under such conditions a fresh start in a new place temporary or permanent was appealing.
americans in hawaii and california saw chinese laborers as a key to solving a shortage of workers to toil on sugar plantations on maui or to clear and cultivate land in california.
the poorest chinese peasant workers had long been known as ku liy literally hard strength and the western term for chinese laborers quickly came to be coolie immediately after the conclusion of the u s war with mexico a long time presidential advisor aaron h palmer reported to congress that no people in all of the east are so well adapted for clearing wild lands and raising every species of agricultural product as the chinese at first chinese immigrants were warmly welcomed in california.
an 1852 article in the daily alta california noted scarcely a ship arrives that does not bring an increase to this worthy integer of our population as a result the chinese population in the west grew rapidly.
the initial chinese response to the gold rush was relatively small 325 immigrants from china arrived in california in 1849 and 450 more in 1850.
then the numbers grew rapidly 2 716 in 1851 and 20 026 in 1852.
by 1870 chinese immigrants represented nine percent of the population of california but 25 percent of the work force since most chinese immigrants were men of working age and larger percentages in oregon and washington.
the chinese also made up 29 percent of the much smaller population of idaho and 10 percent in montana.
nearly 95 percent of chinese immigrants to california before 1870 were male.
they tended to see their voyage across the pacific a harsh 8 week trip as a temporary separation from their families in china.
united states law dating from 1790 prohibited nonwhite immigrants from achieving citizenship and most chinese expected to return 12 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 home after a few years.
in the early years most male chinese immigrants joined other newcomers in the search for gold.
chinese gold miners could be seen all along the rivers of california in their blue cotton blouses and wide brimmed hats shoveling sand into pans or rockers.
these men left wives fiancees children and parents behind to find ways to support them.
chinese culture dictated that a woman should stay with her family especially her husbands parents while the man found the means of support.
cultural practices such as these and the cost of travel made immigration difficult for women though hawaii was much more welcoming of families than was the united states.
of the few chinese women who avoided the cultural prohibitions and came to california before 1870 many were forced to work as prostitutes either lured into the work by false promises or forced into the work by the absence of other ways to survive.
in 1870 2 157 of the 3 536 chinese women in california reported their profession as prostitute only later did other options open for chinese women.
as more chinese entered the gold fields they encountered growing resistance from white miners.
the cry california for americans began in the gold fields and was picked up by many including the political leaders of the state.
in 1852 the california legislature adopted a foreign miners license tax of 3 per month which was aimed specifically at the chinese.
it provided between a quarter and a half of state revenue before 1870.
the tax and the growing anti chinese sentiment that it represented slowed but did not stop chinese immigration.
as the gold fields became less productive many chinese went to work building the railroads.
immediately after the civil war 12 000 chinese laborers laid the tracks of the central pacific railroad.
chinese workers also moved into agriculture mining fishing and later into urban businesses.
men from china often found work at the least desirable jobs or jobs that other men considered to be womens work including starting the ubiquitous chinese laundries that were solely a chinese american development.
although many individual chinese immigrants returned home after a few years other chinese immigrants stayed in the united states creating permanent communities in the american west.
between miners of european origin and chinese miners were severe and most chinese miners were driven frm the gold fields before long.
chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 333 12 1 native born americans especially those in the know nothing party reacted with fear and anger to the surge in immigration to the united states during the 1830s and 1840s.
some of the stereotypes included images of whiskey drinking irish and beer drinking germans in a country that was turning its back on its own hard drinking ways.
told to say i know nothing in the 1850s the know nothings elected eight governors more than 100 members of congress mayors in several major cities and many state legislators.
the know nothing partys platform was anti catholic and anti immigrant including plans to limit catholic political power in part by banning immigrants from holding office and requiring them to wait 21 years to become citizens.
moderate reformers like horace mann were horrified by the burning of the ursuline convent in boston and the political platform of the know nothings but still sought to ensure that the public school system was used to make all future citizens especially immigrants into good americans as they understood the term.
massachusetts governor edward everett told the states school board to save society not with the cannon and the rifle but with the spelling book the grammar and the bible nevertheless despite hostility and their own poverty irish and german immigrants eventually gained political and economic power in the nations major cities.
the mexican experience in the southwest in 1847 as immigrants to america were trying to fit in to the new culture father antonio jose martinez was trying to keep peace in his own community of taos new mexico where mexican and pueblo indian residents had rebelled against the new american authorities killing the american appointed governor charles bent.
father martinez tried to convince rebels that killing americans was wrong and futile while trying to convince the americans to give due process to insurgents.
he was not fully successful in either effort but by the end of 1847 the rebellion had ended after a group of rebels were defeated by u s soldiers.
like the rebels he was seeking to defend father martinez had suddenly become an american citizen no longer a citizen of the republic of mexico not because he moved but because the american border had moved hundreds of miles south and his home was now in a different country.
under the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo territory that was home to pueblo navajo comanche apache ute and cheyenne tribes as well as spanish settlements some dating back 300 years was now part of the united states.
while in the short part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 run the treaty had little impact on native americans it almost immediately had a huge impact on people who were now mexican americans.
the 1848 treaty gave every mexican citizen within the new boundary of the united states the right to american citizenship or the right to keep mexican citizenship.
mexico urged its citizens who lived to the north of the new border to move to mexico and some 4 000 people from new mexico and smaller groups from texas california and arizona did move south back in to mexico.
but most former mexican citizens chose to stay in their homes and make new lives as citizens of the united states.
their choice turned out to be a difficult experience for them however.
many within the mexican community in california were initially optimistic about their new country.
indeed quite a few of the mexican leaders in california men such as mariano vallejo and juan bandini had been hoping for an american takeover of their territory even before the war with mexico because they saw the united states as a vibrant democracy that could replace the distant and inept mexican administration.
when the constitutional convention met in monterey in august 1849 to prepare california for statehood eight of the 48 voting delegates were californios as former mexican citizens were called.
on most matters they did not vote as a separate bloc assuming that their interests and those of newer american residents were the same.
the huge population surge of the gold rush however meant that the californios quickly became a small minority in california.
by the time that statehood came in 1850 they numbered only about 13 000 out of a non indian population of over 100 000.
ultimately the sheer numbers of those newly arrived from the united states destroyed the economic base for the culture that mexican citizens like vallejo represented.
looking back vallejo described the impact of statehood and the gold rush on california when legal thieves clothed in the robes of the law took from us our lands and our houses and without the least scruple enthroned themselves in our homes like so many powerful kings vallejos dreams of being an equal citizen of the united states never materialized.
the vehicle by which the legal thieves stole the land of the californians was established even before statehood was granted the united states land commission was set up specifically to challenge the mexican land grants on which vallejos and his compatriots fortunes rested.
although the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo had promised that all residents of these lands shall be maintained and protected in the free enjoyment of their liberty and property the land commission treated every grant as invalid until documented and proven.
the result was that many of the old families lost their land.
being of mexican descent in california meant second class citizenship for a long time to come.
in texas the mexican or tejano population was also small.
like their counterparts in california the tejanos did not fare well after texas joined the united states.
juan seguin one of the heroes on the texas and american side of the decisive battle of san jacinto and mayor of san antonio eventually joined the exodus to mexico.
in san antonio the city with the largest tejano population the number of tejanos elected to office which had been high under the republic of texas declined sharply once statehood was achieved.
new migrants from the united states took over the political and economic control of the state.
the mexican or hispano elite in new mexico fared better because american newcomers remained a minority in new mexico throughout the 19th century.
the hispano elite were a majority in the first american territorial assembly held in 1851 and they published its proceedings in both spanish and english.
merchants from the united states had played a significant role in new mexico since the 1820s when the santa fe trail connected st louis with santa fe.
despite the revolts in northern new mexico after u s annexation many in the territory made their peace with the new government and some made fortunes in the new economy.
gertrudis barcelo achieved both fame and fortune for the elegant chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 337 123 12 2 1231 i committees of vigilance also known as vigilantes groups of people who took on extralegal means to assert law and order.
saloon and gambling house she controlled in santa fe.
barcelo s saloon was a fixture for santa fe trail traders from the 1820s to the 1850s and a business of sufficient success to allow her to make significant bequests to charity and leave three houses and other wealth to her heirs when she died in 1852.
barcelo was not alone in attending to her own interests whether the flag of spain mexico or the united states flew on the plaza near her establishment.
for many poor people in the southwest however the transfer of authority from mexico to the united states meant increased poverty and far less opportunity for justice in a court system that was operated in a strange language by people who were often filled with racial and ethnic prejudices.
not surprisingly the term vigilante meaning people who take justice into their own hands rather than rely on lawful authorities came from the committees of vigilance in the california mining camps.
vigilante groups made up of private citizens took the administration of justice into their own hands when they thought that the official government authorities were absent or too often when they did not like their decisions.
members of these groups delivered public whippings and lynched people they did not like whether or not a crime had been committed.
california mobs lynched at least 163 mexicans between 1848 and 1860.
in southern california a white gang known as the el monte boys used the hysteria around a short lived mexican rebellion to settle old scores and attack mexican families regardless of whether they had been involved in the rebellion.
similar outrages happened across the west.
still in texas new mexico and arizona the latino presence remained strong.
the mexican american community fought back as it could.
one californio joaquin murrieta became a california legend feared in the white community honored in the mexican community because of his vengeance on those who had stolen his gold claim raped his wife rosa and hung his brother.
murrieta stole horses and gold and killed those who had raped and murdered his loved ones before he in turn was discovered and killed by the california rangers in 1853.
kangaroo courts unauthorized and obviously biased courts and lynchings were all too common within and across all ethnic lines as traditional community relationships were destroyed by distance and greed.
quick review how did native born americans react to immigrants in the 1840s and 1850s.
how did immigrants react to their new american surroundings.
12 2 slavery in the united states 1840s and 1850s explain how the lives of slaves slaveholders and abolitionists evolved in the decades before the civil war.
the institution of slavery had existed in the united states from the nations beginning but slavery which had never been a static institution changed significantly yet again after 1820 see chapter 9.
for enslaved people and those who claimed to own them life in a slave society was a different experience at different points in history.
slavery was always harsh and dehumanizing but it was harsh in different ways at different times.
after the end of the war of 1812 southern planters experienced new economic benefits from slavery benefits that grew with each decade as the worlds cotton market exploded and slave labor as well as developments in technology and transportation made it possible and profitable for american slave grown cotton to satisfy the market.
since most cotton was produced by slave labor the new demand for cotton greatly increased the value of individual slaves.
thus just as slavery was dying out in the north for both economic and ethical reasons the new cotton economy of the south made slavery far more profitable than ever before.
the result 38 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 was a kind of industrialized agriculture that by the 1840s produced 60 percent of the world s cotton and made the south and particularly some elite southerners extremely wealthy.
with the increase in profits and wealth many slaveholders developed what they claimed was a new ethical rationale for slavery and challenged their critics head on see map 12 2.
slaves and slave masters as cotton prices kept increasing in the 1830s and especially in the 1840s and 1850s close to a million slaves were moved from the coast where many had cultivated tobacco indigo and other crops to new cotton states where they had to learn the different and difficult work of tending cotton.
yet even as slavery was becoming more profitable northern public opinion was turning against it.
more people were joining what had been a small group of abolitionists in viewing human bondage as a terrible wrong and a stain on the honor of a nation dedicated to human freedom.
with slavery disappearing in the north northern abolitionists got an increasingly responsive hearing from their neighbors.
other northerners who had fewer moral qualms about slavery saw slaves as competitors for scarce jobs and they too joined the opposition to slavery.
in 1840 antislavery forces created the liberty party and nominated james g birney for president and in 1848 the short lived antislavery free soil party nominated former president martin van buren as its candidate.
neither party campaigned for outright abolition only for an end to extending slavery to new areas of the country.
nor did either party win any electoral votes though 12 1 12 2 12 3 slavery.
in the 30 years before the civil war slavery became strongest in the cotton ll states of the deen south for an individual slave the further north one was the better one s chances ere to connect to the underground railroad but slaves from every part of the south made their way north freedom.
chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 339 j 12 1 12 2 123 van buren did win some 10 percent of the popular vote in 1848.
nevertheless abolitionist rhetoric and political muscle were frightening an increasingly defensive slaveholding south.
slaveholders and their political and intellectual allies responded to both the increased profit and the increased criticism.
in the past most slaveholders including all of those from the south who attended the constitutional convention had defended slavery as a necessary evil somehow they argued slavery had become an economic and social necessity that was at best unfortunate.
however after 1830 a new generation of slaveholders began to describe slavery as a positive good an institution that christianized heathen africans while providing them with food shelter and an ordered life.
these new defenders of slavery also contrasted it with work in northern factories and noted that slaves unlike factory workers were not fired when work got slow or they grew old but rather were provided for throughout their lives.
southern apologists also became increasingly angry with northern critics of slavery.
one example of the new proslavery ideology was the changing views of roger b taney who served as chief justice of the united states from 1836 to 1864.
as a young attorney in maryland in 1819 taney defended a methodist preacher jacob gruber who had warned it was inevitable that slaves would rise up and kill your children their oppressors when maryland charged gruber with breaking the peace and inciting rebellion taney asserted grubers legal right to free speech and said that slavery was a blot on our national character and every real lover of freedom confidently hopes that it will be wiped away in 1857 however almost 40 years after the gruber trial and 20 years after taneys appointment to lead the supreme court he wrote in reference to the dred scott decision see chapter 13 that blacks were altogether unfit to associate with the white race either in social or political relations and so far inferior that they had no rights which the white man was bound to respect the chief justice like many other southerners had come to see slavery as simply the inevitable result of black inferiority.
taney was far from alone.
as every able bodied slave and every new born slave child became more valuable from 1800 to the outbreak of the civil war in 1861 any thought of abolishing slavery disappeared among slaveholders.
after 1830 southern states also made it more difficult to set any slaves free and for free blacks to stay in the south.
the apologists for slavery never tired of pointing out the difference between the supposedly contented life of southern slaves and the harsh lives of factory workers in the northern states and great britain.
40 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 lu american voices edmund ruffin slavery and free labor described and compared ca.
1860 pdmund ruffin 1794 1865 was a southern agronomist who in ethe 1850s turned from improving the productivity of southern soil to defending southern slavery.
he published several proslavery articles and pamphlets this one probably in 1860 or 1861 advocated succession of the southern states after lincoln s election and fought in the first battles of the civil war.
at the end of the civil war he committed suicide rather than live under what he called yankee rule.
the privilege of the english laborer to choose his employment and his master even when such choice legally exists does not prevent his service being truly slavery.
for he has no choice but to toil incessantly for wages barely affording a scant and wretched support or to starve and no change of pursuit or of service can make that condition better n comparison to the english pauper and even to his earlier condition as the over worked under fed and suffering hireling laborer supporting a family on regular wages the general condition of our negro slaves is one of comfort ease and happiness until recent investigation and discussion had elicited more truth it had been claimed by the people of the north and by all the opposers of slavery and even was generally admitted by the people of the southern states that the free labour states of new england were greatly superior to the old southern states in obtaining the fruits of industry and capita southern capita and industry were almost exclusively devoted to agriculture northern capital was much more vested in commerce and manufactures which are deemed much more profitable than agricultural investments it has also been especially and loudly claimed for and by the people of the new england states that such difference was the necessary result of the blighting and demoralizing effects of negro slavery in the south and of its absence in the north.
instead of our labors and investments in slave labor being less profitable than northern operations it is manifest that the slaveholding states are much richer than the free states and to make this result the more striking even if counting every slave as if free and supposing the whole property to be divided among all the population slaves included still on this general average the individual share of every one bond or free would be considerably larger than in the free states.
source edmund ruffin slavery and free labor described and compared library of congress american memory from slavery to freedom the african american pamphlet collection 1824 1909.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis according to ruffin in what ways was the life of a poor white worker worse than that of a black slave in the south.
historical interpretation in what ways did ruffin argue slavery was a positive good.
12 1 the growing value of individual slaves also led ironically to somewhat better treatment for them.
a slave life was now of too much economic value to be lost easily.
the same states that made it difficult to free slaves passed new laws against their murder or mistreatment.
in many instances the nutrition and medical care provided for slaves also improved.
a healthy relatively well fed slave could work harder than a sickly or starving slave.
a pregnant slave could produce a valuable new slave who could in time also work or be sold.
however a slave who died of mistreatment was a lost investment.
there is evidence that the actual treatment of slaves while never approaching anything that could be called humane did improve throughout the 19th century.
where multiple slave families had been crammed into cramped quarters more plantation owners built or had their slaves build individual family cabins with board floors instead of dirt.
more meat was added to slave diets and slaves were allowed to grow their own vegetable gardens as well as hunt and fish to supplement their diet.
slave hours of work were controlled by custom and unspoken agreement most slaves had sunday as a day of rest and except in harvest time few were expected to work after dark.
a new generation of slave children was allowed to play relatively freely until put to work at age 10 to 12.
former slave harriet jacobs wrote i was born a slave but i never knew it till six years of happy childhood has passed away for defenders of slavery like edmund ruffin such improvements in the lives of slaves became proof that slave life was better than the lives of some northern or european workers and peasants.
chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 341 slave quarters like these shown on a south carolina plantation provided better living conditions than what was provided to previous generations of slaves though hardly anything that could be called comfortable.
the houses built close together also fostered a sense of community life that helped enslaved people survive.
the slave population of the united states grew from 1 5 million slaves in 1820 to 4 million slaves in 1860.
after 1808 it was illegal and difficult to bring new slaves into the country so much of this growth reflected reproduction among existing slaves.
many saw this growth as a sign of the new and better treatment that slaves were receiving.
in the united states slaves were surviving reproducing and providing significant profits to others.
although some improvements in slave life occurred there were limits to those developments.
the slave cabins were hot and stuffy in summer and inflammable in winter.
the meals were monotonous.
the work for adults was backbreaking being called out to work at 4 00 or 5 00 a m and then working in hot fields hoeing or picking cotton with little break until sunset.
slaves were whipped routinely for falling behind in their work or for infractions of the plantation rules.
while some southern reformers talked of honoring slave marriages the separation of spouses continued without interruption.
slave women could not protect their own bodies.
harriet jacobs also remembered that once she came of age it was deemed a crime in her to wish to be virtuous and she spent considerable time avoiding the constant advances of the owner of her plantation and the jealous anger of his wife.
many slave women were not so fortunate and the rape of slave women by white men was a commonly acknowledged reality.
mary boykin chestnut wife of a plantation owner described the treatment of slave women as a monstrous system and noted that any lady is ready to tell you who is the father of all the mulatto children in everybodys household but her own.
those she seems to think drop from the clouds even laws that were being passed against murdering a slave could be enforced only if there was a white witness because slaves were not allowed to testify in court.
most of all nothing could change the fact that slavery was still slavery.
no amount of reform or improvement could change that reality.
in the midst of appalling conditions slaves created lives for themselves and developed the psychological strength to withstand the horrors they faced.
historians have argued whether slave life was better on the small family farms that included only a few slaves or on large plantations with many.
in reality it probably depended on the conditions and the owner of an individual farm or plantation.
slaves on small farms 342 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 v american voices susan merritt memories of slavery in the 1850s 1x1 12 2 h the late 1930s susan merritt was interviewed near marshall texas not far from where she had once been a slave by historians working for the federal writers project.
she estimated herself to be 87years old but still remembered slavery all too well.
i couldn t tell how old i is but does you think i se ever forget them slave days i se born right down in rusk county texas not a long way from henderson and massa andrew watt am my owner.
my pappy hob rollins he come from north carolina and belonged to dave blakely and mammy come from mississippi.
mammy have eleven of us chillen but four dies when they babies.
albert hob john emma anna lula and me lives to be grown and married.
massa watt lived in a big log house what set on a hill so you could see it round for miles and us lived over in the field in little log huts all huddled along together.
they have homemade beds nailed to the wall and baling sack mattresses and us call them bunks.
us never had no money but plenty clothes and grub and wear the same clothes all the year round.
massa watt made our shoes for winter hisself.
he made furniture and saddles and harness and run a grist mill and a whiskey still there on the place.
that man had everything.
the hands was woke with the bit bell they was in that field before day and stay till dusk dark.
they work up till saturday night and then washes their clothes and sometimes they gets through and has time for the party and plays ring plays.
when the hands come in from the field at dusk dark they has to tote water from the spring and cook and eat and be in bed when that old bell rings at nine o clock.
about dusk they calls the chillen and gives em a piece of corn pone about the size my hand and a tin cup milk and puts them to bed.
but the growed folks et fat pork and greens and beans and such like and have plenty milk.
every sunday massa give em some flour and butter and a chicken.
lots caught a good cowhiding for slippin round and stealin a chicken fore sunday.
massa watt didn t have no overseer he carry a long whip round the neck and i s seed him tie slaves to a tree and cowhide em till the blood run down onto the ground lots of times massa watt give us a pass to go over to george petro s place or dick gregg s place.
massa petro run a slave market and he have big high scaffold with steps where he sells slaves.
they was stripped off to the waist to show their strength.
our white folks have a church and a place for us in the back.
sometimes at night us gather round the fireplace and pray and sing and cry but us darn t low our white folks know it.
thank the lord us can worship where we wants nowadays.
source susan merritt interview in norman r yetman editor voices from slavery wo authentic slave narratives mineola ny dover publications 2000 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis on what aspects of slavery did merritt focus.
how would you characterize her relationship with her master.
comparison how might merritt s life have compared to that of poor southern whites.
how were they similar.
how were they different.
12 3 worked alongside the owners and often shared the same meals.
but if the owner was cruel there was little respite from the suffering and it was hard to maintain connec tions with other slaves.
if the owner ran short of funds and many did it was all too easy to cut the food and clothing of the slaves.
working conditions on a large planta tion with several hundred slaves could be much harsher but slaves had more opportu nity to create a community and cultural identity of their own and often the routines and expectations were more regularized.
on large plantations the work life of slaves was usually controlled by an overseer often a poor white whom the plantation owner hired to get as much work and profit from the slaves as possible.
slaves and overseers had to develop a working relationship of sorts however tense it might be.
an overseer who was too lax would not produce the profits an owner expected one who was too cruel could also be unproductive.
the owner of one of alabamas larger plantations a h arrington wrote in his diary i have this day discharged my overseer mr.
i found so much dissatisfaction amongst the negroes that i placed under his charge that i could not feel satisfied to continue him in my employment such decisions were not uncommon.
while overseers had total legal control over the slaves slaves also knew that for any work to get done at all an accommodation had to be reached chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 343 123 12 2 123 between their white masters and themselves.
slaves knew how to make the most of what power they had.
it was risky to complain about an overseer but it was less risky to feign illness even pregnancy and more slaves did that.
some slaves feigned clumsiness and broke tools that then had to be repaired others pretended laziness and attempted to slow the pace of work.
resistance took many ingenious forms and it helped slaves survive.
especially on larger plantations slave families were also essential to the emotional and often physical survival of their members.
while slaves were not allowed legally recognized marriages many slave partnerships lasted for a long time while others were disrupted by the sale of one partner or the tensions that drive people apart in any circumstance.
slave parents especially mothers had a difficult task loving children while also preparing them for the rigors of slavery.
many former slaves recalled parents being especially tough in ways that as adults they recognized as the most loving thing slave parents could do.
after all to allow a slave child to grow to adulthood without proper preparation for a world in which submission at least outward signs of submission was key to survival was to give that child a death sentence.
some slave mothers simply could not endure the thought of children they loved being raised to be slaves.
one former slave told the story of a mother who after seeing three children sold away from her gave her fourth child something out of a bottle and soon it was dead couse didnt nobody tell on her or hed the owner of beat her nearly to death resisting slavery enslaved people found many different ways to resist their enslavement.
for those with no other options they could pretend illness laziness or stupidity to resist their circumstances.
slave labor could be notoriously slow when slaves actively tried to subvert the work of a plantation doing just enough work to avoid punishment.
but passive resistance was not the only kind of resistance.
newspaper advertisements for runaway slaves give solid evidence that thousands and thousands of slaves tried to run away from the places where they were held.
while many runaways were caught many tried again and again to find shelter in free states of the north or in canada and quite a few succeeded.
and finally in every generation there were full scale slave revolts some small and some large in which enslaved people attacked their oppressors and sought to claim their freedom.
runaway slaves in 1837 joseph taper and his family ran away from their lives as slaves on a virginia plantation.
it was a dangerous decision to do so.
the chances of being caught were great and the punishments harsh perhaps flogging perhaps having the family separated and sold into the deep south farther from the opportunity for a second escape perhaps being killed.
at first the tapers made their way to pennsylvania where joseph taper found work.
but when he read the offer of a reward for his return the family moved further north and eventually left the united states for canada in 1839.
britain had abolished slavery in all its dominions in 1833 making it illegal for slave hunters to seek former slaves there.
in november 1840 a year after their arrival in canada joseph taper wrote of his journey that i am in a land of liberty in good health my wife and self are sitting by a good comfortable fire happy knowing that there are none to molest or make afraid as happy as the taper story was the long and dangerous journey north was frightening for any slave who sought to escape.
harriet jacobs escaped from slavery by boat in 1843.
she remembered that even after she was safely on the boat we were filled with constant apprehensions that the constables would come on board.
neither could i feel quite at ease with the captain might he not be tempted to make more money by giving us up to those who claimed us as property 44 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 but she was relieved when the next morning i was on deck as soon as the day dawned for the first time in our lives on free soil nevertheless though she had successfully escaped from slavery jacobs remembered the next days as difficult ones.
she was lonely having left dear ties behind us ties cruelly sundered by the demon slavery ihe taper and jacobs stories are unusual.
most slaves who ran away were quickly caught.
the route to freedom in the north was known as the underground railroad a highly secret system of safe havens and supporters that guided slaves toward a new free life.
it was a symbol for many but a reality for only a few.
nevertheless every year more and more slaves were aided by conductors who were either former slaves who had run away or free people black and white who hated slavery and were willing to take enormous risks to help new people on the road to freedom.
conductors on the underground railroad knew the hidden paths and the safe houses where sympathetic owners were willing to hide runaway slaves as they journeyed ever further north either to cities in the united states or increasingly out of the united states to canada.
both taper and jacobs were among the few slaves who were literate which helped them elude the authorities and prosper.
but they were not nearly so unusual in deciding to run away from slavery.
advertisements that appeared in southern newspapers in the 19th century offered considerable detail about runaway slaves.
one 1850 issue of the new orleans daily picayune reported the offer of rewards for jack sam zip or harry edward daniel henrietta mary mackendish william and tom.
by 1860 some 50 000 slaves ran away every year out of a total slave population of 4 million who were held by 385 000 slave owners which meant that one in seven slaveholders could expect someone to run away each year.
runaway slaves became abolitionists and later national leaders during reconstruction.
henry highland garnet whose adult writing inspired fear in the hearts of many slaveholders was born a slave in maryland.
while he was a child his 12 1 12 2 underground railroad support system set up by antislavery groups in the upper south and the north to assist fugitive slaves in escaping the south.
12 j by far the most famous conductor on the underground the perhaps 300 people she led north out of slavery ran again and again to lead others to freedom.
railroad harriet tubman shown here with a few of away from slavery and then returned to the south i chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 345 l 123 12 2 123 family set out on the pretext of going to the funeral of a slave on a nearby plantation but went instead to the home of a quaker underground railroad conductor in delaware who started them on the road to freedom in new york city where each member of the family took a new name in a ceremony of baptism to liberty.
frederick douglass was born a slave in maryland around 1817.
douglass remembered visits from his mother who lived on another plantation 12 miles away and made the journey on foot at night before returning for the next days work she was a field hand and a whipping is the penalty for not being in the field at sunrise 1 do not recollect of ever seeing my mother by the light of day douglass made his first attempt to run away in 1835 but was caught and sent to a former master in baltimore.
instead of giving in to the fear of capture douglass tried again 3 years later and succeeded in running away to freedom in new york in 1838.
harriet tubman became famous as a slave who not only ran away but also returned to the south and guided between 200 and 300 others along the underground railroad to freedom.
by most reckonings she was responsible for freeing more slaves than any other person in the institutions long history.
tubman was born about 1820.
two of her older sisters were sold to a plantation farther south and tubman never shook her own fears of a similar fate.
she almost died at the age of 14 from a severe head injury when an overseer threw a 2 pound weight at another slave but hit tubman instead.
in 1844 she married john tubman a free black who lived nearby.
marriages of slaves and free blacks were uncommon but not unknown.
the free husband thought his wife worried too much about being a slave.
in 1849 tubman made her way north to philadelphia without her husband or other help and found work as a domestic.
she recalled i was free but there was no one to welcome me to the land of freedom everyone she knew and cared for was down in the old cabin quarters with the old folks and my brothers and sisters thinking historically understanding advertisements for runaway slaves n december 22 1848 the following advertisement appeared in the baltimore sun fifty dollars reward ran away from the subscriber on the 10th inst this month a man named celus calls himself celus dorsey about 23 years old slender made about 5 feet 7 or 8 inches high dark complexion rather thick lip he has a large scar on one of his hands from a burn.
it is probable he is lurking about baltimore.
i will give the above reward if taken out of the state and 30 if taken in the state and secured so i get him again.
saml c hunt 10 miles from baltimore on baltimore and susquehanna railroad historians have found hundreds of similar advertisements in newspapers in slaveholding states from the american revolution to the middle of the civil war.
each advertisement tells a small part of the story of someone who had the opportunity and the courage to run away from slavery and the slaveholder s determination to see him or her returned.
source baltimore sun december 22 1848.
thinking critically 1.
contextualization what does hunt s location tell us.
what opportunity would a slave living further from a city have to run away.
why might hunt have thought that dorsey was lurking around baltimore.
was there something about a city even in a slaveholding state that might attract a slave.
historical interpretation why were slaveholders so willing to advertise about runaway slaves and let others know that enslaved people were running away as often as the advertisements imply.
what might be lost and what might be gained for a slave owner by posting such advertisements.
w 346 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 tubman decided that the best solution was to bring the rest of her family to freedom though she never rejoined her free husband.
having successfully brought most of her family north tubman developed a pattern that she would continue until the civil war.
she worked for a while raised some money and then made a trip south to free a group of slaves.
between 1850 and 1861 tubman made trip after trip helping slaves escape and taking them north.
as the full impact of the 1850 fugitive slave law took effect she did not stop in pennsylvania but accompanied each group to canada.
as tubmans fame grew it earned her the support of northern abolitionists and the hatred of many slaveholders.
the reward for her capture grew steadily but she kept returning south to free more people.
northern abolitionists supported her work and in 1859 the unitarian minister thomas wentworth higginson took up a collection at the massachusetts anti slavery society so that tubman could resume the practice of her profession rebels and slave revolts although slaveholders typically claimed that their slaves were happy and content the number of slaves who ran away undermined those claims.
on some level slaveholders were aware of the reality because as much as they sought to catch runaway slaves they most intensely feared the possibility of a slave revolt.
slave revolts were relatively rare but they did happen.
historians have documented over 200 slave revolts in the united states in the 60 years before the civil war.
some were little more than small scale events on a single plantation others were much larger.
on august 30 1800 gabriel prosser led over 1 000 slaves in a planned attack on richmond virginia see chapter 7.
in 1810 plans for a revolt were discovered in lexington kentucky.
in 1811 400 slaves revolted in new orleans.
and in 1815 a white man named george boxley attempted to lead a slave revolt in virginia.
in 1822 denmark vesey and his supporters planned to burn the military and financial center of charleston south carolina murder the white residents and then seize the citys caches of weapons and gold.
they would then set sail for a new life of freedom in haiti.
vesey who had purchased his own freedom in 1800 had been plotting his revolt for years.
he led a bible class in charlestown for the african methodist episcopal church and he spoke of the biblical stories of moving from slavery to freedom with the passion of a latter day moses.
he also spoke fluent french and was clearly influenced by the success of the haitian slave revolt.
no one really knows how close vesey came to success before his plot was betrayed.
some estimated that his co conspirators numbered in the thousands making it one of the largest slave revolts.
in stories whispered behind closed doors vesey and his followers represented the ultimate terror to the white community.
in 1831 nat turner led a revolt that was more successful than veseys.
terror spread throughout the south when turner s forces killed over 60 slave owning whites before the revolt was defeated by state and federal troops.
over 100 slaves were killed in the fighting or executed after capture.
turner himself was captured and interviewed by his white court appointed attorney thomas gray before he was executed.
gray subsequently published an account of the conversation as the confessions of nat turner.
turner reported having been a religious man from his earliest years.
his prayers and meditations convinced him of three things that i was ordained for some great purpose in the hands of the almighty that the almightys purpose included freedom for american slaves and that the great day of judgment was at hand it was some time after the revolt before nat turner was captured.
in spite of his capture his actions had already sent fear through the slaveholding south.
chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 347 12 1 12 2 123 in the aftermath of the turner revolt southern fears increased and repressive laws were passed across the south including laws making it illegal to teach a slave to read and write to prevent others like turner from studying the bible and other information on their own.
in the slave quarters however turner became a legend and stories of his exploits were told and retold.
despite the consequences the revolts continued.
some northern blacks also called for slave uprisings.
david walker who was born free in ohio published his appeal to the colored citizens of the world in boston in 1829.
walkers goal was to awaken in the breasts of my afflicted degraded and slumbering brethren a spirit of inquiry and investigation respecting our miseries and wretchedness in this republican land of liberty.
walker also asked white americans will god let the oppressors rest comfortably and happy always but the primary audience for walkers appeal was among his fellow african americans to whom he said the whites want slaves and want us for their slaves but some of them will curse the day they ever saw us in his 1843 address to the slaves of the united states of america henry highland garnet also did not mince words.
he said to the slaves of the south brethren arise arise.
strike for your lives and liberties.
now is the day and the hour let your motto be resistance.
resistance.
resistance.
for garnet and walker the time was long past for aiding individual escapes or agitating for a constitutional end to slavery they were ready for direct action.
the liberator a newspaper dedicated to the antislavery cause launched by william lloyd garrison in 1831.
american anti slavery society founded in boston in 1833 the society was dedicated to the abolition of slavery.
white abolitionists in the first issue of his newspaper the liberator published in 1831 william lloyd garrison declared i am in earnest i will not equivocate i will not excuse i will not retreat a single inch.
and i will be heard over the next 35 years until the passage of the thirteenth amendment ending slavery in the united states in 1865 garrison never backed down.
he was a loner who alienated most people who tried to work with him.
nevertheless in 1833 he was one of the key members in launching the american anti slavery society in boston which like the liberator was committed to the total abolition of slavery everywhere in the united states and for a third of a century he kept the issue of slavery in front of a white society that often did not want to hear about it.
garrisons role in the abolitionist movement can hardly be overstated.
in the 1830s garrison was already a believer in the free labor doctrine that the republican party would adopt in the 1850s.
he contrasted northern free labor which provided opportunities for anyone to gain the economic independence so important to freedom and southern slavery which created a rigid hierarchy of wealthy elites poor whites and enslaved blacks.
garrison was not a church member but he modeled himself on the image of an old testament prophet and he saw the considerable abuse that was heaped on him over many years as proof of his own righteousness.
other abolitionists white and black also were subject to considerable abuse.
in 1835 garrison himself was almost lynched in boston.
in new york city lewis and arthur tappan highly successful merchants were also shunned for their abolitionist activity.
and in alton illinois on the mississippi river opposite the slaveholding state of missouri elijah lovejoy was killed by a mob in 1837 after he had set up a small printing press to publish antislavery literature.
despite his status as a loner garrison did befriend other abolitionists and runaway slaves.
he helped launch frederick douglass on his remarkable career as an abolitionist leader though the two differed on many issues.
on the fourth of july in 1854 at a sunny afternoon picnic of the massachusetts anti slavery society in framingham massachusetts garrison burned a copy of the 348 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 hated fugitive slave act of 1850 that required all citizens to help return escaped slaves to those who claimed them.
as it burned garrison shouted and let all the people say amen.
it was not a surprising action at an antislavery rally but when the crowd roared its response garrison also held up a copy of the united states constitution a sacred document to many and called it the source and parent of the other atrocities because of its clauses that protected slavery and set it on fire too.
and again the crowd responded to his call for an amen for all his radicalism garrison was also a pacifist.
he always insisted that his goal was to accomplish the great work of national redemption through the agency of moral power not force.
while he argued that events like nat turners bloody rebellion were inevitable he could never condone violence even the violence of the civil war to end slavery.
garrison may have crusaded independently but many other white americans were joining forces as abolitionists in the 1830s and 1840s and especially after the passage of the fugitive slave act in 1850.
what came to be known as oberlin abolitionism emerged from the revivals that charles grandison finney led in upstate new york in the 1820s.
in may 1836 the american anti slavery society began a campaign to evangelize the nation for abolitionism.
what was needed the societys leaders decided were antislavery revivalists who modeled their activities on the work of religious revivalists.
funds would be raised to send out at least 70 organizers to preach the sin of slavery and the need for the repentance of abolitionism.
theodore dwight weld who had begun his career working with finney was commissioned to choose the agents.
weld turned to his old classmates from theology school especially now that many of them were seeking their first appointments as ministers.
eventually 30 of the 54 students who had been part of welds class at lane seminary in the early 1830s became antislavery agents.
they carried revivalism and activism to all the free states of the union.
in the 1840s and 1850s 12 to 15 percent of all americans were slaves like susan merritt or former slaves like john taper.
most americans held some opinion about the condition of slaves and increasingly activists on both sides of the issue were taking strong stands.
some including edmund ruffin were defenders of slavery others such as william lloyd garrison david walker and sarah grimke were its opponents.
but almost no americans were completely free of economic ties to slavery or were able to ignore its impact on american culture and politics.
slaves produced cotton which clothed most americans and fueled the nations economy.
by the 1850s the issue of slavery also dominated american politics.
whatever one s place in society and ones point of view slavery was a central issue and topic of debate.
it would not go away.
0 quick review in what different ways did enslaved people and their free allies white and black resist the institution of slavery and help individuals escape from it.
how did apologists for slavery respond to the growing criticism of the institution that emerged in the 1830s and 1840s.
what do the numbers of slaves who ran away say about the defense of slavery.
oflll not oxcf se.
m lam in earnest.
b this banner announced the publication of a new journal the liberator dedicated entirely to the complete abolition of slavery in all parts of the united states.
chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 349 12 1 new strength for american women describe how the women s rights movement developed in the united states in the 1830s and 1840s.
123 122 123 declaration of sentiments and resolutions the resolutions passed at the woman s rights convention at seneca falls in 1848 calling for full equality including the right to vote for women.
on july 20 1848 68 women and 32 men signed a declaration of sentiments and resolutions at the end of their 2 day meeting in seneca falls new york.
the document which followed the form of the declaration of independence is often viewed as the opening statement of the womens rights movement in the united states.
this declaration stated we hold these truths to be self evident that all men and women are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
then just as jefferson listed grievances against george iii those who gathered in upstate new york offered their grievances against the male dominated culture in which they lived.
their document made history and achieved far more recognition than its authors ever imagined.
but the seneca falls convention would likely not have happened without the work of others who began to question womens roles in the decades before the convention and the work of the those at the convention still depended on the continued efforts of supporters to fight for change.
new ideas about women s rights the 1848 convention of women at seneca falls was not the first time women in the united states began to lobby for their rights.
although hardly a feminist in todays terms abigail adams had reminded her husband john that the framers of a new government in 1776 should remember the ladies in 1838 the abolitionist and feminist sarah grimke published letters on the equality of the sexes and the condition of women portions of which she first published in garrisons the liberator and which she originally addressed to the boston female anti slavery society.
in the 1838 book she argued that in the present condition of women in my own country well off women were taught to regard marriage as the one thing needful the only avenue to distinction while in those employments which are peculiar to women their time is estimated at only half the value of that of men grimke also argued that men suffered from the assumption that they alone needed to support families while she believed they would ultimately find greater happiness in seeing women as their equal even if that view did not come easily to them.
few women symbolized the strong links between feminism and abolitionism as did sarah and angelina grimke sisters from south carolina.
born to a prosperous south carolina slaveholding family both women broke with their family over the issue of slavery.
by 1836 the sisters had become the first female representatives of the american anti slavery society based in new york city.
they had also become ardent feminists.
in 1838 angelina married another abolitionist theodore dwight weld.
for most of the rest of their lives weld and the two sisters lived together and campaigned to end slavery racism and sexism in society.
sarah grimke wrote letters on the equality of the sexes after she and her sister were criticized for giving public lectures on the antislavery cause.
the ministers and others who criticized the sisters might have been sympathetic to the womens antislavery views but they thought women had no place speaking in public to a group that included women and men.
sarah had no intention of backing down on either topic.
she began her letters here i plant myself.
god created us equal then focusing on womens rights she continued all history attests that man has subjected woman to his will used her as a means to promote his selfish gratification to minister to his sensual pleasures to be instrumental in promoting his comfort but never has he desired 350 partv expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 to elevate her to that rank she was created to till.
he has done all he could to debase and enslave her mind and now he looks triumphantly on the ruin he has wrought and says the being he has thus deeply injured is his inferior to me it is perfectly clear that whatever it is morally right for a man to do it is morally right for a woman to do she is clothed by her maker with the same rights and the same duties.
grimkes letters were in circulation a decade before the meeting at seneca falls but that gathering brought the cause of womens rights to a much larger audience.
because it brought together such powerful women as elizabeth cady stanton lucretia mott and many others soon joined by others including susan b anthony and matilda gage seneca falls provided the foundation for a half century long campaign for womens rights and specifically womens suffrage.
the seneca falls convention shapes a movement elizabeth cady stanton and lucretia mott were the organizers of the 1848 seneca falls women s rights convention that brought the cause of womens rights to the attention of many.
stanton and her family had come to rural seneca falls new york only the previous year.
they missed life in their former home in boston but thought seneca falls would provide a rest.
however elizabeth found life in seneca falls difficult and lonely.
in the summer of 1848 lucretia mott already a well known quaker abolitionist and reformer and her husband james were visiting seneca falls as part of a trip to the nearby seneca indian tribe and to former slaves now living as free people across the border in canada.
stanton visited mott and poured out her frustration.
mott had similar grievances.
both women had long been active in the antislavery cause.
henry b stanton elizabeths husband was a well known abolitionist and he and elizabeth had traveled widely in the service of the cause.
stanton and mott had both attended the world anti slavery convention in london in 1840 with their husbands.
at that gathering all of the women were excluded from any speaking role.
as they talked about it in 1848 stanton and mott decided then and there to call a womans rights convention for the following week.
ihe womans rights convention at seneca falls generated far more attention most of it negative than the organizers expected.
stanton remembered all the journals from maine to texas seemed to strive with each other to see which could make our movement appear most ridiculous looking back on the hostility that the convention generated stanton said if i had had the slightest premonition of all that was to follow that convention i fear i should not have had the courage to risk it.
not all the responses were hostile however.
the abolitionist frederick douglass attended the seneca falls gathering and spoke in favor of and signed the declaration.
abolitionists were used to hostility and much of the abolitionist press supported the seneca falls statement launching an important alliance between abolitionists and advocates for womens rights.
stanton mott and many like them were abolitionists first who then added womens rights to their concerns in part because of their exclusion from leadership positions in the abolitionist movements and in part because they saw the rights of enslaved people and new freedoms for women as part of the same reform effort.
douglass and many male abolitionists were also among the strongest supporters of womens rights.
and many of the most determined opponents of one movement also opposed the other.
reports of the womans rights convention at seneca falls caught the attention of other women and subsequent conventions were held across new york state and in massachusetts ohio indiana and pennsylvania.
among those who heard the news of the seneca falls convention were susan b anthony and matilda joslyn gage.
anthony was a teacher in rochester new york and active in temperance and antislavery reforms.
seneca falls women s rights convention a significant convention demanding women s equality in legal rights held in upstate new york in 1848.
chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 351 122 122 elizabeth cady stanton and susan b anthony became lifelong friends soon after the woman s rights convention at seneca falls and in spite of occasional disagreements worked together for almost half a century to fight for women s right to vote.
gage gave birth to a son just before the seneca falls meeting and could not attend.
both of these women quickly became friends with stanton and fellow leaders of the womens rights movement for over half a century.
they also joined as editors of the first three volumes of history of woman suffrage published between 1881 and 1886.
the gathering at seneca falls the declaration that the convention issued and the movement that followed became far more than the small band of organizers dared hope for when they gathered on those hot summer days.
a growing women s rights movement women continued to lead campaigns to open other doors to women during the years after the convention at seneca falls.
some collaborated with the seneca falls leaders and some worked on their own.
when lucy stone graduated from oberlin college in 1847 oberlin and antioch were among the first american colleges to admit women as students she was chosen as the commencement speaker but was told that a man would have to read her speech because it was not appropriate for women to speak to mixed audiences.
in response she refused to write one.
in 1855 when she married henry b blackwell stone insisted on keeping her own name a huge break with tradition.
stones oberlin friend and sister in law antoinette brown blackwell was the first woman ordained as a protestant minister in 1851.
in 1849 elizabeth blackwell sister in law to both women became the first woman awarded an m d.
another reformer amelia bloomer who had participated in the seneca falls convention and served as a temperance lecturer embraced a different kind of freedom for women when in 1851 she popularized a kind of trousers that women might wear instead of the cumbersome hoop skirts that were expected of all middle class women.
other women demanded other kinds of rights.
one of the most important issues for many women was the right to control their own property.
in nearly all the states before the 1830s a married womans husband controlled all of the couples property.
women fought such rules and after the panic of 1837 in which many women saw their life savings disappear because of a husbands bankruptcy their voices began to be heard.
mississippi was the first state to pass laws specifically allowing women to keep the property they brought into their marriages.
the 1839 law said that property that women had before a marriage or inherited during a marriage including slaves could not be controlled by their husbands.
michigan passed a law in 1844 that protected a womens property from a husbands creditors and in the 1840s and 1850s other states followed.
in texas and other states that had once belonged to mexico spanish era laws had long given women the rights to control their own property and those rights were incorporated into the new american legal systems.
in the 1830s other women formed antiprostitution societies to protect women from being forced into such work.
additional reformers of the 1830s became advocates for dietary reform including mary gove nichols who along with sylvester graham of graham crackers advocated a healthier diet free of alcohol coffee meat sugar and spices.
advocates for the rights of women also had their differences with one another.
some of the most intense differences came over the issue of divorce.
frances fanny wright who had been influenced by robert owens ideas about an ideal community see chapter 10 represented an extreme view of the topic.
wright tried to create her 352 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 own utopian community at nashoba tennessee where she advocated that the best way to end slavery and the racial prejudice that maintained it was to promote interracial unions that would produce a new breed of americans.
even after the failure of nashoba wright continued to argue that the institution of marriage was a barrier to womens equality.
more moderate women including elizabeth cady stanton argued that marriage was a simple legal contract not a sacred institution and that at least in the case of a husband who was a drunkard or abusive divorce should be easy.
others disagreed not only those hostile to womens rights but also leaders of the womens movement such as antoinette brown blackwell.
the links between the womens rights and antislavery efforts important as they were were not without their tensions.
some african american women felt those tensions especially deeply.
as early as 1832 the first female antislavery society in the united states was created by african american women in salem massachusetts.
white women soon followed with their own societies in a number of large cities but black women were often reluctant to join the integrated societies in which white women nearly always claimed all of the leadership roles.
at a womens rights convention in akron ohio in 1851 sojourner truth asked may i say a few words truth was already a nationally recognized figure.
she had been born a slave in new york state in 1799 but was freed by the new york emancipation act of 1827.
she took the name sojourner truth and traveled across the nation demanding freedom for her fellow americans of african origin.
she told the convention i have as much muscle as any man and can do as much work as any man.
i have plowed and reaped and husked and chopped and mowed and can any man do more than that.
i have heard much about the sexes being equal.
i can carry as much as any man and can eat as much too if i can get it.
i am as strong as any man but man is in a tight place the poor slave is on him woman is coming on him he is surely between a hawk and a buzzard.
the bloomers that amelia bloomer popularized were much more than a fashion statement they essentially meant that women could wear pants liberating them from the long hoop skirts that were virtually required wear for middle class women and that made any sort of activity from walking upstairs to physical activity out of doors extremely difficult.
versions of the speech published later added the famous refrain and aint i a woman in that speech truth linked the antislavery and womens rights campaigns telling those who opposed that link that they would indeed be caught between a hawk and a buzzard if she had anything to do with it.
a quick review what did the women s and abolitionist movements have in common.
how did the two movements build on each other.
conclusion in the decades leading up to the civil war the united states grew in area and in population.
from 1830 to 1850 the number of people living in the united states almost doubled from fewer than 13 million to more than 23 million.
rising birth rates among native born americans fueled the largest proportion of this growth but other forces also sent u s population statistics upward.
immigrants particularly from china ireland and germany contributed to the rise as did the multitudes of new residents acquired when the united states gained new territory after its war with mexico.
responding to 3 variety of push and pull factors immigrants flocked to america to escape hardships chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 353 at home and to pursue economic opportunity on american soil as domestics farmers miners railroad workers builders and factory laborers.
in many cases native born americans did not take well to immigrants seeing them as a threat to their own jobs and quality of life.
the countrys growing diversity brought new tensions.
large territorial gains ceded to the united states under the terms of the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo in 1848 and purchased from mexico by u s diplomat james gadsden in 1853 stretched the nations borders farther south and west bringing many spanish speaking people as well as plains and pueblo indians into the country.
although the treaties had promised that these residents would be respected and allowed to continue living in the areas americans who flocked into those regions generally pushed out those who were already there leaving them in much more marginal positions.
changes in fashion technology and transportation led to cottons becoming a highly profitable crop in the 19th century more profitable with each succeeding decade.
its cultivation spread across the lower south transforming the southern economy and the dynamics of slavery.
the slave population also surged during this time increasing from 1 5 million to 4 million between 1820 and 1860.
by 1840 the american south was the leading producer of cotton in the world and plantation owners eager to exploit the rising demand for the crop moved slaves into new cotton growing regions to work in the fields from dawn to dusk.
this new cotton economy made slavery in the south far more profitable than ever before.
slave owners justified the institution of slavery as a positive good wherein slaves were thought to be better off being provided for on plantations than left to fend for themselves.
slaves through open revolt escape and other less dramatic means resisted their enslavement.
abolitionists in the north white and black also resisted slavery campaigning against the institution with renewed vehemence that heightened sectional tensions.
women who were also struggling for full rights as citizens launched a suffrage movement at seneca falls new york in 1848 and a campaign for full rights in all areas of society.
many women and some men saw a link between freedom from slavery and the emancipation of women and they agitated tirelessly for both causes even though others of both sexes renounced their efforts.
chapter review which changes in the united states had the greatest impact on emerging social movements in the 1840s and 1850s.
you may want to consider immigration the growth of both antislavery and proslavery propaganda and the campaign for equal rights for women in your answer.
354 part v expansion separation and a new union 1844 1877 chapter 12 chapter review the changing face of the american people in the 1840s and 1850s b analyze how immigration from china ireland and germany as well as the incorporation of mexican citizens in the southwest changed the united states.
review questions 1.
historical interpretation what forces pushed chinese immigrants to leave their homeland.
what forces pulled them toward california.
comparison compare and contrast the place of irish immigrants in american society before and after the great famine of 1845 1850.
how would you explain the differences you note.
chronological reasoning how did life change for hispanic elites living in california texas and new mexico after the absorption of those territories into the united states.
what explains the changes you note.
slavery in the united states 1840s and 1850s 12 2 explain how the lives of slaves slaveholders and abolitionists evolved in the decades before the civil war.
contextualization how did slaves build lives and communities of their own within the institution of slavery.
historical interpretation how would you explain the growth of antislavery sentiment in the north after 1830.
what connections do you see between the rise of the abolitionist movement and the changing nature of the southern defense of slavery.
new strength for american women describe how the women s rights movement developed in the united states in the 1830s and 1840s.
review questions 7.
historical interpretation what links were there between the abolitionist and womens rights movements of the 1840s and 1850s.
how would you explain the connections you note.
chronological reasoning why was the seneca falls convention such an important turning point in the history of the struggle for womens rights.
review questions 4.
chronological reasoning how did the nature of slavery change between 1800 and 1850.
how would you explain the changes you note.
chapter 12 living in a nation of changing lands changing faces changing expectations 355 1850 1861 13 the politics of c h a p t e r o b j e c t i ve demonstrate an understanding of the growing split between the north and the south that led to secession and civil war.
wskasasaassbm from union to disunion leaflets like this reflected the outrage many northerners felt in response to the capture and reenslavement of african americans that resulted from the passage of a tougher fugitive slave law.
analyze the political jockeying in congress and how reaction to the fugitive slave act and the publication of unde toms cabin changed the opinions of many americans south and the north making a break between them hard to avoid.
bleeding kansas and dred scott v sandford analyze the causes and consequences of the battle over slavery in kansas and the supreme court s decision in the dred scott case and the impact of those events on public opinion.
the economy the panic of and the lincoln douglas debates explain how the economic crisis of 1857 and the growing political crises of the decade impacted each other and led the nation to divide.
from john brown to the secession of the south analyze the political impact of john brown s raid and why lincoln won the presidential election of 1860 and the southern states then voted to leave.
356 part v expansion separation and a new union while thousands of americans along with asians and europeans were pouring into california in search of gold other americans were attacking or defending slavery.
these two seemingly separate issues came to a head in congress in 1850.
because of its rapid gold rush inspired growth president taylor advocated statehood for california from the time that he took office in 1848 and in 1849 californians adopted a state constitution and applied for statehood only 1 year after the united states acquired it from mexico.
the territory far exceeded the minimum population threshold for statehood but there was a problem although the admission of california as a free state would once again restore the carefully crafted balance of free and slave states evening out the numbers after the balance in the senate had been disrupted by admitting texas as a slave state other future free states might follow which threatened those in the south.
contrary to some expectations the u s war with mexico had not produced another slave state for the union after texas.
admitting california as a free state would restore the balance in the senate that had been the rule since the missouri compromise of 1820 and that the admission of texas hah disrupted in 1846 leading to 15 slaves states represented but only i4 ee states.
many in the north and south thought a balance was essential to maintaining the union.
but southern senators both whig and democrat agreed that if california were admitted as a free state then other free states 1844 1877 13 1 might quickly follow especially because there were virtually no slaves in either oregon or new mexico territories the other land acquired by the united states in the 1840s that might logically soon be divided into states.
the young senator from mississippi jefferson davis concerned about that possibility warned his colleagues that we are about permanently to destroy the balance of power between the sections the souths ill and aging champion john c calhoun wrote in his diary as things now stand the south cannot with safety remain in the union much had happened to lead davis and calhoun to their conclusions.
in the 1850s more southerners would come to believe that they could not remain in the union and hostility to the south and its peculiar institution of slavery would increase in the north.
although a new generation in congress tried again to enact the kinds of compromises that had held the country together since the adoption of the constitution in 1789 those efforts no longer worked.
the tensions that led southern states to feel compelled to secede from the united states in 1861 are the focus of this chapter.
from union to disunion analyze the political jockeying in congress and how reaction to the fugitive slave act and the publication of uncle tom s cabin changed the opinions of many americans south and the north making a break between them hard to avoid.
the congress that met in 1849 and 1850 and debated whether and how to admit california was one of the most contentious ever seated.
the same three men daniel webster of massachusetts john c calhoun of south carolina and henry clay of kentucky who had dominated the senate as young men in 1820 now as old men played the central role in 1850.
the dramatic debates of 1850 would be the last time the three would appear on the senate floor.
a new generation of senators would also play crucial roles in the coming years stephen a douglas of illinois who would contest the presidency with abraham lincoln in 1860 william h seward of new york and salmon p chase of ohio who would both seek the republican nomination for president in 1860 and then serve in lincolns cabinet and jefferson davis of mississippi who would be elected president of the confederacy in 1861.
proslavery senators like calhoun and davis were worried about california but they were even more worried about abolitionism in the north which had been a growing force since the 1840s.
throughout the 1840s and 1850s there were many different kinds of abolitionists with differing levels of commitment to their cause but southerners tended to view all abolitionists as extremists.
at the core of the movement were those known as the radical abolitionists for whom slavery was the greatest evil in the nation an evil that needed to end immediately and completely.
a larger group of northerners were sympathetic with the radicals but not willing to move as quickly or do as much to oppose slavery.
many of these moderates fell into the free soil category willing to let slavery stay where it already existed but adamantly opposing any extension of slavery to new territories where it did not yet exist by law.
finally there were others for whom ending slavery was perhaps a good thing but not the highest priority.
au of these northerners however were committed to free labor the belief that slavery undermined the value and dignity of hard work and that many white people we also marginalized in places where slave labor was predominant.
in the 1850s this sentiment would lead voters in the new republican party to cheer for free soil free speech free labor and free men many of the tensions that exploded in congress in 1850 dated to the u s war with mexico in the 1840s.
in 1846 democratic congressman david wilmot of pennsylvania proposed an amendment to a military appropriations bill prohibiting slavery in any territory acquired from mexico.
this so called wilmot proviso sprang from growing anger among northern democrats at what they saw as the pro southern tilt of the polk administration.
with support from northern whigs the amendment wilmot proviso the amendment offered by pennsylvania democrat david wilmot in 1846 which stipulated that as an express and fundamental condition to the acquisition of any territory from the republic of mexico neither slavery nor involuntary servitude shall ever exist in any part of said territory.
1850 compromise of 1850 including fugitive slave act passed 1852 harriet beecher stowe s unde tom s cabin published in book form 1854 kansas nebraska act republican party founded 1854 1859 civil war in kansas known as bleeding kansas 1857 supreme court s dred scott decision lecompton constitution adopted in kansas but free soil majority boycott election panic of 1857 1858 lincoln douglas debates lecompton constitution for kansas rejected by congress 1859 john brown s raid on harpers ferry federal arsenal 1860 democratic party splits into northern and southern halves abraham lincoln elected president south carolina secedes from the union 1861 more southern states secede total of seven by february 1 confederate states of america founded lincoln inaugurated as president.
chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 1801 1823 jefferson and the republican ideal the ideal of religious freedom beyond the mississippi the louisiana purchase and the expedition of lewis the war of 1812 expanding american territory and influence chapter 9 new industries new politics 1815 1828 creating the cotton economy commerce technology and transportation from the era of good feeling to the politics of division chapter 10 democracy in the age of jackson 1828 1844 jacksonian democracy jacksonian government democratized religion the second great awakening democratized education the birth of the common school chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 1830 1853 manifest destiny the importance of an idea the u s war with mexico 1846 1848 west into the pacific 8 1 8 2 83 chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of how the post revolutionary generation created a new culture for the country while also expanding the land area of the united states.
jefferson and the republican ideal explain how jefferson s republicanism shaped and reflected the nation s democratic culture.
the ideal of religious freedom explain how americans applied new individualist ideals in their religion and how the expansion of faith based organizations supported yet also challenged jeffersonian republicanism.
beyond the mississippi the louisiana purchase and the expedition of lewis explain what effects the louisiana purchase and the westward expansion had on how americans saw themselves.
the war of 1812 8 4 analyze the causes and impact of the war of 1812.
8 5 expanding american territory and influence analyze how the united states acquired new territory and increased influence abroad.
the conestoga wagon pulled by a team of oxen as shown here or horses and pulling white settlers west became a symbol of the changing united states after 1800 as explorers and then settlers moved ever further toward the west displacing the original inhabitants and building new communities.
on inauguration day march 4 1801 thomas jefferson had breakfast at his boardinghouse in washington d c and then walked up new jersey avenue to the unfinished capitol building to take the oath of office as the nations third president.
he was sworn in by one of his political archenemies the federalist chief justice john marshall.
in his inaugural address jefferson acknowledged the bitterness of the 1800 presidential campaign but continued but every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle.
we have called by different names brethren of the same principle.
we are all republicans we are all federalists.
if there be any among us who would wish to dissolve this union or to change its republican form let them stand undisturbed as monuments of the safety with which error of opinion may be tolerated where reason is left free to combat it.
federalist ideas which were at the core of the constitution and the first two presidential administrations were increasingly out of touch with the democratic tone of the new century.
as the new president made clear more trust and less fear as well as dynamic exchanges and significant freedom were to characterize jeffersonian democracy and his emerging democratic republican party.
republican ideals and an explosion of interest in religion defined the politics and culture of jeffersonian america.
this chapter will examine these ideals and explore their effect on the growth of religious bodies as well as on the expansion and consolidation of american territory and power through the louisiana purchase the war of 1812 and policies such as the monroe doctrine.
210 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 8 1 table 8 1 comparison of the first political parties federalists and democratic republicans jefferson and the republican ideal explain how jefferson s republicanism shaped and reflected the nation s democratic culture.
from the moment he took office jefferson set a new tone for the federal government.
his inaugural address emphasized conciliation and national unity while his actions involved dramatic changes.
jefferson wanted to preside over a country in which social equality among white male citizens and individual freedom were the order of the day.
the social hierarchies that had characterized the colonial era and the first years of the republic were he thought long out of date.
he wanted a limited government that fostered the kind of freedom that was his ideal.
most of his countrymen it seems agreed.
jefferson quickly sold the horses and coaches that john adams had used.
in place of formal state dinners he held smaller dinner parties.
what some called a pell mell seating arrangement marked these gatherings at the white house.
there was no assigned seating and no respect for the rank of the dignitaries who attended.
the president simply sat down with whomever he found interesting and expected the other guests to do the same.
a british diplomat described the new president as a host with a most perfect disregard to ceremony both in his dress and manner and vowed never to attend another white house dinner.
these changes in tone were not trivial.
they represented what was quickly becoming the dominant ideology of the united states quite different from that of the federalists a commitment to a democratic republican government but also republicanism in personal styles and political beliefs see table 9 1.
americans valued equality not only in terms of representation in government but also in terms of how americans treated others at state dinners in the white house at town meetings and in taverns and family homes.
they also valued a notion of freedom in which a nation of independent farmers could make their own decisions independent of one another if they preferred.
american republicanism was a new way for citizens to relate to each other emphasizing equality and independence far more than the class separation deference and dependence that had marked british north america and great britain itself.
federalists originally organized by supporters of the constitution although george washington insisted he stood above party and hated the idea of political parties he was usually considered to be a federalist.
the federalists supported john adams for president in the elections of 1796 and 1800.
the party wanted a strong national government favored hamilton s economic reforms and generally supported stronger u s ties with great britain.
after the 1800 election the federalists never again dominated the national government but remained strong in new england for another 20 years.
they nominated their last presidential candidate in 1816.
democratic republicans began as an informal protest movement led by jefferson and madison in response to hamilton s economic plans by the 1796 and 1800 elections democratic republicans formed a well defined caucus within the congress though hardly a modern political party.
between 1800 and 1820s it was the nation s majority party the democratic republican party sometimes called the jeffersonian republican or simply the republican party.
the party sought a smaller federal government wanted less federal involvement in economic matters and generally favored france over great britain.
by the 1820s it was the only remaining political party before splitting into the democrats and the whigs.
significant dates 8 1 1800 thomas jefferson elected president 1803 louisiana purchase u s supreme court s marbury v madison decision ohio admitted to the union 1804 1806 lewis and clark expedition 1807 chesapeake leopard affair congress passes embargo act 1808 james madison elected president 1812 1815 war of 1812 1812 american defeat at detroit 1813 american victories on great lakes and battle of the thames death oftecumseh 1814 jackson victory over creeks at battle of horseshoe bend the british burn washington d c treaty of ghent signed ratified 1815 1815 u s victory at battle of new orleans 1816 james monroe elected president 1817 rush bagot treaty demilitarized the great lakes between the united states and canada 1818 anglo american convention set the border between the united states and canada and included an agreement for temporary joint ownership of the oregon territory 1819 adams onis treaty spain cedes florida to the united states 1822 plans for slave revolt in charleston led by denmark vesey 1823 monroe doctrine republicanism a complex changing body of ideas values and assumptions that developed in the united states in the late 1790s and early 1800s around thomas jefferson and james madison s political organizing and their campaigns for the presidency.
chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 211 tariff a tax on imports into any nation.
midnight judges the name the jeffersonian democratic republicans gave to those judges appointed by the outgoing federalist president john adams.
there are many ironies in jeffersons success.
jefferson whose lack of religious orthodoxy was an issue in his campaigns led the country during one of the great revivals of religion.
jefferson the sophisticated aristocrat in his personal life presided over white house events with a sense of informality that many officials found insulting.
jefferson a slaveholder who had great misgivings about slavery led the country during the time when slavery became stronger and more entrenched as well as a source of bitter divisiveness.
and jefferson the believer in an agrarian vision of the united states presided over a growing commercial economy that saw an expansion of u s territory as well as the rise of cities banks and corporations which would have pleased his old rival alexander hamilton much more than it ever impressed thomas jefferson.
the apparent disconnect between jefferson the political leader and jefferson the person generated much criticism but those ironies also reflected the dramatic changes afloat in the nation.
jefferson the political leader jeffersons changes in the government went far beyond symbolism.
he shrank the federal bureaucracy while doubling the landmass of the united states.
jefferson thought the bureaucracy he had inherited from john adams was too complicated too expensive and vowed to cut it though that government was hardly a large one.
the largest federal office the war department included the secretary of war one accountant 14 clerks and two messengers.
the secretary of state had one chief clerk six other clerks and a messenger.
the attorney general did not even have a clerk.
still jefferson thought it was too big and cut it.
in addition having always feared the impact of a standing army he cut the size of the army in the west and the size of the navy that patrolled the atlantic ocean.
he founded the military academy at west point only because he wanted to replace federalist officers with a thoroughly professional and republican officer corps.
jeffersons secretary of the treasury persuaded him to keep hamiltons bank of the united states but jefferson was never enthusiastic about the bank and a republican congress refused to renew its charter in 1811 after he had left office.
while he kept the tariff the tax on imported goods jefferson abolished all internal taxes.
most americans dealt with the federal government only through the post office during the jefferson madison and monroe administrations.
washington d c had fewer than 10 000 residents most of whom lived in boardinghouses.
a british diplomat described it as a capital city like no other in the world where one could get stuck in the mud on pennsylvania avenue and a carriage had to avoid tree stumps and grazing cows but there was excellent snipe a type of game bird shooting close under the wall of the capitol jefferson liked it that way.
he wanted a small federal government.
for jefferson the states not the federal government were supposed to have the principal care of our persons our property and our reputation one of jeffersons early efforts to shrink the federal government sparked one of the most significant supreme court decisions in u s history.
the new jeffersonian majority in congress repealed the judiciary act of 1801 which had expanded the number of federal judges and which john adams had signed just before leaving office.
following jeffersons views congress wanted fewer federal judges and it especially disliked the federalist judges that adams had appointed in his last days in office which some called midnight judges because of the hour at which the outgoing president appointed them.
congressional leaders and president jefferson virtually dared the supreme court particularly chief justice marshall a federalist whom adams had appointed to declare congresss actions unconstitutional.
they promised that if the court did so congress would reduce the court s authority.
but marshall was a wily judge.
he waited for the right case to make his decision.
one of the many last minute court appointments that adams had made was to name william marbury a justice of the peace for the district of columbia.
but adams left office before marburys commission was delivered and president jefferson and his secretary of state james madison refused to 212 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 deliver it.
marbury sued and in 1803 the supreme court led by john marshall issued its decision in the case of marbury v madison.
marbury v madison was a complex decision with far reaching consequences.
marshall began by saying that jefferson had indeed been irresponsible in failing to deliver the commission for even a president cannot at his discretion sport away the vested rights of others however marshall also said the court could do nothing because the clause in the judiciary act of 1789 giving the federal courts the right to issue writs requiring governmental action was unconstitutional because the constitution did not give the judiciary such authority.
the result of the ruling was three fold.
first marbury did not get his job.
second while the court slapped jeffersons wrist it also gave him the legal victory in the case because he was not forced to appoint marbury and his partys overturning of the judiciary act of 1801 stood.
since jefferson had won there was nothing in the court decision for him to challenge.
but third marshall also made a point of saying that the court had the authority to declare an act of congress unconstitutional.
it was the first time the court asserted this power of judicial review.
the court would not use this power to determine the constitutionality of an act of congress again until 1857 long after marshall was gone but marshall had dramatically expanded the authority of the federal courts while also ensuring that they would not be challenged by jefferson or the republican congress.
marbury v madison supreme court decision of 1803 that created the precedent of judicial review by ruling part of the judiciary act of 1789 as unconstitutional.
8 1 judicial review a power implied in the constitution that gives federal courts the right to review and determine the constitutionality of acts passed by congress and state legislatures.
rural america and the agrarian ideal in 1801 the occupations opinions and manners of most american voters were compatible with jeffersons agrarian ideal of a nation of independent farmers and they provided a solid foundation on which to build political consensus.
ihe population of the united states when jefferson took office was just over 5 3 million almost 900 000 of whom were african slaves.
ninety percent of whites lived on farms.
however far from being permanently attached to their isolated rural communities many moved often seeking more and better land in ohio kentucky and tennessee.
older farms were sold and resold regularly.
a french observer the due de la rochefoucauld liancourt visited the united states just before jeffersons inauguration.
he wondered whether american farmers had any of the french peasants attachment to a particular piece of land but when he asked the americans they said that such attachments represented a lack of pluck.
so he wrote it is a country in flux that which is true today as regards its population its establishments its prices its commerce will not be true six months from now for many in the republic all forms of authority in government and in manners were suspect.
republican virtue was to be found in equality at least among white men.
while voting restrictions related to race and gender continued and even grew in the early 1800s virtually all property qualifications for voting disappeared and many people now wanted to vote.
as a result the number of voters which had previously included around 20 percent of the white male population expanded in most states to 70 and 80 percent.
compared to any earlier era the white male electorate was large.
it was also opinionated and individualistic.
european visitors were fascinated and appalled by the manners and morals of americans.
an englishman charles william janson who lived in the united states from 1793 to 1806 called americans the only remaining republicans in the civilized world but he also found them in every respect uncongenial to english habits and to the tone of an englishmans constitution everyone in the united states janson said from the poorest and least educated to the most elite consider themselves on an equal footing with the best educated people in the country.
the united states of the early 1800s was also a violent place.
political arguments were often settled with fists.
urban riots were not unusual when crowds poured out of a tavern theater or factory.
observers worried that the country was losing its cohesion.
fighting was as common in rural communities.
daniel drake who grew up chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 213 8 1 during jefferson s time in office the nation s capital in washington d c was little more than a sleepy village along the shores of the potomac river.
jefferson liked it that way as a symbol of a weak federal government.
in kentucky and became one of the leading citizens of cincinnati described his childhood home in the early 1800s as a place where men fought with no holds barred using hands feet and teeth and scratching pulling hair choking gouging out each others eyes and biting off each others noses men of higher social standing often settled minor grudges with a duel.
jeffersons vice president aaron burr who never forgave his longtime political rival former treasury secretary alexander hamilton for his role in the final outcome of the 1800 election later challenged him to a duel in response to unkind comments hamilton made.
hamilton agreed as a point of honor and burr killed him in the resulting fight in 1804.
long before he became president in 1829 andrew jackson was shot in a duel over a bet on a horserace in tennessee in 1806.
he carried that bullet in his chest for the rest of his life his opponent was killed in the encounter.
one cause of the violence was the high level of alcohol consumption.
most americans with access to alcohol which did not include slaves enjoyed a drink during the colonial era.
but in the early 1800s drinking doubled from an average of 2 5 gallons per person per year in 1790 to five gallons in 1820.
one doctor complained that 40 of the 100 physicians in new york city were drunks.
charles janson reported his horror at boys whose dress indicated wealthy parents intoxicated shouting and swearing in the public streets another observer estimated that some workers were consuming a quart of hard liquor every day.
the violence lack of manners and shouting and swearing were not limited to duels among the elite or fist fights on the frontier.
interracial violence between white americans and indians continued long after the indian wars in the east had ended.
individual indians were easy marks for attack.
similarly slaves could do little to protect themselves against the violence that was always a part of the slave system.
the i beating rape even killing of slaves was seldom considered a matter of concern for anyone but those on the plantation.
family life too was not exempt from violence.
when a new yorker stephen arnold was tried for the murder of his adopted daughter many saw it as government intrusion into a family matter.
but while violence toward wives and children may have increased it was also resisted as it had not been earlier.
divorce rates increased as women refused to stay in violent or unhappy marriages or remain legally connected to a man who had left them long before.
214 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 k jefferson built a grand home monticello for himself and his family near charlottesville virginia.
slave laborers expanded the house according to jefferson s plans and attended to his personal needs.
jefferson the individual while americans debated the many meanings of freedom and unfreedom in the democratic experiment of which they were a part they also debated the personal life of their president and whether he was himself a good example of the ideals he espoused.
while jefferson insisted on a simplified social scene at the white house his life at his grand house in monticello was anything but.
at monticello he entertained lavishly and served the finest food and wine while continually expanding the house and the library.
slaves did all of the hard work and took care of the presidents every need.
the defender of republican equality in social relations lived an aristocratic private life.
the presidents private life became national news soon after he took office.
on september 1 1802 the richmond recorder edited by james callendar a former jefferson ally turned enemy carried a story that began it is well known that the man whom it delighteth the people to honor keeps and for many years has kept as his concubine one of his slaves.
her name is sally thus did rumors of thomas jeffersons longtime relationship with his slave sally hemings become national news.
not everyone believed the story and jefferson remained silent but his opponents used the story of his life with sally hemings and the birth of their children to smear the president.
the federalists made a major issue of the relationship when jefferson ran for reelection in 1804.
he still won easily but the rumors persisted long after he died and hemingss children were free.
with the advent of dna testing in the late 1990s it has been established as highly likely that the children of sally hemings four of whom survived into adulthood and were set free were also the children of thomas jefferson.
although not without debate this conclusion is the consensus of most historians who have studied jeffersons life.
3 quick review jefferson called his election the revolution of 1800.
considering the changes in the government during his administration do you agree with him.
why or why not.
chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 215 sj 8 2 thinking historically thomas jefferson and sally hemings as a young man jefferson married martha wayles skelton like himself a wealthy young virginian.
martha jefferson died at monticello in 1782 and jefferson never remarried.
in 1787 a 16 year old slave sally hemings who was the half sister of jefferson s wife martha by her slave owning father became a servant in jefferson s paris home while he was ambassador to france.
when jefferson returned to the united states in 1789 hemings could have stayed in france and been free by french law but she returned with him.
while much is not known about their relationship jefferson seems to have promised hemings that he would free the children of their union.
hemings and many of her family lived at monticello near the older children from jefferson s marriage.
sally hemings s last child was born there in 1808 and hemings stayed at jefferson s home until he died in 1826 when she went to live with her own free children.
in her book the hemingses of monticello an american family new york w w norton 2008 historian annette gordon reed traces not only the story of sally hemings but the story of the intertwined generations of the jefferson and hemings families.
the story raises many questions for historians including questions about the relevance of jefferson s personal relationship with sally hemings in terms of judgments about his political career and as president.
thinking critically 1.
contextualization was it possible for a slave woman and a powerful older free man who claimed ownership of her to form a truly consensual relationship.
why or why not.
historical interpretation what bearings might jefferson s relationship with sally hemings have on his complex attitudes about the institution of slavery.
what does an understanding of jefferson s family with sally hemings and her family tell us about the nature of american slavery and society in the early 1800s.
iii the ideal of religious freedom 8 2 explain how americans applied new individualist ideals in their religion and how the expansion of faith based organizations supported yet also challenged jeffersonian republicanism.
i on his first new years day in the white house thomas jefferson wrote to the members of a committee of the danbury connecticut baptist association believing with you that religion is a matter which lies solely between man and his god that he owes account to none other for his faith or his worship that the legislative powers of government reach actions only and not opinions i contemplate with sovereign reverence that act of the whole american people which declared that their legislature should make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof thus building a wall of separation between church and state.
wall of separation between church and state a phrase coined by thomas jefferson to make clear his belief that the first amendment to the constitution guaranteed that governments should not interfere with the work of churches and churches should not interfere with or expect support from government.
with the wide distribution of that letter the wall of separation between church and state became part of the american lexicon.
some have pointed out that the wall of separation is merely a phrase coined by one president and not part of the constitution or law of the land.
they are right.
but in 1802 jefferson was expressing another aspect of the republican ideal.
more and more americans believed that two of the most important arenas of american life politics and religion should stay as far away from each other as possible.
people who wanted to be treated equally with everyone else no matter what their wealth or family who wanted to be free to curse drink and fight without the laws intrusion and who wanted to be left alone on their own farms also wanted to be able to pursue their religious beliefs as they chose.
a decade before jefferson wrote to the connecticut baptists president george washington had written to the sephardic jewish congregation in newport rhode island expressing similar views see chapter 7.
like the letter that washington and a national identity 1800 1848 part iv crafting a nation people land wrote jefferson s letter was written to a specific audience but unlike washington jefferson sought a change in government policy specifically state government policy in new england.
in 1802 when he wrote the letter connecticut was one of four states that still had an official state supported church a so called religious establishment connecticut required all of its citizens including its baptists and nonbelievers to pay taxes to support the states congregational churches as did new hampshire and massachusetts.
maryland required support for the episcopal church.
when it was adopted in 1791 the first amendment to the u s constitution indeed all of the bill of rights amendments applied only to the federal government.
states could do as they pleased in church state matters.
only after the civil war was the reach of the bill of rights broadened.
long before the revolution all of the states had stopped requiring church attendance or prosecuting people for heresy but the clergy in the four states of connecticut new hampshire massachusetts and maryland were still civil servants supported by the state government.
some of the governed including connecticuts baptists and marylands catholics resented paying a tax that benefited other religious bodies but not their own.
so in the 1802 letter jefferson was telling these connecticut baptists just what they wanted to hear.
not surprisingly some of the congregational leaders in connecticut did not agree.
the separation of church and state at the state level jefferson along with james madison had convinced the virginia legislature to end public financial support for the episcopal church in that state in 1786 5 years before madison helped shepherd the first amendment through congress.
that victory had not been an easy one.
the fiercest battle over state support for specific churches however was fought in connecticut.
timothy dwight who became president of yale in 1795 was a firm federalist who hated jeffersons republicanism and who could not imagine good government or moral citizens without a state church.
one of dwights students at yale lyman beecher organized the connecticut society for the suppression of vice and the promotion of good morals and published the connecticut evangelical magazine and religious intelligencer in an effort to maintain the special status of the congregationalist churches.
but he lost.
in 1817 oliver wolcott who opposed a state supported church in connecticut defeated a federalist for governor and connecticut would end its state support for all religious bodies.
beecher was heartbroken.
years later however he changed his mind the injury done to the cause of christ as we then supposed was irreparable.
for several days i suffered what no tongue can tell for the best thing that ever happened to the state of connecticut.
by voluntary efforts societies missions and revivals they clergy exert a deeper influence than ever they could by queues and shoe buckles and cocked hats and gold headed canes.
religion in connecticut as beecher noted actually survived and flourished without state support and not long afterward massachusetts the last holdout followed the same path to separate church and state.
new religious expressions direct government support for churches disappeared in the early 1800s but the importance of religious freedom did not.
the ideals of individual freedom in all areas of life generated an amazing growth in religious organizations and ideas in the same era.
church attendance in america dropped during and after the revolution.
many of the elite like jefferson were deists who saw god as at most a distant force in human affairs many working people ignored religious matters altogether.
during jeffersons presidency however americans participated in an outpouring of evangelical religious establishment the name given to a state church or to the creation of an established church that might play a role in and expect support and loyalty from all citizens.
deist one who has a religious orientation that rejects divine revelation and holds that the workings of nature alone reveal god s design for the universe.
chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 217 ft4 i second great awakening a series of religious revivals in the first half of the 1800s characterized by great emotionalism in large public meetings.
i this popular illustration of an early camp meeting gives some sense of what went on at a camp meeting though especially in the west the crowds who attended were larger and more diverse than indicated here.
christianity the beginning of the second great awakening.
this religious revival paralleled and indeed exceeded the great awakening of the 1740s that had transformed american christianity.
although major developments of the second great awakening occurred largely in the 1820s and 1830s the movement began in the late 1790s and the early 1800s.
cane ridge and the revivals of the early 1800s in 1796 a presbyterian minister named james mcgready moved from the carolinas to kentucky.
most of those who had moved across the appalachian mountains into kentucky had left their religion at home if they ever had any at all.
mcgready described rogues harbor in logan county kentucky as a place of horse thieves murderers robbers counterfeiters and runaways.
they were the same people whom daniel drake had described as fighting with no holds barred mcgready set out to make them good church going christians.
he was surprisingly successful.
in 1799 he and other preachers held a church service at the gaspar river meeting house.
john mcgee one of the others involved remembered i left the pulpit and went through the audience shouting and exhorting with all possible ecstasy and energy and the floor was soon covered with the slain revivalist preachers often called those who experienced emotional conversion the slain because they were seen as having died to their old sinful lives.
the revival of 1799 led to more religious gatherings and they grew so big that they needed to be held at outdoor campgrounds.
in one of the largest religious gatherings before the civil war perhaps 20 000 people 10 percent of the states population gathered at cane ridge in bourbon county kentucky for a 5 day camp meeting in august 1801 that was led by presbyterian and methodist ministers.
preaching continued from dawn to midnight with little time for meals or rest.
james finley who was himself converted to christianity at the cane ridge camp meeting and went on to a long career as a frontier revivalist described the days i counted seven ministers all preaching at once some on stumps others in wagons and one was standing on a tree trunk which had in falling lodged against another.
some of the people were singing others praying some crying.
barton w stone the pastor of the cane ridge presbyterian church that hosted the gathering remembered many things transpired there which were so much like miracles that if they were not they had the same effect as miracles on infidels and unbelievers methodists baptists and other protestants although cane ridge was a joint presbyterian methodist endeavor it was the methodists and baptists who grew the most from the revival movement.
indeed the revivals that began in the early 1800s made these two denominations the largest protestant groups in the country during that time.
methodism had come to america through john wesley 1703 1791 who founded the methodist movement in england along with his brother charles the hymn writer 1707 1788.
john wesley had also preached in georgia.
but it was the first american methodist bishop francis asbury 1745 1816 who established american methodism.
asbury created a new form of protestant ministry the methodist circuit riders who moved from community to community preaching with great fervor and organizing churches at every stop.
218 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 john wesley believed that it was in the power of every person to decide whether they wanted to experience salvation.
his emphasis on the need for free individuals to make their own decisions appealed in freedom loving jeffersonian america.
in addition wesley s experience of having his heart strangely warmed allowed a level of emotionalism in methodism that was lacking in other denominations.
baptists had been in north america for almost as long as the puritans.
they were the largest religious body in rhode island where they founded brown university.
the baptists of the second great awakening however were a different breed from their earlier new england baptist counterparts.
their religious events were more emotional and they were more individualistic and determined to assert local authority.
where methodism was tightly organized from bishops to preachers to congregations baptist organization was highly decentralized with each congregation retaining total control.
while methodists were largely united until the coming of the civil war baptists tended to splinter into rival groups regular baptists anti mission baptists freewill baptists church of god baptists seventh day baptists six principle baptists hard shell baptists.
the model methodist minister was the circuit rider the typical baptist minister was a farmer preacher who grew up in a particular congregation and was selected to lead it while he continued to support himself by his own labor.
despite their differences however both the methodist and the baptist ministers were highly effective in changing the religious outlook of the country after 1800.
faith in the slave quarters and free black churches white communities were not the only ones experiencing a revival of religion in the early 1800s.
at revivals like cane ridge blacks and whites whether slaves or free people mixed with surprising freedom.
revivals in some parts of the south especially in the early 1800s were seen as a kind of holiday and many of the rules of daily life including racial segregation were suspended.
many plantation owners organized religious services for slaves that focused on the virtues of submission and obedience.
but slaves passed along memories of another form of worship congregations that met often at night in secluded places.
the scholar and activist w e b.
dubois 1868 1963 described the meetings of these clandestine congregations as occasions to speak of the longing and disappointment and resentment of a stolen people and about their deep passion for liberty.
litt young a slave on a plantation near vicksburg mississippi remembered that the mistress of the plantation built a nice church with glass windows and a brass cupola for the blacks.
a yellow man a light skinned african american preached to us.
she had him preach how we was to obey our master and missy if we want to go to heaven but when she wasnt there he come out with straight preachin from the bible.
clara young recalled her favorite preacher was a man named matthew ewing who even though he could not read or write sure knowed his bible for these slaves effective preaching involved knowing the bible either by memory or from the rare and illegal ability to read it and an ability to preach with passion about freedom in the next life and quite possibly in this life.
worship included singing dancing and a cathartic emotional release and renewal.
any unsupervised meeting of slaves frightened whites.
denmark vesey a free black sunday school teacher who saw himself as a latter day moses ready to lead his people to freedom led a slave revolt in south carolina in 1822.
in 1831 nat turner would lead the largest slave revolt before the civil war.
when turner told the 8 a chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 219 i 84 83 authorities that he knew he was ordained for some great purpose in the hands of the almighty and that the great day of judgment was at hand he confirmed what they had been fearing about slave religion.
the longing for freedom usually took less violent paths however.
slavery depended on hopelessness and religion gave slaves hope that could lead to resistance.
the songs of the slave quarter are often songs of freedom.
thus slaves sang steal away steal away steal away to jesus.
steal away steal away home i aint got long to stay here.
sometimes these lyrics meant stealing away to the religious meeting but they could also mean stealing away from slavery to flee north.
at the same time northern free blacks began to form their own religious orga j nizations.
richard allen was born a slave in delaware.
he converted to methodism and was able to purchase his freedom and begin preaching.
although allen preached to white and black congregations he soon saw a large field open in seeking and instructing my african brethren who had been a long forgotten people and few of them attended public worship because white churches were not always welcoming allen became convinced that a racially integrated congregation was impossible.
in response he organized the bethel church in philadelphia in 1794.
thus was born the african methodist episcopal church which by 1820 had 4 000 members in philadelphia and 2 000 more in baltimore.
other black methodists founded the african methodist episcopal zion church in new york.
african american baptists also created their own congregations.
fears of religiously inspired slave rebellions especially after denmark veseys rebellion of 1822 led southern governments to block the growth of independent black churches but in the north free black churches thrived as their members exercised leadership developed their own ideas and worshipped among themselves.
american catholic and jewish communities in the early years of the republic there were few roman catholics or jews in the areas of the original 13 colonies.
during the late 1700s and early 1800s the largest number of catholics in north america lived in new orleans which had become part of the united states only in 1803 and in texas new mexico and california which were still part of mexico until the 1840s.
nearly all white immigrants to the british colonies had been at least nominally protestant except for catholics who had been granted safe haven in maryland.
religious freedom in the jeffersonian era was tremendously important to those who were in the smallest minorities.
the freedom to form their own religious organizations free of government control and often free of full authority by their own senior leaders was important to catholics and jews in jeffersonian america.
in 1790 john carroll was appointed the first catholic bishop in america.
he was based in maryland where catholics having lost their right to govern the colony had again gained religious freedom after the revolution see chapter 7.
carroll was later promoted to archbishop of baltimore when the vatican appointed bishops for boston new york and bardstown kentucky.
carroll worked hard to build catholic strength and to fit into the democratic spirit of america.
he established the first american catholic college at georgetown maryland later part of the district of columbia and a catholic seminary at baltimore.
in many places catholic laypeople created their own churches appointed themselves trustees and when possible hired their own priests.
vatican responses to the radical secularism of the french revolution led to pressure on carroll to curtail this trend among the american laity and instead agree 220 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 to the hierarchical appointment of priests but throughout the early 1800s american catholicism had remarkably strong lay leadership.
at the time of the revolution most of the few american jews lived in east coast cities such as newport philadelphia and new york city.
between then and 1820 new congregations and synagogues were formed in richmond new orleans cincinnati and baltimore.
jewish religious communities like those of catholics and protestants took on republican sentiments.
in new york city congregation shearith israel adopted the words whereas in free states all power originates and is derived from the people as the beginning words to their new congregational constitution.
q quick review how does this trend toward religious freedom epitomize the republican values of the jefferson administration.
beyond the mississippi the louisiana purchase and the expedition of lewis and clark 83 explain what effects the louisiana purchase and the westward expansion had on how americans saw themselves.
jefferson was a political philosopher committed to a small federal government and religious freedom but he was also a pragmatic politician.
one of the practical issues that he faced in leading a country of independent farmers was that those farmers living in western regions were not happy.
geography shaped american politics at the beginning of jeffersons term in office.
before the advent of railroads farmers west of the alleghenies found it very difficult to ship their goods over the mountains to the atlantic coast or transport them down the mississippi through new orleans.
these difficulties had helped fuel the whiskey rebellion and the short lived effort to make kentucky the independent nation of franklin during washingtons administration see chapter 7 and jefferson worried that frustrated frontier farmers might still seek to form an independent country as some of them advocated to do.
he also worried about european influence still among them and knew that having many unhappy citizens was not good for the future of a sitting president.
he was determined to do something about it.
french explorers were the first europeans to reach and settle the banks of the mississippi river and most european influences in the region were still french reflected in french place names from detroit to saint louis to new orleans.
however at the close of the french and indian war in 1763 france ceded to spain the area west of the mississippi and the city of new orleans.
throughout the washington and adams administrations and into jeffersons in spite of the provisions of the pinckney treaty spain periodically restricted non spanish vessels from sailing on the mississippi and collected customs duties on all goods moving through new orleans.
that practice was detrimental because more than half of all the goods shipped out of the united states were shipped down the mississippi river and through the port of new orleans not atlantic ports.
by 1800 spain had become weaker prompting jefferson to write that spanish control of the river and new orleans would hardly be felt by us however napoleon bonaparte who now ruled france negotiated a secret treaty with spain to return new orleans and the entire louisiana territory to france.
when word of the treaty reached the united states in 1802 it provoked a crisis.
jefferson believed that for france then the strongest nation in europe to control american commerce was intolerable.
the president told the american ambassador in paris chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 221 louisiana purchase the 1803 u s purchase of the vast land holdings that france claimed along the west side of the mississippi river beginning in new orleans and extending through the heart of north america to the canadian border.
there is on the globe one single spot the possessor of which is our natural and habitual enemy that spot was new orleans.
the louisiana purchase the solution for more secure commerce jefferson thought was to buy the city of new orleans from france.
once the port was under american control jefferson was confident that he would have solved a long term problem for his western constituents and won an important political victory.
jefferson dispatched two of his most trusted associates james monroe and robert livingston to paris to offer 6 million for the city.
if they could not reach an accommodation with the french monroe was to proceed to london and try to make an alliance against france with great britain.
while jefferson worried about control of new orleans napoleon had worries of his own.
although he was victorious on the european continent napoleon needed money.
in addition french efforts to put down the slave uprising in haiti had gone terribly.
militant slave resistance and yellow fever had killed 24 000 french soldiers and haitian independence seemed inevitable.
new orleans and the mississippi valley which supplied haiti with food and raw materials would become much less important to france if france no longer controlled the haitian sugar and coffee plantations.
so when the americans offered 6 million for one city napoleons government offered to sell the whole middle third of the present day united states for 15 million.
jefferson was thrilled with napoleons offer.
he worried however that a strict reading of the constitution did not authorize the federal government to make such a huge purchase of land it certainly did not mention that authority in the powers granted to the national government.
nevertheless the practical political benefits of the louisiana purchase overcame his constitutional doubts.
some federalists in congress opposed the purchase fearing correctly that the influence of new england the last federalist region of the country would be diminished in a vastly larger nation.
but most americans even most federalists were enthusiastic.
congress acted quickly and the treaty confirming the transfer of 828 000 square miles from nominal french control to the united states was easily ratified.
the united states had solved the problem of new orleans and secured control of both sides of the mississippi river from the great lakes to the gulf of mexico while almost doubling the nations land area.
how to incorporate this land into the united states whether as states or territories would be left for future administrations to determine.
the city of new orleans new orleans was unusual for an american city when it became part of the united states in 1803.
many of its inhabitants spoke french or spanish but they now lived in a country where business was conducted in english.
it was a catholic city that was now part of an overwhelmingly protestant country.
its citizens were a cosmopolitan mix with attitudes toward many things including race and sexuality that were different from those of most americans.
slavery in spanish and french colonies varied widely.
some of the harshest slavery in the world was in the sugar plantations of french haiti and in spanish cuba.
but slaves in cities like havana and pre 1803 new orleans could maintain stable families enjoy their own holidays and earn money to buy goods for themselves and sometimes even their freedom.
in new orleans slaves and free blacks could gather at congo square on sundays to dance play drums and sing in their own languages under the watchful eye of whites but with a freedom of action unimaginable elsewhere in the united states.
the music that they brought from africa and developed in new orleans was the foundation of american jazz music.
there was also considerable racial mixing in new orleans.
mixed race people faced discrimination but many black women nonetheless became long term partners to white men.
indeed such unions were an avenue of upward mobility for some black 222 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 women not only in new orleans but also in many of the spanish and french colonies in ways that were not true in british colonies or in the united states.
that african women could maintain their own gardens buy and sell goods and be involved in intimate relationships with white men led to complex family negotiations.
a libre as free blacks were called woman carlota derneville purchased her freedom in 1773 and the freedom of her son carlos in 1775.
she later became rich enough to own her own tavern and houses that she rented to others.
ihe new orleans that jefferson purchased in 1803 had a population of 8 000 with their own churches dance halls theater newspapers and police force.
one third of all people of african origin in the city were free compared with less than two percent in nearby kentucky or tennessee and under 10 percent in the united states as a whole.
many of the french speaking women and men of new orleans black or white slave or free tended to refer to any citizens of the united states as kaintucks or kentuckians no matter where in the united states they came from.
kaintucks were the tough backwoods farmers and slaves who crewed flatboats.
these large floating rafts often 15 feet wide by 50 to 80 feet long carried up to 100 tons of grain.
for the americans who came down the mississippi on a flatboat new orleans was a city of pleasure that lured many to stay and create a new american population.
although the racial and cultural diversity of new orleans frightened some americans its essential geographic location made it the prize of the louisiana purchase.
the lewis and clark expedition jefferson wanted to assert american dominance in north america.
in 1803 before he even knew the outcome of the monroe livingston negotiations for new orleans that he had authorized he asked congress to support a scientific expedition to study the people lands and animal and plant species of the north american continent across the louisiana territory and on to the pacific ocean.
while he wanted the scientific information jefferson was even more interested in a full report on spanish and french military power in the region.
the expedition was to be led by his private secretary meriwether lewis and an army officer william clark.
before lewis and clark could depart word came of the louisiana purchase.
suddenly the united states owned much of the land the expedition was authorized to explore.
ihe news changed nothing the order still stood learn as much as possible about the new american lands and the places beyond them and make treaties with as many of the original inhabitants as possible.
it was a daunting assignment that would become one of american historys most celebrated exploits.
lewis and clark and their corps of discovery the team of soldiers civilian woodsmen boatmen interpreters and clarks slave york prepared for the trip during the winter of 1803 04 in st louis on the west bank of the mississippi river.
the site was a spanish french trading post of about a thousand people which was a gateway to the territory the united states had just acquired.
french explorers were familiar with much of the land over which the expedition would travel as was a british trader alexander mackenzie who had been the first european to cross north america in 1792 93.
of course the indians living along the route knew their homelands well.
still for americans this vast area was unknown land.
on may 14 1804 the corps of discovery left camp river dubois in hartford illinois to travel up the missouri river into the heart of the louisiana territory.
by the end of october they reached an area close to the current u s canadian border in north dakota.
there near a mandan indian village on the missouri river they made camp for the winter.
the mandans lived in earth lodges in settled villages.
they had traded with the french for over a hundred years had been decimated by european smallpox and knew european ways but the arrival of the lewis and clark expedition was their first contact with americans.
the americans traded goods and celebrated feasts including new years day with the mandans drinking dancing and playing the fiddle to the surprise of their hosts.
in 1803 president thomas jefferson sent james monroe and robert r livingstone to paris to negotiate the american purchase of the city of new orleans.
in their meeting with the french foreign minister charles maurice de talleyrand shown in this contemporary engraving the french offered and the americans accepted the transfer of the entire louisiana territory to the united states.
corps of discovery the name given to the expedition led by lewis and clark in 1804 1806 that explored the louisiana purchase and the oregon lands extending to the west coast.
chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 223 critical to the success of the corps were french trapper toussaint charbonneau and his shoshone partner sacagawea who joined the expedition with their newborn child.
whether sacagawea was the slave or the wife of charbonneau is unclear but she became an essential guide and an american legend.
sacagawea began as a cook and laundress for the corps while she carried her baby on her back but quickly used her knowledge of the countryside to find food and translate with some of the tribes they met.
at the end of their journey lewis and clark paid charbonneau 500 for his services but later they wondered whether they should have paid sacagawea too.
according to unverified shoshone tradition sacagawea lived to an old age dying at the wind river indian reservation in 1884.
as they tried to cross the rocky mountains in september of 1805 the corps moved beyond the rather inexact western boundary of the louisiana purchase into oregon country that was claimed by britain russia and spain but not the united states.
as instructed by jefferson they kept going and almost starved.
they had assumed that the rocky mountains were like the appalachians.
they crossed through a valley expecting to see downward slopes but instead clarke noted in his journal they faced higher mountains in every direction as far as i could see at weippe prairie in what is now idaho they stumbled into a party of nez perce indians by far the largest tribe in that part of the western rockies who brought them to a large spacious lodge and fed them.
an indian leader known as twisted hair drew a map of the river system leading to the columbia river and the pacific coast and taught the americans how to make dugout canoes out of pine.
the food saved the explorers lives and the canoes saved the trip.
on november 24 1805 the corps of discovery left their horses with twisted hair and following the route he mapped for them reached the pacific ocean.
they built fort clatsop near present day astoria oregon and wintered there until march 23 1806 when they began the long arduous journey home reaching saint louis on september 23 1806 see map 8 1.
word spread quickly to the nation and to jefferson at the white house that the party whom many had given up for lost had made it back.
british possessions x s dom jmaine spanish florida louisiana x forts p rctose t mjssions mountains a lews o r e g o fortf clatsop 1806 s el count4 4 i massachusetts.
new york v connecticut jersey delaware maryland x san francisco j san luis obispo x santa barbara losangelesx spanish san diego x posse map 8 1 exploring the new territory.
this map shows the size of the louisiana purchase in comparison beyond lou sitna3 11 un t6d stat6s rute f the lewis and clark expedition through and 224 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 while lewis and clark were exploring the northern parts of the louisiana purchase and the oregon coast jefferson launched other expeditions.
zebulon pike led an expedition that departed from st louis in the fall of 1805 to explore the mississippi and arkansas rivers and much of the present day state of colorado.
in 1806 jefferson appointed a third expedition led by thomas freeman an astronomer and surveyor to track the red river valley in the southern portion of the new territory.
the reports from these expeditions opened the way for other adventurers and traders some of whom like new yorks john jacob astor made a fortune in the fur trade.
the result for the mandans nez perce and other tribes was far too often disease war and the loss of lands and a way of life.
quick review what key aspects of the louisiana purchase were of particular importance to the united states and how would they change life for different groups of americans.
american voices william clark and red bear iwo views of the lewis and clark experience rhe rescue of the lewis and clark expedition by the nez perce in september 1805 was critical to the success of the expedition.
but the explanation for why the nez perce were so friendly depends on who was describing the event.
for william clark it was an appropriate response to his gifts and skill as a negotiator.
for the nez perce it was a response to a much earlier nez perce tradition.
from the journals of lewis and clark september 20 i set out early and decended the mountain to a leavel pine countrey proceeded on through a butifull countrey for three miles to a small plain in which i found maney indian lodges at the distance of 1 mile from the lodges i met 3 boys when they saw me ran and hid themselves searched found gave them small pieces of ribin sent them forward to the village a man came out to meet me with great caution and conducted me us to a large spacious lodge which he told me by signs was the lodge of his great chief great numbers of women gathered around me with much apparent signs of fear and apr.
pleased they those people gave us a small piece of buffalow meat some dried salmon beries roots in different states some round and much like an onion which they call pas she co quamash the bread or cake is called pas she co sweet of this they make bread supe they also gave us the bread made of this root all of which we eate hartily i gave them a fiew small articles as preasents and proceeded on with a chief to his village 2 miles in the same plain where we were treated kindly in their way and continued with them all night.
those two villages consist of about 30 double lodges but fiew men a number of women children they call themselves cho pun nish or pierced noses their dialect appears very different from the flat heads tushapaws i have seen.
red bear from an oral history recorded in 1926 with red bear s grandson chief red bear first learned of white people through a girl of his band living on tamonmo the salmon river.
when small she was stolen by the blacklegs in the buffalo country who sold her to some tribe farther toward the sunrise.
in time she was bought by white people probably in canada where she was well treated.
it is a long story how in time carrying her little baby she ran away and after several moons reached the friendly selish who cared for her and brought her in a dying condition to her own people at white bird.
her baby had died on the way.
she was called watkuweis returned from a faraway country.
she told of the white people how good they had been to her and how well she liked them.
when the first two white men lewis and clark with their followers came watkuweis said to her people these are the people who helped me.
do them no hurt.
this was why the strange people had been received in friendship.
there had been a prophecy about red bear and a new people which was thus fulfilled in 1805.
he met the strangers.
they first have a smoke.
if no smoke then they must fight.
red bear made presents of dressed buckskins and they gave him beads and a few other articles.
they afterwards found the white man s gifts to be cheap.
source frederick e hoxie and jay t nelson editors lewis clark and the indian country the native american perspective urbana university of illinois press 2007 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how did clark explain the friendly reception they received from the nez perce.
what was red bear s explanation for the same reception.
historical interpretation what light do these documents shed on the assumptions white americans often brought to their interactions with american indians and indians brought to white americans.
chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 225 the war of 1812 8 4 analyze the causes and impact of the war of 1812.
jefferson expanded the united states but he had been able to do little about the british and french navies that threatened the country as a result of conflicts between the two european powers.
the actions jefferson took to protect the united states on the seas actually hurt the country economically what had begun as an irritating concern to jefferson escalated into the war of 1812 during the presidency of his successor james madison.
that conflict which continued from 1812 to 1815 deserves more attention than it often receives from historians.
the war resolved issues that had limited u s development for decades and its conclusion launched a new period of growth for the country.
it was the last war ever fought between the united states and great britain.
the two nations had been in conflict almost nonstop since 1775 but the end of this war brought real peace.
it was also the last war in which indian tribes were allied with one nation or against another.
after the war no tribe was ever again able to make an alliance with a foreign nation and the u s government treated the tribes less and less as sovereign nations and more as an internal matter renewed tension between the united states and great britain the tensions that led the united states and great britain to go to war in 1812 had existed since the battles of lexington and concord in 1775.
despite treaties the two nations were never fully at peace and each made alliances with indian tribes to make trouble for the other.
for the british troubles in north america were a sideshow to a world war with france that had begun in 1689 and continued with brief pauses until 1815.
english colonists fought on the british side until the french and indian war ended in 1763.
in 1778 france had come to the aid decisive aid of the american colonists in the revolution.
with the coming of the french revolution in 1789 and the rise of napoleon in 1799 the war between britain and france took on a deeper ideological tone.
while earlier wars had primarily been territorial disputes after their revolution the french saw themselves as the agents of democracy against a despotic coalition led by britain.
especially after the rise of napoleon the british saw themselves as defenders of the free world against napoleonic tyranny.
in the united states the greatest divide between the emerging political parties was the federalist tilt toward britain and the democratic republican tilt toward france.
by early 1806 napoleons armies controlled most of the european continent while the british royal navy controlled the oceans.
for the united states british control of the seas was a much larger threat than worries about who controlled the european continent.
with britain and france each casting itself as the defender of freedom while fighting for national preservation the war was intense.
to survive britain depended on its navy to protect the island nation from invasion and to dominate the oceans.
but the royal navy was always short of sailors and one of the reasons for the shortage was the tendency of british sailors to desert and join the crew of a u s merchant vessel where the working conditions were better and the pay up to five times higher.
the british regularly stopped u s merchant vessels and occasionally warships on the high seas in violation of international law to search for their own sailors and all too often also to force any able bodied seaman british or american into service.
this policy of seizing sailors or impressment was seen as vital to britain but it was a direct threat to american freedom and to the economic survival of the united states.
impressments had long infuriated americans and in fact had helped spark the revolution in 1776 see chapter 5.
between 1803 and 1812 3 000 6 000 american citizens were pressed into service on british warships against their will many of whom never returned.
the practice was an assault on individual liberties that challenged 226 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 everything the american revolution stood for.
a major crisis erupted in june 1807 when the royal navy s hms leopard opened fire on the uss chesapeake after its commander refused to let british officers board the ship to look for deserters.
three american sailors were killed in the fighting and the british then took four sailors off the chesapeake who were either deserters from their navy or americans resisting impressments.
president jefferson wrote this country has never been in such a state of excitement since the battle of lexington jefferson and congress however knew that the united states was too weak for a fight in part because of the cutbacks jefferson had authorized in the navy and army that adams had previously built up.
congress initially passed a non importation act hoping that boycotting british goods would be an effective strategy but it failed to have an effect.
consequently jefferson urged the embargo act which congress passed in december 1807 preventing u s trade with any foreign ports to keep ships and sailors out of harms way the president was confident that the major impact would be on britain which he thought could not survive without american foodstuffs and that the american people would be willing to suffer short term loss to gain peace.
he was wrong on both counts.
british warehouses were full the country was having a good harvest other nations were willing to sell food and they could wait out the americans.
most americans were anxious to maintain the income that commerce provided.
new england shipping was devastated and farmers in all of the states lost money as cotton grain and tobacco piled up and could not be shipped.
smugglers became active by land across the border between new england and canada and by sea eluding the small u s navy that tried to enforce the embargo.
the massachusetts and connecticut legislatures following the precedent of jeffersons own earlier kentucky and virginia resolutions declared the embargo illegal in their states thus setting up talk of secession or civil war.
as a compromise that was meant to appease new england merchants congress replaced the embargo with the non intercourse act in 1809 just days before jefferson left office.
the new act authorized trade with everyone except britain and france.
france had plundered u s ships for supplies during their war with britain.
during madisons first term as president tension continued to grow between the united states and great britain.
in 1810 a further modification of the non intercourse act known as macons bill no.
2 created new tensions especially between the united states and britain.
british impressments of u s sailors continued unabated while each new act continued to hurt commercial ties between the two countries.
embargo act an act passed by congress in 1807 prohibiting american ships from leaving for any foreign port.
8 4 non intercourse act an act passed by congress in 1809 designed to modify the embargo act by limiting it to trade with britain and france so as to extend u s commerce in the rest of the world.
renewed tension between whites and indians while tensions mounted between the united states and great britain warfare between the united states and indian tribes broke out in the ohio country.
after the u s armys victory at the battle of fallen timbers and the subsequent treaty of greeneville in 1795 the old northwest had been at peace.
but a new generation of indians was much less willing to live with what they saw as an unfair treaty.
a new tribal alliance led by a charismatic religious figure named tenskwatawa or the prophet and his half brother the military leader tecumseh frightened white settlers and seriously challenged the small u s army.
many correctly deduced that tecumseh and tenskwatawa were aided by the british.
after their losses from the treaty of greenville in 1795 many shawnees came to believe that their sorry state was due to their having displeased waashaa monetoo the good spirit who their traditions said had recreated the world after its destruction by a flood.
in the early 1800s a spiritual leader tenskwatawa told the tribes that their dependence on white culture was the source of the good spirits unhappiness.
after 200 years of coexistence tribes like the shawnees had become dependent on european muskets wore cotton clothing cooked in european cookware and even lived in european style houses.
tenskwatawa promised that if his people would renounce chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 227 two shawnee leaders and half brothers tecumseh who led a diverse indian military alliance and tenskwatawa known as the prophet proposed a revival of native american religion in opposition to white expansion.
european ways and goods they could renew their culture and drive whites out of their country.
he created a new settlement at what is now west lafayette indiana called prophetstown where shawnees and other tribes gathered for spiritual renewal.
while tenskwatawa preached tecumseh prepared for war.
tenskwatawa was a religiously inspired leader tecumseh an inspired military tactician.
white colonists had killed their father pukeshinwau at the beginning of the american revolution.
the brothers had seen whites make and break treaty after treaty.
tecumseh traveled throughout the ohio territory and sought help from british authorities in canada who he remembered had sought to exclude whites from the ohio region before the american revolution.
tecumseh traveled as far south as tennessee and alabama to recruit cherokees choctaws and creeks.
in a meeting with choctaw and chickasaw leaders in the spring of 1811 tecumseh speaking in the shawnee language said the whites are already a match for us all united and too strong for any one tribe alone to resist so that unless we support one another with our collective and united forces unless every tribe unanimously combines to give check to the ambition and avarice of the whites they will soon conquer us apart and disunited and we will be driven away from our native country and scattered as autumnal leaves before the wind.
tecumseh was willing to negotiate with the united states but his goal was an all indian alliance to drive all whites from the land south of canada and from between the alleghenies and the mississippi.
whites on the frontier were frightened.
in september 1807 thomas kirker the acting governor of the new state of ohio met with tecumseh and the two agreed to peace.
but in november 1811 while tecumseh was away seeking cherokee allies william henry harrison governor of the indiana territory attacked prophetstown with 1 000 u s troops.
harrisons troops burned the village to the ground though 228 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 american voices tecumseh speech to the governor of indiana 1810 ij i before william henry harrison governor of indiana territory led the u s army to attack the shawnee encampment at prophetstown tecumseh met with harrison in hopes of establishing a peace agreement.
for all of his distrust tecumseh was willing to negotiate and the two met in august 1810.
tecumseh spoke little or no english but the 1810 meeting included interpreters.
the u s government interpreters were careful to transcribe the speech as accurately as possible and the copies they sent to washington became the most accurate account on record of tecumseh s words.
brother i wish you to listen to me well.
i wish to reply to you more explicitly as i think you do not clearly understand what i before said to you.
i shall explain it again you ought to know that after we agreed to bury the tomahawk at greenville we then found their new fathers in the americans who told us they would treat us well not like the british who gave us but a small piece of pork every day.
i want now to remind you of the promises of the white people.
you recollect that the time the delawares lived near the white people americans and satisfied with the promises of friendship and remained in security yet one of their towns was surprised and the men women and children murdered.
the same promises were given to the shawnees flags were given to them and were told by the americans that they were now children of the americans.
these flags will be as security for you if the white people intend to do you harm hold up your flags and no harm will be done you.
this was at length practiced and the consequence was that the person bearing the flag was murdered with others in their village.
how my brother after this conduct can you blame me for placing little confidence in the promises of our fathers the americans.
since the peace was made you have kill d some of the shawnee winnebagoes delawares and miamies and you have taken our lands from us and i do not see how we can remain at peace with you if you continue to do so.
source in spite of the government s care there are differing accounts of the speech.
see for example camilla townsend american indian history a documentary reader malden ma wiley blackwell 2009 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how did tecumseh characterize past interactions between whites and indians.
crafting an argument in your opinion why was it so difficult for whites and indians to live side by side in peace.
what ideas does this document provide on this question.
8 4 the prophet and most residents escaped.
a year later when the united states went to war with great britain tecumseh strengthened by support from the british who had never stopped stirring up indian opposition to the united states led his tribal confederation in an all out war on the americans.
with the united states and britain formally at war the shawnee alliance with britain was a major threat to the americans.
war and its consequences as hostilities grew between the united states and great britain and its indian allies some in congress known as the war hawks saw a war with britain as just what the country needed.
republicans led by henry clay of kentucky and felix grundy of tennessee argued that war was key to territorial expansion.
they were confident that if the united states went to war with britain those french inhabitants who remained in canada after france ceded the territory to britain would revolt allowing the united states to seize canada.
the war hawks also wanted to attack the small spanish colonies in florida and claim that territory for the united states.
with britain and spain out of the picture the country could then settle things once and for all on the indian frontier.
republican leader elbridge gerry of massachusetts eager to stop british disruptions to american trade in the atlantic told president madison by war we should be purified as by fire federalists however saw war as just one more step in a process by which the democratic republicans had moved the country into an unnecessary and commercially foolish hostility with britain.
when madison asked congress for a declaration war hawks members of congress mostly from the south and west who aggressively pushed for a war against britain after their election in 1810.
chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 229 10 1 land granted to indians west of the mississippi river date and route of removal map 10 1 indian removal.
while indian removal began with the forced relocation of the sac and fox tribes from illinois and iowa by far the largest relocation of tribes took place when the five indian nations who were living in large territories in georgia alabama florida and mississippi were forced far to the west to the newly created indian territory.
catharine beecher a reformer associated with many causes organized women across the northwest to defend indian rights and flooded congress with petitions.
missionaries campaigned against the bill so vigorously that georgia sentenced two of them to prison at hard labor for refusing to abandon the indians.
in the senate theodore frelinghuysen of new jersey long a supporter of protestant missionaries and reform efforts led the opposition to the indian removal bill.
frelinghuysen insisted that the government was bound by its treaties and that if need be should use the u s army to force georgia to retract its claims to the indian lands.
henry clay who had not previously spoken in favor of indian rights joined the antiremoval forces.
in the end the removal bill passed the senate 28 to 19 but passed the house by only a 102 98 vote.
among those voting no was congressman davy crockett of tennessee who called the bill oppression with a vengeance but jackson signed the law may 28 1830 making half a century of treaties void.
the tribes would have to move.
while all of the tribes resisted negotiated and ultimately had to surrender the cherokees went to u s courts to assert their claims to their lands.
initially 276 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 10 1 american voices perspectives on indian removal 1818 1829 10 j mericans responded differently to president andrew jackson s plan to remove american indians from the old southwest to reservations west of the mississippi.
most whites in georgia and many elsewhere applauded.
in the north many opposed indian removal and catharine beecher organized a petition campaign in which women petitioned congress to stop what they saw as an immoral process.
not surprisingly most cherokees t like the other tribes involved also opposed removal.
writing a s decade before jackson s speech cherokee women demanded that the tribal elders not cede land to the united states.
the following i three documents represent three different american voices.
andrew jackson message to congress december8 1829 statements of residents of steubenville ohio february 15 1830 cherokee women s petition june 30 1818 the condition and ulterior destiny of the indian tribes within the limits of some of our states have become objects of much interest and importance.
it has long been the policy of government to introduce among them the arts of civilization in the hope of gradually reclaiming them from a wandering life.
this policy has however been coupled with another wholly incompatible with its success.
professing a desire to civilize and settle them we have at the same time lost no opportunity to purchase their lands and thrust them farther into the wilderness.
by this means they have not only been kept in a wandering state but been led to look upon us as unjust and indifferent to their fate our ancestors found them the uncontrolled possessors of these vast regions.
by persuasion and force they have been made to retire from river to river and from mountain to mountain until some of the tribes have become extinct and others have left but remnants to preserve for awhile their once terrible names.
humanity and national honor demand that every effort should be made to avert so great a calamity as a means of effecting this end 1 suggest for your consideration the propriety of setting apart an ample district west of the mississippi and without the limits of any state or territory now formed to be guaranteed to the indian tribes as long as they shall occupy it each tribe having a distinct control over the portion designated for its use.
there they may be secured in the enjoyment of governments of their own choice subject to no other control from the united states than such as may be necessary to preserve peace on the frontier and between the several tribes that your memorialists are deeply impressed with the belief that the present crisis in the affairs of the indian nations calls loudly on all who can feel for the woes of humanity.
it is readily acknowledged that the wise and venerated founders of our country s free institutions have committed the powers of government to those whom nature and reason declare the best fitted to exercise them and your memorialists would sincerely deprecate any presumptuous interference on the part of their own sex with the ordinary political affairs of the country as wholly unbecoming the character of american females yet all admit that there are times when duty and affection call on us to advise and persuade as well as to cheer or to console.
and if we approach the public representatives of our husbands and brothers only in the humble character of suppliants in the cause of mercy and humanity may we not hope that even the small voice of female sympathy will be heard.
in despite of the undoubted natural right which the indians have to the land of their forefathers and in the face of solemn treaties pledging the faith of the nation for their secure possession of those lands it is intended we are told to force them from their native soil and to compel them to seek new homes in a distant and dreary wilderness.
to you then as the constitutional protectors of the indians within our territory and as the peculiar guardians of our national character and our country s welfare we solemnly and earnestly appeal to save this remnant of a much injured people from annihilation to shield our country from the curses denounced on the cruel and ungrateful and to shelter the american character from lasting dishonor.
we have called a meeting among ourselves to consult on the different points now before the council relating to our national affairs.
we have heard with painful feelings that the bounds of the land we now possess are to be drawn into very narrow limits.
the land was given to us by the great spirit above as our common right to raise our children upon to make support for our rising generations.
we therefore humbly petition our beloved children the head men warriors to hold out to the last in support of our common right as the cherokee nation have been the first settlers of this land we therefore claim the right to the soil.
we well remember that our country was formerly very extensive but by repeated sales it has become circumscribed to the very narrow limits we have at present.
our father the president advised us to become farmers to manufacture our own clothes to have our children instructed.
to this advice we have attended in everything as far as we were able.
now the thought of being compelled to remove to the other side of the mississippi is dreadful to us because it appears to us that we by this removal shall be brought to a savage state again for we have by the endeavor of our father the president become too much enlightened to throw aside the privileges of a civilized life.
we therefore unanimously join in our meeting to hold our country in common as hitherto.
some of our children have become christians.
we have missionary schools among us.
we have h e ard the gospel in our nation.
we have become civilized enlightened are in hopes that in a few years our nation will be prepared for instruction in other branches of sciences arts which are both useful necessary in civilized society sources andrew jackson annual message to congress december 8 1829 messages and papers of the presidents ed.
j d richardson national archives and records administration 1896 ii 456 459 dec 8 1829 ladies of steubenville ohio petition against indian removal february 15 1830 ellen skinner women and the national experience sources in women s history third edition boston prentice hall 1996 pp 42 143 petition of nancy ward and other cherokee women to the united states congress 19 818 in karen l kilcup editor native american women s writings 1800 1924 an anthology malden ma blackwell 2000 pp.
continued chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 277 y r b 10 1 10 j 103 continued thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how did jackson attempt to argue that indian removal was in the indians best interest.
how might opponents of indian removal have responded to his position.
contextualization how might the fact that two petitions in opposition to indian removal were written by women have affected their reception.
how might it have helped the authors cause.
how might it have hurt.
contextualization the cherokee women say that they hope that soon their people will be prepared for instruction in other branches of sciences arts which are both useful necessary in civilized society.
what does this statement mean.
what do you think is the strongest reason they give for asking not to be moved west.
in cherokee nation v georgia 1831 and worcester v georgia 1832 the u s supreme court under chief justice john marshall ruled that the cherokees were a domestic dependent nation and could not be forced by the state of georgia to give up land that treaty rights agreed to by the united states government had given them.
jackson simply ignored the court.
jackson is supposed to have said john marshall has made his decision now let him enforce it no one actually heard jackson say that but jackson controlled the army and he was not about to enforce the courts decision.
no other president before or after ignored the supreme court in that way.
the indian removal act and the implementation that followed was a disaster for the five civilized tribes.
the government had seized their homes and offered in return land that was thousands of miles away and completely foreign to them.
moreover the tribes were divided about how to respond.
while most of the country was focused on the cherokees jackson sent secretary of war john eaton to negotiate with the choctaws.
by excluding those he considered troublemakers and bribing others eaton got a small group of choctaw leaders to agree for the tribe to leave its homes in mississippi but most in the tribe considered those who negotiated the removal treaty to be nonrepresentative and refused to abide by it.
the federal troops enforced it anyway.
the french observer alexis de tocqueville who became famous for his analysis of american life in the jacksonian era described the day the choctaws crossed the mississippi river on their way west at the end of 1831 1 stood on the left bank of the mississippi it was then the depths of winter and the cold was exceptionally severe the snow had frozen hard on the ground the river was drifting with huge ice floes.
the indians had brought their families with them and hauled along the wounded the sick newborn babies and old men on the verge of death.
they had neither tents nor wagons i saw them embark to cross the wide river and that solemn spectacle will never be erased from my memory.
not a sob or complaint could be heard they stood silent.
their afflictions were of long standing and they considered them beyond remedy.
already the indians had all embarked upon the boat which was to carry them their dogs still remained upon the bank.
when these animals finally saw they were being left behind forever they raised all together a terrible howl and plunged into the icy mississippi to swim after their masters.
within the decade most members of the cherokee chickasaw creek tribes had made the same crossing.
only the seminoles avoided their fate.
alabama and mississippi followed georgias lead and voted to end tribal rights for the creeks.
in march 1832 the creeks surrendered all land east of the mississippi and most of them moved to oklahoma.
those that took advantage of a promise that they could stay in the east as private citizens soon lost their lands.
some of the remain ing creeks began violent resistance to state and federal authorities but the so called second creek war of 1836 37 ended quickly when jacksons secretary of war ordered federal troops to expel all creeks from lands east of the mississippi.
the creeks who 8 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 10 1 were deported after the second creek war suffered higher mortality rates than the cherokees perhaps half lived to see oklahoma.
among the cherokees a civil conflict broke out about how to respond to the demand that they move to oklahoma.
principal chief john ross and most of the cherokees were determined to fight for their lands.
a minority some of whom were among the rising middle class and slave holders within the tribe decided that a compromise was better than forced expulsion.
john ridge and elias boudinot publisher of the cherokee phoenix signed the treaty of new echota in december 1835 trading land in georgia for new land in oklahoma and 5 million.
the u s senate barely ratified the treaty after daniel webster and henry clay pointed out how fraudulent it was since the majority of the cherokees opposed it.
after ridge and boudinot and their followers departed for oklahoma or indian territory as it was called the u s army put most of the remaining members of the tribe in detention camps.
a few were able to flee into the wilderness and remained in their homelands but without their land.
others fought but in the end chief ross and general winfield scott negotiated a settlement to avoid further bloodshed.
even though jackson had left office by then his successor martin van buren was determined to enforce his predecessors policy.
from the detention camps soldiers forced 12 000 cherokee men women and children to march west in the fall and winter of 1838 39.
it was an especially cold winter and a terrible time to make a march of over a thousand miles into the unknown.
the cherokees never had enough food blankets or warm clothing and as they moved in large groups disease and exposure took a terrible toll.
on what became known as the trail of tears perhaps a quarter to a third of the marchers including rosss wife died before they reached oklahoma.
seeing what was happening to other tribes the chickasaws moved west quickly on their own.
the seminoles of florida territory had no intention of moving however.
although a minority of seminoles agreed to move most stayed in florida disappearing into the swamps and hiding places they knew well.
when soldiers tried to force them to move the seminoles annihilated them.
the second seminole war was not resolved until 1842.
fewer seminoles than members of any other tribe ever moved to oklahoma.
102 103 trail of tears the forced march in 1838 of the cherokee indians from their homelands in georgia to the indian territory in the west thousands of cherokees died along the way.
cherokee men women and children and their u s army guards rode or walked on the long march from their ancestral homes across a thousand miles to new territory in oklahoma.
chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 279 10 1 10 j 10 j in the meantime the sac and fox tribes which had already been exiled to the indian territory as a result of earlier removals from the old northwest were not too happy about life there.
in april 1832 a chief named black hawk led 1 000 2 000 sac and fox people back east across the mississippi closer to their old homelands.
the sac and fox indians were moving mostly to escape from hostile sioux groups on the great plains and iowa territory.
the illinois governor took the tribes move into illinois as an attack called out the militia and asked for federal troops.
in black hawk s war federal and state troops on the east side of the mississippi and sioux warriors on the west virtually annihilated the fox and sac tribes to the delight of whites who were happy to see these tribes completely out of their way.
in fact jackson had meant to use the removal law for georgia to force all indians east of the mississippi out of their lands.
when the forced exile finally reached its goal by the end of the 1830s only the iroquois in new york a few cherokees in north carolina and scattered small communities remained legally east of the mississippi although others like the seminoles simply melted into the woods and could not be found by the government.
all in all 46 000 indians were forcibly removed during the jackson administration and subsequent administrations removed as many more.
the cherokees and other tribes tend to disappear from the history books after the trail of tears.
but the cherokees choctaws and creeks were resilient people.
forced onto an inhospitable and alien land they sought to reestablish their communities and culture.
to a surprising degree they succeeded.
as the last cherokees arrived in indian territory in 1839 the tribe adopted a new constitution and established tahlequah as their capital.
in 1844 they began publishing the cherokee advocate in both english and cherokee.
they also set up a school system with elementary schools as well as higher education institutes and seminaries to prepare teachers european and cherokee for their schools.
in the u s civil war parts of the tribe favored each side and the divided tribe fought internally.
but again they rebuilt after the war.
today there are some 200 000 to 300 000 cherokees of whom 70 000 live within the cherokee nation in northeast oklahoma and the rest are scattered around the country making them the largest federally recognized tribe today.
jacksonian economics the war on the bank of the united states the second bank of the united states a national bank chartered by congress in 1816 with extensive regulatory powers over currency and credit.
in his campaign for president jackson pledged to do something about the bank of the united states which he and many others blamed for the panic of 1819 and saw as an elitist threat to a democracy.
the second bank of the united states was patterned on the first bank of the united states that had been a cornerstone of alexander hamiltons economic plans for the new nation see chapter 7.
the first bank had been chartered in 1791 for a period of 20 years.
in 1811 the jeffersonian republicans refused to extend its charter and it closed.
henceforth it seemed state banks would issue currency in the form of banknotes backed by gold or silver federal funds would be deposited in state banks and the federal government like everyone else would borrow money from these banks when needed.
then came the war of 1812.
as the war of 1812 threatened to bankrupt the country some of the nations richest men led by john jacob astor met with treasury secretary albert gallatin and offered to loan the nation the funds it needed if the bank of the united states were rechartered.
they believed that only a national bank could build long term prosperity and ensure that their loan would be repaid.
as a result a charter for a second bank of the united states passed congress in 1816.
the madison monroe and john quincy adams administrations were strong advocates for a unified national market economy that could foster prosperity and stability and they had used the bank to support that economy.
jackson wanted prosperity but he disagreed about the governments role in the nations economy.
the second bank of the united states was never without enemies.
the constitution never mentioned a bank and strict constructionists who thought the government 2i crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 10 1 should limit its role to things specifically included in the constitution always opposed it.
the bank was also seen by many as a way to expand the power of the commercial elite based in new york and philadelphia and thus was seen as an enemy by farmers whether they lived on small out of the way farms in the still very rural country or on the bourgeoning plantations of the cotton growing south.
in the opinion of many farmers whether small or large scale jackson was the defender of their interests against threatening commercial elites.
particularly since the supreme courts ruling on mcculloch v maryland that congress had the right to charter a bank if it thought it was in the national interest popular support for the bank had weakened see chapter 9.
many farmers did not believe the national interest that congress saw was in their interests.
during his first months in office jackson did not say a lot about the bank but in december 1829 he told congress both the constitutionality and the expediency of the law creating this bank are well questioned i t has failed in the great end of establishing a uniform and sound currency in spite of jacksons challenge the banks charter ensured that it could continue for 7 more years but jackson had fired a warning shot.
before long he would do much more.
many of jacksons strongest supporters disagreed with him about the bank.
the country was prospering credit was solid and the soundness of the currency despite jacksons words seemed secure.
the federal banks policies of calling in loans may have helped start the panic of 1819 but nicholas biddle the banks president had done as much as anyone in the country to end the hard times after the panic of 1819.
nevertheless jackson was a populist intending to represent the common people politically.
and although the nations elite supported the bank many citizens did not like any banks.
in a meeting at the white house he told biddle i do not dislike your bank any more than all banks but the federal bank was the only one jackson could do something about.
his attack on the bank was as emotional as it was calculated.
for the next few years biddle led the bank in continued efforts to stabilize the currency help state banks through difficult times and expand the nations credit something that both northern mill owners and western land promoters liked.
the bank also concentrated wealth and power within the economy in the hands of a commercial elite and strengthened the nations unified market economy based on currency and trade.
that uneven concentration of wealth and power was something jackson would not forgive.
in 1832 jackson launched his campaign for reelection.
for the first time something resembling modern political parties played a role.
under jacksons leadership the democratic republicans had become simply the democrats.
they easily nominated jackson for a second term and his handpicked running mate secretary of state martin van buren for vice president.
the opposition to jackson sometimes known as the national republicans because they had supported a strong national government now became known simply as the whig party.
they nominated henry clay for president and john sergeant of pennsylvania as vice president.
unlike the jacksonian democrats the whig party was committed to alexander hamiltons vision of a federal government that took an active role in shaping the economy so they strongly supported the second bank of the united states.
the whig nominee henry clay urged biddle to secure the banks future as well as that of the pro bank whig party.
if biddle were to request an extension of the banks charter even though the original charter would not expire for 4 years clay would promise to make the bank an issue in the campaign.
either biddle would win the recharter fight immediately or he would provide clay a weapon with which to attack jackson.
biddle who was astute at counting votes in congress took clays advice and applied for a new charter.
the charter bill passed both houses of congress easily.
but jackson vetoed it.
he told martin van buren who was now his running mate the bank mr van buren is trying to kill me but i will kill it 102 103 chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 281 by the time jackson became president political cartoons were becoming popular including this one that shows jackson using his order to withdraw government funds to topple the pillars of the bank as nicholas biddle the bank s devil president and investors run.
in november 1832 jackson defeated clay 219 electoral votes to 49.
congress refused to override the presidents veto.
biddle still tried to rally support in congress.
he made arguments offered congressmen loans and ensured that the banks lead attorney was elected to congress from philadelphia.
when massachusetts senator daniel webster complained that his annual retainer from the bank had not been refreshed as usual biddle promised quick action.
biddle also loosened credit across the country ensuring short term prosperity but provoking an eventual reckoning.
he was desperate to save his bank.
jackson then made his move.
he ordered his treasury secretary to remove federal deposits from the bank and place them in 23 state banks that he selected banks that were quickly called jacksons pet banks by his opponents.
the move was meant to destroy the second bank of the united states.
but the law said that federal funds could be withdrawn only if there was clear evidence that the deposits were not secure.
even jacksons handpicked auditors could find no such evidence.
when treasury secretary mclane refused the presidents order to move the funds jackson promoted him to secretary of state.
when another treasury secretary also refused jackson fired him.
finally jacksons third treasury secretary roger b taney who also had doubts about the legality of removing federal funds hit on a compromise.
he would not actually remove federal deposits from the bank but he would do something just as effective to undermine the bank.
going forward taney regularly paid the governments bills with funds from the accounts that the government had in the bank of the united states but he stopped depositing new federal revenue in the bank.
instead the governments income went to the state banks.
it was a mortal blow.
the federal governments accounts slowly shrunk to zero and the second bank of the united states was dead though it took a few years to die.
led by clay the senate censured the president saying he had assumed upon himself authority and power not conferred by the constitution and laws but the censure did not hurt jackson or save the bank.
biddles politically motivated loans and payments sapped support for the bank.
the second bank of the united states became a wholly private bank and soon went bankrupt.
the combination of inflation caused by biddles too easy credit and the loss of a national bank that could stabilize the currency caused financial distress.
by 1837 just after jackson left office the nation experienced another financial panic and there was no national entity to help stabilize the economy.
nevertheless efforts to revive the bank failed.
for decades all of the paper currency in circulation would be issued by state banks some of less than solid credit.
only in 1863 during the civil war did the u s government again issue paper money and not until the creation of the federal reserve bank in 1913 did the nation again have a central bank to regulate the economy.
the tariff the union and the nullification crisis the battle over the tariff began as a modest disagreement over federal tax policy.
before it ended that battle was the greatest constitutional crisis the nation faced between the adoption of the constitution in 1789 and the civil war in 1861.
to a degree it was a personal battle between two proud and stubborn men andrew jackson and john c calhoun.
in another sense it was a battle about the fundamental nature of the u s government.
andrew jackson vs john c calhoun john c calhoun of south carolina had been elected vice president when john quincy adams won the presidency in 1824 irt iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 10 1 and he was reelected to that office in 1828 to serve with jackson.
because separate ballots were cast for presidential and vice presidential candidates after the passage of the twelfth amendment in 1804 and before the rise of party nominating conventions in 1832 no one thought it strange that two leaders as hostile to each other as adams and jackson would have the same vice president.
as a congressman and as secretary of war under president james monroe calhoun had been a nationalist who favored internal improvements as much as henry clay or john quincy adams.
he sought a strong national government and had supported the bank of the united states.
although his views differed from jacksons on some issues everyone expected calhoun and jackson as proslavery southerners to have a close partnership.
it was not to be.
one of the first wedges between them was purely social.
jacksons secretary of war john eaton had married the recently widowed margaret oneale timberlake but rumors swirled that she was a widow only because her first husband a naval officer had committed suicide when he learned of her long adulterous relationship with eaton.
jackson who had been deeply hurt by attacks on his own marriage defended the eatons.
others in washington led by mrs calhoun snubbed peggy eaton.
when emily donelson jacksons official white house hostess joined with mrs calhoun jackson temporarily banished her from the white house.
he never forgave the calhouns.
another reason for the growing split between jackson and calhoun centered on the fact that calhouns political beliefs were changing.
by 1828 calhoun who had previously advocated for a strong federal role in the life of the nation far stronger than anything jackson ever advocated was becoming the nations strongest defender of states rights against federal authority.
this new stance may have reflected an honest change of heart but it also served a political purpose.
regardless it guaranteed a clash with jackson since no matter how much jackson might have favored states rights in the past he would not tolerate any challenge to his authority as president.
many of the leaders in south carolina calhouns home state were becoming very fearful of the federal government and south carolina was developing the strongest anti federal stance in the union.
the south carolina radicals as they were called dominated state government.
they advocated the right of states to declare any federal law null and void or even to secede from the union.
the reason was clear south carolinians feared for the future of slavery more than people in any other state.
most residents of south carolina 54 percent were enslaved people of african descent.
in some rice growing regions of the state that figure was closer to 90 percent.
a wealthy but deeply fearful white elite governed these slaves and depended on their labor to generate continuing wealth.
in 1827 a pamphlet called the crisis or essays on the usurpations of the federal government argued that federal tariffs internal improvements and other federal activities were all means to enable the national government if it chose to abolish slavery.
as word spread that parliament was about to abolish slavery throughout the british empire in the 1830s the fear grew that congress might try to do the same.
calhoun had to decide whether he was with his states planter elite or against them.
he might have dreamed about becoming president someday but in the meantime he would have to win elections in south carolina.
he made his choice.
nullification and the future of the republic in 1828 calhoun wrote a pamphlet arguing that a state could declare a tariff or any other federal law null and void.
calhoun claimed that since state by state conventions had ratified the constitution state conventions not the supreme court had the authority to decide what was constitutional.
in his view once a state convention declared a federal law void other states would have to weigh in and only a new amendment to the constitution could force the law on the dissenting state.
calhoun did not advocate secession as many of the south carolina radicals did.
instead he hoped nullification in response to a tariff or to restrictions on slavery would make secession unnecessary.
he was thus more moderate than many south carolinians but that moderation would not continue to be the case.
j 10 2 i chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 283 l 10 1 io j j 10.
5 tariff of abominations a revised federal tariff or tax on imports that lowered the tax on cotton products but raised it on many of the products made in the mid atlantic states.
the tariff not the issue of slavery brought the issue of nullification to the fore.
the tariff or tax on imported goods had been the major source of financial support since the washington administration and it had been an issue in the 1828 election in which jackson defeated adams.
as jacksons supporters prepared for that election jacksons chief advisor martin van buren realized that even though he and jackson opposed a high tariff in part because they thought the federal government needed less money and in part because the tax raised the cost of foreign made consumer products in the united states the adams clay tariff was popular in many parts of the country because it protected local industries from foreign competition and because many people liked the internal improvements like roads and canals that the tariff helped finance.
adams and clay might want to fight the 1828 election on the issue of tariffs but van buren did not.
when the adams administration suggested a new tariff van buren and his congressional allies decided to reshape it rather than oppose it.
they knew they could not win new england in the next election so they did not hesitate to modify the proposed tariff by reducing the protection for the cotton produced by new england mill owners thus allowing foreign made cotton to be sold more cheaply than might otherwise have been the case.
they also raised tariffs to protect export of products like molasses hemp iron and wool which were produced in the mid atlantic states especially in pennsylvania to woo voters there by protecting their industries and jobs from foreign competition.
the result was a tariff that raised the price of products that many americans bought from foreign sources and that angered the cotton mill owners who originally wanted the tariff but now saw the protection of their industry disappear.
the new tariff also infuriated rural interests especially southern plantation owners who saw the cost of everything they needed go up while no protection was provided to the price of the goods they produced and sold on the international market.
the 1828 tariff came to be known as the tariff of abominations because it was so uneven and obviously unfair in the industries and regions it protected but it passed congress and set the stage for a confusing presidential campaign and the crisis that followed.
planters in south carolina saw the tariff as a terrible hardship and an unfair use of federal power.
to a degree they were right.
a tax on imports raised the cost of virtually everything the planters needed.
planters claimed that 40 out of every 100 bales of cotton they produced went to pay the tariff.
this claim was an exaggeration but the tariff may have raised the cost of living in south carolina by 20 percent.
in addition planters worried that a tariff on imported goods might cause other nations to purchase less cotton either in retaliation or because with americans buying less from abroad other nations might not have had the funds to purchase american grown cotton.
with their states economy hurting public opinion in south carolina supported nullification of the tariff.
the issue of states rights versus the rights of the federal government was argued on the floor of the u s senate in january 1830.
it was a debate that would be remembered for generations.
south carolina senator robert y hayne a protege of calhouns claimed that the federal government was making the north the winner and the south the loser and that the pro northern policy has invaded the state of south carolina is making war upon her citizens and endeavoring to overthrow her principles and institutions everyone understood that hayne was talking about the tariff but also the issue of slavery.
he was determined to defend the right of south carolina to nullify federal law and if still dissatisfied to secede from the union if congress ever made a move against slavery.
massachusetts senator daniel websters second reply to hayne staked out a different position.
webster pleaded for a strong federal union that no state should be allowed to undermine.
his closing line liberty and union now and forever one and inseparable became part of american lore.
hayne congratulated webster on winning the war of words though hayne never changed his mind.
14 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 in january 1830 as tensions were building over the right claimed by south carolina to nullify federal law massachusetts senator daniel webster shown here defended the priority of the federal government and the cause of the national union.
at first people wondered how the president would respond to the debate.
jackson had campaigned for reducing the federal role in peoples lives but he did not like to be crossed.
he was not elected to see the government over which he presided pushed aside.
as a military man he would not countenance mutiny.
as a politician he despised calhoun s self serving strategic maneuvering.
to the surprise of some jackson the president elected with virtually no support from new england embraced websters speech in spite of the fact that it was given by the senator from massachusetts.
four months after the hayne webster debate political leaders were asked to make toasts at a banquet.
looking directly at his vice president jackson offered a simple toast our union it must be preserved calhoun responded the union.
next to our liberty the most dear.
may we always remember that it can only be preserved by respecting the rights of the states it marked the final break between the two men.
nevertheless as strongly as jackson believed in asserting federal authority he was still prepared to compromise about the tariff itself.
the actual rate charged in the tariff mattered far less to jackson than the principle that no state had a right to nullify federal law.
a compromise seemed possible when congress convened in 1831.
former president john quincy adams had been elected to the house of representatives from massachusetts the only former president in history to return to congress and the congressional leaders asked him to write a new tariff to replace the tariff of abominations.
adams took the job seriously.
he reduced the duty on goods not produced in the united states and therefore not in need of protection but retained tariffs to protect growing u s industries especially iron and cotton textiles.
he also reduced the tariff on cheap woolens which slaves wore from 45 percent to 5 percent a significant concession to the slave states.
most of the south found adamss tariff reasonable.
besides much of the cottongrowing south was prospering despite the tariff because of other jacksonian policies especially from the new land that indian removal had made available for growing cotton.
other states were in no mood to press the nullification issue.
but south carolina was different.
much of the states farmland had been exhausted by decades of overuse and its dependency on slave labor made its leaders more fearful of federal intervention in the institution of slavery than those of any other state.
led by calhoun the states leaders believed that they had to win the right to nullify the tariff to establish the larger principal that states could nullify any law.
for them the adams tariff was not enough.
in november 1832 a south carolina state convention declared that both the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 were unconstitutional and that it shall not be lawful to enforce payment of duties imposed by the said acts within the limits of this state after february 1833.
they also said that the state would secede if the federal government tried to force it to back down.
the south carolina legislature elected robert hayne who had debated with webster as the governor to lead the state through these difficult times and elected calhoun to replace hayne in the senate.
calhoun would essentially be south carolinas ambassador to the federal government for the next 2 decades.
calhoun resigned as vice president in december 1832 a little more than 2 months before his term ended and returned to the senate as a member a very belligerent member.
the stage was set for a major confrontation.
in november 1832 the south carolina legislature also raised a state militia of25 000 volunteers.
jackson responded with a proclamation stating that the states vote was in direct violation of their duty as citizens of the united states according to jackson they had no right to nullify federal law and certainly not to raise their own army and chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 285 he said disunion by armed force is treason he told a south carolina congressman i will hang the first man of them i can get my hands on to the first tree i can find he backed his words with action reinforcing federal garrisons and sending armed revenue ships to charleston harbor.
he also shifted the collection of customs duties in charleston to warships offshore.
when governor hayne told senator thomas hart benton of missouri that he did not think jackson would really hang anyone benton who knew jackson better replied i tell you hayne when jackson begins to talk about hanging they can begin to look out for ropes jackson also lobbied to ensure no other southern state supported south carolina and pushed congress to keep the tariffs low.
in the end no shots were fired.
on march 1 1833 congress passed a compromise tariff that henry clay had crafted based on adamss proposals and gave the president the authority to put down the rebellion.
wiser heads in south carolina decided to compromise.
the state convention reconvened and declared victory based on the new clay tariff.
for spite they also nullified the congressional vote of new military authority which they called the force bill but that action was now meaningless since south carolina was no longer resisting federal authority.
jackson won the nullification battle but it was an incomplete victory.
he made it clear in words and actions which abraham lincoln would use as precedent that no state could nullify federal law and that the u s government would use force to assert its authority.
he was treated as a hero in many parts of the country and even thinking historically the nullification crisis the 1832 south carolina convention that passed the ordinance of nullification said whereas the congress of the united states by various acts purporting to be acts laying duties and imposts taxes on foreign imports but in reality intended for the protection of domestic manufacturers and giving the bounties to classes and individuals engaged in particular employments at the expense and to the injury and oppression of other classes and individuals hath exceeded it just powers under the constitution we therefore the people of the state of south carolina in convention assembled do declare and ordain that the several acts and parts of acts of the congress of the united states purporting to be laws for the imposing of duties and imposts on the importation of foreign commodities are unauthorized by the constitution of the united states and violate the true meaning and intent thereof and are null void and no law nor binding upon this state its officers or citizens.
this declaration was not the first time in u s history that a state had taken such a stand.
the kentucky and virginia resolves of 1798 and 1799 written by thomas jefferson and james madison had said the same thing about the alien and sedition acts.
the hartford convention that met in 1814 said the much the same thing about congress having declared war on great britain in 1812.
yet unlike the response to earlier challenges president jackson declared the south carolina ordinance incompatible with the existence of the union and prepared for a military response.
source statues at large of south carolina vol.
columbia south carolina a s johnston 1836.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis why did the authors of the ordinance of nullification believe that the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 were unconstitutional.
craft an argument defend or refute the following statement as the nullification crisis demonstrates the ratification of the constitution in 1788 was only a first tentative step towards defining the relationship between the federal government and the states what events and developments between 1788 and 1832 support your position.
i6 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 given an honorary degree by harvard university.
even so neither calhoun nor the south carolina legislature admitted defeat.
in fact that legislature passed a new law in 1834 requiring anyone holding state office to swear primary loyalty to south carolina and only conditional loyalty to the federal government.
this law effectively barred unionists those moderates who disagreed with nullification perhaps a third of the states voters from state office for the next 30 years.
alexis de tocqueville was in the united states during the nullification crisis.
he took a dim view of the compromise on the tariff and the decision of south carolina to nullify the force bill either i am mistaken or the federal government of the unites states is daily losing its power it is gradually withdrawing from public affairs and is increasingly narrowing its sphere of action 1 think i have seen a more lively feeling of independence and a more evident affection for regional government developing in the individual states of the union.
the outcome of this movement tocqueville said was hidden in the future and i do not claim the ability to lift the veil but he remained worried for the future of the country.
10j 10 2 10 j 10 1 quick review was andrew jackson s presidency democratic.
which of his actions and policies support your argument.
democratized religion the second great awakening analyze the diversity of american religious experience and how the freedom of the era gave rise to diverse religious expressions.
10 2 most americans had strong opinions about andrew jackson.
they might love or hate him but they followed his career.
however politics was far from the only interest of most people.
many things closer to home and sometimes closer to their own souls mattered more.
for many americans in the 1820s and 1830s the growth of a more popular democracy and popular social movements led by ordinary citizens was far more important than presidents jacksons policies or opinions.
no popular movement was more powerful than the upsurge in religious activity that took place in jacksonian america.
once again de tocqueville understood the country well there is no country in the whole world in which the christian religion retains a greater influence over the souls of men than in america he described the christianity he saw as a democratic and republican religion when de tocqueville wrote these words in the early 1830s the second great awakening was in full swing.
it had begun around 1800 see chapter 8 but gathered new strength in jacksonian america.
contrary to what tocqueville implied not all americans were protestant christians and many of those who were christians did not fit into traditional protestantism.
but for a large numbekof those who lived from the 1820s to the 1840s religion was important even if formal membership in a specific religious congregation was not.
charles g finney and new york s burner over district in 1821 charles grandison finney a 29 year old lawyer in adams new york not far from the erie canal was struggling with the question of whether true religious belief was consistent with his legal career.
he decided to leave his law practice and began to preach in churches in upstate new york eventually becoming one of thejnost influential preachers in the united states.
chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 287 103 in july 1824 finney was ordained a presbyterian minister in spite of his lack of formal training.
in 1826 the spirit of revivalism hit upstate new york and in 1830 finney led the largest religious revival ever seen in rochester new york.
six hundred people joined one of the towns three presbyterian churches and the other denominations were also strengthened.
finney did not seek an emotional catharsis from his congregants but like an attorney argued his case logically using wit and wisdom.
nevertheless in his preaching the rigid religious orthodoxy that dominated congregational and presbyterian churches gave way to a more egalitarian spirit.
finney called people to change their lives not necessarily to agreement with specific creeds.
because of his preaching hundreds then thousands took religion more seriously joined churches participated in reform movements and changed new york and american society.
by the late 1830s the area along the erie canal where finney preached had become known as the burned over district because of the fires of religious enthusiasm that rolled over the region.
finney was far from the only revivalist in new york.
however he gave the new york revivals a distinct tone different not only from the emotionalism of frontier revivals but also from the staid life of many established churches.
ihe erie canal also made communications easier and faster than before so word of the revivals traveled fast.
lyman beecher and the growth of voluntary societies as a young minister lyman beecher had been one of the staunchest defenders of state support for the congregational churches in connecticut see chapter 8.
once the connecticut churches lost their government support beecher embraced the new situation and supported revivals and voluntary associations for moral reform in new england and the nation.
beecher described his goal a bible for every family a school for every district and a pastor for every 1000 souls must be the motto upon the standard round which the millions who enjoy these blessings must rally for the purpose of extending them to those who do not.
lyman beecher one of the leaders of the second great awakening is shown here with his numerous children including petitioner and educator catharine to the left of her father harriet beecher stowe far right and one of the most famous ministers of the next generation henry ward beecher standing on the right.
288 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 as the second great awakening grew in force in the 1820s and 1830s a series of voluntary societies or interdenominational organizations that beecher helped launch grew in their influence.
these societies were not owned by any one religious body but rather depended on the voluntary contributions of members of several different religious bodies.
they represented a new form of cooperation across traditional religious lines in the service of a larger goal to change the culture of the united states.
the american bible society distributed bibles the american sunday school union provided curriculum materials for church based sunday schools and the american education society supported the education of ministers.
in addition the american board of commissioners for foreign missions sent missionaries around the world including adoniram judson and his wife ann hasseltine judson whose efforts in burma became role models for generations of foreign missionaries to convert the world to christianity.
beecher included prominent members of the congregational presbyterian and episcopal churches in the leadership of these societies.
the underlying mission of all of these societies was moral reform the creation of a sober god fearing american public.
by the early 1830s beecher had become convinced that the key to transforming the nation lay in the mississippi valley.
he became president of lane theological seminary in cincinnati to fulfill this goal.
beecher helped prepare future ministers strengthened religious colleges and placed protestant pastors in hundreds of midwestern churches.
he also helped create the public school system of ohio and supported schools and teachers across the midwest.
the goal of all of this activity was to strengthen the moral sway of congregational presbyterian protestantism against the individualism of jacksonian democrats catholics and other protestants who disagreed with them.
in the world that beecher and his fellow protestant evangelists were creating the separating of church and state meant that specific denominations would not wield political power but together these protestants would help build a culture in which the churches voluntary societies and public schools would reinforce common beliefs and practices.
revivalism and moral reform movements most converts in the revivals that preachers like finney and beecher led perhaps three fourths of them were women who then prayed and lobbied for their husbands and families to convert.
finney and his closest lieutenant theodore dwight weld encouraged women to be active in their religious communities.
where new england churches had urged women to keep silent except at home the new generation of revivalists welcomed them as prayer leaders and preachers.
such speaking in promiscuous assemblies may have been familiar in baptist and even methodist churches but it was new in the more middle class presbyterian and congregational churches.
women who became religious leaders in the revivals often also became leaders in their communities.
the movement demanding womens rights that swept the united states in the 1840s sprang from the same areas of upstate new york that revivalists called the burned over district see chapter 12.
the link was not surprising.
for finney conversion meant that one needed to show ones new faith in ethical behavior and no ethical behavior was more important to him than opposing slavery.
upstate new yorks churches sent revivalist preachers into the rest of the country to preach for the abolition of slavery.
for the next 30 years the finney weld brand of revivalism spread across the country and was one of the streams of abolitionism that inspired northerners to fight a war to end slavery.
the rights of women and opposition to slavery were not the only reform causes to spring from the revivalism of the second great awakening.
other reformers inspired by the same forces began to advocate for important changes in the way prisoners were treated.
too often they said overcrowded prisons were simply schools for crime and the focus on punishment whatever the original crime did little to redeem or reclaim prisoners to reenter society.
at first reformers advocated the building of prisons in which each prisoner would be confined to a solitary cell where they would have time to reflect on their past be taught new habits and prepare to reenter society.
but too often the solitary confinement led to insanity rather than reform.
in response prison reformers built a new kind of prison in which each prisoner had a separate cell but also had access to common dining quarters workshops and a chapel.
in all of these spaces the authorities sought to teach prisoners a new way of behaving as preparation for reclaiming them.
in the 1830s the new york state penitentiary at auburn was redesigned to foster the new approach and soon thereafter a large new penitentiary at sing sing on the hudson river was built with 1 000 cells plus the common areas.
reformers hoped that the new more humane approach would change lives and ultimately society.
other states quickly followed in adopting the new models.
many mentally ill people were treated very much like prisoners before the reforms and they often found themselves in similar circumstances.
reformers quickly took up the cause of those they said were insane.
perhaps no one equaled dorothea dix as a reformer in the treatment of the mentally ill.
in 1843 dix told the massachusetts fegislature that she was calling their attention to the present state of insane persons confined within this commonwealth in cages closets cellars stalls pens.
chained naked beaten with rods and lashed into obedience moreover she had the facts to chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 289 this illustration from an anti alcohol publication makes the claim that drunkenness was the cause of many problems in society especially the abuse of women.
prove her point.
the result beginning in massachusetts was that a system of state hospitals for the insane replaced the earlier prisons.
many other reforms also blossomed.
although the campaign against alcohol would reach its peek many decades later it began during the second great awakening.
lyman beecher preached temperance sermons that were widely reprinted including one in which he said what then is this universal natural and national remedy for intemperance.
it is the banishment of ardent spirits from the list of lawful objects of commerce many including members of congress took the pledge to stop drinking the u s army stopped the old tradition of a ration of alcohol and refusing to drink became a mark of religious observance in many circles.
at the same time the american peace society advocated an end to all wars.
the american sunday school union distributed not only bible stories but also basic reading books in places where there were no schools.
schools were opened for those who were deaf and blind.
efforts were made to rescue prostitutes.
countless reforms designed to create a better more humane and sometimes more tightly controlled society emerged from the enthusiasm of the awakening.
utopian religious communities the religious enthusiasm of the early 1800s also inspired untraditional ways of thinking about religious matters.
large american spaces that allowed people to develop their own communities relatively undisturbed and the american emphasis on liberty even the liberty to be eccentric made the united states fertile ground for radical experiments and utopian religious communities.
some of these religious experiments were short lived.
others lasted for generations.
a few most of all the mormons have continued to the present.
mother ann lee and the shakers the founder of the united society of believers in christs second appearing or the shakers was ann lee known as mother ann lee who before the american revolution gathered a few supporters in england and came to america in 1774.
lee was convinced that she was receivings special revelation from god that human sexuality was the basis of all sin and celibacy was the only way to live a godly life.
lee inspired shaker communities in new york and new england.
shaker worship reflected lees spirituality and according to observers included shaking and singing hopping and turning smoking and running groaning and laughing shaker communities at new lebanon new hampshire sabbath day lake maine and elsewhere thrived and the shakers became one of the largest and most successful of the pre civil communitarian movements.
290 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 sblsglmkbiiamsibb in shaker worship and community life women and men were kept separate but all participated in lively music and dance designed to shake sin out of their bodies.
shaker theology placed ann lee on a par with jesus and committed the society to the equal leadership of women with men.
but shakers were united by their community life more than by theology.
they demanded celibacy a requirement that limited the communitys appeal and prevented increasing membership by means of childbirth.
instead all new members had to be converts who were attracted to shaker life.
the revivals produced many such converts who sought a deeper spiritual life than they found in traditional churches.
shaker beliefs were reflected in their commitment to making things of beauty and shaker furniture remains a reminder of their beliefs.
american voices the shaker community tis the gift to be simple 1830s rhe simplicity and joyfulness of the shakers have infiltrated american culture in many ways.
shaker furniture now so popular was not just a product for them.
mildred barker leader of a shaker community in maine who died in 1990 once reflected i almost expect to be remembered as a chair or a table.
but barker reminded those who came to interview her that behind oil of the shakers physical artifacts there s the religion.
and while many of their complex theological ideas have largely been forgotten the basic joy humility and playfulness of the shakers continue to be remembered in this familiar hymn that dates to the 1830s tis the gift to be simple tis the gift to be free tis the gift to come down where we ought to be and when we find ourselves in the place just right twill be in the valley of love and delight.
when true simplicity is gaind to bow and to bend we shan t be asham d to turn turn will be our delight till by turning turning we come round right.
source stephen j stein the shaker experience in america new haven yale university press 1992 p 191.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what values and priorities are extolled in the hymn.
historical interpretation why might simplicity certainty and humility have been particularly appealing to 1830s americans.
what aspects of the larger society might shakers have found most disturbing and unwelcome.
chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 291 10 2 the things they created whether furniture houses or art were owned in common not individually a requirement that some found as difficult to accept as celibacy.
john humphrey noyes and the oneida community the oneida community also had its roots in the second great awakening and flourished in oneida new york between 1848 and 1879.
its founder and spiritual guide was john humphrey noyes who was born in vermont in 1811.
as a student for the ministry he became convinced that repentance from sin was not enough and that people should simply stop sinning.
noyes became convinced that all christians could achieve a state in which all the affections of the heart are given to god and in which there is no sin gathering a small community in putney vermont he expanded his definition of christian perfectionism to include what he called complex marriage an arrangement in which monogamy was replaced with many sexual companions.
noyes argued that sexual pleasure was a gift from god and that christianity demanded the sharing of that gift without any exclusive or jealous reservations.
vermont authorities however took a dim view of these sexual practices and beliefs and noyes and his followers moved to oneida new york where the community thrived for decades supported ultimately by producing and selling silverware.
oneida eventually fell victim to victorian morality and to its dependence on noyes as its single charismatic leader.
between 1875 and 1879 oneida was torn by debates as new york authorities began threatening arrests for oneidas flouting of the marriage laws.
noyes fled to canada and the community dissolved although the silver business supported former members for generations.
robert owen and the new harmony community after making a fortune in london robert owen founded a model factory town at new lanark scotland in which he sought to put the spirit of universal welfare into practice.
in the early 1820s owen decided to relocate his utopian vision of a community designed to benefit all of it members and establish it in the united states.
in early 1825 900 people arrived at new harmony indiana where owen had purchased land.
but new harmony failed within a year.
the community could not attract enough skilled workers to make it economically successful.
there was tension between those who ran new harmony and the rest of the community.
as one disaffected resident recalled the aristocrats quarreled and the fields went to ruin.
owen lost most of his fortune which he had invested in new harmony but returned to england to continue to advocate his version of social reform.
f joseph smith and the church of jesus christ of the latter day saints joseph smith 1805 1844 was as much a product of new yorks burned over district as charles g finney.
smith was born in 1805 and moved with his family to a farm in palmyra new york when he was age 11.
in 1827 word spread along the erie canal that smith had found a treasure that would unlock the indian history of the area.
he had he said found golden plates and magical stones known as urim and thummim with which to read and translate what was written on the plates by an ancient prophet historian named mormon.
he published the result the book of mormon in 1830.
with that book a uniquely american religious tradition was born one that its followers believed represented a rebirth of true christianity.
smith however did much more than publish a new book he organized a community.
within a month of the books publication the first mormon community began to form near palmyra new york with smith as its leader.
some responded with hos tility to his efforts even tarring and feathering smith at one point.
but converts seeking religious truth poured in a temple was built and the community grew.
in response to the hostility smith and the mormon community moved first to missouri and then in the late 1830s to nauvoo illinois which became the largest and fastest growing city in illinois because of mormonism.
the citys 15 000 residents part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 became a virtually autonomous state and their militia was recognized by state law.
but smith s political involvements and religious teaching especially his suggestion that all members participate in marriages involving one husband and multiple wives brought renewed hostility.
on june 27 1844 a mob killed smith and his brother hyrum.
with smiths death brigham young became the new leader of the mormons in 1847 and led them on a cross continent trek to the shores of the great salt lake in what is now utah.
salt lake was then on the northern edge of the republic of mexico which was soon to be annexed by the united states.
there far from any governmental authority they set up settlements in a tight church regulated community.
they also embraced smith s revelation that a man could take as many wives as he could support.
but the treaty of guadalupe hildago which marked the end of the u s war with mexico from 1846 to 1848 brought salt lake city and the mormon community under the control of the u s government.
for a while the u s government left the mormons alone but in 1857 president james buchanan replaced young with a non mormon territorial governor and the mormon war broke out as federal authorities tried to enforce monogamy on the mormons and the mormons fought back.
in one well publicized incident mormons massacred a group of non mormon settlers.
only in 1890 after an intense time of prayer and a new revelation did the mormon leadership abandon plural marriage.
relations with the government improved and utah became a state in 1896.
of all the new religious communities spawned during the second great awakening the church of jesus christ of the latter day saints has been the most successful.
mormons like those shown in this wagon train crossed the plains and mountains to get to new homes in utah.
transcendentalism in 1838 far from salt lake city or the revivals of new york ralph waldo emerson gave a speech at harvard divinity school in cambridge massachusetts that had as much impact as any revival sermon.
emerson had been ordained as a unitarian minister but had resigned when he came to believe that the lords supper and public prayer were barriers to direct experience of the divine.
in the divinity school address emerson told an audience of future unitarian ministers that too often in formal worship the soul is not preached and he said the true preacher can be known by this that he deals out to the people his life life passed through the fire of thought emersons call to preach throbs of desire and hope rather than formal theology offended most of his audience and he was never invited back to the divinity school but the speech represented a new approach to religious life that was developing in america in the 1830s.
while emerson continued to develop his ideas for another 40 years the transcendentalist movement with which he is most associated blossomed in the 1830s.
in 1836 a group that came to call themselves the transcendental club met at the boston home of george ripley another unitarian minister to discuss ideas.
the members of the club created a theology that reflected a powerful personal experience of life.
in 1841 under ripleys leadership members of the transcendental club founded brook farm a utopian community in west roxbury massachusetts where the residents sought to support themselves through manual labor.
women and men shared work equally and an effort was made at true gender equity.
but few of the residents of brook farm actually knew much about farming the farm did not prosper and the community disbanded in 1847.
nevertheless emersons writings and the transcendental movement he helped launch reflected an impatience with old ways and a desire for direct and immediate experience of the divine that continued to impact american religious life.
10 2 quick review how did the increasing diversity of religion in america reflect other political and social changes in the nation.
chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 293 democratized education the birth of the common school explain thg dgvgloprnent of public education as a result of and in response to the cultural currents of the 1820s and 1830s.
103 the years during which andrew jackson dominated american politics were also years in which the nations public school system was radically transformed though the transformation was mostly the work of jacksons staunch opponents.
many of the most prominent education reformers were whigs who did not share jacksons vision for american society.
they often sought to change the ways schools were organized and conducted for the same reasons they opposed jackson politically.
schools whig educators believed could build a new american culture more to their liking than the jacksonian brand of democracy that most school reformers found too individualistic and unlikely to transmit the kind of moral code they thought was essential to a well regulated national life.
various individuals with their own agendas contributed to what came to be known as the common school crusade.
catherine beecher sought to empower women by opening the doors for them to become school teachers.
horace mann a whig party leader helped launch a new and more tightly organized school system in massachusetts a system that came to serve as a model for much of the nation.
ihe transformation of the nations schools in this period was a key dynamic of the changing culture of the united states between the 1820s and the 1840s.
women become teachers in 1835 catharine beecher daughter of the religious leader lyman beecher was already well known for founding the hartford female seminary to help educate women and for her petitions seeking to stop jacksons indian removal.
in her essay on the education of female teachers published in that year beecher argued that women were much better equipped than men to be teachers but she also wanted to educate them for the work.
she saw teaching as an extension of motherhood a nurturing role what is the most important and peculiar duty of the female sex.
it is the physical n i0 u very yun9 women taught school most often in one room schools like this one where ch dren of 311 ages learned to read write count and then advance through more complex assignments.
no all the schools were as comfortable as the one shown here and not all the children were as well behaved.
part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 intellectual and moral education of children.
she continued woman whatever are her relations in life is necessarily the guardian of the nursery the companion of child hood and the constant model of imitation.
it is her hand that first stamps impressions on the immortal spirit that must remain forever at a time when most teachers were still men beecher argued not only that women actually made better teachers than men but also that including women as teachers would expand the supply of teachers for the country and open the door to a professional life for middle class women who had few employment options.
beechers impassioned views reflected those of emma willard who had founded the troy female seminary in 1821 in upstate new york to prepare women to be teachers.
like beecher willard had argued there are many females of ability to whom the business of instructing children is highly acceptable she also believed that women should get the same education as men and modeled the curriculum at troy on what men studied at college though she added courses on how to teach.
in 1837 mary lyon founded mount holyoke female seminary in massachusetts to give future female teachers a college education.
new structures for schooling while catharine beecher and her colleagues were transforming the gender of the teaching profession other reformers sought to transform the structure of schools.
none of these leaders was more important than horace mann.
in 1836 mann a rising star in the massachusetts whig party helped shepherd a bill through the massachusetts legislature that created a state board of education.
he then became the boards full time paid secretary.
mann spent the next 12 years advocating tighter state standards for education more money for schools and teacher salaries and a better education for children.
he became the best known spokesperson for public education of his generation.
mann believed in state standards for the schools.
he described the schools of massachusetts as so many distinct independent communities mann meant to change that.
he also believed that it was the responsibility of all citizens to pay taxes to support schools looking at the conditions of the states schools when he took office he did not think that they paid nearly enough at the time in such taxes.
like beecher and willard mann wanted educated teachers and created a system of state sponsored teacher preparation schools called normal schools that offered 1 year of state funded preparation to any young woman or man who wanted to be a teacher.
manns greatest concern however was the moral education of the states citizens.
he believed that there needed to be a public guardian of morality and since the united states had no state church that guardian had to be the public school.
while mann was the best known educational reformer almost all whigs also came to advocate the same changes he did state systems of education state support for teacher preparation and state efforts to ensure a common morality.
like many reformers mann and his allies could not understand why anyone would oppose them.
yet even in massachusetts there was opposition.
jacksonian democrats in the legislature tried to abolish the board of education and the office of secretary.
they saw the state control that mann advocated as expensive unnecessary and an unwarranted interference by the state in local affairs which would undermine local support for each towns school.
roman catholics were especially unhappy with the growing influence and cost of the public school system.
catholics saw the public schools as essentially a protestant venture something protestants like mann could never understand.
mann advocated teaching the protestant bible in school without note or comment leaving it to churches or parents to interpret it.
but catholics believed that the bible should be read in light of the teachings of the church and not left to individual interpretation.
chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson 295 10 3 they found anti catholic bias in many of the textbooks the public schools used to pay taxes only to have their children read such material outraged them.
citing examples from textbooks that spoke of deceitful catholics catholics in new york city wrote that they could not in conscience and consistently with their sense of duty to god and to their offspring send them to the citys public schools and requested public funds so that they could operate their own schools.
when such funds were denied catholics in new york and around the country started their own parochial system at their own expense.
the nation s textbook mcguffey s reader claws catch harks scratch j l the j ler.
p teeth she will she will i in 1836 the small cincinnati publishing house of truman and smith brought out a new textbook for schools.
the first mcguffeys reader became part of a series the mcguffey s primer mcguffey s speller and the first through the sixth mcguffey s eclectic readers.
by 1920 when most school districts had turned to other materials 122 million copies of the books had been sold.
the mcguffey reader offered lessons in reading and public speaking designed to create a unified literate and patriotic society.
the readers reflected the same morality that mann and beecher wanted the schools to teach.
they included patriotic speeches by patrick henry and stories of george washington as well as tales of the poor boy and his faithful dog or the poor boy who worked hard and made good.
the texts also included ethical instruction for example dont steal apples from someone elsestree and instruction in how to speak and present oneself.
the goal was a citizenry that could speak well participate in a common democratic dialogue and use a common national language instead of regional dialects.
a story in the second eclectic reader is illustrative of the mcguffey approach.
henry the bootblack begins with the story of henry a kind good boy henrys father was dead and his mother was very poor.
he had a little sister about two years old one day henry found a pocketbook.
he could have kept all the money in it but he found the owner and returned it.
the owner then gave him a dollar for doing so.
henry used the dollar to set himself up as a bootblack and he was so polite that gentlemen soon began to notice him and to let him black their boots when henry brought home his first fifty cents in earnings his mother responded you are a dear good boy henry.
i did not know how i could earn enough to buy bread with but now i think we can manage to get along quite well this account is not the kind of success story that would appear fifty years later.
in the story henry does not go on to own a factory or make a fortune.
he is simply a dutiful child who makes his mother happy.
the students who read the mcguffey texts were urged to do the same.
they were also urged to learn the correct pronunciation and spelling for support boots notice money and other words in the story.
mcguffey was teaching a common morality but also a common american english to all students.
the united states that the readers portrayed was white middle class hard working and willing to sacrifice for the common good.
the readers also demanded a high standard of reading ability and moved students step by step to attain it.
in one room schoolhouses often staffed by teachers with little training which was the national norm throughout the 1800s a teacher could encourage different stu dents to move from reader to reader in careful order and be confident that by the time the student had mastered the sixth eclectic reader he or she would be fluent in the english language and in the nation s of the eclectic heheis.
see how this dog stands on his feet.
he wants to play with john.
a dog has four feet.
a dog and a cat can see in the dark.
hogs keep watch at night and hark lliey bark most when the moon shines.
a dog will chase a sheep or a hog or a co5v.
an j bjte it.
if you are kind to dog he will not bite you.
ike riders were filled with patriotic speeches and stories ictr e.
ne s wr here designed to teach morality in addition to istruction on ummon ways of pronouncing key terms.
296 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 ethical norms.
not everyone agreed with the specific values the readers taught and reformers were often tone deaf to complaints but the public schools and their teachers shaped american culture as significantly as any of the religious political or commercial ventures of the age of jackson.
quick review why might education be increasingly important in an expanding country.
conclusion andrew jackson was like no other president before him.
he had no connection to the founding fathers either by blood class or any similar privilege.
jackson was determined to make the presidency the center of american government believing that the government should be an expression of his agenda and of his party.
in his two terms as president jackson successfully prodded congress to bend to his will or used executive power to realize his goals despite fierce opposition.
a complex american leader with a long standing distrust of centralized government his views were reflected in his actions an indian removal policy that forced thousands of native americans out of their ancestral homes in illinois georgia mississippi alabama and florida and on to new lands in present day oklahoma opposition to the second bank of the united states because he thought the federal government should have no role in banking issuing paper currency or expanding credit and the nullification crisis in which jackson successfully challenged south carolinas efforts to declare federal law null and void in that state.
those actions would have long lasting effects on the nation.
for many americans in the decades between 1820 and 1850 the growth of a more popular democracy and popular social movements led by ordinary citizens were far more important than president jacksons policies or opinions.
along with the market revolution that was transforming the physical commercial and political landscapes of the united states the age of jackson as his years in the white house were called was also a period of social and religious revival and reform.
it was the peak of a long running series of religious revivals known as the second great awakening.
this upsurge in religious activity resulted in greater rights for women stronger opposition to slavery and radical transformation of the nations public schools whose teachers and moral teachings shaped american culture as significantly as any of the religious political or commercial ventures of the age of jackson.
chi r e considering the political economic and social aspects of the age of jackson to what extent was the united states in that period different from the beginning of the 1800s.
chapter 10 democracy in the age of andrew jackson chapter 10 chapter review 10 1 jacksonian democracy analyze jackson s advocacy for indian removal his opposition to the bank of the united states his support for a tariff and the impact of these policies on other americans.
review questions 1.
comparison how did jacksons vision of the presidency differ from that of his predecessors.
crafting arguments what were jacksons most important political priorities.
what connections can you make between his policies and his vision of the presidency.
historical interpretation what does the debate over indian removal tell you about political divisions in the united states in the 1830s.
what groups were most likely to support removal.
what groups were most likely to oppose it.
synthesis in what ways was the nullification crisis part of a longstanding disagreement about the nature of american government that went at least as far back as the debate over ratification of the constitution.
democratized religion the second great awaken i ng analyze the diversity of american religious experience and how the freedom of the era gave rise to diverse religious expressions.
review questions 5.
synthesis how did the role of religion in american society and culture change between 1800 and 1840.
what explains the changes you note.
historical interpretation what might explain the close connection between calls for religious revival and campaigns for social reform in the 1830s and 1840s.
comparison compare and contrast the various utopian religious com.
munities of the early 1800s.
what common features die they share.
what common forces might have contributes to their emergence.
democratized education the birth of the common school i 103 explain the development of public education as a result of in response to the cultural currents of the 1820s and 1830s.
i review questions 8.
contextualization why did reformers like catherine beecher believe women had a natural aptitude for teaching.
in what ways did beecher see teaching as a natural extension of womens role in the home.
crafting arguments is it fair to describe manns system of public education as some of his opponents did as nothing more than a vehicle for imposing mainstream protestantism on all americans.
why or why not.
historical interpretation how did textbooks in the mcguffey reader series shape the society and culture of the united states in the first half of the 1800s.
298 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 1830 1853 in this painting emigrants at kanesville by william henry jackson a backlog of wagons waits to be ferried across the missouri river at council bluffs iowa.
in the summer of 1845 the democratic review a new york city paper edited by john l osullivan urged the nation to annex the independent republic of texas it is time now for opposition to the annexation of texas to cease sullivan wrote.
texas was a hot topic and many newspapers were taking the same position.
but the review claimed that including texas in the united states was an essential part of the fulfillment of our manifest destiny to overspread the continent allotted by providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions.
manifest destiny quickly became a core american belief.
it was a mindset that justified the louisiana purchase of 1803 the hoped for u s acquisition of the oregon territory along with the northern half of mexico including texas and california and a significant influence across the pacific ocean.
manifest destiny gave a new name to an old idea.
even before the american revolution and in growing numbers in the 1790s white americans had crossed the allegheny mountains in spite of government prohibitions and had established colonies in kentucky and in the ohio river valley.
soon after 1800 others were crossing into florida and missouri both then under spanish control.
in both cases the settlers were confident that the american army and american government would soon follow.
while the first americans to cross into texas spoke of loyalty to the chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of how the idea of manifest destiny and the policies of the polk administration almost doubled the size of the united states in 12 years in spite of opposition from many people in the country.
manifest destiny the importance of an idea explain what manifest destiny meant and how it led the united states to involvement in texas california and oregon.
the u s war with mexico 1846 1848 analyze the causes strategies and outcomes of the u s war with mexico.
west to the pacific analyze the causes and outcomes of u s expansion in california and into the pacific region including establishing new relationships with hawaii china and japan.
11 1 11 2 chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 299 113 significant dates 1821 mexico gains independence from spain first american colony established in texas 1829 mexico abolishes slavery including in texas 1830 revolts against mexican authority begin in texas 1835 americans in texas capture the alamo drive out mexican army 1836 narcissa and marcus whitman help found the first protestant mission in oregon texas declares independence from mexico fall of the american forces in the alamo to mexican army treaty of velasco recognizes independent republic of texas congress passes gag rule forbidding discussion of slavery 1837 financial panic of 1837 1842 webster ashburton treaty resolves u s canadian border dispute 1844 treaty of wang hsia gives united states open trading rights in china 1845 the term manifest destiny becomes popular james k polk inaugurated as president u s annexation of texas 1846 beginning of u s war with mexico 1848 treaty of guadalupe hidalgo ends war with mexico gold rush in california 1849 thoreau s civil disobedience published 1851 herman melville s moby dick published 1853 commodore perry enters tokyo harbor begins opening japan to united states gadsden purchase last acquisition of land in continental united states manifest destiny the doctrine first expressed in 1845 that the expansion of white americans across the continent was inevitable and ordained by god and was a means to spread protestant christianity and jacksonian democracy to more people.
republic of mexico by 1830 they too were seeking protection from the american government.
in all these cases many in the government were happy to oblige seeing the movement of colonists as a first step in expanding the nation.
being aware of the nations long term expansion the power of the idea of manifest destiny and the political and military actions that the nations leaders took in the name of that idea is essential to understanding how the nation expanded into the shape it has today.
this chapter will explore the political diplomatic and military issues involved in turning the idea of manifest destiny into a geographic reality.
it is also important to understand how the acquisition of so much new territory in the 1830s and 1840s as well as other developments in peoples thinking changed the lives of those who lived in the united states.
the population of the country was expanding as dramatically as its geographical borders.
migrants from around the world especially flocked to california to find their fortunes in the gold.
citizens of the republic of mexico suddenly found themselves living in the united states because the border had moved as did american indians who rejected the claims of all nations to their lands.
other immigrants came to the already established parts of the nation.
in addition amid the many changes slaves supporters and opponents of slavery and women became increasingly vocal about the issue of freedom and equality.
these issues will be explored in chapter 12.
the great territorial expansion of these years and dramatic changes in the makeup and the thinking of people in the united states during the same time period transformed the country and its future.
manifest destiny the importance of an idea explain what manifest destiny meant and how it led the united states to involvement in texas california and oregon.
ifllli at the mythical level manifest destiny was seen as the spirit hovering over the westward movement of white settlers leading them and urging them on whether they came by foot covered wagon or stage coach.
11 1 the idea that the united states had a manifest destiny led to more than simply acquiring land though between 1845 and 1848 the united states would almost double in size from 1 8 million square miles to almost 3 million.
advocates of manifest destiny claimed that the united states with gods blessing should rule the heart of north america from the atlantic ocean to the pacific and from a still to be defined border with british canada to an even more undefined border with the republic of mexico.
for o sullivan and other supporters of manifest destiny it was the nations appointed role to spread not only democracy in its jacksonian form but also to spread protestant christianity in place of the catholicism of mexico or the native beliefs of american indians.
the same year that osullivan coined the term manifest destiny illinois representative john wentworth told congress that he did not believe the god of heaven designed that the original states should be the only abode of liberty on earth.
on the contrary he only designed them as the great center from which civilization religion and liberty should radiate and radiate until the whole continent shall bask in their blessing.
that belief held by many beyond wentworth that the united states was specially chosen by divine will to bring liberty and democracy to the planet and especially north america was a driving force in the push for new lands in the 1840s.
many americans supported versions of manifest destiny for their own reasons.
land speculators and those promoting the extension of the nations railroads wanted to exploit the vast lands in the west.
farmers dreamed of starting over in rich and cheap new lands.
workers believed that rapid national expansion would guarantee industrial profits and thus their jobs or give them a chance to start over if necessary.
protestant leaders and missionaries saw u s control of the new lands as an opportunity to ensure that a protestant united states not a catholic mexico controlled the continent.
manifest destiny also referred to a patriotic belief that the nation had a divine mission to become a world power.
and a national identity 1800 1848 in contrast many other americans opposed the whole idea of a manifest destiny democrats tended to support expansion but most whigs led by henry clay had grave reservations.
clays goal was not necessarily a larger country but a better developed one with roads canals railroads and industries knitting it together and ensuring its prosperity.
antislavery advocates opposed the acquisition of more land especially texas since they were certain that new lands meant new slave states.
however some proslavery advocates notably south carolina senator john c calhoun wanted texas but worried that other incorporated lands especially california and oregon might become free states peopled by darker skinned citizens which would shift power away from the white slaveholding regions.
some americans also saw the violence associated with expansion as simply wrong.
many residents of the lands from texas to california did not want to become part of the united states at all.
antonio maria osio spoke for those who did not want to become u s residents when he described himself as a californio who loves his country and a mexican on all four sides and in my heart he opposed the annexation of california to the united states and when it happened he left eventually settling in baja california so that he could to remain a citizen of mexico.
while many americans debated manifest destiny in the congress the press and the pulpits other americans especially trappers and farmers moved into the regions just as a generation before the same types of people had expanded beyond the mississippi.
regardless of whether the united states mexico or britain claimed the land these frontiersmen and women were confident that in time their government would follow them.
most of all they moved into texas see map 11 1.
the birth of the texas republic the tensions between americans living in texas and the mexican government that governed it had been building even before mexico gained its independence from spain in 1821.
when the united states purchased louisiana from france in 1803 the western chapter 11 californio person of spanish descent and after 1821 citizen of mexico living in california.
manifest destiny expanding the nation 301 300 part iv crafting a nation people land t saltillo map 11 1 trade networks between mexico texas and the united states.
mexico and before it spain had established settlements and trade networks throughout its sparsely populated northern territories.
texas trade ran not only south from san antonio and goliad in texas to monterrey and other trading centers in mexico but also east into the united states.
separate networks connected the heartland of mexico with its settlements in santa fe and taos in new mexico with tucson in the future arizona and with the missions and presidios along the coast of california.
san francisco n san jose santa cruz branciforte san carlos de monterey pacific ocean f mission b presidio town present day political boundaries principal road present state names and boundaries provided for orientation indian communities including the new mexico pueblos are not shown tejanos people of spanish or mexican descent born in texas.
border of the territory was disputed.
spain insisted it was the sabine river the current border between louisiana and texas but french officials hinted that the united states might claim territory further west.
jefferson had wanted louisiana to include all of the land from modern day texas to the rio grande river but he was not prepared to fight spain over it.
in the adams onis treaty of 1819 spain ceded florida to the united states along with spanish claims to oregon in exchange for u s recognition of the sabine river as the border between u s louisiana and spanish texas though some in congress criticized the treaty for that reason.
despite treaties however americans still crossed the sabine in the early 19th century settling in texas.
soon after the adams onis treaty was signed a revolutionary uprising began in mexico.
like the people of the united states most mexican citizens wanted to be free of control by a european power.
the mexican revolution against spanish rule which lasted from 1810 to 1821 was long and bloody and decimated the mexican economy in texas the mexican population people known as tejanos fell from 4 000 in 1800 to 2 500 in 1821.
comanche and apache tribes dominated large parts of texas and much of the desert was vacant of any human habitation.
nevertheless after 1821 mexico had won its independence.
part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 with the establishment of the republic of mexico two independent republics the english speaking overwhelmingly protestant united states in the north and the spanish speaking and mostly catholic republic of mexico to the south bordered each other at the sabine river with settlers from one living in the territory of the other.
even before mexican independence the spanish government had given missouri merchant moses austin permission to start a colony in texas believing that more settlers whatever their origin would help stabilize a border area that was far from the population centers of either mexico or the united states.
in 1821 mosess son stephen f austin along with erasmo seguin a tejano with liberal political views rode into texas to build the new settlement.
a month later austin and his party learned that mexico had won its independence.
austin then went to mexico city where he met with mexicos new leader agustin de iturbide and announced i make a tender of my services my loyalty and my fidelity to the constitutional emperor of mexico austins physical presence in mexico city and willingness to make an oath of allegiance to the new nation impressed the new government.
in april 1823 austin received confirmation of his claims to a huge swath of land in texas and his right to act as an empresario or colonizing agent for this land.
he was the only american to get such rights.
at first the new american colony grew slowly but austin continued to recruit settlers.
the mexican government aware that it could do little to stop settlement and anxious for a buffer against indian tribes and the united states hoped that settlers in texas would create a stable population of loyal citizens.
few europeans and even fewer mexicans moved into texas but americans came in large numbers.
the tejano community was overwhelmed by the newly arrived americans.
by 1830 20 000 american colonists had arrived and had brought 2 000 slaves with them.
the americans generally ignored the requirement that they convert to catholicism though they did not build protestant churches and most absolutely refused to free their slaves in spite of the fact that mexico had abolished slavery in 1829 and expected the residents of texas to obey that decree.
one american visitor to texas amos parker wrote a person may travel all day and day after day and find americans only those in the tejano community were also divided.
many tejanos profited from trade with the americans and identified with their independent streak.
others clung to their connection to mexico.
distance difficult travel conditions and an unstable government in mexico city with more pressing concerns closer to home allowed an american community to develop in texas that was officially governed by one set of laws but lived by its own rules see map 11 2.
the mexican governments benign neglect of the american community in texas ended in 1830 when the mexican congress closed texas to further american immigration and the importation of slaves.
mexico also insisted that trade be routed through established ports further south in mexico rather than directly between texas and the united states.
the government stationed more soldiers in texas to enforce the new rules.
austin was stunned and revolts broke out in the english speaking colonies a few of which drew tejano support.
in 1832 mexican troops defeated an american effort to take control of an army garrison but in october american colonists met at san felipe and called for autonomy for texas within the republic of mexico.
in 1833 they organized an army under the command of sam houston and sent austin to mexico city to negotiate for them.
tejanos were not represented in these meetings and most of the 5 000 tejanos probably opposed these actions.
but by now there were 30 000 americans in texas and the tejanos were greatly outnumbered.
austin had little success in mexico city.
he was arrested in the fall of 1833 and at the time of his release from jail in the summer of 1835 he wrote war is our only recourse.
there is no other remedy most americans in texas seemed to agree.
empresario an agent who received a land grant from the spanish or mexican government in return for organizing settlements.
chapter 11 manifest destiny expanding the nation 303 of war in june 1812 it passed by the smallest margin of any u s declaration of war 79 49 in the house and 19 13 in the senate.
the nation was far from unanimous in its commitment to war and the war did not go well.
madison was confident that the war would be quick and cost little in terms of money or american lives.
he was terribly wrong.
the attack on canada was a disaster.
jefferson and madison with their commitment to a small government and modest taxes had kept the army weak while many in congress who voted for war had also voted against every military appropriation in the time leading up to the war.
far fewer of the people in canada english or french wanted to become part of the united states than the americans expected.
in addition the british army was strong and had been cultivating indian alliances.
in july 1812 detroit fell to british soldiers and indians led by tecumseh and an american attack on british forts on the niagara river failed.
far from taking canada the opening battles of the war had left the northwest more open to attack by the british and tecumsehs tribal alliance.
tecumseh is still remembered as a hero in canada for his role in defending that country.
battles along the frontier were brutal.
the kentucky militia scalped british soldiers and indians scalped american settlers.
both sides complained of atrocities.
at first the royal navy enforced a much tighter blockade on the atlantic coast than jeffersons embargo had ever accomplished wrecking the u s economy.
british landing parties attacked coastal towns at will.
however an american naval victory on lake erie by ships under the command of oliver hazard perry gave the country a new hero.
shortly after tecumseh was killed in october 1813 when the u s army won a significant victory over combined british and indian forces at the battle of the thames in southern canada.
the combined victories brought some safety to the new york pennsylvania and ohio frontier but all thought of conquering canada disappeared.
by 1814 the war turned further against the united states.
napoleons abdication in april 1814 freed the british for a full scale fight.
in august british troops raided washington and burned the capitol and the white house.
first lady dolly madison collected state papers and the famous gilbert stuart painting of george in august 1814 only a short time after 1800 when they had begun serving as the center of the american government british troops burned both the capitol building and the white house.
the deserted husks of both buildings stood until the war ended and they could be rebuilt.
230 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 washington and fled just ahead of the british.
however on september 13 the british bombardment of fort mchenry in baltimore harbor failed to dislodge the american garrison.
when francis scott key who was temporarily being held in british custody saw that the american flag had not been struck in defeat he was inspired to write the star spangled banner that same month american forces also stopped a british invasion of new york.
but stopping invasions was hardly winning the war.
on the indian front however american forces were achieving some important victories.
like the french and indian war and the american revolution the war of 1812 was a disaster for indians living east of the mississippi.
tecumsehs death at the battle of the thames ended the fragile coalition he had built and opened all of ohio and indiana territory to rapid white settlement.
in the south at the battle of horseshoe bend in march 1814 andrew jackson defeated a creek and cherokee alliance killing close to 1 000 indian fighters and 2 000 more in subsequent battles 15 percent of the tribes total population.
my people are no more the creek leader red eagle or william weatherford said.
in the treaty of fort jackson the creeks were forced to give up almost 25 million acres in georgia and alabama half of their total land.
while both sides were winning and losing battles an american peace delegation of henry clay albert gallatin and john quincy adams son of the former president met with their british counterparts in ghent belgium to negotiate what would become the treaty of ghent.
despite its strong position in the war britain having ended its hostilities with france was fearing that peace would not last and it wanted to end its battles with the united states to conserve resources.
initially the british asked for significant concessions including a large protected zone for their indian allies but the american delegation stalled through much of 1814.
late in the year fearing the situation with france the british agreed to a treaty that essentially returned all borders and issues to their status quo before the war began.
it was a wise move for them.
napoleon living in exile on the island of elba off the italian coast since his defeat in 1814 returned to power briefly in 1815.
he again ruled france until his final defeat by british and german troops at the battle of waterloo in june 1815.
if the british had lost at waterloo and the battle was a close call it might have been because their best troops were in north america.
even as the ghent negotiations were taking place federalists in new england were taking actions against the war.
many new englanders saw little value in the territorial expansion of the country and were convinced that new lands would only mean new democratic republican representatives in congress.
even more the war had devastated the new england economy which was dependent on international shipping.
in protest new england governors ordered their state militias to serve only within the borders of their own states.
in december 1814 federalist delegates from across new england convened the hartford convention in hartford connecticut to demand peace and consider new englands secession from the union if peace did not come quickly.
while a majority of the delegates ultimately opposed secession the convention insisted on the right of nullification the right of state governments to impede congressional actions within their own boundaries and proposed amendments to the constitution to protect new englands power.
delegates to the convention expected the madison administration to give in to their demands but when news arrived of jacksons victory in new orleans and then the peace treaty the convention did more to discredit the federalist party than support their cause.
nevertheless it signaled the level of hostility to what many came to call mr.
madison s war.
the wars final dramatic battle of new orleans was fought after the peace treaty was already signed but before news of it had reached jackson or the opposing british army.
the british planned to attack new orleans so they could win control of the mississippi river and cut u s trade on it.
major general sir edward pakenham and his 8 000 troops were battle hardened from years of fighting the french but in new orleans they faced jacksons 4 700 american troops a collection of regular militia tennessee and kentucky volunteers and pirates and smugglers under the command 8 4 treaty of ghent a treaty signed in december 1814 between the united states and britain that ended the war of 1812.
hartford convention a meeting of federalist delegates from the new england states to protest the continuation ofthewar of 1812.
chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 231 of the infamous jean lafitte.
on january 8 1815 pakenhams troops marched straight into a line of fire organized by jacksons army.
when after hours of fighting the british called for a truce almost 700 british soldiers had been killed and 1 400 wounded.
of the americans 8 were killed and 13 wounded.
it was one of the great victories of the war and it made jackson a hero and would help make him president.
and though it came after the peace treaty it helped convince the british that they should indeed honor the terms of the treaty which they might not have done if they had taken new orleans see map 8 2.
far more americans indians and british soldiers and sailors died in the war of 1812 than anyone expected when the war began.
indian tribes from the shawnees to the creeks would never have significant power again.
the united states was virtually bankrupt as a result of the war.
secretary of the treasury george w campbell reported that the government needed to borrow 50 million in the fall of 1814 and resigned when he could not raise it and the government for the only time in history defaulted on its debts.
nevertheless news of the treaty of ghent and of jacksons victory in new orleans was met with national celebrations.
henry clay asked what is our present situation and answered his own question respectability and character abroad security and confidence at home daniel webster who as a representative from massachusetts had opposed the war now said the peace brought about an entirely new and a most interesting state of things it opened us to other prospects and suggested other duties.
we ourselves were changed and the whole world was changed.
it was an odd mood for a nation that had lost more battles than it won come close to bankruptcy and still had its new capital city laying in ashes.
but webster captured the national mood better than the statistics.
the end of britains long war with france also brought an end to britains war with the united states which had continued in various forms of conflict for 40 years.
lake supef british north america canada vermont lib.
illinois i territory fort dearborn aug 15 1812 u michigan territory massachusetts nnsyu 7connect1cut new jersey a delaware virginia michillimackinac v july 17 1812 indiana territory ohio british north america canada michigan territory queens on height ja battle of he themes octs i8i3 t new york tennessee north carolina south carolina atlantic ocean j detroit surrendered aug 16 1812 louisiana fort mims new orleans 1813 jan 8 1 15 o u n igeorgia horseshoe bend wc mar 27 1814 j k.
american victories american victories over indians jjk.
british victories forts american troop movements british troop movements british naval blockade fort mej fort defiance tippecanoe indiana territory ohio dayton cincinnati erie pe nn sylvania t new zjers6y t maryla fort mchenry baltimore jfc sept 13 14 1814 i s.
washington.
d c daaware surrendered and burned f aug 24 1814 il s o new xx blxde o xxrx were 6xempt the fightin9 of the war of 1812 the british navy maintained a highly successful in batdes on thexat fak h.
9 t l sta and making il easy t0 attack and bum the pital in 1814.
the american navy was more at thzwar s es arm es 9 9 mississippi river from tippecanoe in indiana territory to the final battle in new orleans 232 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 almost immediately after the war ended britain and the united states negotiated a commercial treaty that gave the united states trading rights with britain and much of britain s empire.
two years later in 1817 the rush bagot treaty guaranteed the disarmament of the great lakes and the year after that another treaty the anglo american convention resolved much of the border between the united states and canada.
these treaties were the beginning of long lasting peace on the northern border of the united states.
indeed after 1815 both europe and america settled into a long period of relative peace and mutual prosperity.
in spite of all the complaints about the war the years during which the regions ports were closed were a time when some residents began manufacturing enterprises that in the years ahead would fuel rapid industrialization of the region.
the united states was considerably more self sufficient at wars end than it had ever been before.
still trade with europe after the wars end not only resumed but also quickly exceeded all previous levels.
in addition with peace came further territorial expansion and an extraordinary economic and commercial transition that fundamentally changed the nation.
perhaps most important of all as webster and clay both claimed the overall effect of the war left the united states a much more confident and proud nation than it had been up to that time.
men like webster and clay who were prophets of that confidence and pride would be national leaders for the next several decades of the nations life.
quick review why did the war of 1812 and the events leading up to it split the nation.
based on events in the early 1800s did madison make the right decision.
expanding american territory and influence 8 5 analyze how the united states acquired new territory and increased influence abroad.
in spite of wars and tensions territorial expansion continued under jeffersons handpicked successors presidents james madison 1809 1817 and james monroe 1817 1825 as it had under jefferson.
during this 24 year period three men who were political allies from the same political party and the same state governed the nation seeking many of the same goals.
rapid growth fundamentally changed the country.
in 1799 daniel boone who had created the first white settlements in kentucky during the revolution moved with his family yet again this time across the mississippi river into spanish controlled missouri.
other american settlers from kentucky followed seeking ever more land.
they assumed that their rights as american citizens went with them and that eventually american sovereignty would follow.
the louisiana purchase in 1803 confirmed boones assumptions.
other americans followed boones pattern in florida texas new mexico and california.
americans ventured far beyond the borders of the united states and expected often demanded that the american government continue to protect them and eventually annex new lands to the union.
many in the government agreed with the settlers and successive governments anxious to expand or consolidate regional control approved.
during the war of 1812 the military victories of william henry harrison over the shawnees in the old northwest finalized the opening of ohio and the future states of indiana and illinois to white settlement.
at the same time andrew jacksons defeat of the creeks and cherokees in the old southwest opened up huge new tracts of land in what would become the states of mississippi and alabama.
with the lands ceded by britain in 1783 and the vast louisiana purchase now firmly under american control the most obvious pieces of real estate left for further u s annexation after the war of 1812 were the territories known as west and east florida still controlled by spain and the oregon territory that several european powers claimed.
chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 233 i i florida and oregon west florida was more or less the southern third of what would eventually be mississippi and alabama while east florida was what is today the state of florida.
to the united states foreign control of those lands represented multiple threats.
it gave spain control of most access to the gulf of mexico which was a threat to u s shipping.
slaves and others seeking to escape u s jurisdiction could easily escape south along a long unguarded border and melt into the vast unruly lands of florida.
seminole indians already refugees from the growing white population north of florida often welcomed escaped slaves and created new communities that were united in their dislike of the americans.
americans just north of the florida border were hungry for more land.
many ignored international boundaries and crossed into florida to farm and build settlements.
these settlers in turn demanded u s protection from the seminoles and creeks who had been displaced by the treaty of fort jackson and were determined to defend their new land in florida.
in 1817 andrew jackson a military hero after his victories in 1814 and 1815 told president james monroe and secretary of state john quincy adams that he could seize florida in 60 days.
the president and adams did not want a war with spain but in language that was deliberately vague called on jackson to attack the seminoles who were harassing white settlers and gave him full powers to conduct the war in the manner he may judge best given how jackson had conducted the war against the creeks monroe and adams knew what their orders meant.
jacksons army marched into florida.
they could not find many seminoles who were adept at disappearing into swamps and marshes but they burned their villages and crops.
they also seized spanish forts and arrested a scots trader named alexander arbuthnot and another british subject robert armbrister charged them with assisting the seminoles and after a quick trial executed both.
when his troops did find seminole and creek leaders jackson simply executed them including hillis hadjo a creek spiritual prophet who had been part of tecumsehs movement.
the execution of indians did not cause an uproar in the united states or europe but an american general executing british subjects in spanish territory caused an international incident.
monroe and adams however were skillful diplomats.
they managed both to distance themselves from jackson and use what adams called the jackson magic his immense popularity after his victories in the war of 1812 to bring pressure on spain.
in fact spain did not care much about florida but did have serious concerns about the independence movements in the spanish colonies in mexico and south america.
the spanish authorities wanted assurance that the united states would not aid or recognize these revolutions.
spain was also deeply worried about its control of the land from texas to california.
it was more than willing to trade florida for assurances about texas and the revolutions further south.
monroe briefly considered making a bid for texas but he decided that it was more trouble than it was worth and agreed to the treaty.
instead of pursuing a claim to texas monroe and adams decided to ask spain for its support in the areas that lewis and clark had explored.
spain great britain and russia all claimed the same territory along the pacific coast known as oregon.
by the late 1700s explorers from new spain were making claims as far north as alaska.
at the same time russian fur traders and explorers had established permanent russian settlements complete with orthodox churches in alaska and almost as far south as san francisco.
british sea captains notably james cook in the 1770s had explored the oregon coast.
british explorers coming overland from canada made land claims among them the hudsons bay company trading post at the mouth of the columbia river which represented the largest european settlement in the region.
an earlier u s claim based on lewis and clarks explorations in 1805 was weak by comparison and there were no u s settlements in oregon.
of course part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 1 the native peoples of the region had little use for any of the claims though they traded with all the claimants.
nevertheless despite its weak claim the united states had an interest in oregon.
while some in congress thought oregon was far too distant and barren to be of interest adams prompted by the merchant and fur trader john jacob astor saw the value of an american presence at the mouth of the columbia river not only for access to the fur trade there but as a way to enter the pacific trade with asia.
in the 1819 adams onis treaty with spain spain not only ceded florida to the united states but also agreed to transfer spanish rights to the oregon territory to the united states.
it was a significant accomplishment.
the united states paid 5 million in spanish debts and the deal was done.
all of florida was now a u s territory.
while the united states was negotiating with spain it was also negotiating with great britain about oregon.
in 1818 adams negotiated the anglo american convention in which britain and the united states agreed to joint control of the pacific northwest for 10 years and to resolve other issues in the future.
the two treaties with spain and britain gave the united states as strong a claim to oregon as either britain or russia a claim it would not forget.
just before he ended his tenure as secretary of state adams agreed to an 1824 treaty with russia that set the border of alaska much farther north leaving it to the united states and britain to resolve questions about oregon which they finally did only in 1846 see map 8 3.
adams onis treaty an 1819 treaty between the united states and spain that led to american acquisition of florida and american rights in the oregon territory in return for a 5 million payment to spain.
8 5 i biyiillll jioihisisi ap8 3 expanding borders 1817 1823.
during his term as secretary of state john quincy adams gotiated a series of treaties that established the border between maine and the louisiana territory d british canada as well as created a joint u s british ownership of oregon and also acqu red flonda m spain.
chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 235 the monroe doctrine monroe doctrine a declaration by president james monroe in 1823 that the western hemisphere was to be closed off to further european colonization and that the united states would not allow european interference in the internal affairs of independent nations anywhere in the americas.
having taken florida and asserted a claim to oregon the united states agreed for the time being to stay out of spains way in texas and california.
nevertheless the monroe administration took further steps to consolidate u s power in the americas.
in 1822 despite earlier promises to spain the united states officially recognized the new independent states of chile colombia mexico and peru.
if latin america was in fact going to be independent of spain then the united states meant to be both the regions benefactor and prime trade partner.
then going a big step further in a speech to congress in december 1823 president monroe declared that henceforth the united states would not allow european intervention or the acquisition of any new territory by a european power in north and south america.
coming less than a decade after the united states had almost lost its independence in the war of 1812 it was a bold announcement.
a complex set of international developments led monroe and secretary of state john quincy adams to formulate this stance which became known as the monroe doctrine.
on the pacific coast russian tsar alexander i was pressing russian claims not only to alaska but also to much of the oregon territory in the pacific northwest.
in 1821 alexander issued an imperial edict that claimed much of the pacific coast and gave the russian american company the right to trade there.
the russians threatened to confiscate american ships that traveled too far north even though more american than russian sailors were actually taking the sea lions and whales and trading with the alaskan natives.
nevertheless for the united states russian actions represented a dangerous european intrusion.
halfway across the world greek patriots borrowing language from the american revolution declared independence from the ottoman empire and liberal constitutionalists briefly took power in spain.
the greek and spanish revolts were tricky for monroe and adams.
many americans were sympathetic with the greeks but the administration also wanted good relationships with the ottomans.
in addition american sentiment was on the side of a revolution in spain.
these situations in russian claims to alaska dated back to the 1700s but by the 1820s the russians were building up colonies including their largest one in sitka alaska.
these outposts complete with russian orthodox churches fostered trade with indigenous alaskans and provided fresh supplies for ships taking fish and sea lions off the coast.
236 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 europe though not the center of american concern still had to be responded to carefully given the strength of public opinion.
much more pressing however was the revolutionary activity in the americas.
taking the wrong side in the revolutions of latin america could hurt the united states politically and economically for a long time to come while little could be gained from interfering in europe.
at the tense moment when the united states was considering ways to respond to russian pressure and to revolutions around the world british foreign secretary george canning proposed a joint british american declaration in which both nations would oppose european intervention in the americas including efforts to restore spains control and that neither great britain nor the united states would have any territorial interests in the americas.
cannings proposal was a problem for monroe and adams.
they did not want spain to reassert power in the americas and britains influence would be helpful in preventing it.
but both the president and his secretary of state had their eyes on eventual u s takeover of parts of the spanish empire from texas to california and perhaps cuba.
cannings hands off agreement would jeopardize long term american interests.
in the end monroe and adams concluded that they would leave it to the europeans to deal with greece and spain and essentially declared noninvolvement in the internal affairs of europe on the other hand they used president monroes december 2 1823 message to congress to say that any nation of the americas that had assumed free and independent conditions would henceforth not be considered as subjects of colonization by any european power many europeans were amazed at what they saw as the arrogance of the new and still relatively weak united states.
it was not clear that the country could enforce the new policy.
but the monroe doctrine which began as a simple diplomatic maneuver became a bedrock of u s foreign policy.
the independence not only of the united states but of all of the independent americas from european control was it seemed the countrys business.
the new policy had no impact on britains long standing control of canada or russias dominance of alaska or indeed on those colonies that spain still claimed in latin america.
but it did announce that the united states would oppose any new colonies anywhere in the americas.
with the monroe doctrine the u s government was again reflecting jeffersonian pragmatism.
it might be a small country of farmers but the united states was claiming vast new influence in all of north and south america.
it was a diplomatic expansion that was being matched by an era of economic expansion growth that was unimagined when thomas jefferson took the oath of office in 1801.
8 5 quick review how did the outcome of the war of 1812 allow the u s government to pursue its expansionist goals and issue the monroe doctrine.
conclusion when thomas jefferson became president of the united states in 1801 much of the countrys population cities seaports agriculture industry indeed much of its economy was contained within the original 13 states.
within the next 20 years under his leadership and that of handpicked successors james madison and james monroe the countrys territorial claims would extend to the pacific ocean.
much of this growth originated in jeffersons republican beliefs and his agrarian ideal of a nation of independent farmers rather than a nation run by any elites.
significant political and social developments also occurred during the first two decades of the 1800s.
with the u s supreme courts marbury v madison decision in 1803 the court essentially gave itself the authority to decide the constitutionality of any law passed by congress.
religion played an increasing role in society even as chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 237 the last states ended their support for specific churches.
many protestant groups made significant new gains among both white and black adherents with revivals in what came to be known as the second great awakening.
the louisiana purchase opened up trade along the mississippi river and through new orleans.
lewis and clark led an expedition to explore the huge expanse of new u s territory even venturing beyond its scope to reach the pacific ocean.
their explorations aided greatly by various indian tribes revealed tremendous potential for future american growth.
tensions leading up to the war of 1812 began during jeffersons term and came to a head under the administration of madison.
ultimately the inconclusive war resolved issues that had limited u s development for decades and launched a new period of growth for the country.
it was the last war ever fought between the united states and great britain.
it was also the last war in which indian tribes were allied with another nation against the united states and afterward the united states dealt with native americans as an internal matter rather than a focus of foreign policy.
although the cost was high in terms of lives lost money spent and economies devastated the end of the war left the united states more confident proud and self sufficient than ever before.
with peace came further territorial expansion especially a series of treaties between 1817and 1823 that established the border with canada gave the nation joint ownership of the oregon territory with great britain and gave the country control of florida.
the end of the war also launched an extraordinary economic and commercial transition that fundamentally changed the nation and transformed the lives of americans.
the bold new confidence of the united states reflected in the monroe doctrine declaring that there could be no new european claims on any lands in north or south america surprised the world.
chapter review what are the most significant differences between the united states in 1800 and the united states in 1823.
why are these differences more important than others.
part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 chapter 8 chapter review 8 1 jefferson and the republican ideal explain how jefferson s republicanism shaped and reflected the nation s democratic culture.
review questions 1.
contextualization what did americans in the early 1800s mean by the terms equality and independence7.
what role did these terms play in shaping their social and political ideals.
crafting arguments defend or refute the following statement thomas jefferson in both his policy choices and personal life embodied the spirit of republicanism in the early 1800s.
what evidence can you present to support your position.
what evidence might support a different argument.
comparison how did the political culture of the united states in the early decades of the 1800s differ from the political culture of the late 1700s.
how would you explain the differences you note.
the ideal of religious freedom explain how americans applied new individualist ideals in their religion and how the expansion of faith based organizations supported yet also challenged jeffersonian republicanism.
review questions 4.
comparison compare and contrast the views of thomas jefferson and lyman beecher on the relationship between church and state.
what conflicting values were at the heart of their disagreement.
historical interpretation when some historians have described the united states as being built on faith in dynamic democracy and evangelical religion what did they mean.
is this description an accurate interpretation of u s history in the years from 1800 to 1820.
crafting arguments why did african americans both slave and free develop their own segregated religious institutions and gatherings over the course of the early 1800s.
what needs might such churches and gatherings have met that white churches did not.
8 2 8 3 beyond the mississippi the louisiana purchase and the expedition of lewis and clark explain what effects the louisiana purchase and the westward expansion had on how americans saw themselves.
review questions 7.
chronological reasoning how did events in europe and haiti create the opportunity for the united states to acquire the louisiana territory.
comparison compare and contrast race relations in new orleans and the rest of the united states during the early 1800s.
the war of 1812 8 4 analyze the causes and impact of the war of 1812 review questions 9.
chronological reasoning trace the growing tensions between the united states and britain between 1783 and 1812.
what events were most crucial in propelling the two nations toward war.
historical interpretation how would you explain the sectional divide over the war of 1812.
why did the war find the most support in the southern and western states and territories and the least support in new england.
synthesis what were the long term consequences of the war.
is it fair to describe the war of 1812 as an inconclusive war.
why or why not.
expanding american territory and influence analyze how the united states acquired new territory and increased influence abroad.
review questions 12.
crafting arguments evaluate the role of individual american settlers in shaping american foreign policy in the early 1800s.
how did the desire of americans to move beyond the boundaries of the united states create both opportunities and challenges for the federal government.
historical interpretation in what ways did the articulation of the monroe doctrine represent a turning point in american history.
what light does the doctrine shed on the vision of americas future shared by the doctrines supporters.
8 5 chapter 8 creating a new people expanding the country 239 intensive and much work was required afterward to prepare the harvest for market.
because of the value of the cotton crop and increasing demands for it there was constant pressure to work harder and no end to the punishment for those who did not produce as expected.
while bibb and thousands of other slaves cultivated the cotton young women working in the mills or textile factories of lowell massachusetts turned it into cloth to be sold around the world.
an anonymous worker described her life in a mill since i was between seven and eight years old i have been employed almost without intermission in a factory which is almost 18 years i do not wonder at your surprise that the operatives were worked in the summer season from five in the morning till seven in the evening the time we are required to labor is altogether too long.
it is more than our constitutions can bear.
if any one doubts it let them come into our mills of a summers day at four or five oclock in the afternoon and see the drooping weary persons moving about as though their legs were hardly able to support their bodies.
north or south for slaves in fields and workers in factories cotton was wearying work.
for some cotton brought extraordinary wealth as king cotton came to dominate the u s economy but for others drudgery permeated life.
in one way or another the rise and dominance of the cotton industry affected almost all americans.
the transformation of the u s economy immediately after the war of 1812 involved many changes that made cotton dominant including new inventions like cotton gins and steamboats new institutions like corporations and a different kind of bank all of which worked together to expand the national economy.
these changing economic and social structures also affected the political scene.
the new cotton based economy made slaves much more valuable and slave owners more anxious to defend slavery.
at the same time many northerners including northerners in cotton industries became more hostile to slaveholding which led to deep national divisions.
significant dates 1794 eli whitney patents the cotton gin 1812 francis cabot lowell returns from england after memorizing plans for manchester s mills 1813 boston manufacturing company chartered to build mills in united states 1815 the end of the war of 1812 launches era of economic prosperity 1816 beginning of alabama fever development of alabama and mississippi cotton plantations 1817 new york legislature authorizes construction of erie canal 1819 financial panic dartmouth college v woodward and mcculloch v maryland supreme court cases 1820 missouri compromise 1823 lowell massachusetts laid out as a new mill town 1824 john quincy adams elected president after disputed election 1825 erie canal completed 1828 tariff of abominations andrew jackson elected president 9 1 9 2 chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the changes in the u s economy brought about by the rapid expansion of cotton production other commercial and financial developments and the impact of these changes on u s political life.
creating the cotton economy explain the role of cotton in transforming the land and the lives of diverse people in the united states.
commerce technology and transportation analyze the technological and financial changes that led to the emergence of a new market economy in the united states.
from the era of good feelings to the politics of division this picture of large bales of cotton being loaded onto steamships by slave labor reflects much of the economic development of the nation in the decades after the end of the war of 1812.
the end of the war of 1812 andrew jacksons victory at new orleans the american takeover of florida and the monroe doctrine were all far from primary concerns of many americans in the years after 1815.
something much closer to home cotton was transforming their lives.
the rapid growth of cotton production changed the lives of more americans whether or not they were directly involved in cotton production than any other development between 1800 and the civil war.
cotton transformed the nations physical commercial and political landscape.
henry bibb a former slave described what cotton meant to him and his fellow slaves on a louisiana cotton plantation that had only recently been developed the object of blowing the horn for them two hours before day was that they should get their bit to eat before they went to the field that they need not stop to eat but once during the day i have often heard the sound of the slave drivers lash on the backs of slaves and their heart rending shrieks i have known the slaves to be so much fatigued from labor that they could scarcely get to their lodging places from the fields at night.
creating the cotton economy 9 3 jyiuiilauum ui me ever expaiw cotton growing regions of the nation knew little respite from the fati ing labor.
they had to clear the land before they could plant and o planted the cotton plants needed almost constant care.
the harvest part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 explain the role of cotton in transforming the land and the lives of diverse people in the united states.
cottons dominant role in the economy came about quickly.
in 1800 a few southern plantations grew enough cotton to make cloth for their own use and ship a few bags to england but the dominant plantation cash crops were rice indigo tobacco and in southern louisiana sugar.
but after the war of 1812 cotton quickly outstripped every other american export and remained a major american industry until the 1930s.
demand and technology two developments in the late 1790s set the stage for the rapid expansion of cotton production in the united states.
first during this period many europeans came to prefer cotton clothing to the wool or linen that had clothed them for generations.
cotton was cooler and more comfortable than wool and it was getting cheaper.
most of europes cotton came from india via great britains east india company but india could not produce enough cotton to meet europes growing demand.
the second development was a set of technological changes that launched the worldwide expansion of cotton.
in england in 1733 john kay invented a flying shuttle that made weaving cloth much faster and allowed a single weaver to handle a loom that previously required many weavers.
in 1764 james hargreaves invented the spinning jenny which could run multiple spindles each spinning cotton into thread.
by 1800 a single jenny could be seen operating up to 120 spindles at once.
in 1769 richard arkwright patented a water frame that used waterpower to drive the spin ning process a major step toward mass production while james watts coal powered.
chapter 9 new industries new politics 241 9 1 1800 1820 1840 1860 year figure 9 1 cotton exports as a percentage of all u s exports 1800 1860.
this graph illustrates the growing significance of cotton in the u s economy during the early 1800s.
while all exports from the country were growing cotton was quickly outstripping everything else increasing from a tiny fraction in 1800 to one third of all exports in the 1820 and to more than half by 1840 steam engine designed in 1763 added steam power to the english mills expanding their size long before it provided the energy for railroads and ships.
although developed in england much of this technology was soon brought to the united states through transfers legal or otherwise.
british authorities knew that their new means of production were key to their industrial and political might.
they provided patents for their inventors and kept their production process secret.
however in 1789 an englishman samuel slater having been sworn to secrecy and apprenticed in arkwrights textile business sailed to new york to bring the industry to the united states.
slater ignored arkwrights patents and recreated arkwrights mechanical spinning in mills in rhode island.
more technological transfers followed.
despite the worldwide demand for cotton and englands growing industrial capacity for turning raw cotton into cloth american farmers and plantation owners were skeptical that they could make money on it.
green seed or upland cotton was the only kind that would grow in the american south except for a few places on the coast or coastal islands where a more profitable variety of long stem cotton grew.
but each ball of cotton produced on a green seed cotton plant contained many of those green seeds.
they had to be removed by hand before the cotton could be spun into threads.
a slave working hard all day could clean about 1 pound of cotton hardly enough to make a meaningful profit.
many people sought a mechanical way to clean cotton.
eli whitney a recent yale graduate who had gone south to work as a tutor lived on the greene family plantation at mulberry grove in georgia where he became interested in devising a machine to clean cotton.
he gained fame if not fortune for his patent on the cotton gin gin was short for engine.
while serving as a tutor and tinkering with how to clean cotton whitney decided to try pulling the picked cotton through a screen that would allow the seeds to fall out and the clean cotton fibers to be baled for shipment.
when the first model failed because the wooden teeth were too brittle catherine greene the matron of the plantation suggested wire from her bird cage and a brush to keep the seeds from clogging the works.
the cotton gin that whitney patented in 1794 could clean 50 pounds of cotton a day.
others quickly improved on whitneys model and manufacturing cotton gins became a big business from natchez mississippi to bridgewater massachusetts.
part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 whitney did not make his fortune from this invention too many other people were improving it too quickly.
however he did become rich developing the idea of interchangeable parts and manufacturing rifles with such parts for the u s government.
interchangeable parts made everything from rifles to farm implements easier to repair since a replacement part could be counted on to work in the original gun or machine.
the cotton gin transformed the nation.
the united states now had an export crop that could make it prosperous.
the cotton market and the technology that made it possible led to the rapid development of new lands especially the great plantations of alabama mississippi and louisiana.
in turn the new england factory system that began in rhode island expanded to the great mill center of lowell massachusetts in 1823 and then to factories and factory towns all over the region.
as the cotton market continued to grow coastal and transatlantic shipping also expanded as more and more southern cotton was brought to the mills of new england and to the even larger mills of manchester and birmingham in england itself.
this rather plain and simple product was a driving force for economics and technology in the period and it seemed to have no limits.
the land of cotton while some of the nations first export cotton the long stem variety was grown along the atlantic coast and especially on the sea islands off the coast of the carolinas and georgia the greatest cotton production involved the green seed variety on the plantations of the so called black belt named for its rich black soil stretching from georgia to louisiana.
the quality of the soil made it perfect for growing cotton.
within this black belt area only georgia was one of the 13 original states.
the northern parts of alabama and mississippi were part of the land britain ceded to the united states at the end of the revolution.
the louisiana purchase added louisiana.
andrew jacksons defeat of the creeks during the war of 1812 and the creek cession that he negotiated in 1816 opened much new land to white settlement while the 1819 u s treaty with spain placed the gulf coast of mississippi and alabama under u s control.
white settlers often single men sometimes families from georgia tennessee the carolinas and europe especially many scots irish poured in and brought black slaves with them.
a land rush that was known as alabama fever began in 1816 just as the war of 1812 ended.
alabama was admitted as a state in 1819 with a non indian population of 128 000 five times what it had been in 1810.
louisiana and mississippi were admitted in 1812 and 1817 respectively see map 9 1.
the federal government played a central role in the development of these lands.
the first european settlers were illegal white squatters moving onto farms recently abandoned by indians but after the coming of peace in 1815 the federal government quickly began official surveys and legal sales of the land.
before the war of 1812 the largest sales of federal lands in 1 year had been 350 000 acres.
in 1815 a million acres of newly acquired lands were sold at 2 per acre and in 1818 2 5 million acres were sold as the government acquired land from the creeks and then from spain and quickly made it available for sale.
these sales helped the federal budget and white settlement surged.
the government spent some of the revenue from land sales on maintaining the army that protected the new lands.
it also aided settlement by building a road from columbia south carolina to columbus georgia and then farther into the black belt region see map 9 2.
the new land was fertile.
planters who had grown 300 pounds of cotton per acre in south carolina could grow 800 to 1 000 pounds an acre in the black belt.
in 1801 nine percent of the worlds cotton came from the united states while 60 percent came from india.
by 1820 the united states was exporting more cotton than india.
by 1850 the american south was producing more than two thirds of the world s cotton.
the new technology the new land and the institution of slavery created great wealth for some a poor hard earned living for others and backbreaking torturous misery for slaves.
black belt the cotton growing region that was developed in the early 1800s stretching from georgia through alabama mississippi and louisiana named for its rich black soil.
9 1 chapter 9 new industries new politics 243 new spain atlantic ocean 500 kilometers map 9 1 the growth of slavery in the black belt.
as the black belt area of cotton production expanded slave labor became they key to its success and the number of slaves grew dramatically.
m more than 50 slave qh 10 to 50 slave less than 10 slave no slaves or no statistics available 250 500 miles the people who worked the land cotton and the transformation of slavery the white settlers who were able to buy large parcels of land in the rich new territory of what was known as the old southwest did not do most of the hard work of actually planting hoeing and picking the cotton that would be grown there.
other americans did that work african slaves whose lives were also transformed by the explosive growth of cotton production and whose value to their white owners increased even more than the value of the new land on which they labored.
between 1800 and 1860 more than 1 million black americans were forced to move from the homes they knew and often from their families too to new homes in the interior cotton growing lands of georgia alabama mississippi and louisiana and later arkansas and texas.
while slavery slowly disappeared in the north after 1800 and the slave population of maryland virginia and the carolinas stabilized or declined slavery exploded in the new land.
in the 60 years before the civil war more slaves made the journey from coastal states to inland plantations than had made the terrible middle passage from africa to north america in the previous 200 years.
in some ways similar to the passage from africa to north america the journey from a settled community in virginia maryland or the carolinas to the new interior plantations was a terrible ordeal.
as more slaves were sold into the interior or sold from place to place within it slaves on the coast lived in terror of being sold and los ing all connections to family and birthplace.
slave owners used the threat of sale or the sale of a perceived troublemaker to maintain discipline in the slave quarter.
slaves often pleaded with masters not to be sold.
sometimes the pleas were successful but often not.
jeff randolph the executor of thomas jeffersons estate was considered especially humane because he refused to sell the former presidents slaves to a buyer from georgia but sold them instead at less profit to other virginians.
the sale of a part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 map 9 2 the expanding cotton belt.
the areas of greatest cotton production in the united states grew dramatically between 1801 and 1860 spouse broke up one slave marriage in five and one third of all slave children were sold away from their parents.
men were sold more often than women planters wanted male muscle and slave owners in older regions were happy to keep women so that they could bear more children who could in turn also be sold.
slaves between ages 14 and 35 were sold much more often than the very young or the aging.
a literate slave arena screven learned that he was to be sold from georgia to new orleans and wrote to his wife with much regret that he hoped if we shall not meet in this world i hope to meet in heaven laura clark a slave remembered her mother asking another slave who had been sold in the same group as she to take care of my baby child and if i never sees her no more raise her for god such heartbreak led many slaves to despair to run away or to rebel.
once sold either to a plantation owner who had come east for additional slaves or more often to a slave trader whose job was brokering other humans slaves were organized in groups called slave coffles to walk west.
coffles of 20 to 50 slaves sometimes more trudging west became a normal sight of southern life.
walking 15 to 20 miles a day it could take the slaves 2 months to go from virginia to the mississippi valley often longer when rain flooded streams and turned roads to mud.
in later years more slaves were transported by ship to new orleans which became the largest slave trading center in the united states by the 1820s.
when they could slaves rebelled.
slave trading was a dangerous business and stories of slaves murdering slave traders were well known.
in 1841 slaves being shipped from norfolk virginia to new orleans on the creole forced the captain to deliver them to the bahamas a british colony where they found freedom because britain had abolished slavery in 1833.
more often slaves simply ran away when they could though many went home to family where they were recaptured and sold again.
once slaves arrived at their destination they often faced difficult and unfamiliar work.
work in cotton fields was backbreaking for men women and children.
while tobacco and rice required more skill cotton required long hours and hard work.
chapter 9 new industries new politics 245 l 9 1 cotton was planted in the early spring and required constant attention and weeding throughout the growing season.
on most plantations there was a strict gender divide men plowed and women and children hoed.
harvest began as early as august and lasted through september and october.
slaves worked the longest hours from sunrise to sunset and if there was a moon much longer to get the whole crop in before storms could hurt it.
prickly cotton pods cut their hands and slaves who did not produce their quota were beaten at days end.
finally with the full crop in there was a brief respite.
but the winter was the time for the women to work the cotton gin and pack the cotton for market while men cleared more land and repaired buildings.
contrary to many images of the old south most cotton was grown on relatively small farms.
many of those who first settled and began growing cotton on the new rich lands owned relatively small plots of land and one or a few slaves.
these white owners worked in the fields with the slaves or if the farm was larger served as their overseers.
less than one percent of the population owned the great plantations for which the south became known.
in the largest plantations owned by the most wealthy planters slaves worked in large gangs with certain slaves appointed as drivers to get the work done and poor whites employed as overseers to manage the whole labor force.
it was on the large plantations with constant pressure on the overseers to ensure profits that slaves faced some of the worst conditions.
slaves established new communities within the slave quarters.
young slaves met new partners children were born and the rhythms of community life were reestablished but always under threat of dissolution.
new leaders emerged within the slave community often preachers and deacons selected by other slaves.
although legally banned from learning to read or write slaves sometime secretly did both and taught others to do so.
as memories of africa or the african american communities on the east coast faded in later generations a new culture was created in the slave communities drawing on older traditions and adapting to new contexts.
often with the permission of their owners slaves grew their own food made cloth for better clothing than their owners gave them and even earned cash by selling surplus food and clothing to the free people in surrounding communities or to their own masters.
while owners saw slaves exclusively as a source of muscle and work many slaves and ex slaves made it clear through their stories that for them family community faith and the as this picture illustrates slaves spent long hours in the fields surrounded by the cotton they were expected to cultivate and pick with no reward for their backbreaking labor.
i6 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 american voices charles ball fifty years in chains or the life of an american slave 1810 1860 charles ball was born a slave on a tobacco plantation in maryland.
he remembered his grandfather telling of being captured into slavery in africa.
after establishing his own family in maryland ball was sold to a slave trader who in turn sold him to a cotton and rice plantation in georgia.
he never saw his home or family again.
haifa century later he escaped hid on a ship bound for philadelphia and lived out his days in freedom.
his autobiography fifty years in chains was a popular publication among abolitionists those who supported the end of slavery.
my master kept a store at a small village on the bank of the patuxent river whilst i was eating in the kitchen i observed him talking earnestly but low to a stranger near the kitchen door.
i soon after went out and hitched my oxen to the cart and was about to drive off when several men came round about me and amongst them the stranger whom i had seen speaking with my master.
this man came up to me and seizing me by the collar shook me violently saying i was his property and must go with him to georgia.
at the sound of these words the thoughts of my wife and children rushed across my mind and my heart beat away within me.
i saw and knew that my case was hopeless and that resistance was vain as there were near twenty persons present all of whom were ready to assist the man by whom i was kidnapped.
i felt incapable of weeping or speaking and in my despair i laughed loudly.
my purchaser ordered me to cross my hands behind which were quickly bound with a strong cord and he then told me that we must set out that very day for the south.
i asked if i could not be allowed to go see my wife and children or if this could not be permitted if they might have leave to come to see me but was told that i would be able to get another wife in georgia.
my new master whose name i did not hear took me that same day across the patuxent where i joined fifty one other slaves a strong iron collar was closely fitted by means of a padlock round each of our necks.
a chain of iron about a hundred feet in length was passed through the hasp of each padlock except at the two ends where the hasps of the padlock passed through a link of the chain our master ordered a pot of mush to be made for our supper after dispatching which all lay down on the naked floor to sleep in our handcuffs and chains.
the women my fellow slaves lay on one side of the room and the men who were chained with me occupied the other.
i slept but little this night which i passed in thinking of my wife and little children whom i could not hope ever to see again.
i also thought of my grandfather and of the long nights i had passed with him listening to his narratives of the scenes through which he had passed in africa.
source charles ball fifty years in chains or the life of an american slave new york h dayton 1860 pp.
28 31 240 241 280.
thinking critically i.
documentary analysis what aspects of his sale were most traumatizing for ball.
historical interpretation what light does ball s story shed on major trends in slavery and slave ownership in the first half of the 1800s.
9 1 it in hope for freedom were the highest priority.
studies of the advertisements for runaway slaves also made it clear that slaves never stopped running away no matter how far they might have to run.
similarly small and large scale slave revolts never stopped.
cotton in the north factories and the people who worked in them the technology that made cotton the core of the industrial revolution in the united states developed in england and north america during the 1700s.
just before the war of 1812 american francis cabot lowell who had spent 2 years working in and observing the british mills in manchester brought the technology he learned there to the united states.
when he left britain customs agents searched his baggage to be sure he was not bringing with him drawings or plans from the british mills which were a closely guarded national secret.
but lowell had simply been memorizing the plans.
like slater an englishman who had transferred british secrets about mechanic spinning to rhode island mills in 1789 lowell was ready to build a british style mill in massachusetts.
lowell also brought with him a second equally important idea the multishareholder corporation that could raise more money than any one individual could provide and could offer less risk to investors.
chapter 9 new industries new politics 247 2 in 1813 lowell incorporated a new business with patrick t jackson and nathan appleton the boston manufacturing company.
lowell and his mechanic paul moody recreated a british style power loom in massachusetts.
with these steps they established what would be the heart of american manufacturing for the next century the multiowner corporation that produced cotton fabric in a large factory.
the partners built their first factory or mill at waltham massachusetts on the charles river.
after lowells death in 1817 they then created a new city in 1823 lowell massachusetts that housed an even larger complex using the 30 foot drop of the merrimack river to power mills that could turn cotton into cloth for a domestic and international market at an astounding rate.
similar large operations sprang up on new hampshire rivers in manchester dover and nashua and on other massachusetts rivers in chicopee holyoke and lawrence.
where samuel slaters mills in rhode island had been rather small family affairs the factories and towns that lowell and his colleagues built transformed the industry and the lives of the people involved in it.
with the creation of lowell as a new industrial city the american industrial revolution was born.
the boston associates needed workers for their giant looms and mills.
they turned first to young women from the farms where most new englanders still lived.
more men than women had been heading west for decades and new england had a surplus of young women.
farm life was hard young women were kept in subservient positions and the independence and the potential to earn their own money appealed to many young women.
to avoid the squalid conditions of the english factories lowell and his colleagues built clean company boarding houses for their female employees complete with chaperones and opportunities for religious and educational activities.
for the most part they hired only single young women whose living conditions and virtue they could control see map 9 3.
the young women who worked in lowells mills in the early 1800s were known as factory girls lowell was a show town and its owners published the lowell offering to tell the world about the success of the venture and the good life the women who worked there enjoyed.
the lowell offering attracted new investors to the business and new young recruits to work in the mills.
but life at lowell and the other mill towns was less rosy than the lowell offering reported.
conditions may have been better than in the dark satanic mills of britain but the work was hard the hours long and the conditions harsh.
this idealized print of women working at their machines gives little hint of the noise danger and drudgery of 14 hour work days where a moment s lack of attention could lead to a disaster.
48 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 other buildings mostly residences 9 1 92 93 map 9 3 lowell massachusetts in 1832.
the water powered mills of the new company town of lowell massachusetts had to be very close to the rivers that surrounded the town but the company also built boarding houses for the workers in close proximity to the mills making the trip to work and the supervision of the workers quite easy.
a new hampshire newspaper the dover gazette friendly to the factory girls reported on an 1834 strike by the young women one of the first strikes in america in consequence of the notice that their wages would be reduced to enable their employers to meet the unusual pressure of the times the girls to the number of between 600 and 700 assembled in the court house on saturday afternoon to devise ways and means to enable themselves to meet the pressure of the times anticipated from this threatened reduction.
the first strikes did not last long and did not win concessions.
the company had too much power and the women too little.
still news of the unrest tarnished the image of lowell as a benevolent community run in the interests of its workers.
a second strike 2 years later described by one of the participants in the following american voices feature also failed.
by the 1840s conditions had become much tougher in lowell.
the mill owners benevolence had worn off.
the option of quitting and returning home which had provided a way to escape the mill life during the 1830s was disappearing because of an agricultural depression in new england.
young women stayed in lowell not necessarily because they wanted to but because they had few other choices.
period publications like the voice of industry published their letters and articles which described the challenges they faced and what hopes they had.
one woman known chapter 9 new industries new politics 249 9 1 92 93 only as ada shared these challenges and hopes in biblical terms that her peers would appreciate do unto others as ye would that they should do to you is a great precept given to us by our great teacher what but the neglect of this great principle has brought into the world all this confusion this disorder this isolated state of interest between man and man all this monopoly and competition in business.
as the industrial revolution expanded ada would not be the last one to ask that question.
new york and the international cotton trade as significant as the mills of new england were in cotton production most american cotton was shipped in its raw state to manchester and leeds in england.
the permanent peace that had been established between the united states and great britain after the end of the war of 1812 made this trade easy.
new york city became the center of the shipment of cotton across the atlantic and in the process became the nations largest city and commercial center a position it has retained ever since.
new york city enjoyed several advantages that allowed it to play such a dominant role in the nations cotton economy even though no cotton was grown within hundreds of miles of the city and few cotton mills were nearby.
first new york had an extraordinary deep water harbor.
ships could dock directly in manhattan and american voices h robinson worked in the cotton mills at lowell from b 1835 to 1848.
she was 10 when she began and left at age 23 to be married.
she published her story half a century later.
the book loom and spindle or life among the early mill girls remains a classic story of what life was like for the first generation of young women most fresh from the farms to take these jobs.
the working hours of all the girls extended from five o clock in the morning until seven in the evening with one half hour for breakfast and for dinner one of the first strikes of cotton factory operatives that ever took place in this country was that in lowell in october 1836.
when it was announced that the wages were to be cut down great indignation was felt and it was decided to strike en mass.
this was done.
the mills were shut down and the girls went in procession and listened to incendiary speeches from early labor reformers.
one of the girls stood on a pump and gave vent to the feelings of her companions in a neat speech declaring that it was their duty to resist all attempts at cutting down the wages.
this was the first time a woman had spoken in public in lowell and the event caused surprise and consternation among her audience my own recollection of this first strike or turn out as it was called is very vivid.
i worked in a lower room where i had heard the proposed strike fully if not vehemently discussed i had been an ardent listener to what was said against this attempt at oppression on the part of the corporation and naturally i took sides with the strikers.
when the day came on which the girls were to turn out those in the upper rooms started first and so many of them left that our mill was at once shut down.
then when the girls in my room stood irresolute uncertain what to do asking each other would you.
or shall we turn out.
and not one of them having the courage to lead off i who began to think they would not go out after all their talk became impatient and started on ahead saying with childish bravado i don t care what you do i am going to turn out whether anyone else does or not and i marched out and was followed by the others.
as i looked back at the long line that followed me i was more proud than i have ever been since at any success i may have achieved and more proud than i shall ever be again until my own beloved state gives to its women citizens the right of suffrage.
source harriet h robinson loom and spindle or life among the early mill girls boston t y.
crowell 1898.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how did robinson explain the factors that led to her decision to join the strike at her mill.
contextualization how did work in a textile factory change robinson s outlook.
what connections can you make between her strike experience and her commitment to the suffrage movement.
50 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 brooklyn without needing to anchor offshore and unload goods to smaller boats.
the port was also easily accessible by coastal vessels from southern ports.
as the production of cotton expanded after 1815 most of the souths cotton was shipped north to new york and then reshipped either across the atlantic to english ports or up long island sound to boston for the new england mills.
second new york already had the infrastructure necessary to accommodate this level of shipping including miles of docks and a community of merchants.
third new york an established port already had experienced workers including dockworkers and longshoremen who handled cargo to handle the hundreds of ships that did business there.
the already large numbers of workers grew rapidly as new york not counting brooklyn which was a separate city until 1898 grew six times its size between the american revolution and 1820.
in 1820 it mushroomed again from 125 000 residents and to over 500 000 in 1850.
new york businesses sent agents called factors to charleston south carolina savannah georgia mobile alabama and new orleans to buy cotton for shipment to new york.
in turn the cotton was transferred from coastal ships to larger transatlantic ships that sailed to ports in england racing each other to make the trip in the shortest amount of time.
on the return trip from england these ships brought cash from the sale of cotton and all sorts of british and european goods iron and steel tools from sheffield england wine from france and manufactured goods that the united states needed and that could often be bought in new york for less than it cost to make them elsewhere in america.
while american manufacturers disliked this reality merchants from across the country flocked to new york to stock up on cheap goods enhancing the citys commerce.
in 1818 shipping across the atlantic was improved when a quaker businessman jeremiah thompson founded the black ball line and established a fixed schedule of weekly departures of fast ships from new york to liverpool england.
the black ball line announced that it had undertaken to establish a line of vessels between new york and liverpool to sail from each place on a certain day in every month through the year and printed the schedule.
until that time commercial vessels waited to fill their holds with cargo however long that took before sailing.
now with the fixed schedule passengers and goods could be sure of leaving on time and factories in england could be sure of a steady flow of cotton to keep their mills operating.
the new ships were called packet ships because the line had a contract with the federal government to carry packets of u s mail.
these packet ships became a regular feature of world commerce and new yorks waterfront.
any packet ship captain who made the trip to liverpool in under 22 days or the return trip to new york which took longer because of less favorable winds in under 35 days would be rewarded with a new coat and a dress for his wife courtesy of thompson.
competition with the black ball line soon developed and the passenger cabins became elegant as different lines competed for business.
shipwrights along new yorks east river changed the construction of new ships so they could make the voyage even more quickly than the original schedule.
but most important the black ball lines ships and its many competitors that emerged in the 1820s and 1830s ensured a steady supply of cotton for english mills and steady profits to u s cotton growers.
new york was also the place in the united states to raise money.
from the time alexander hamilton established the first bank of the united states in new york city in 1791 some new yorkers grew rich financing commercial activities that were far away from the city itself.
many farmers had long needed to borrow money for seed and fertilizer to plant a crop.
after industrialists like francis cabot lowell began creating giant new corporations to build the factories for producing the cotton cloth that launched the industrial revolution they too needed ways to borrow much larger amounts of money as well as longer periods of time to make profits and pay off the loans.
without such financing the industrial revolution would never have happened.
financial brokers had agreed to work together in new york in 1792 and the new 9 1 chapter 9 new industries new politics 251 york stock exchange was founded in 1817 to support this large scale commerce by allowing investors to pool funds and create new industries as well as commercial enterprises that were larger than any one person even a rich one could fund alone.
new york was also home to many banks investment houses and insurance companies that helped finance the cotton industry.
nautilus insurance company wrote over 300 life insurance policies on slaves which protected the investments of plantation owners even if those policies did nothing for the slaves themselves.
the investment house that became brown brothers harriman loaned millions of dollars to southern growers to finance the planting and shipping of cotton as well as the buying of slaves.
at one point the company owned three plantations and 346 slaves in louisiana when owners defaulted on their loans.
in general however new york financiers made their profits in trade and commerce and kept their distance from the institution of slavery and the risks of cotton growing.
jeremiah thompson of the black ball line made his fortune transporting slave grown cotton though as a quaker he opposed slavery itself.
the extraordinary growth of cotton production in the south the shipment of cotton within and beyond the united states and the seemingly insatiable european demand for cotton cloth resulted in a rapid growth of the industry.
in 1800 great britain imported 56 million pounds of raw cotton 16 percent from the united states and most of the rest from india.
after an economic downturn that disrupted the entire industry and more production once again began to pick up and by 1830 britain imported 264 million pounds of cotton 77 percent from the united states and by 1840 592 million pounds 81 percent from the united states.
once again the demand seemed endless but many were now a bit wiser.
with the development of the trans atlantic cotton trade and the opening of the erie canal new york city grew rapidly in its commercial success.
however especially in hard times the city was also plagued with areas of squalid poverty.
many new yorkers lived in the most difficult conditions especially in the notorious crime filled five points neighborhood of lower manhattan.
252 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 the panic of 1819 the boom in the industry was not as it turned out a continual progression.
as more americans invested in land or slaves to grow cotton or in the commercial activities that flowed from cotton the optimism led them to become financially overextend.
suddenly in 1819 the growth came to a sudden if temporary halt.
after 4 years of peace europe was growing more food and a good harvest in 1818 meant less need for imported american grain.
in addition more raw cotton was being delivered to liverpool than the mills could process and new mills took time to build.
the value of cotton fell from 32 5 cents a pound in october 1818 to 24 cents a pound in december.
by early 1819 it was only 14 cents a pound.
at that price it was not profitable to grow cotton to invest in land to plant more cotton or to ship cotton either to new york or to europe.
unfortunately the bank of the united states decided to protect itself by limiting credit and calling in loans.
state banks followed suit and investors and farmers could not pay their debts.
small businesses failed farms were foreclosed and people across the country lost their jobs.
the great migration west came to a halt at least for the time being and the business cycle slowed dangerously.
at the time no one knew when or indeed if prosperity would return.
a national economy was a new thing in the united states and it was not well understood.
in earlier eras what happened to new england shipping had little impact further south and a crisis in southern tobacco never had much impact further north.
by 1819 however the nations economy was interconnected as never before and as a result a widespread depression affected all americans.
the boom and bust cycle of this young industrial economy was also new and people were shocked.
eventually the economy and the country recovered but it took years and much hardship.
in the middle of that first national depression however americans worried about the future.
the price of cotton and the value of the cotton industry eventually rebounded and grew beyond anything imagined before the panic but those successes would be at least partly tempered by what had happened.
9j quick review why did cotton come to be known as king cotton in the early 1800s.
commerce technology and transportation analyze the technological and financial changes that led to the emergence of a new market economy in the united states.
9 2 i 5 1 9 2 i while cotton was the prime factor in the growth of the u s economy after 1815 it was not the only one.
north american wheat and corn had been feeding britain and continental europe long before north american cotton began to clothe them.
trees from north american forests provided wood for ships and buildings on both sides of the atlantic.
north american furs remained in demand as they had been before the american revolution.
and as more americans moved further into the interior improvements in internal transportation became essential for the countrys commercial development.
the erie canal the hudson river offered easy north south connections between new yorkers in manhattan and brooklyn and farmers along the river valley up to albany and beyond but the heartland of new york state far to the west of the hudson was isolated.
the mohawk river had never been navigable and rural roads were in terrible shape.
the treaties with the iroquois after the american revolution opened up tens of thousands of acres many of them rich lands that white farmers could settle but these farmers faced terrible isolation and difficulty in selling their crops.
beginning in the 1790s many new yorkers wanted a way to ease transport across the state but no chapter 9 new industries new politics 253 9 1 9 2 93 erie canal completed in 1825 the canal linked the hudson river with the great lakes and gave farmers all along its route new ways to be part of a global economic system of trade.
easy approach seemed possible.
indeed americans throughout the rest of the growing country had similar needs and a similar lack of know how.
after congress refused to fund a canal linking rural upstate new york with the hudson valley former new york city mayor dewitt clinton ran for governor in 1816 with a promise to build a canal using state funds.
the canal that clinton proposed avoided the hard to navigate mohawk river and lake ontario using the lake would have lowered construction costs but risked diverting trade to canada.
instead he proposed a canal that would follow an old mohawk indian trading route the governor knew his new york history and run from the hudson valley directly to buffalo on lake erie.
such a canal would give farmers along its route a link to markets and would connect all of new york state to the growing ohio region and eventually to the mississippi river.
it would make new york city the commercial capital of the nation.
the plan called for an unimaginable engineering feat.
thomas jefferson called it madness the canal needed a series of locks to raise and lower water to accommodate changes in elevation of 565 feet.
the united states had few engineers and no one really knew how to build such locks.
the longest canal in the country at that time was only 26 miles less than one tenth of the projected plan.
none of those problems discouraged clinton or the canals backers.
when the anti clinton faction led by martin van buren realized how much enthusiasm there was for the canal they ended their opposition and the project quickly moved through the state legislature.
at dawn on july 4 1817 a gala ground breaking celebration was held at rome new york when the symbolic first shovel of dirt was dug to build the erie canal a manmade waterway that would extend 363 miles between albany and buffalo and contain a total of 83 locks.
clinton was a wily politician.
he made sure that many different the erie canai crossed rural new york state connecting villages all along the way.
travelers needed to keep their heads down when traveling under bridges and wait as locks raised and lowered boats but the canal boats provided transport at a speed unimagined before it was built.
254 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 contractors got a piece of the action digging the canal.
he built political support by ensuring that up to three quarters of the 9 000 men who did the actual digging were dutch or english farmers and laborers from new york state and future clinton voters.
as soon as the section near rome was completed clinton used the revenue it generated to cover the interest on the 7 million in bonds that had been floated to pay for the canal reducing the cost to taxpayers.
clinton found contractors willing to experiment with new approaches to construction.
in one section near the town of lockport locks needed to be constructed to raise and lower the boats over changing elevations.
contractors used gunpowder to blast out the rock and horses hauled away the debris.
by 1825 the canal four feet deep and 40 feet wide was completed.
governor clinton traveled from buffalo across the state on the canal and then down the hudson to mark the official opening by pouring water from lake erie into new york harbor.
many admired the engineering of the canal and many more enjoyed its economic impact.
goods and exports that had cost 100 a ton to ship from lake erie to new york city before the canal now shipped for 9 or even 3 a ton.
farmers in distant upstate new york and in ohio could get their wheat to international markets through new york harbor.
formerly isolated farm families could now send letters and even visit friends and relatives.
they could also import goods that had earlier been unimaginable luxuries because they had been too heavy or perishable to transport.
a newspaper in batavia new york celebrated the arrival of oysters.
beautiful oysters from long island to a town where fresh seafood had never been available.
farmers and small town residents now could not only eat sea food but also buy a clock for their wall a mattress for their bed or curtains for their home at a fraction of the price these goods had cost before the canal opened.
by the 1830s the erie canal carried more than twice the freight of the mississippi river and rochester syracuse and buffalo boomed.
where cotton had made new york city the nations commercial center foodstuffs and other products from upstate new york and even western pennsylvania and ohio now cemented the citys role as the place where the nations trade commerce and finance met.
other shorter canals were built in many other parts of the country but none had the commercial impact of the erie canal.
steamboats roads travel and news erie canal boats were pulled by horses walking along the bank.
the packet ships that crossed the atlantic were powered by sail as ships had been for thousands of years.
but the invention of the steamboat revolutionized water transportation.
in 1807 robert fulton built the first commercially successful steamboat the clermont which significantly cut the travel time from new york to albany.
within 2 decades new york harbor and adjacent areas had become a hive of steamboat activity for both commerce and passengers and many steamboat lines competed for the trade none more successfully than the line cornelius vanderbilt owned.
steamboats also transformed trade on the mississippi river.
in the early 1800s farmers floated down the river on large riverboats with their goods and then sold the boats for lumber when they reached their destination and walked or rode horses home.
steamboats however could travel up the river against the current.
in 1817 a steamer went from new orleans to louisville kentucky in 25 days an unheard of speed.
in less than a decade the travel time had been cut to 8 days as faster boats competed for the mississippi river business and became a colorful part of america in the 1800s see map 9 4.
in certain areas water transport was the fastest and easiest way to travel through and around the united states but roads were also important.
in 1802 congress authorized the use of funds from the sale of government lands in ohio to build a gravel road to the interior of the country.
beginning in 1811 at cumberland maryland the national road was built across the appalachian mountains.
when it reached its original terminus at wheeling virginia after the civil war west virginia in 1818 it 9 1 9 2 93 chapter 9 new industries new politics 255 atlantic ocean charleston hamburg railroad st augustine canals 1830 navigable waterways 1830 roads 1830 railroads 1850 map 9 4 canals and road in the united states.
although the erie cana was without question the most important canal in the nation a huge network of canals dirt and gravel roads and later railroads connecting to rivers and ocean ports connected inland areas to world markets.
westernjtailroad bostonw worcester railroad portland well boston ster providence boston new haven road delaware hudson canal f new york ter lancaster turnpike baltimore baltimore turnpike ashi igton d c chesapeake ohio canal not only had crossed the mountains but also had linked the potomac river with the ohio river which flowed into the mississippi and from there to the gulf of mexico.
later slowly the national road was extended across ohio indiana and illinois connecting to the mississippi river itself.
while many notably jeffersons secretary of the treasury albert gallatin argued for more federally financed construction presidents jefferson madison and monroe all three advocates of a small federal government doubted whether the national government could finance such undertakings without an amendment to the constitution.
those three were also virginians and virginia with a long coastline benefited more from coastal shipping than from canals or roads.
on occasion they put their doubts aside and signed bills providing part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 federal funding for specific projects but none of those who lived in the white house between 1801 and 1825 were enthusiastic about federal support for a transportation infrastructure for the nation.
in addition states built their own roads like the lancaster turnpike across pennsylvania but travel by road was slow and expensive throughout the 1820s and 1830s.
a stagecoach could travel 6 8 miles an hour on a good road 11 on the best road between new york and philadelphia.
wagons could haul goods as far as the next river or canal.
tollbooths collected fees to pay for the roads but on a poor road in the wilderness it was easy to detour around the tollbooth.
until railroads arrived in the 1840s proximity to a canal river or the atlantic and gulf coasts was essential for the productive commerce in goods and services.
people who lived near land or water routes for transport were able to get their goods to market receive newspapers and stay connected to an increasingly national economy and culture.
those who lived farther away from such transportation lived isolated lives all the more isolated as others became more connected.
with increased speed in travel news also moved more quickly see table 9 1.
packet ships from liverpool brought european news and as the ships cut trans atlan tic travel time from 50 days in 1816 to 42 days in the 1820s that news traveled faster.
within the united states by 1817 a man on a horse could bring news from new york to philadelphia or boston in 2 days.
a steamboat traveling through long island sound could also bring the news to coastal cities in connecticut and to boston in about the same amount of time.
for southern coastal cities the travel time was slower and for inland towns much slower.
newspapers sprang up across the country and the federal government developed an extensive post office system since the constitution clearly sanctioned the post office and post roads that helped americans connect for personal and business matters.
the packet ships stagecoaches and canal boats also depended on contracts with the federal post office to make their routes profitable.
commercial leaders and traders on the new york stock exchange were anxious to have the latest news especially about crops but also about european and american demand for goods.
they supported the post office and newspapers as essential for the growing unified market economy.
while steamships like robert fulton s clermont made for easy and fast travel up the hudson river and along other riversaround the nation they were limited to water transport while stage coaches which were much slower were essential for travel over the country s poorly constructed roads until replaced on many routes by ra lroads chapter 9 new industries new politics 257 i i i tj 9 2 table 9 1 changes in travel times within the united states as a result of the revolution in transportation route 1800 1830 i860 new york to philadelphia 2 days 1 day less than 1 day new york to south carolina more than 1 week 5 days 2 days new york to illinois 6 weeks 3 weeks 2 days new york to new orleans 4 weeks 2 weeks 6 days new york to florida 2 to 3 weeks 1 to 2 weeks 3 days new york to ohio 2 to 3 weeks 1 week 2 days banks corporations and finance in the early years of the republic many americans harbored deep distrust of large business enterprises.
the family farm was the business model with which most people were familiar and other businesses were expected to be small individual or family ventures.
people might join together to finance a voyage or a project but these efforts were short term partnerships.
at the time of the american revolution there were only seven american corporations each chartered by colonial legislatures.
state legislatures chartered 40 more corporations in the 1780s and some 300 in the 1790s but gaining a corporate charter remained difficult.
in general such charters were given only to colleges or other nonprofit agencies to serve the public good.
commerce was considered as being for individual gain and therefore not something worthy of a state charter.
some of the first corporations were banks.
congress had chartered the nations first bank the bank of north america at hamiltons urging in 1781.
by 1815 the united states had 200 state chartered banks.
banks offered two essential services.
first they printed paper currency bank notes that were backed by the banks gold and silver deposits known as specie making commercial transactions much easier than hauling actual gold and silver around.
second banks also made loans and collected interest making funds available to people who wanted to develop a new enterprise and making the banks themselves profitable investments.
soon banks also began to issue bank notes not only on the species they held but also on the loans in their portfolio.
this development made banking more risky but expanded the amount of money in circulation and the credit available essential elements in the growth of a commercial republic.
as commerce developed however larger commercial and industrial ventures like the mills at lowell were too large and risky to be financed solely by individuals even if those individuals could secure large bank loans.
a new idea that of a corporation as a free standing commercial venture with multiple stockholders took hold slowly.
two key elements in a corporation limited liability for individual stockholders and the corporations freedom from having its charter withdrawn or altered by the government were new in the united states.
individually owned businesses came and went but corporations with their many stockholders and secure charters eventually became a permanent and important feature of american economic life after 1815.
the reality of the new market economy in 1819 washington irving already a well known author published rip van winkle.
the story has entertained generations of readers but it captured the changes in the united states in the first decades of independence.
in the story rip a lazy fellow living in new yorks catskill mountains takes a nap in the woods on a fine fall day.
he awakes 20 years later and finds everything has changed in his home village 258 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 the picture on the sign over the inn was of someone named general washington instead of king george iii but even more surprising the whole town was different the very village was altered it was larger and more populous.
there were rows of houses which he had never seen before and those which had been his familiar haunts had disappeared the very character of the people seemed changed.
there was a busy bustling disputatious tone about it instead of the accustomed phlegm and drowsy tranquility.
rip had been a passive subject of king george iii.
when he awoke he was a citizen in an independent country that took politics voting and political parties very seriously.
when he was asked whether he was federal or democrat rip was equally at a loss.
but irving was saying something more about the decades after the revolution that the very character of the people seemed changed where once rural america had moved to a relaxed slow pace the whole country was now a more unified commercial enterprise in which a busy bustling disputatious tone was the norm because people needed to work and work fast.
there were many real life rip van winkles who while not necessarily having the benefit of a 20 year nap still came to live in an adult world utterly different from that of their youth.
ichabod washburn was born in the small town of kingston massachusetts in 1798.
his widowed mother supported the family with a loom in her home.
when his mother could not feed her whole family washburn was put out to work as a harness maker and told that a boy should not ask too many questions about the world around him.
later he found work in one of the factories that were springing up around new england and then founded his own business.
washburn moen wire manufactory became the largest wire maker in the country sending its products all over the world and making washburn a rich man.
not all americans became as rich as washburn but many people in many parts of the land moved from isolated family businesses to work in large nationally and internationally connected industries.
ihey went from a slow paced world of barter to a cash economy based on trade and they moved from rural isolation to participate in the exchange of information within a much larger world.
9 2 i i growing economy and the revolution in transportation only increased dennand for the nations raw materials such as lumber which new machinery made easy to cut into standard sized boards for shipment sn l use in building houses and ships.
chapter 9 new industries new politics 259 before the american revolution most farmers lived in a barter economy in which most goods and services were simply traded.
in that economy life moved at a slow and predictable pace and little money was transacted.
by the 1820s the barter economy had disappeared in all but the most remote areas.
farmers sold their goods on the world market and used the cash they received to purchase not only necessities but also often luxuries that their pre revolutionary forbearers never imagined.
to many americans not just to national leaders distances seemed shorter money more important and politics more omnipresent after 1815 than one would have thought possible even a few years before.
visitors to remote farm settlements in illinois in the 1820s found that cloth coats and calico dresses purchased from a trader or a store were replacing homespun and buckskin.
once one family made the shift everyone in the village felt pressure to earn enough money to keep up.
as people worked harder and longer public clocks with an added hand that noted minutes not just the passage of the hours became more prominent.
chauncey jeromes connecticut clock company made a fortune manufacturing and shipping clocks to every part of the nation.
as one 1840 traveler reported in every dell of arkansas and in cabins where there was not a chair to sit on there was sure to be a connecticut clock rip van winkle was not the only one waking up in a different time and in a money conscious country.
9 2 quick review how did new trading routes progressively improve the u s economy and in doing so change the united states.
93 era of good feelings the period from 1817 to 1823 in which the decline of the federalists enabled the democratic republicans to govern in a spirit of seemingly nonpartisan harmony.
from the era of good feelings to the politics of division explain the political developments in the united states during the 1820s including the shift of power toward the south and west that resulted from the changing economic situation.
james monroes two terms as president from 1817 to 1825 were known as the era of good feelings because of the lack of rancor in his virtually unanimous election and reelection during a time when the opposing federalist party had almost disappeared.
the period was quite a change from the days when john adams and thomas jefferson contested the presidency and federalists and democratic republicans fought in the press and on the floor of congress.
but even during the era of good feelings all was not calm on the political front.
the supreme court was rapidly expanding its reach and the reach of the federal government into new aspects of the country.
in addition political tensions over the cotton economy territorial expansion and slavery exploded with surprising force in the 1820s.
the good feelings were not destined to last.
the supreme court defines its place john marshall served as chief justice of the u s supreme court from 1801 to 1835.
throughout his long tenure on the court marshall was usually able to convince a majority of the justices to go along with his views no matter what their prior political beliefs were.
he used his position to define the role of the court as arbiter of the constitution and he expanded the role and power of the federal government in many aspects of national life.
early in his tenure marshalls 1803 marbury v madison decision claimed a role for the supreme court in reviewing the constitutionality of acts of congress.
marshall never again invoked that right but in a series of subsequent decisions he created the same right for the court in relationship to state legislatures and state courts.
two 1819 decisions from the marshall court were especially important in expanding the role of the supreme court and the federal government.
160 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 in an appeal to the supreme court in the case of dartmouth college v woodward 1819 the old federalist marshall reviewed a decision by lower courts that began when the democratic republican dominated new hampshire legislature revised the original charter of dartmouth college converting the school from a private to a state college.
the supreme court ruled that state charters including charters from colonial legislatures like dartmouths were contracts and that contracts once agreed to were inviolable thus the legislatures actions were unconstitutional.
the case was important not only because it asserted the right of the supreme court to review the actions of state legislatures not just congress but also because it asserted the inviolability of contracts.
as a result it became an important bedrock of the american economic system.
after the dartmouth college decision the nations growing businesses and industries were able to be certain that their contracts once agreed to could not be overturned by legislative action.
the other important 1819 decision was mcculloch v maryland.
congress had chartered the second bank of the united states at the end of the war of 1812 to stabilize the nations finances.
but the bank was not popular with many people especially farmers and others who saw it as an instrument of the commercial elite.
in response to the general opposition to the bank and to charges of irregularities in the banks maryland branch the state of maryland imposed a tax on the bank as a way to drive it out of business or at least out of maryland.
in response the bank brought suit in the federal courts and the case worked its way up to the supreme court.
in the decision written by marshall the court took alexander hamiltons view that the necessary and proper clause of the constitution meant that congress had the right to charter a bank if it thought it was in the national interest despite the tenth amendments mandate that states should retain any power that was not specifically delegated to the national government in the constitution.
marshall went further saying that the power to tax involves the power to destroy while the power to create that congress had invoked in the case of the bank implies a power to preserve the issue marshall referred to was not obscure.
with mcculloch v maryland the supreme court declared that states could not interfere with the workings of the federal government.
the marshall court continued to expand federal authority in subsequent cases.
in gibbons v ogden 1824 the court ruled that the state of new york did not have a right to give ogden a partner of robert fulton a monopoly to ferry service in new york harbor since the harbor connected new york and new jersey and thus involved interstate commerce which only congress could control.
later in worcester v georgia 1832 the court ruled that the state of georgia could not regulate private dealings by u s citizens within the territory controlled by the cherokee tribe since tribes had their own sovereign rights subject only to the authority of the federal government.
in these and other decisions the court affirmed what came to be known as a loose construction of the constitution which as marshall explained enabled the constitution to be adapted to the various crises of human affairs to preserve its relevance through time.
not everyone agreed with marshall s perspective and when he died in 1835 a democratic republican paper did not mourn the political doctrines of a justice who sought to strengthen government at the expense of the people nevertheless many felt that both the constitution and the rights of people were stronger for his efforts.
the politics of cotton and the missouri compromise of 1820 although missouri was too far north to be a cotton growing state its population also grew as a result of americas westward movement and by 1819 missouri applied to congress to be admitted as a new state.
a bill to authorize a state constitutional convention was introduced in congress with little fanfare early in 1819.
however congressman james tallmadge jr of new york introduced an amendment to the chapter 9 new industries new politics 261 missouri statehood bill to prohibit the introduction of new slaves into the state and gradually free those who were already there.
tallmadges amendment created a huge crisis in which southern representatives and senators attacked it and its author.
in language that prefigured the heated debates of the next four decades georgia representative thomas w cobb told tallmadge you have kindled a fire which all the waters of the ocean cannot put out which seas of blood can only extinguish tallmadge responded in kind if a dissolution of the union must take place let it be so.
if civil war which gentlemen so much threaten must come i can only say let it come threats of disunion were as old as the constitutional convention of 1787 but this language was harsher than congress had heard in a long time.
the reasons were clear.
when the constitution was adopted many from both the south and the north believed that slavery was dying even its defenders tended to describe the institution as a sad though necessary evil.
when george washington and others of his generation freed their slaves the economic impact was limited since slaves were not of great value.
but that period was before cotton transformed the economics of slavery.
a slave in the prime of life who might be sold for 400 or 500 in 1814 could be sold for 800 1 100 in 1819 and though the price of slaves as of land decreased with the panic of 1819 values in both cases recovered and then kept rising.
slaves had become valuable whether as workers or as products to be sold.
if virginia and carolina planters could not use all the slaves they owned instead of freeing them they could now sell them to cotton growers in georgia mississippi and alabama at a substantial profit.
missouri had few slaves but by 1820 slave owners were not about to allow an attack on the institution of slavery.
although much of the debate about missouri was spoken in the language of popular will and the sovereign right of white people there to decide their own policies it took place as economic and racial realities were changing quickly.
in the north hostility to slavery was growing.
many northerners including many whose pre revolutionary parents and grandparents had owned slaves now hated the whole idea of human slavery and disliked a constitutional system that protected it.
even before 1820 some people were starting to call themselves abolitionists those committed to completely ending slavery.
many other northerners had more strategic objections to the constitutional protection of slavery.
ihe three fifths clause in the constitution gave the slaveholding south 17 more seats in the house of representatives and thus 17 more electoral votes in presidential elections than an allocation of representatives based on only free people would have done.
as a result four of the five u s presidents who had served by 1820 had come from virginia.
ihe nation was becoming divided between a commercial north and an agricultural south and although neither region was purely for or against slavery the fact that slavery gave the south a political edge came across to many northerners as being unfair.
the debates about missouri despite all the anger voiced by tallmadge and cobb were not as vitriolic as future debates would be.
there were not yet many radical abolitionists in the north and so far few in the south were saying that slavery was a positive good.
but already in 1819 neither side would back down and congress adjourned without doing anything about missouri.
before congress reassembled in 1820 president monroe and henry clay of kentucky the speaker of the house of representatives designed a compromise to resolve the issue.
while the north had a solid and growing majority in the house the senate was evenly divided between slave and free states.
since each state had two senators no matter what its population 11 free states and 11 slave states meant a senate that was split 22 22 on the issue of slavery.
in addition while congress had debated what to do about missouri the region known as the district of maine within the commonwealth of massachusetts was also petitioning for statehood with the blessing of the massachusetts legislature.
the compromise proposed that if maine and missouri were admitted at the same time and if missouri was allowed to be a slave state then the balance in the senate would be maintained.
however this proposed compromise iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 would also restrict the spread of slavery while missouri would be admitted as a slave state all other states north of the 36 30 north parallel that is the southern border of missouri would be admitted as free states.
although most northerners in the house and senate voted against it some supported the compromise as did almost all of those from the south and the missouri compromise passed congress allowing missouri and maine to be admitted to the union.
the crisis had been averted.
the success would be the first of many such compromises for which henry clay would become known as the great compromiser over the next 3 decades.
however the need for this compromise signaled more clearly than ever before that slavery had become a divisive issue that would not go away see map 9 5.
the contested election of 1824 as president monroe came to the end of his second term the political good will that had marked his tenure disappeared.
although no constitutional limitation had yet been set on presidential terms washington had set a precedent for stepping down after two terms which others had followed.
in 1824 as the nation sought a new president missouri compromise a compromise in congress in 1820 that admitted missouri to the union as a slave state and maine as a free state as well as prohibited slavery in the rest of the louisiana purchase territory above 3630 north latitude.
9 3 i los angeles russian territory british north america oregon country us and great britain spanish territory missouri ft michigan unorganized territory xjy territory michigan territory ar sas r illinois st.
louis ohio ohio pacific ocean 1 arkansas territory 1819 36 tied r 7 j u hatchez nacogdoches san antonio de bejar kentucky tennessee v.
alabama free states and territories slave states and territories open to slavery by missouri compromise closed to slavery by missouri compromise missouri compromise line virginia pennsylvania washington d c new hampshire massachusetts rhode island connecticut new jersey delaware maryland north carolina south carolina georgia louisfc na orleans gulf of mexico st augustine florida t ritory atlantic ocean map 9 5 the missouri compromise line.
this map shows the way the nation was divided in an equal lumber of free and slave states by the missouri compromise.
chapter 9 new industries new politics 263 thinking historically the missouri compromise when he heard about the missouri compromise the aging thomas jefferson who had been infuriated by the tallmadge amendment because it interfered with the rights of states wrote to john holmes a massachusetts congressman i had for a long time ceased to read the newspapers or pay any attention to public affairs confident they were in good hands and content to be a passenger in our bark to the shore from which i am not distant.
but this momentous question like a fire bell in the night awakened and filled me with terror.
i considered it at once as the knell of the union.
it is hushed indeed for the moment.
but this is a reprieve only not a final sentence.
a geographical line coinciding with a marked principle moral and political once conceived and held up to the angry passions of men will never be obliterated and every new irritation will mark it deeper and deeper.
while clay was being hailed as a national hero for crafting the compromise jefferson perhaps had a better sense of what lay ahead.
the former president and slaveholder who also wrote passionately against slavery knew that in the long term no issue would so greatly divide the nation s citizens and as he grew old he saw the division become increasingly intense.
thinking critically 1.
contextualization how would you characterize pro and antislavery forces in 1820.
what might explain the widespread belief that the issue of slavery had been resolved with the passage of the missouri compromise.
historical interpretation in hindsight it is clear that jefferson was correct and the missouri compromise was only a reprieve.
what evidence was available in 1820 to support jefferson s point of view.
what trends had already begun to emerge that would lead the intensification of the conflict over slavery in the decades to come.
mi the united states experienced one of the most contested and confusing presidential elections in its history.
for citizens of a nation that had elected james monroe almost unanimously in 1816 and 1820 the ill will of 1824 was a surprise.
in one sense the election of 1824 proceeded just as the writers of the constitution who hated the idea of political parties envisioned a contest in which members of the house with each states delegation having one vote would decide on a president from among several of the nations leading citizens who had been identified by the votes of the electoral college.
with the demise of the federalists the democratic republican party was the only party in the nation.
it had been as that partys candidate that monroe had been elected by an almost unanimous vote since the federalists did not nominate a candidate in 1820 or anytime after that.
by 1824 however the usual process in which a party caucus within congress would select a presidential nominee had broken down and three members of monroes cabinet along with the speaker of the house of representatives all sought the presidency.
a fifth candidate from the same democratic republican party senator andrew jackson the national war hero from tennessee also joined the race.
in this type of contest personal animosity and political intrigue were inevitable.
at first many thought secretary of the treasury william h crawford of georgia was the obvious choice.
crawford had stepped out of the way to support monroe s election and he and many of his supporters thought it was now his turn.
the congressional caucus that traditionally nominated presidential candidates in fact did choose crawford.
however in what was clearly a warning of trouble to come less than a fourth of the members of congress showed up to vote in the caucus.
others in congress and outside of it would find other candidates and other ways to support them.
secretary of state john quincy adams of massachusetts had a good claim to consideration.
many considered the office of secretary of state as the natural stepping stone to the presidency.
monroe had been madisons secretary of state as madison had been part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 jefferson s and jefferson had been washingtons.
in addition adams had served the nation well.
he had acquired florida for the united states arranged treaties that opened vast new lands to settlement and handled south american revolutions and potential european interference skillfully.
as a former ambassador senator son of a former president and favorite of the antislavery north adams had much going for him.
secretary of war john c calhoun from south carolina was another candidate.
calhoun had not yet become the fierce advocate of states rights that he was later.
in 1824 he was a strong nationalist.
he advocated for a strong army and for using army engineers to conduct a national survey that would lead to federally supported roads bridges and canals connecting all parts of the nation.
he also supported the bank of the united states.
calhoun initially backed adams but when he became convinced after the missouri crisis that southern and border state electors would never support a new englander his own ambition was fired up and he campaigned actively.
henry clay of kentucky also a contender was speaker of the house of representatives and an ardent nationalist.
like calhoun he supported an expansive federal government that controlled the currency through a strong national bank and that built roads and bridges as well as supported commerce.
from his political base in kentucky clay hoped to be the first president from west of the alleghenies.
he was also shrewd enough to guess that with so many candidates in the race the house of representatives which he controlled might make the final decision.
finally there was andrew jackson of tennessee.
at first jackson seemed an unlikely candidate for president.
unlike any president after washington jackson had never served in the cabinet or represented the nation abroad.
instead he was the hero of the battle of new orleans.
he had served for 1 year in the senate and in other government posts but his primary public role was as a military leader and in the 1820s the military was not always a popular institution.
his wife rachel jackson strongly opposed his seeking the presidency.
in 1822 however the tennessee legislature formally nominated jackson as a candidate for president primarily as a way to block the then frontrunner crawford.
at that point jackson probably supported adams in part because adams had supported jacksons actions in florida while crawford and clay had not.
no one including jackson counted on how popular he would be with the electorate.
when a tavern keeper in pennsylvania wrote asking whether jackson would indeed seek the presidency the canny general knowing that his response would be published replied that it was his undeviating rule neither to seek or decline public invitations to office his response seemed the height of statesmanship to a country that had seen monroes almost unanimous election in the era of good feelings replaced by a divisive contest for the presidency.
the constitution allows each state to decide how to choose presidential electors.
by 1824 most states allowed voters to select electors pledged to a specific candidate thus greatly democratizing the presidential selection process.
that electorate had changed since the constitution was adopted in 1789.
since 1808 when new jersey retracted its decision to give women the right to vote only men voted.
property restrictions on voting still common when washington was elected were long gone in most states so nearly all white men could now vote and in some northern states so could free black men.
in new york city free blacks sometimes held the balance of power among various factions.
excluded from voting were women of all races most blacks including all slaves and indians.
nevertheless this broad male electorate valued widespread popularity as more important in selecting a president than the voice of a few members of the social and economic elite.
by 1824 the white male popular will was coalescing behind jackson far more than anyone expected.
in a nation increasingly divided by sectional issues a nationally respected war hero had great appeal.
in addition a fierce opponent of banks like jackson was popular with many people who were convinced at least partially rightly that the bank of the united states had brought on the panic of 1819.
in places like mississippi 9 3 chapter 9 new industries new politics 265 9 3 1 and alabama where some people were growing rich on farmlands that jackson had j wrested from their indian owners he was a local hero.
particularly in a country where an elites economic decisions had hurt many farmers and workers a candidate who had been born in a log cabin and grown up poor though he had become wealthy as an adult had deep appeal.
popular appeal had not been a major factor in the elections of madison and monroe but it was the factor in 1824.
in the 1824 election jackson won the popular vote.
calhoun who had withdrawn from the campaign after deciding that jackson was too popular to beat was easily elected as vice president since the twelfth amendment ratified in 1804 in the after math of the jefferson burr fiasco mandated that presidential electors cast separate ballots for presidential and vice presidential candidates.
in addition to pennsylvania jackson easily carried the black belt states of georgia alabama mississippi and louisiana as well as most of the rest of the south a region benefitting from its population of nonvoting slaves which strengthened its electoral votes as a result of the three fifths clause to the constitution.
jackson defeated adams in new jersey crawford in north carolina and clay in indiana and illinois.
adams carried new england some of the mid atlantic region and the northwest.
however although jackson won the most popular votes no one had the 131 electoral votes needed for a majority jackson 99 electoral votes adams 84 electoral votes crawford 41 electoral votes clay 37 electoral votes clays prediction was right the election had been tossed into the house of representatives.
not since 1800 had the house of representatives been called on to decide the outcome of a presidential contest.
ironically however since the constitution required the house to choose from among the top three candidates clay himself had been eliminated.
moreover although his supporters had kept it hidden crawford had had a stroke and could not possibly assume the presidency.
so the election came down to jackson and adams and adams was determined to fight for the office despite ranking second in the popular and electoral votes.
the constitution mandated a process and adams wanted to follow it.
many of adamss followers and the supporters of other candidates saw jackson as a would be american napoleon who would undermine american democracy.
no one held that concern more strongly than henry clay who was master of the house and determined that jackson should not be president.
when the house met on february 9 1825 adams was elected president by a vote of 13 states with seven states for jackson and four for crawford.
on the evening of the vote outgoing president monroe held a party at the white house.
jackson approached adams and they greeted each other with considerable formality.
observers thought jackson was genial and gracious while adams was stiff rigid cold as a statue.
the two would not often meet again but the interaction that night imprinted an image on the public that would follow them to jacksons benefit for the next 4 years and beyond.
whether adams had made any secret agreement with clay will never be known.
but 5 days after the vote adams appointed clay to be his secretary of state and thus his successor if the previous pattern held true.
jackson denounced both men for making a corrupt bargain resigned from the senate and returned to his home in nashville to begin what was essentially a 4 year campaign against adams clay and their administration as well as a campaign for his own election to the office that he and his followers believed he had won in 1824.
adams and clay had underestimated the popular feeling for jackson.
the animosity of the campaign and jacksons rancor would make the next 4 years difficult for an administration led by two of the nation s most gifted political and diplomatic leaders.
266 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 the adams clay agenda in his inaugural address in march 1825 adams acknowledged that he came to the presidency less possessed of your confidence in advance than any of my predecessors nevertheless it was his goal to unify the nation and improve all parts of the country.
he was the last president to believe that the baneful weed of party strife might be avoided and he struggled unsuccessfully to avoid the creation of political parties and permanent national divisions.
adams proposed a list of national improvements to be implemented by the federal government.
support for federally funded improvements such as roads canals and so on would be a hallmark of the adams administration.
an emerging political faction that supported national development and strong federal actions to deal with national problems agreed with the direction that the adams administration was taking.
jackson and another emerging faction would strongly oppose this sort of activist federal government advocating instead for states rights.
improvement both personal and political was a popular ambition in the 1820s.
adams worried about becoming a better person and he swam naked in the potomac every day to improve his body.
but he also wanted to improve the country and he saw the money freed from paying off the revolutionary war debt and the income from sales of federal lands as the perfect opportunity for investing in the country.
the general survey conducted by army engineers when john c calhoun was secretary of war was the blueprint.
adams with an eye to southern voters proposed a second national road to link washington d c to new orleans.
he proposed and congress approved building the chesapeake and ohio canal that would connect with the original national road and link the potomac with the ohio and mississippi rivers.
postmaster general john mclean built post offices in rural areas and subsidized the stagecoach industry to carry the mail and connect the nations far flung people to one another.
adams also proposed a new national university to be based in washington and a national observatory a lighthouse of the skies all of these activities were designed to knit the nation together advancing knowledge and making it easier to transport goods.
in addition the intent was to unite the nation in a single political entity and a market economy especially after the divisions sparked by the debates around the missouri compromise see map 9 4 on page 256.
secretary of state clay was involved in all these efforts and in fact during the presidential campaign had described a program of internal improvements and protective tariffs that came to be known as the american system in clays mind the american system would reduce poverty by linking all americans all white americans clay considered neither his own 50 slaves nor others slaves to be americans in a prosperous commercial community.
the system was american because it made the federal government an agent of economic development.
clay believed that the roads and canals as well as the support of interstate commerce that he and adams wanted to foster on a federal level would make a stronger and more united america commercially geographically and socially.
ultimately clay wanted transportation and commerce to bridge traditional sectional divides and create a thriving commercial nation that was united by common national investments.
moreover the system was potentially a way to protect the country by building an infrastructure that could serve military needs allowing troops to move quickly from one part of the country to another when necessary.
finally the american system would protect infant american industries through a strong tariff that would allow them to develop and thus reduce american dependence on cheaper foreign imports.
in one of his last acts as speaker in 1824 clay led an effort to increase the average tariff from 20 percent to 35 percent.
the new higher tariff made him a hero to new england mill owners and their workers whose jobs it protected.
it was also popular in commercial centers like cincinnati ohio and clays hometown of lexington kentucky where new industries needed protection.
but the improvements and tariffs 93 american system the program of government subsidies to improve roads and canals and to foster economic growth and protect domestic manufacturers from foreign competition.
chapter 9 new industries new politics 267 1 this stylized picture of andrew jackson speaking to a crowd begins to suggest the enormous popularity that the former war hero had as he connected with diverse audiences of voters in a way no leader since george washington had done.
of the american system were not popular in other parts of the country.
a high tariff raised the cost of everything southern cotton planters had to buy but did nothing to raise the price of their cotton in the market.
they saw the tariff and the presidents antislavery opinions as a sign of a federal government that was working against their economic interests and many in the south hardened their opposition to adams clay and the american system.
as the 1828 presidential campaign built steam adams and clay continued their pitch for the costs and benefits of the american system.
jackson however had a more focused agenda to replace adams the minority president with the man who had rightfully won in 1824.
ironically although adams ardently wanted to avoid the baneful weed of party strife it was during his term that new american political parties were born.
the jackson victory of 1828 and the rebirth of political parties whig party political party that began to take shape in support of the adams clay american system and was first known as the national republicans but became the whig party in the 1830s in opposition to the jacksonian democrats.
from the day he left washington d c in 1825 jackson was running to become president in 1828.
he believed that he and his supporters had been cheated and he meant to be vindicated.
nevertheless it took time for the campaign to take shape.
it is easier to understand the birth of political parties in retrospect than it was at the time.
many americans were glad to see the old federalist party gone at the same time they hated to see the democratic republicans splinter.
at first the two factions in congress were described simply as adams men and jackson men after the midterm congressional elections of 1826 the jackson men controlled congress.
the adams men then started to call themselves national republicans that is democratic republicans who supported the national administration led by president adams.
this group led primarily by henry clay would become the core of the new whig party the party that advocated for a strong national government role in the economy internal improvements such as roads and canals and social reform movements in general.
the jackson men continued to call themselves democratic republicans emphasizing that they were the rightful winners of the last election and represented the democratic will of the people which had been thwarted by adams and clay in the 1824 268 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 election.
soon the jacksonians dropped the republicans in their name and were simply known as democrats forerunners of the democratic party that throughout the 1800s argued for the rights of the common man to be left alone by centralized government and economic interests.
neither party was fully organized in the 1828 election and though each had newspapers that were strongly on their side other hallmarks of national political parties like national nominating conventions came later.
nevertheless from 1828 on most americans expected presidential elections to be hotly contested by two or more candidates representing their respective political parties and running on specific promises.
the era of electing a few wise men to select the best president was over forever.
the prime architect of jacksons campaign and his political agenda besides jackson himself who delegated little was senator martin van buren of new york.
van buren was a strict constructionist of the constitution who believed that the american system advocated by adams and clay violated the constitution because it involved the federal government in many matters not specifically assigned to it by the constitution.
although a new yorker van buren was closely allied with many in the south who liked van burens commitment to a small federal government because they feared that if the federal government could involve itself in shaping the nations economy it could also interfere with slavery a threat that terrified the slaveholding class.
the campaign of 1828 was as nasty as any in american history.
newspapers took on a larger role than ever before endorsing candidates and spreading slander about the opposition.
the national republicans reminded voters of jacksons temper and his many brawls and duels which they said were unpresidential as well as the times he may have exceeded his authority in attacking indians or executing british subjects.
in addition they attacked his marriage to rachel jackson.
more than 30 years earlier the jacksons had been married before rachels divorce from her first husband was final so she was thus guilty of bigamy.
the attack on their marriage infuriated jackson and deeply hurt rachel.
when she died shortly after the election jackson never forgave his adversaries.
the campaign organized by jackson and van buren was equally nasty.
they reminded voters of the supposed corrupt bargain that had put adams in the white house and claimed with no proof that adams as ambassador to russia had procured young american women for the czars pleasure.
they portrayed adams as cold and elitist and attacked his unitarian beliefs as un christian compared with jacksons devout presbyterian faith.
for the democrats the campaign was not about the american system but a choice between j q.
adams who can write and andy jackson who can fight the fighter won easily.
the popular vote nearly tripled between 1824 and 1828 and 57 5 percent of all eligible voters actually voted.
all but two states delaware and south carolina chose presidential electors by popular vote for slates pledged to one candidate or another in 1828.
campaigning had risen to new heights and more voters believed that their votes counted.
political parties organized a new get out the vote effort which for the first time included election materials such as buttons mugs posters and slogans.
in the end jackson won 647 286 votes 56 percent of the popular vote and 178 electoral votes and adams won 508 064 popular votes and 83 electoral votes.
four years earlier the popular vote had been 153 554 votes for jackson to 108 740 votes for adams.
ere was no need for the house of representatives to be involved.
a new style of electioneering had emerged.
democratic party political party that favored states rights and a limited role for the federal government especially in economic affairs.
93 quick review how did the nation evolve from the era of good feelings to the partisanship of the mid to late 1820s.
what were the most important factors in this transition.
chapter 9 new industries new politics 269 conclusion washington irvings story rip van winkle published in 1819 tells the story of a man who awakens after a 20 year nap to find that everything in his village has completely changed.
the story captures the transformation of the physical commercial and political landscapes of the united states and the corresponding changes in the lives of americans during the first decades of independence largely caused by the rapid growth of cotton production and technological innovation.
although it would have seemed unimaginable even a few years earlier after 1815 distances seemed shorter money and material goods more important and politics omnipresent to many americans not just national leaders.
production of cotton and all the accompanying commerce it generated changed the lives of nearly all of the countrys residents and focused the attention of many americans on productivity and hoped for prosperity.
slavery expanded from the atlantic coast as thousands of enslaved people were forced to move into the interior of the country where the black belt stretching from georgia through alabama mississippi and louisiana became the center of cotton production based on the backbreaking labor of slaves.
at the same time many white americans especially young women who had been used to the rhythms of farm life went to work in highly regimented mills spinning cotton into cloth.
other americans transported cotton between states and across the atlantic ocean at speeds their forbearers could not have imagined.
the new prominence of public clocks with a hand that noted minutes in addition to the passage of hours reflected this shift.
the demand for cotton and the labor intensive process of its cultivation led to the explosion of slavery in the south the growth of the textile industry in the north and a revolution in industry and transportation.
new york city emerged as a transportation hub connecting the united states to the international cotton trade.
the erie canal also secured new yorks place as a commercial center as it made transport between interior locations and coastal ports more efficient.
steamboats canal boats transatlantic packet ships and stagecoaches traveled the routes in ever faster circuits.
banks some of the first and most important corporations in the young nation played an essential role in the market economy.
corporate shareholders a dramatically new development deepened the stability of businesses and extended their ability to operate.
however the cotton market slumped in 1819 which caused an economic downturn and financial panic among americans.
although the economy would eventually recover and thrive the experience reflected a new and not fully understood national economy.
during monroes administration the supreme court led by chief justice john marshall decided a series of cases that expanded the power of the federal government and limited that of the states claiming a role for the supreme court in reviewing the constitutionality of acts of state legislatures which would become important in the years to come.
despite general calm during the era of good feelings of monroes two term administration political tensions over the cotton economy territorial expansion and slavery exploded with surprising force in the 1820s.
when missouri applied to become a state in 1819 the divisions over slavery intensified and although the missouri compromise was meant to resolve the differences many agreed with the aging thomas jefferson that it was a reprieve only the era of good feelings gave way to divisive contests for the presidency in 1824 a victory for john quincy adams and in 1828 a victory for andrew jackson and the rebirth of political parties.
jacksons political agenda reflected his concerns for the economic and political interests of a broad spectrum of white america that was growing in influence in the government and he represented the symbolic voice of a new generation.
chapter review how did the economic changes fostered by the growth of cotton production and the new national market economy in the united states affect national politics and governmental decisions.
why were economic and political trends so closely connected.
270 part iv crafting a nation people land and a national identity 1800 1848 chapter 9 chapter review 9 1 creating the cotton economy explain the role of cotton in transforming the land and the lives of many diverse people of the united states.
review questions 1.
chronological reasoning how did events and developments in the 1790s set the stage for the rapid expansion of cotton production in the united states in the early 1800s.
what role did events taking place outside of the united states play in this process.
historical interpretation how did the expansion of cotton production shape the development of slavery in the united states.
in what ways did it make life harder for enslaved african americans.
historical interpretation how did the expansion of cotton production shape the development of the commercial economy in the united states.
what new opportunities and challenges did it create for northern workers.
commerce technology and transportation analyze the technological and financial changes that led to the emergence of a new market economy in the united states.
review questions 4.
historical interpretation how did the transportation revolution create new connections between americans and alter old ones.
how did it facilitate the movement and exchange of people products and ideas.
crafting arguments defend or refute the following statement.
the emergence of the market economy in the early 1800s would not have been possible without significant government involvement what evidence can you provide to support your position.
comparison what were the most important social political and economic differences between the united states in 1800 and the united states in 1820.
how would you explain the changes you note.
from the era of good feelings to the politics of division explain the political developments in the united states during the 1820s including the shift of power toward the south and west that resulted from the changing economic situation.
review questions 7.
comparison why was the sectional divide over slavery deeper in 1820 than it had been in 1790.
historical interpretation how did andrew jacksons unexpected popular success in the election of 1824 foreshadow broader changes in the nature of american politics.
to whom did jackson appeal.
historical interpretation how did the economic policies of the adams administration contribute to the emergence of new political parties.
how was the growing sectional divide reflected in the new parties.
chapter 9 new industries new politics 271 chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the changing definitions of democracy in the age of jackson and what jacksonian democracy meant for different groups of americans.
politics dominated the thinking of many americans in the age of jackson.
this painting titled stump speaking captures the scene as a large group of white men gathered to hear a political speaker.
this illustration of the crowd at the white house after jackson s inauguration captures the mood of the day even though the artist was not present and created it based on stories told by others.
significant dates 10 1 learning objectives jacksonian democracy jacksonian government analyze jackson s advocacy for indian removal his opposition to the bank of the united states his support for a tariff and the impact of these policies on other americans.
democratized religion the second great awakening analyze the diversity of american religious experience and how the freedom of the era gave rise to diverse religious expressions.
democratized education the birth of the common school explain the development of public education as a result of and in response to the cultural currents of the 1820s and 1830s.
272 part iv crafting a nation people land and a andrew jacksons inauguration as president in march 1829 was a somber affair for jackson himself who was still mourning his wife rachels death the previous december.
he did not make the traditional call on the outgoing president blaming john quincy adams for attacks that he believed hastened rachels death and he did not attend his own inaugural ball.
for his supporters however jacksons inauguration was a raucous celebration of democracy.
when jackson arrived at the white house a festive crowd overran the place stood on the furniture broke china and had to be lured outside with bowls of spiked punch.
a washington observer margaret bayard smith complained about what she saw as the rabble that inundated the white house describing their behavior as scrambling fighting romping supreme court justice joseph story called it the reign of king mob but order was restored and jacksons agenda began to emerge.
jackson cared about a few big issues and these shaped his agenda as president.
he did not worry much about how the issues were connected.
during both of his campaigns for the presidency in 1824 and 1828 he had promised to acquire land for white settlement by forcing indian tribes to move west of the mississippi river.
he also promised to undermine the bank of the united states and the power of northern economic elites national identity 1800 1848 he was opposed to henry clays american system and wanted to keep taxes low and the role of the federal government modest.
that said jackson understood power and was committed to expanding the power of the presidency itself.
as he proceeded with his agenda he was often challenged and his response was to fight back with all the resources he could find.
the era during which jackson led the country was known as the age of jackson.
jackson was the symbolic voice of a new generation and a specific class of american people.
the first president born west of the alleghenies he was not connected to the founding fathers as all of his predecessors had been.
he spoke for the economic and political interests of a broad spectrum of white america that was growing in influence in the government.
although it was not his doing jackson also presided over a nation in which the churches and the schools expanded and changed significantly.
jacksonian democracy jacksonian government analyze jackson s advocacy for indian removal his opposition to the bank of the united states his support for a tariff and the impact of these policies on other americans.
jackson knew what he wanted to accomplish as president.
before implementing any other policies he planned a clean sweep of senior federal office holders some of whom had served under several presidents.
jeffersons successors madison monroe and john quincy adams had made few changes below the level of the cabinet itself partly because they were all from the same political party and partly because they did not see it as the presidents role to make wholesale personnel changes.
in a significant change of practice jackson replaced many officials and in the process created the suspicion that there had been corruption without evidence for it.
jackson believed in what came to be called the spoils system which was a patronage system in which a victorious political party rewards a candidates supporters with government jobs.
jackson used the term rotation in office but his supporters believed to the victor belongs the spoils suddenly with jackson in office experienced officials including 25 customs collectors and 423 postmasters were fired from what had been a small stable federal bureaucracy.
services deteriorated and the quality of some federal services like the postal service did not recover until civil service reform took hold in the 1880s.
10 1 1826 charles b finney leads religious revivals in western new york 1828 tariff of abominations jackson defeats adams for president 1829 andrew jackson inaugurated president 1830 congress passes indian removal act nullification crisis begins joseph smith founds the church of jesus christ of the latter day saints 1832 jackson vetoes recharter of second bank of the united states south carolina legislature nullifies federal tariffs black hawk s war in illinois 1833 congress passes compromise tariff nullification debate ends 1835 treaty of new echota catharine beecher publishes essay on the education of female teachers 1836 first mcguffey reader published second creek war in alabama 1837 horace mann elected secretary of the massachusetts board of education 1838 ralph waldo emerson divinity school address 1838 1839 trail oftears spoils system a way of selecting people for government jobs based on the idea that to the victor belongs the spoils.
