chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 169 important ideas a americans and their leaders faced many challenges in the years after the ratification of the u s constitution when the new republic was established.
b george washington became the nations first president in 1789.
he established the first cabinet.
the first congress passed the bill of rights and the judiciary act of 1789 completing the nations federal court system.
c to create a stable economic system alexander hamilton the secretary of the treasury set out an economic plan in which the federal government would both assume the debts of the national and state governments and create a national bank a whiskey tax and a protective tariff to help american manufacturers.
all of hamiltons financial plan was accepted except for the tariff.
d western farmers rebelled against the new whiskey tax.
the whiskey rebellion collapsed when washington and hamilton made a show of force.
e jefferson and madison disagreed with hamiltons plan giving rise to the first american political parties the federalists and the democratic republicans.
f americans were also divided in their support of the french revolution.
jefferson and madison supported it while adams and hamilton feared mob rule in america.
washington kept the nation neutral when war broke out between france and britain.
in his farewell address washington warned against entangling alliances believing the nation should avoid ties to europe.
g jefferson was elected in the revolution of 1800 this was a peaceful transition of power from the federalists.
in 1803 jefferson approved the louisiana purchase doubling the nations size and giving america control of the mississippi river.
jefferson continued washingtons policy of neutrality with europe.
h chief justice john marshall issued a series of landmark supreme court decisions which helped strengthen the national government established the role of the supreme court and unified the nation.
in marbury v madison marshall established the principle of judicial review that the supreme court can rule whether a law is constitutional.
in mcculloch v maryland he established the supremacy of federal law and the ability of congress to exercise powers needed to carry out its duties.
in gibbons v ogden he expanded the scope of congress power to regulate commerce between the states.
i americans finally became involved in a conflict with britain in the war of 1812.
britains impressment of u s sailors and u s ambitions in canada were the main causes.
the war proved the nation could defend itself.
the federalist party collapsed after the war giving rise to the era of good feelings during these years americans felt renewed national pride.
the missouri compromise 1820 preserved unity and the monroe doctrine 1823 asserted american influence in the western hemisphere.
k during these years americans also saw the spread of steamboat travel increasing numbers of factories and construction of canals such as the erie canal.
chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 171 defining our new central government the constitution allowed the president to appoint officials in charge of executive departments.
the chief officials that washington appointed began meeting together with him in what came to be known as the cabinet.
over the years additional cabinet departments were created.
the cabinet was one of the important precedents established by washington.
a precedent is an action taken for the first time which is followed by others afterwards.
creating a stable economy the most pressing problems facing washingtons government were economic.
as a result of the american revolution the national government owed 54 million.
the states owed another 24 million and the paper money issued by the continental congress and the articles of confederation was worthless.
the job of solving these economic problems fell to alexander hamilton our nations first secretary of the treasury.
hamilton drew up a four part plan for getting the nation on a sound financial basis president washington far right meets with his cabinet.
hamilton s economic plan repay the debt hamilton believed the national govern national bank.
hamilton proposed creation of a national 1 whiskey tax.
hamilton proposed a tax on whiskey to raise protective tariff.
hamilton asked congress to pass a ment should pay off bank as a place to is money from western high tariff a tax the debts of both the deposit taxes to farmers.
on imported foreign states and the previous provide a sound cur goods which would national government in rency and to make 9 protect american order to establish the loans to the national 1 ij industries from foreign nation s credit.
si government.
s ii b competition.
the rise of political parties hamiltons program was strongly opposed by thomas jefferson washingtons secretary of state.
jefferson madison and their followers believed hamiltons plan would just benefit wealthy americans since speculators had bought up much of the debt.
they also felt that the constitution did not give the federal government the right to create a national bank.
this disagreement gave rise to americas first political parties associations that try to elect their members to government offices so that they will pass laws favorable to their ideas.
alexander hamilton project without permission chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 173 washington called up the militia to put down the rebellion.
washington with alexander hamilton by his side was ready to use force but the rebels fled before any fighting took place.
imagine you are a representative in congress in 1794.
write a speech either for or against hamiltons financial plan.
how were shays rebellion and the whiskey rebellion handled differently.
explain your answer.
during washingtons presidency the revolution in france became increasingly violent.
the revolutionaries overthrew and executed louis xvi the french king.
war between france and britain then broke out in 1793.
jeffersons supporters continued to favor the french revolutionaries while alexander hamilton john adams and other federalists favored the british.
proclamation of neutrality 1793 the united states had won its independence largely through the military and financial support of france.
some french leaders thought it was time for the americans to return the favor and that the franco american alliance of 1778 was still in effect.
hamilton and his supporters were able to persuade washington that frances war was totally european in nature.
washington finally became convinced that there was nothing to be gained if the united states involved itself in this european conflict.
compared to european powers the united states was weak militarily.
to avoid being drawn into the anglo french conflict washington adopted a policy of neutrality the united states would avoid taking sides in any european conflict or becoming involved in any foreign war.
acting as an amateur.
historian washington believed america should not become entangled in the conflicts of foreign nations.
his proclamation of neutrality stated this nations position it appears that a state of war exists between austria prussia sardinia great britain and the netherlands on the one part and france on the other.
the duty and interest of the united states require that they should adopt a conduct friendly and impartial toward the warring powers.
i have thought fit to declare the position of the united states to observe a conduct towards those powers respectfully and warn our citizens to avoid all acts which may in any manner tend to go against this position in your own words describe washingtons proclamation of neutrality.
do you think washington chose a wise policy.
explain your answer.
name chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 175 learning with graphic organizers complete the following chart on the highlights of the presidency of george washington.
chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 177 construction of the national road begins.
whitneys plan was for machines to produce standardized parts which could be used with other parts to assemble a whole product without a laborer filing and fitting each part together.
this interchangeability allowed easy assembly of new devices and easier repair of existing devices while minimizing the time and skill needed for a person to assembly or repair a product.
use of interchangeable parts in the manufacture of muskets guns was a major contribution to the development of america industry.
the shift of manufacturing to factories known as the industrial revolution would soon lead to the rise of new industries and rapidly growing cities.
transportation.
americas vast and untamed landscape made travel difficult.
cities were connected by roads that were little more than dirt trails.
a few had log or plank roads.
most short travel was done by walking.
for longer trips people rode on horse drawn wagons.
travel on roads was slow a trip from boston to new york took three days by stage coach.
western settlers sought roads to aid settlement and for the transfer of goods.
they wished for a way to make it easier to market their goods and to buy essential supplies in return.
in 1806 congress set aside funds to build the first federally funded road the national road.
travel by water was easier and cheaper than travel overland.
goods were often carried along streams and rivers to ports along the coast.
people took ferries to cross rivers and took boats to travel down rivers across lakes or along coastlines.
communication.
communications were slow.
there were no telephones telegraphs televisions or computers.
people communicated primarily by letter.
letters had to be carried over dusty unpaved roads or by packet boat.
mail was often mangled or even lost.
news about events traveled slowly.
most people received their information from local newspapers.
most were published weekly or monthly and were shared by many readers.
regional differences.
the three main regions from colonial times new england the middle atlantic colonies and the south were replaced by the north the south and the emerging west.
the nations population was growing at an enormous rate.
the land available for settlement increased by almost the size of europe from 4 4 million to 7 8 million square kilometers.
regional population growth 1800 1830 select one state and use your school or public library and internet websites of local organizations to gather documents artworks statistics and other materials about life in that state in the early 1800s.
chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 179 the second president of the united states john adams was a federalist who continued many of washingtons policies.
in 1800 john adams lost the presidential election to thomas jefferson.
jefferson sought to show that he was one of the people.
the capital had just been moved from philadelphia to washington d c jefferson walked alone from his boardinghouse to the capitol to take the oath of office.
his inauguration marked the first transition of the executive branch from one party to another.
sometimes known as the revolution of 1800 this change occurred without violence.
jefferson s views on government jefferson saw his election as a turning point.
he believed the best government was one that governed least.
jefferson opposed special privileges for the wealthy and had strong sympathies for the common farmer.
as president he set about reducing the size of the army ending naval expansion and lowering government costs.
thomas jefferson acting as an amateur historian in his first inaugural address 1801 jefferson spoke of what he thought was necessary to make america a prosperous nation.
here is what he said with all these blessings what more is necessary to make us a happy and prosperous people.
still one thing more fellow citizens a wise and frugal government which shall restrain men from injuring one another which shall leave them otherwise free to regulate their own pursuits of industry and improvement and shall not take from the mouth of labor the bread it had earned.
this is the sum of good government what did jefferson see as good government.
fc is what jefferson said 200 years ago still relevant to our nation today.
the louisiana purchase 1803 jefferson had always dreamed of extending the united states westward.
he sent envoys to france to negotiate the right to send goods down the mississippi river to new orleans.
in 1803 napoleon bonaparte the new ruler of france offered to sell the louisiana territory.
chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 181 acting as an amateur historian marbury v madison was the first significant decision handed down by the u s supreme court after john marshall was sworn in as its chief justice in 1801 it is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial depart ment to say what the law is.
those who apply the rule to particular cases must of necessity explain and interpret that rule.
if two laws conflict with each other the courts must decide on the operation of each what was marshalls decision.
do you agree with his decision.
fc why was the court ruling in marbury v madison of such importance.
the embargo act of 1807 war continued to rage between britain and france.
british ships started stopping u s ships to search for deserters from the british navy.
sometimes they took americans to serve on british ships.
this practice of impressment forced military service greatly humiliated americans and put pressure on president jefferson to take action.
to avoid war jefferson pushed the embargo act through congress.
under the act american ships were prohibited from trading with european nations.
in the last days of jeffersons presidency congress replaced the embargo act with the non intercourse act 1809.
this act lifted the embargo on u s shipping except for ships bound for british or french ports.
an american sailor is seized impressed by british seamen.
research important people and events from this period and devise skits to show how various precedents were set in the new nation consider the cabinet the pinckney treaty the louisiana purchase and marbury v madison.
did thomas jefferson live up to his ideals as president.
explain your answer.
using the internet or your local library for information create your own map showing the route lewis and clark took to the pacific.
chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 183 after jefferson served two terms as president he followed the precedent set by washington and stepped down from the presidency.
his good friend and fellow democratic republican james madison became the nations fourth president in 1809.
three years later americans were drawn into another war with great britain in 1812.
this war is known as the war of 1812 or the second war for independence causes of the conflict ever since 1793 france and britain had been continuously at war against each other with only one short break.
americans continued to trade with europe but tried to keep out of the war between these two nations.
however british ships continued to stop american ships and to seize or impress u s sailors.
some british troops in canada also encouraged native american indians to attack american settlements.
at the same time several young congressmen thought the time was ripe to seize canada from the british who were fighting napoleon in europe.
in 1812 president madison asked congress to declare war on britain.
main events of the war american forces tried to invade canada but they were unsuccessful.
in retaliation british troops temporarily occupied washington d c and burned down the white house.
madisons wife dolley madison acted quickly to remove paintings and other valuables from the white house before the british arrived.
much of the fighting during the war of 1812 took place on the great lakes and in upstate new york.
in 1813 british troops further retaliated for the attack on canada by burning the american settlement at buffalo.
meanwhile american and british ships clashed in the battle of lake erie.
in december 1814 a peace treaty was finally signed between britain and the united states.
this agreement actually left things much as they had been before the war.
the british prom ised they would no longer search american ships for british deserters.
americans promised to respect british rule in canada.
americans felt they had proved they could protect their independence.
communications from europe were so slow that the bloodiest battle of the war was actually fought after the treaty was signed.
general andrew jackson defeated the british at the battle of new orleans in january 1815.
chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 185 clay s american system in these years americans cooperated to improve their transportation routes by building roads and canals.
henry clay a spokesman for moderate policies sought to resolve differences between the north and south while representing the nationalist outlook of the west.
clay proposed his american system to congress.
his system consisted of a high tariff tax on imports to protect american manufactured goods from competition with cheaper british products.
clay then proposed that the revenues collected from the tariff should be used to pay for internal improvements such as new roads and canals in the west.
in this way clay hoped his american system would bind the industrial henry clay 777 1852 east and the agrarian west together.
despite clays good intentions the american system never went into effect.
the national system of internal improvements was never adequately funded by congress the failure to provide funds was due in part to sectional jealousies and a belief that such spending was never provided for in the constitution.
the erie canal in the early 1800s it was easier and cheaper to ship goods by water than by land.
in 1816 the governor of new york proposed a 360 mile canal connecting lake erie to the hudson river.
farmers could then ship goods from the great lakes to new york city entirely by water.
after a long and heated debate state lawmakers voted to build the canal.
the erie canal was the most ambitious project ever constructed up to that time.
a path 50 feet wide had to be cut through forests swamps and hills.
then a ditch 40 feet wide and 4 feet deep had to be dug.
the canal was an important modification of the physical environment.
without the heavy equipment we have today thousands of workers were needed to cut trees rip out tree stumps blast through rock and dig the canal.
one out of every four workers was irish.
at the peak of construction more than four thousand workers were laboring on the canal.
canal workers earned about 10 a month in 1832.
erie oswego and champlain canals chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 187 gibbons v ogden 1824 during this period the supreme court encouraged the growth of a national market by its decision in the case of gibbons v ogden.
background.
ogden had been granted a monopoly by new york state to operate a steamboat between new york and new jersey.
gibbons was granted a similar license by the federal government.
ogden sued to stop gibbons from competing with him.
gibbons appealed to the supreme court.
decision significance.
marshall ruled that congress could regulate ferry boats crossing the hudson river between new york and new jersey as part of its power under the constitution to control interstate commerce trade between states.
only the federal government according to the u s constitution could regulate interstate commerce including activities affecting interstate commerce.
this established the federal governments right to regulate anything that involves commerce between the states.
it set the stage for future expansion of congressional power over other activities once thought to be under the control of the states.
the purchase of florida 1819 the border between spanish colonial territory and the united states was a source of heated debate with spain.
plagued by many problems spain feared losing florida without compensation.
spanish leaders therefore chose to negotiate a settlement.
the united states agreed to purchase florida in 1819 for 5 million.
it also agreed to recognize spanish sovereignty over texas.
mcculloch v maryland 1819 another key decision by chief justice john marshall was mcculloch v maryland.
this case also tested the relationship between state and federal law.
background.
in 1818 the maryland legislature imposed a tax on the maryland branch of the second national bank.
the national bank was unpopular since it competed with state banks.
maryland legislators hoped that state taxes on the federal bank would shut down the maryland branch.
james mcculloch the federal banks cashier did not pay the taxes the maryland law required and maryland sued for payment.
after the state of maryland won the dispute in its own courts the case was appealed to the u s supreme court.
decision significance.
the case presented two key issues 1 does congress have the power to create a bank even though that power is not specifically mentioned in the constitution.
2 does maryland have the power to tax an institution of the federal government.
marshall ruled that congress could indeed charter a national bank since this would help congress carry out its other powers.
marshall said that the necessary and proper clause elastic clause in the constitution gives congress all those powers needed to carry out its powers listed in the constitution.
he also said that since the federal government had the right to establish the bank maryland had no right to interfere by taxing it.
name chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 189 the missouri compromise of 1820 the american revolution and the constitutional convention had failed to resolve the issue of slavery in america.
george washington had freed his own slaves on his death but thomas jefferson the author of the declaration of independence had not.
many early american leaders had imagined that slavery would just gradually die out.
however the invention of the cotton gin by eli whitney in 1793 made it easier for unskilled slaves to remove seeds from the type of cotton that grew in the south.
this invention led to the spread of slavery in the south.
the factories of england and the northern united states kept up the demand for raw cotton.
with the purchase of the louisiana territory the issue of slavery again came into sharp focus.
should the territories of the louisiana purchase enter the union as free or slave states.
the missouri compromise 1820 henry clay engineered a compromise in which slavery was forbidden in the louisiana territory north of the missouri compromise line 3 6 30 except missouri.
one free state maine and one slave state missouri were admitted to the union at the same time to keep the balance between free and slave states in the senate.
the monroe doctrine james monroe fought in the american revolution helped negotiate the lousiana purchase and served as secretary of state under president madison.
in 1817 monroe became president.
in 1823 in his annual message to congress monroe issued a bold statement on foreign policy.
he repeated the nations longstanding commitment to neutrality and offered a warning to europe.
the american and french revolutions had inspired people in latin america to be free.
during the napoleonic wars spain had been cut off from its colonies.
the spanish colonists grew accustomed to self government.
when spains king was restored he tried to reassert control.
colonists in latin america then declared their independence.
later it was feared that france would help spain reconquer her colonies.
monroe announced that the united states would oppose any attempts by european powers to establish new colonies or to restore spanish rule in countries in the western hemisphere that had achieved their independence.
name chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 191 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below.
for each event listed describe it and evaluate its impact on the united states.
war of 1812 description impact monroe doctrine description impact era of good feelings description impact chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 193 use the passages and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
in every political society parties are unavoidable.
a difference of interests real or supposed is the most natural and fruitful source of these james madison 1792 political parties serve to distract the public and weaken the government.
parties stir up the community with ill founded jealousies and false alarms george washington 1796 1 what were james madison and george washington disagreeing about in these statements.
a the necessity of political parties f citi 21 a h b the rise of sectional rivalry c the right of americans to donate funds to political parties d fear that political parties will use intimidation to elect their candidates examine the question.
this question tests your ability to recognize two different points of view.
recall what you know.
both passages deal with the emergence of political parties.
choice b is wrong since they are not about sectionalism.
choices c and p are also wrong.
the documents say nothing about donations or the use of intimidation.
the best answer is choice a madison saw the emergence of political parties as unavoidable while washington feared that political parties would distract and weaken the government.
mw try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 alexander hamiltons economic plan was designed to f help build the national economy g encourage british imports h prevent congressional control of interstate commerce j strengthen the powers of state governments 3 why did president george washington caution americans against forming alliances with foreign nations in his farewell address.
a he feared trade with latin america would be harmed.
1 hist 5 e b he was troubled that france might establish colonies in the americas.
c he worried that the nation might later be dragged into a foreign war.
d he sought to protect americas western frontier.
name chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 195 eli whitney and samuel slater were important to the spread of the industrial revolution to the united states because they csts a created new methods of production c increased steel production b devised new forms of transportation d built steam powered machines use the graph and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
10 what conclusion can be drawn from the information in the graph.
f the u s government encour aged foreign trade between 1800 and 1812.
g american trade was affected by events taking place in europe.
h trade increased sharply with the passage of the embargo acts j american trading ships were attacked by france and great britain.
source historical statistics of the united states 11 a major reason president thomas jefferson supported the purchase of the louisiana territory in 1803 was that it a gave the united states ownership of florida 1 oq b allowed the united states to gain control of california c gave the united states control of the mississippi river d removed the spanish from north america 12 washingtons proclamation of neutrality 1793 jeffersons embargo act 1807 and the monroe doctrine 1823 were all efforts to f avoid political conflicts with european nations hist 5 e g directly support european revolutions h aid great britain in its war against france j promote military alliances 13 the decision in marbury v madison 1803 was important because it a upheld the constitutionality of the national bank govt 18 b j b restricted congresss power to use the elastic clause c permitted the federal government to regulate interstate commerce d established the supreme courts power to judge the constitutionality of laws 14 which areas were added to the united states by the louisiana purchase.
f territory from the atlantic ocean to the appalachians g territory from the appalachians to the mississippi river h territory from the rocky mountains to the pacific ocean j territory from the mississippi river to the rocky mountains chapter 10 the early republic 1789 1828 197 18 the decision in gibbons v ogden 1824 basically addressed which of the following issues.
f the issue of congressional privileges govt is s j g the regulation of interstate commerce h the right of states to tax a federal property j the supreme courts right to declare congressional acts unconstitutional 19 one similarity in the foreign policies of presidents george washington thomas jefferson and james monroe was that they a favored france over england f hist 5 e b sought colonies in other parts of the world c came to the defense of latin american nations d sought to avoid involvement in european political struggles 20 which power did the u s supreme court establish in marbury v madison f judicial review g hearing appeals from lower federal courts h deciding cases involving two or more states j judicial independence through lifetime tenure 21 president george washington pursued a foreign policy of neutrality during his administration because he believed that a treaties were prohibited by the constitution b the united states should not expand by force c the nation should develop its own interests in the western hemisphere d alliances should be established with both france and england 22 under john marshalls leadership the supreme court issued decisions that f declared racial segregation laws unconstitutional f citt 22 a g gave states the power to tax the bank of the united states h increased the ability of congress to limit the powers of the president j emphasized the supremacy of federal laws over state laws 23 during the early 1800s major improvements to a nationwide system of trade were advanced with the a construction of canals i sts 27 b j b use of gasoline powered boats on rivers c completion of the transcontinental railroad d construction of an interstate highway system 24 which was an important leadership quality of president george washington.
f strong support for the emerging party system citi 22 a j g a willingness to listen to different points of view h a failure to make his own decisions j eagerness to engage in conflict with european powers.
chapter 11 the age of jackson 199 a andrew jackson a popular military hero accused john quincy adams and henry clay of stealing the election of 1824 by a corrupt bargain b jackson was elected president in 1828.
he saw himself as the representative of the common man and invited the public to attend his inauguration.
c in these years state governments ended property requirements for voting allowing all adult white males to vote.
political parties adopted new tactics to reach more voters popular rallies parades and nominating conventions.
d jackson favored the spoils systems replacing government officials with his own supporters.
this policy gave more citizens a role in government and prevented the creation of a permanent class of government officials.
e jackson proposed the indian removal act in 1830.
the act required the indians to adopt western ways or move west.
the cherokees refused to do so and appealed their case to the supreme court.
john marshall ruled in their favor.
in worcester r georgia the court again ruled in favor of the cherokees.
this could not prevent jackson from removing the cherokees.
the delay in their move led to thousands of cherokee deaths along the trail of tears f southerners opposed the tariff of abominations and the tariff of 1832.
john c calhoun wrote that a state had the right to nullify within its borders a federal law it believed was unconstitutional.
in 1832 south carolina threatened to secede but backed down when president jackson threatened to use force.
g jackson opposed the second national bank which he felt favored the rich in the north.
he withdrew government funds and refused to renew its charter.
h the american free enterprise system is based on respect for private property minimal government interference in the economy and the free interaction of producers and consumers.
prices are set by the interaction of consumer demand and the available supply from producers.
the industrial revolution started in the 1760s in britain and spread to the united states.
it began in the textile industry but soon transferred to other industries.
work shifted from homes to factories where workers could be supervised and where water and steam power could be used to run machines.
the age of jackson was a period of reform.
protestant preachers traveled the countryside and preached for days at camp meetings in the second great awakening.
abolitionists sought to end slavery.
dorothea dix campaigned to improve conditions in mental hospitals.
other reformers belonged to the temperance movement which sought to ban the drinking of alcohol.
k during this period women met at the seneca falls convention 1848 where they demanded equality with men including the right to vote.
l this period was also a golden age of literature and art with such prominent writers as nathaniel hawthorne herman melville and edgar alan poe and the painters of the hudson river school including thomas cole.
name chapter 11 the age of jackson 201 the age of jackson a native of tennessee andrew jackson was not bom to wealth.
he defeated british forces at the battle of new orleans in 1815.
later he spent several years fighting native american indians in georgia and florida.
after his defeat in the election of 1824 jackson and his supporters spent the next four years campaigning for the presidency.
they introduced new campaign tactics like popular rallies parades and nominating conventions.
the age of the common man.
jackson was finally elected president in 1828.
his supporters were the common people laborers farmers and frontiersmen.
jackson saw himself as the spokesman of the common man the average american.
the inauguration.
jackson invited the public to visit the white house for his inauguration.
a crowd of 20 000 people many in muddy boots passed through the building.
some broke glassware and china dishes in their struggle to get refreshments.
the expansion of democracy.
jacksons two terms in office saw an expansion of american democracy.
this was a time in which state governments were changing their requirements for voting.
when the republic was founded most states required white adult males to own some property in order to vote.
now these property qualification were lifted.
democratic changes under jackson voting rights.
in the 1820s states eliminated the requirement that voters own property so that most white males over 21 could vote.
choosing a president.
selection of presidential candidates by party leaders was replaced by nominating conventions where popularly elected members of each political party chose their candidates.
campaign methods.
with increased numbers of voters new campaign methods emerged.
candidates held dinners rallies and public meetings.
jackson invited ordinary people to his inauguration.
the spoils system.
jackson believed the president should act as the voice of the common people.
to make government more responsive to popular needs jackson favored the spoils system.
supporters who helped in his election campaign were appointed to government posts in place of existing officials.
name chapter 11 the age of jackson 203 based on their accomplishments the cherokees rejected jacksons proposal.
when the state of georgia tried to remove them the cherokees took their case to the u s supreme court.
in cherokee nation v georgia they claimed they were an independent nation protected by treaty.
john marshall held that the tribe was a dependent nation subject to federal not state law.
the cherokees won their case but jackson was determined to remove them anyway.
he concluded a treaty with some cherokee tribe members giving them two years to relocate to oklahoma.
worcester k georgia meanwhile georgia passed a law in 1830 stating that any white person living among indians without a license from the governor would be sent to prison.
state legislators feared white missionaries were encouraging indians to resist removal.
samuel worcester a missionary was arrested and sentenced to prison for four years for living among the cherokees.
worcester sued to obtain his freedom.
his case came before the u s supreme court in 1832.
acting as an amateur historian in worcester v georgia john marshall freed worcester and declared the cherokee nation is a distinct community occupying its own territory with boundaries accurately described in which the laws of georgia can have no force and the citizens of georgia have no right to enter without the permission of the cherokees themselves.
the whole relationship between the united states and this nation is by our constitution and laws placed in the government of the united states.
the act of georgia under which the plaintiff was prosecuted is void.
the acts of georgia are against the constitution laws and treaties of the united states based on this excerpt why did the u s supreme court free worcester.
cherokee leaders delayed moving.
ironically because of this legal delay the cherokees were now forced to move in late fall and winter when the weather had turned bitterly cold.
in 1837 federal troops were called in to escort 16 000 cherokees to their new home in indian territory.
one fourth of them died from exposure starvation and fevers during the march along the 800 mile journey known as the trail of tears the trail of tears journey of the cherokee.
chapter 11 the age of jackson 205 webster also pointed out that the constitution assigned the task of determining a laws constitutionality to the supreme court not to the states.
he ended his speech with the stirring words liberty and union now and forever one and inseparable several months later the nation learned president jacksons views when he confronted his vice president john c calhoun with a toast to our federal union it must be preserved calhoun replied with a toast to the union next to our liberty most dear south carolina threatens secession.
in 1832 a new tariff lowered duties by ten percent.
south carolina believing the tariff was still too high put calhouns nullification theory into practice.
a state convention passed a law the ordinance of nullification voiding the tariff banning the collection of its duties in south carolina and threatening to secede from the union if the federal government tried to enforce it.
president jackson immediately spoke out against nullification calling it nothing more than treason.
he acted quickly by dispatching u s naval ships to charleston harbor and ordered that federal fortifications there be strengthened.
to bolster jackson congress responded with the force bill giving the president the power to use military force against south carolina.
jackson also issued a warning in his proclamation to the people of south carolina which called resistance to federal law a form of treason.
henry clay finally proposed a compromise through a reduction in tariffs over the next ten years.
faced with the use of federal troops south carolina withdrew its nullification law and averted a national crisis.
jackson showed that despite his support for states rights he would use force to preserve the union.
jackson declares war on the bank president washington had introduced a national bank as part of hamiltons financial plan.
a second national bank had been chartered in 1816.
jackson greatly disliked the national bank.
he thought it gave an unfair monopoly to wealthy moneyed interests in the northeast.
although the bank was found to be constitutional by the supreme court in mcculloch v maryland jackson set out to eliminate it.
when jackson was reelected president in 1832 he ordered the removal of all federal deposits from the national bank.
this massive withdrawal of funds had the effect of crippling the national bank.
jackson ordered these funds to be placed in state banks which he felt were more agreeable to lending money to farmers.
when it came up for renewal jackson refused to renew the national banks charter.
although many americans admired jackson others thought he was far too dictatorial in the way he handled the bank and other matters.
this cartoon shows how many felt jacks on acted as a monarch.
name chapter 11 the age of jackson 207 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing some of the events associated with jacksons presidency and their importance.
name chapter 11 the age of jackson 209 before the industrial revolution weavers and craftsmen worked at home spinning wool cotton and linen by hand into finished cloth.
this was known as the domestic system.
the industrial revolution began in great britain in the 1760s.
britain already enjoyed many advantages including a powerful middle class a colonial empire to supply it with raw materials plentiful coal to run its machines and a prosperous agriculture in which fewer people were needed to work on farms.
new inventions propel change two important british inventions helped trigger the industrial revolution.
the spinning jenny 1764 allowed several threads to be spun at once permitting many threads to be made quickly and inexpensively.
james watts improved steam engine 1769 made steam power available for mechanical purposes.
steam power could be used to drive many machines at once.
the steam engine led in turn to the construction of large factories the invention of the steamboat and the development of railroad trains.
the shift from home to factory you have already learned that in the 1790s samuel slater had begun producing cotton thread by machine in a factory in new england.
in massachusetts francis cabot lowell 1775 1817 a successful merchant and other investors built new factories during the war of 1812.
in factories workers could be supervised and could use machines driven by w ater or steam power resulting in increased production.
as the production of textiles and other goods increased their prices fell.
a young female lowell factory worker.
with lower prices consumer demand rose for textiles.
people could now afford factory made clothes.
producers were able to produce for mass markets at home and internationally not just for a few local customers.
as demand grew more and more factories were built employing ever larger machines and greater numbers of workers.
these changes set in motion the chain reaction known as the industrial revolution rise of use of i mass the factory steam production system llb power 1 of goods chapter 11 the age of jackson 211 the nature of work the mass production of goods in factories required new work habits.
pre industrial craftsmen had worked at home and performed a variety of tasks.
they could divide their time between tasks as they wished.
factory work was tedious and monotonous workers including children often performed the same simple task for 12 hours each day.
factory work was also highly disciplined workers had to arrive at the factory on time and pay close attention to their work throughout the day.
in 1820 there were only 350 000 factory workers in the united states by 1860 there were already two million.
the working conditions of women and children during these years women were an important part of the workforce.
farm women had to work in the fields as well as cook clean make clothes and care for their children.
other women worked outside the home as servants laundresses cooks or factory workers.
with the rise of industry even more women found work outside the home.
for example the lowell factories in new england employed young single women as workers.
children were expected to respect and obey their parents.
often they worked on the farm in addition to helping with household chores.
with the rise of industry some children worked long hours in mines and factories.
industrial society also required more educated leaders and managers.
people became more aware of childhood as a distinct stage of life with its own special needs.
oka young children work in a textile mill.
the period from the 1820s to the civil war witnessed the growth of several new reform movements.
the spread of jacksonian democracy as well as the new challenges of industrialization helped stimulate these movements.
religious revival the second great awakening there was a revival of strong religious feelings sometimes called the second great awakening methodists baptists and other protestant groups held outdoor religious services and won new converts.
chapter 11 the age of jackson 213 eliza farnham was the warden of a womens prison in new york state in the 1840s.
she believed in treating prisoners fairly.
she allowed prisoners to talk opened a prison library and established a school inside the prison to teach prisoners to read and write.
improved treatment for mental illness in the 1800s most people lacked the knowledge needed to care for those with mental illness.
many mentally ill patients were locked in unheated rooms chained to their beds and beaten into obedience.
some were even sent to jail.
dorothea dix 1802 1887 led the fight for better treatment of the mentally ill dix was distressed to learn that they were often housed with criminals or abused.
her report to the state legislature of massachusetts revealed these shocking conditions.
dix toured other states to report on their treatment of the mentally ill dix also campaigned for general prison reform.
some states established separate buildings to house those with mental disorders.
these patients were permitted to work outdoors and to enjoy recreation.
further improvements in treatment were delayed until mental illness was better understood in the next century.
dorothea dix temperance movement many americans worried that drinking alcoholic beverages ruined peoples health disrupted family life led to unemployment and promoted ungodly behavior.
some protestant preachers denounced drinking alcohol as a sin.
in 1826 the american temperance society was founded.
its chief objective changed from moderation to total abstinence from alcoholic drinks.
in 851 maine became the first state to ban drinking of alcohol.
excessive drinking was considered a serious social issue.
ication common school movement industrial revolution most american children received little formal schooling ldren were taught reading writing arithmetic foreign languages and prayers futor.
reformers like horace mann of massachusetts fought to provide free ary school to every child.
he and other reformers insisted that elementary both free and compulsory.
these reformers wanted american children of mix together in the same common schools.
mann also introduced the teachers.
name chapter 11 the age of jackson 215 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below.
for each reform movement indicate its goal characteristics and important leaders.
temperance movement education reform prison reform goals goals goals characteristics characteristics characteristics leaders leaders leaders treating mental illness women s rights goals goals characteristics characteristics leaders leaders name his birds of america containing life sized portraits of 1 065 individual birds is the most important work on birds ever published.
audubons works in pastel show what american wildlife and woodlands were like before the spread of human settlement.
audubon was also responsible for the discovery of many new species of north american birds and mammals.
his influence on birds and natural history was far reaching.
most later works about birds were in some way inspired by his artistry.
despite a few errors in his observations audubons notes make up one of the most important contributions to our understanding of the anatomy and behavior of birds.
james audubon 1785 1851 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing some of the leading individuals in the arts in america during this period.
name chapter 11 the age of jackson 219 worcester v georgia 1832 jackson and the nullification crisis issue georgia claimed jurisdiction over the cherokees.
they claimed cherokee lands were within their jurisdiction.
the cherokees claimed they were independent.
t supreme court.
established indian tribes standing as domestic dependent nations.
court ruled states couldn t pass laws regulating indians on lands within state borders.
despite winning the case the cherokees lost in reality.
six years after decision they were forced to move to lands in the west.
issue does a state have the power to nullify cancel a federal law within its borders.
tariff crisis 1832 1833 tariff of abominations 1828.
8 t calhoun s exposition and protest 1828.
i webster hayne debate 1830 tariff of 1832 i south carolina threatened to secede.
president jackson threatened force.
8 south carolina backs down s compromise tariff of 1833.
economy and american society the age of reform free enterprise system.
individuals free to produce and sell whatever they wish.
people go into business to make a profit.
prices are set by supply and demand.
t industrial revolution.
began in england.
factory work replaces home production.
mass production in factories.
use of steam engine in factories.
t traditional role of women and children.
women and children had few rights.
religious revival.
second great awakening.
abolitionist movement.
sought to abolish slavery.
t prison reform.
it treatment of mentally iii.
it temperance movement.
t women s rights movement.
seneca falls convention 1848.
issued the declaration of sentiments.
elizabeth cady stanton lucretia mott.
use the quotation and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
the cherokees are nearly all prisoners.
they have been dragged from their homes and encamped at the forts and military places all over the nation.
the properties of many have been taken and sold before their eyes for almost nothing 1 this quotation from an eyewitness on the trail of tears describes events resulting from the a intolerable acts hist 5 g j b lewis and clark expedition c quartering act d indian removal act name chapter 11 the age of jackson 221 7 prior to 1850 what was the primary reason that the north developed an economy increasingly based on manufacturing while the south continued to rely more on an agricultural based economy.
a protective tariffs applied only to northern seaports.
econ 12 b j b slavery in the north promoted rapid economic growth.
c manufacturers failed to make a profit in the south.
d geographic conditions supported different types of economic activity.
8 which was an important effect of the second great awakening.
f andrew jackson was elected president.
citi 25 b g president jackson refused to renew the national bank.
h protestant evangelicals sought to end slavery and achieve other reforms.
j congress supported the first amendment separating church and state.
9 which congressional leader proposed the missouri compromise the compromise tariff of 1833 and helped to resolve the disputed election of 1824.
a john quincy adams c john c calhoun c2j1st 7 d b henry clay d daniel webster use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
we have been obliged to preach womans rights because instead of listening to what we had to say on temperance many have questioned the right of a woman to speak on any subject.
in all courts and legislatures all business waits until that point is settled.
now it is not settled in the mass of minds that woman has any rights on this footstool and much less a right to stand on an even pedestal with man look at him as an equal and rebuke the sins of her day and generation.
let it be understood that we are a womans rights society we believe it is a womans duty to speak whenever she feels the urge to do so first annual meeting of the womans state temperance society rochester new york 1853 10 according to this document which constitutional right was denied women.
f freedom of the press h freedom of speech cibs b g the right to bear arms j freedom of religion 11 in the early 1800s urbanization was mainly the result of the a shortage of land for new farms 1 econ 12 c b federally funded national roads c impact of industrialization d migration of native american indians 12 which political leader argued that states could nullify federal laws.
f john quincy adams h henry clay 7 w j g john c calhoun j daniel webster chapter 11 the age of jackson 223 use the chart and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
year inventor invention 1798 eli whitney system of interchangeable parts for guns 1807 robert fulton first commercially successful steamboat 1829 joseph henry electromagnet used in telegraphs relays 1830 peter cooper first u s steam locomotive 1835 samuel colt first repeating revolver 1844 samuel f b.
morse first telegraph 1846 richard m hoe rotary printing press 1846 elias howe first sewing machine 18 based on the information in the chart what conclusion can be drawn about how inventions changed life in the united states.
f most inventions were made to increase factory production.
sts 27 cj g the greatest changes occurred in the way people communicated.
h american inventors lacked the creativity shown by british inventors.
j american inventions affected a wide range of products and industries.
use the passages and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness that to secure these rights governments are instituted among men deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed that whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it we hold these truths to be self evident that all men and women are created equal that they are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights that among these are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness that to secure these rights governments are instituted deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed.
whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends it is the right of those who suffer from it to refuse allegiance to it r p liiisil 19 in what way did the ideas of the declaration of sentiments differ from the ideas found in the declaration of independence.
a the declaration of sentiments was written by thomas jefferson.
qti24 t b the declaration of independence granted voting rights to men and women.
c the declaration of independence supported the idea of nullification.
d the declaration of sentiments included the equality of men and women.
name manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism teks.
covered in chapter 12 history 1 the student understands traditional historical points of reference in u s history through 1877.
5 history 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including westward expansion and sectionalism.
history 6b explain the political economic and social roots of manifest destiny.
history 6c analyze the relationship between the concept of manifest destiny and the westward growth of the nation.
history 6d explain the causes and effects of the u s mexican war and their impact on the united states.
history 6e identify areas that were acquired to form the united states history 7b compare the effects of political economic and social factors on slaves and free blacks.
history 7c analyze the impact of slavery on different sections of the united states.
history 7d identify the provisions and compare the effects of congressional conflicts and compromises prior to the civil war including the roles of john c calhoun henry clay and daniel webster.
geography 10a locate places and regions of importance in the united states during the 19th century.
economics 12a identify economic differences among different regions of the united states.
economics 12b explain reasons for the development of the plantation system the transatlantic slave trade and the spread of slavery.
economics 12d analyze the causes and effects of economic differences among different regions of the united states at selected times in u s history.
government 17b explain constitutional issues arising over the issue of states rights government 18c evaluate the impact of selected landmark supreme court decisions including dred scott v sandford on life in the united states.
citizenship 2oc analyze reasons for and the impact of selected examples of civil disobedience in u s history such as henry david thoreau s refusal to pay a tax.
citizenship 21a identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues.
citizenship 21c summarize a historical event in which compromise resulted in a peaceful resolution.
citizenship 22b describe the contributions of significant political social and military leaders of the united states such as frederick douglass.
culture 23a identify selected racial ethnic and religious groups that settled in the united states and explain their reasons for immigration.
culture 23d analyze the contributions of people of various racial ethnic and religious groups to our national identity.
culture 24a describe the historical development of the abolitionist movement.
culture 24b evaluate the impact of reform movements including abolition.
science technology and society 27a explain the effects of technological and scientific innovations such as the steamboat the cotton gin and interchangeable parts.
continued j 225 name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 227 a.
the united states expanded westward to the pacific ocean by acquiring a series of new territories.
these territories included the louisiana purchase the purchase of florida the annexation of texas the acquisition of part of the oregon territory the mexican cession and the gadsden purchase.
b americans came to believe it was their fate or manifest destiny to occupy north america from the atlantic to the pacific ocean.
manifest destiny had political economic and social roots.
americans felt they needed these territories to be secure against foreign powers and that these lands would bring new wealth.
finally americans believed god had ordained them to occupy the west.
c by the mid nineteenth century the nation consisted of three different regions or sections many americans felt greater loyalty to their section than to the country as a whole.
this strong regional loyalty was known as sectionalism.
d the north was the most industrialized.
factory workers produced manufactured goods.
farmers raised livestock to supply food to towns and cities.
railroads connected natural resources with factories and consumers.
e the west became the breadbasket of the country growing wheat and other crops.
cities developed on the banks of the great lakes and along major rivers.
f the south was transformed by the invention of the cotton gin and the growing demand for cotton by english and northern factories.
plantation owners grew harvested and shipped cotton with large forces of slaves.
ge immigrants contributed to both economic and demographic growth in this period.
irish immigrants came to escape the famine in ireland.
german immigrants came to escape political repression.
many irish settled in cities in the northeast while germans often settled in ohio michigan and wisconsin.
h northern states abolished slavery.
some southern slaves were freed by their owners and became free blacks.
most moved to the north.
i abolitionists wanted to abolish slavery.
william lloyd garrison frederick douglass and harriet tubman were leading abolitionists.
harriet beecher stowes uncle toms cabin revealed the brutality and violence of slave life.
some slaves escaped slavery in the south on the underground railroad.
k henry david thoreau developed the strategy of civil disobedience refusing to obey laws a citizen believed to be unjust.
slavery apologists like john c calhoun argued that slavery was justified by the bible.
l the struggle over slavery focused on the issue of its extension into new territories.
southerners feared the north would take control of congress and abolish slavery.
under the compromise of 1850 california was admitted as a free state and the fugitive slave law was greatly strengthened.
m the system of compromise started to breakdown when the kansas nebraska act let settlers decide if they wanted slavery adding violence to the issue.
n the republican party was founded against the further spread of slavery.
the dred scott decision holding that african americans had no right to citizenship and that congress could not limit slave owners control of their property ended the possibility of further compromise of the issue.
name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 229 oregon territory 1846 in 1818 great britain and the united states had agreed to joint control of the oregon territory which reached as far north as the latitude 54 40.
in the 1840s large numbers of pioneers began moving along the oregon trail to the fertile wil liamette valley in oregon.
thousands caught oregon fever groups crossed the 2 000 mile trail in covered wagons.
after crossing the rocky mountains most of these pioneers moved to oregon but some moved southwest to california then still a part of mexico.
the trail was often treacherous over deserts rivers and mountains and more than 20 000 people died along the route.
the mormons in utah the mormons were founded in upstate new york in 1830 by joseph smith at the time of the second great awakening they moved from new york to ohio missouri and illinois but were driven out of these states because of their unique religious beliefs which included marrying several wives.
in 1847 their leader brigham young led them westward by covered wagon to the great salt lake in utah a seemingly desolate and barren region in the great basin which the move west by followers of joseph smith.
could be cultivated only through irrigation.
here they found comfort in their isolation.
by the time of youngs death in 1877 125 000 mormons lived in utah.
the annexation of texas 1845 in the 1820s a group of americans reached an agreement with the government of mexico to settle in the region of mexico known as texas as the number of anglo american settlers increased the mexican government feared losing control of the area.
in 1830 the mexican government announced a law prohibiting additional settlers from immigrating to texas from the united states.
name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 231 a joint congressional resolution stated that if any new states were to be created out of the lands of texas those north of the missouri compromise line should enter as free states while those south of the line should choose whether or not to permit slavery.
many americans feared that the annexation of texas with its boundaries in dispute was likely to lead to war with mexico.
northern critics suspected that the whole project was being carried out in the interests of slavery.
u s mexican war 1846 1848 shortly after texas was annexed a dispute broke out between the united states and mexico over the southern border of texas.
was the border to be the rio grande or the nueces river.
president polk ordered troops into the contested area.
hoping to use the incident to extend americas borders polk declared war on mexico.
americans living in california also rebelled and declared their independence.
u s troops landed in mexico and marched to mexico city.
mexico was defeated and forced to give up california nevada utah arizona and parts of colorado and new mexico.
in the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo the united states agreed to pay mexico 15 million for these areas known as the mexican cession.
in the mexican american war more than 1 700 americans were killed.
gadsden purchase 1853 in 1853 the united states completed its expansion in the southwest with the gadsden purchase.
this small slice of territory was purchased from mexico for 10 million.
president franklin pierce was anxious to insure u s possession of the area.
as the railroad age progressed business oriented southerners saw that a railroad linking the south with the pacific coast would greatly expand trade opportunities.
the area was seen as the most practicable route for a southern railroad to the pacific.
james gadsden u s minister to mexico was responsible for negotiating the deal.
growth of u s.
territory 1783 1853 name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 233 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below by describing how the united states obtained each of these territories to extend its frontiers to the pacific ocean.
name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 235 many women and children worked in factories.
in 1840 the federal government agreed to the ten hour workday on public projects.
a few states also passed ten hour workday laws.
the west the appalachians had once posed an obstacle to the opening of lands further west but the availability of cheap land and construction of the national road and canals opened the region to settlers.
pioneers carried their possessions in conestoga wagons.
after the construction of the erie canal farmers could send their produce up the mississippi river to the great lakes over the erie canal and down the hudson river to new york city.
the midwest with its flat land and fertile soil became the main producer of grains like wheat and com.
farmers began using machines like the mechanical plow reaper and thrasher.
the west replaced the north as the nations bread basket growing com and wheat and milling flour.
by the mid 1800s the number of settlers moving to the west now the midwest had increased rapidly.
the desire for land and new opportunities continued to fuel westward expansion.
the regions fertile soil attracted many farmers.
removal of the native americans to lands west of the mississippi greatly accelerated westward settlement.
all along major rivers towns like pittsburgh louisville st louis and memphis sprang up.
ohio soon had more residents than massachusetts.
settlers moving west with a conestoga wagon.
settlers to the west set about clearing the land and preparing it to grow crops.
the attraction of the west was more than just farmland for settlers the lure of timber gold silver and grazing lands was an important motive for many to endure the hardships of the region.
white settlers poured across the mississippi to establish ranches dig mines and farm the land.
some free blacks also came west convinced that economic prosperity could be found there.
what role did geography play in helping to make the north and west different.
what role did technological advances play in helping to shape each of these regions.
name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 237 the south at the time of the constitutional convention it appeared that slavery in the united states would gradually die out.
the prices of tobacco rice and indigo were falling and planters in virginia were introducing wheat which did not require slave labor.
thomas jefferson denounced slavery as despotism although he did not free his own slaves.
impact of the cotton gin.
in 1792 however the inventor eli whitney developed the cotton gin a machine that combed through cotton and separated out the seeds.
one machine could do the work of fifty workers separating the seeds by hand.
as a result of this invention cotton cultivation became profitable.
plantation owners began using more slaves and the price of slaves more than doubled almost overnight.
over the next forty years the plantation system and cultivation of king cotton spread throughout the south.
it was hard to satisfy the enormous demand for raw cotton from the factories of the northeast and england.
in jacksonian times the south actually had a variety of economies based on its geographic diversity.
in the piedmont and appalachian regions of virginia north carolina georgia and tennessee families were mainly subsistence farmers who may have grown a few cash crops.
few farmers had slaves.
on the atlantic coastal plain however plantation owners used slave labor to grow cotton rice and tobacco for export to northern cities and european markets.
major southern cities like new orleans and charleston served as ports for shipping southern exports.
cotton production and the slave population 1800 1860 4 000 000 3 500 000 3 000 000 53 2 500 000 1 12 000 000 o 1 500 000 1 000 000 500 000 0 4 000 000 3 500 000 3 000 000 2 500 000 2 000 000 1 500 000 1 000 000 500 000 0 1800 1810 1820 1830 1840 1850 1860 1800 1810 1820 1830 1840 1850 1860 years years tzi i in what relationship do you see between these two graphs.
an over emphasis on the cultivation of cotton and other cash crops led some southern states to ignore improvements in industry and transportation.
southern plantations often exhausted the soil fell into debt and failed to develop new technologies.
the south fell behind the north in the number of railroads factories and schools.
southern cities generally remained small and lacked industry.
name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 239 despite their horrible living and working conditions many slaves held onto their rich african heritage through music religion and folklore.
many also resisted slavery by not cooperating by escaping committing sabotage or theft.
in some cases open rebellion was carried out.
nat turners rebellion in 1831 caused a wave of fear among slave owners.
the uprising terrorized white southerners.
as a result southern lawmakers passed stricter regulations tightly controlling the activities of both enslaved and free blacks.
the free blacks benjamin franklin and others organized an end to slavery in pennsylvania which became the first state to abolish it in 1780.
most other northern states passed laws gradually eliminating slavery while many southern states then passed laws making it easier for slave owners to free individual slaves.
after the american revolution thousands of slaves were freed.
in 1800 there were already 100 000 free blacks in the united states while by 1810 three quarters of the african americans in the north were free.
on the eve of the civil war about ten percent of african americans in the united states about a half a million people were free.
even free blacks however lived in an atmosphere of racial prejudice.
some stayed in southern cities where they became skilled craftsmen.
a large number moved to the north especially to port towns where they worked in dockyards or opened shops in their own neighborhoods.
free african americans also opened their own churches which became centers for education and community life.
discrimination against free blacks increased as white workers began facing new competition from immigrant laborers.
in the south free blacks had few legal rights.
by the mid 1800s each of these sections of the country had developed its own distinctive way of life.
these differences led to sectionalism the greater loyalty many americans felt toward their own section than to the country as a whole.
in particular southerners felt their way of life was being threatened by the north.
northerners feared the south wanted to spread slavery throughout the nation.
the norths focus was on business and industry as they concentrated on manufacturing shipping and trading goods.
by contrast the souths economy centered around plantations cash crops and steady agricultural growth.
fa look on the internet or in your local library to find examples of pictures or paintings of each section of the nation at this time.
what does an examination of these pictures or paintings tell you about that particular section.
make a map showing sectional differences before 1860.
use boxes with labels to identify the political economic and social features of each section.
name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 241 frederick douglass 1818 1895 abolitionists believed that slavery was morally wrong and wanted to end it.
in the decades leading up to the civil war abolitionist leaders were men and women of high moral purpose and courage who sought to make the issue of slavery a focus of national politics.
at first most abolitionists were widely denounced.
mobs sometimes attacked them even in the north.
southerners burned antislavery pamphlets and excluded them from the mails.
the u s congress imposed the gag rule to avoid considering abolitionist petitions.
john quincy adams who had returned to congress after his term as president spent much of the final years of his political life fighting against this gag rule.
in 1833 the british empire abolished slavery.
by 1838 more than 1 350 antislavery societies existed in the united states with almost 250 000 members.
the book uncle toms cabin 1853 by harriet beecher stowe depicted the evils of slavery and stirred the public conscience of the north.
william lloyd garrison and other abolitionists including former slaves harriet tubmann and frederick douglass published anti slavery writings and delivered speeches throughout the north.
they were also active in the underground railroad which helped many fugitive slaves to escape to canada.
acting as an amateur historian william lloyd garrison 1805 1879 william lloyd garrison was a prominent abolitionist who started his own newspaper the liberator in 1831.
the passage below appeared in vol.
1 i will be as harsh as truth and as uncompromising as justice.
on this subject abolition of slavery i do not wish to think or speak or write with moderation.
tell a man whose house is on fire to give a moderate alarm tell the mother to gradually pull her baby from the fire into which it has fallen but urge me not to use moderation in this cause.
i will not hesitate i will not retreat a single inch and i will be heard.
the apathy of the people is enough to make every statue leap from its pedestal and to hasten the resurrection of the dead describe one goal that garrison was trying to achieve in the liberator.
name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 243 escaping along the underground railroad.
the underground railroad.
some slaves escaped from the south with the help of the underground railroad a vast network of people who helped fugitive slaves escape to the north or canada where slavery had been abolished.
people allowed the escaping fugitives to rest in their bams cellars or houses.
these safe places were called stations the fugitive slaves usually moved by foot at night helped on their journey by a conductor they took advantage of the protection offered by nature by hiding in swamps bayous forests and waterways.
they would generally travel 10 to 20 miles until they reached the next station.
there they would rest and eat hiding in bams and other out of the way places until they moved on to the next station.
some runaways sought refuge in cities such as baltimore and new orleans where they tried to blend in with free blacks living there.
acting as an amateur.
historian t this passage by frederick douglass was taken from his book my escape from slavery.
douglass was a gifted writer and speaker.
in this passage he describes his escape from slavery and how dehumanizing slavery was though i was not a murderer fleeing from justice i felt perhaps quite as miserable as such a criminal.
the train was moving at a very high rate of speed for that period of railroad travel but to my anxious mind it was moving far too slowly.
minutes were hours and hours were days during this part of my flight.
after maryland i was to pass through delaware another slave state where slave catchers awaited their prey for it was not in the interior of the state but its borders that these human hounds were most vigilant and active.
the border lines between slavery and freedom were the dangerous ones for the fugitives why did douglass fear when he came to a border crossing.
investigate the abolitionist movement on the internet and make a map showing some of the major stations of the underground railroad.
in your school library public library or on the internet read excerpts from harriet beecher stowes uncle toms cabin.
name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 245 learning with graphic organizers complete the graphic organizer below describing the accomplishments of each abolitionist.
look on the internet for more information name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 247 founding of the republican party 1854.
critics of the kansas nebraska act formed a new political party the republican party.
republicans agreed to let slavery continue in the south but they opposed any further extension of slavery into any of the new territories.
dred scott v sandford 1857.
a southern slave dred scott was taken by his owner to the north and then back into slavery in the south.
scott sued for his freedom.
having been on free soil he argued that he could not be taken back into slavery.
decision significance.
in 1857 chief justice roger taney read the supreme courts decision as a descendant of african bom slaves dred scott was declared to be a non citizen and therefore was not entitled to bring a lawsuit before the court.
taney further asserted that africans could never become u s citizens since africans were not included when the constitution was written.
taney then ruled that slaves were property and that congress had no right to take away a slaveholders property.
this meant that congress could not lawfully prohibit slavery in new territories since slavery was still legal the missouri compromise of 1820 was unconstitutional.
chief justice taneys ruling meant that slavery could spread.
dred scott acting as an amateur.
historian t in 1857 80 year old chief justice taney was a southern supporter of slavery who was intent on protecting southerners from attacks by abolitionists.
in delivering the courts majority opinion in dred scott v sandford he said african americans had no rights which the white man was bound to respect and that the negro might justly and lawfully be reduced to slavery for his benefit.
he was bought and sold and treated as an ordinary article of merchandise whenever profit could be made by it.
referring to language in the declaration of independence it is too clear for dispute that the enslaved african race were not intended to be included and formed no part of the people who framed and adopted this declaration most abolitionists were enraged at this decision but frederick douglass found a bright side believing that the decision would bring slavery to the attention of the nation and would be a step toward its ultimate destruction.
was douglass justified in his optimism about the case.
lincoln douglas debates.
the dred scott decision questioned the power of congress to control the spread of slavery.
in 1858 lincoln challenged senator stephen douglas author of the kansas nebraska act to a series of formal debates.
douglas had introduced the doctrine of popular sovereignty to the slavery question.
name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 249 applying what you have learned abraham lincolns house divided speech spoke of the dangers of disunion because of slavery.
look up that section of the speech in the library or on the internet.
describe in your own words why lincoln felt slavery posed a danger.
should john brown be considered an american hero or a villain.
turn your classroom into the u s senate in the 1850s.
assign roles as democratic or republican senators from the north south and west.
then see if you can negotiate a compromise on the issue of the extension of slavery in order to avoid the civil war.
a make your own illustrated timeline of major events involving sectional rivalry from the missouri compromise of 1820 to john browns raid of 1859.
learning with graphic organizers in the next chapter you will leam about the civil war.
some of the developments you read about in this chapter relate to causes of that conflict.
complete the graphic organizer below by identifying each of the following causes of the civil war.
sectionalism issues of state s rights abolitionist movement dred scott decision kansas nebraska act causes of the r civil war y issue of slavery in the the new territories founding of the republican party john brown s raid in virginia name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 251 the abolitionist movement the breakdown of compromise goals of the abolitionist movement.
saw slavery as morally wrong.
sought to bring about an end to slavery.
leading abolitionists.
harriet beecher stowes wrote unde tom s cabin about the evils of slavery.
harriet tubman.
frederick douglass.
william lloyd garrison.
the liberator underground railroad.
slaves escaped to the north and many went on to canada.
the major issue was the extension of slavery in the newly acquired territories of the west.
i missouri compromise 1820.
i compromise of 1850.
california entered as free state fugitive slave law bolstered.
i kansas nebraska act 1854.
introduced the idea of popular sovereignty.
republican party formed in 1854 to oppose j the extension of slavery.
j scott decision 1857.
supreme court i ruled that congress cannot limit slaves j missouri compromise is unconstitutional.
i 1 the climate and topography of the southeastern united states had a major impact on the history of the united states before 1860 because the region a developed as the largest domestic source of steel production tccn 12 b b became the center of commerce and manufacturing c was the area in which most immigrants chose to settle d grew agricultural products that encouraged the continuation of slavery examine the question.
this question deals with the impact of climate and topography of the south on u s history.
recall whatyou know.
you should recall that the climate and topography of the south was favorable to growing cotton rice and tobacco that relied heavily on slave labor.
apply whatyou know.
choices a 13 and c are all incorrect.
these choices were more characteristic of the north and west than the south.
choice d is the best answer since the south grew agricultural products that encouraged the continuation of slavery.
now try answering some additional questions on your own.
2 which event was most influenced by the american belief in manifest destiny.
f the start of the u s mexican war f hist 6 cj j g cherokee march along trail of tears h defeat of britain in the american revolution j acquisition of the florida 3 in which section of early 19th century america did the emergence of the plantation system have a key economic effect.
a new england c the mid atlantic states econ i2 b b the south d the west name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 253 use the venn diagram and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
william lloyd garrison frederick douglass 8 what term belongs in place of the question mark in the venn diagram.
f womens rights movement fciti 24 a g temperance movement h abolitionist movement j educational reformers 9 both the missouri compromise of 1820 and the compromise of 1850 settled conflicts between the north and the south over a the admission of new states into the union titi 21 cj b presidential election results c immigration to the united states d the role of the supreme court in declaring acts unconstitutional use the map and your knowledge of social studies to answer questions 10 and 11.
10 which area on the map was annexed by the united states in 1845.
f area 1 hist 6 e j g area 2 h area 3 j area 4 11 which area on the map was part of the mexican cession.
a areal c hist 6 e 1 b area 2 c area 3 d area 4 12 the dred scott decision had a major impact on life in the united states because it f limited the power of the supreme court to rule on cases of race 4govt 18 c j g supported congress right to forbid slavery in the territories h reopened the issue of slavery in the territories j reaffirmed the presidents right to serve more than two terms in office name chapter 12 manifest destiny and the rise of sectionalism 255 use the passage and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
am i to argue that it is wrong to make men brutes to rob them of their liberty to work them without wages to keep them ignorant of their relations to their fellow men to beat them with sticks to lash their flesh with a whip to load their limbs with irons to hunt them with dogs to sell them at auction to break up their families to knock out their teeth to bum their flesh to starve them into obedience to their masters.
must i argue that a system marked with blood is wrong.
no i will not a speech to citizens of rochester new york on july 4 1852 18 which statement best summarizes the argument made by frederick douglass in this speech.
f the national government has an obligation to protect slaves.
citi 22 b g some have falsely accused slaveowners over how slaves were treated.
h it is obvious to all who care to look that the system of slavery is wrong.
j some slaves do not mind their treatment at the hands of their masters.
19 which statement best describes the economic differences between the north and the south in the period prior to the civil war.
a the northern economy had significant manufacturing while the econ 12 a southern economy was almost exclusively agricultural.
b jobs on plantations attracted more european immigrants to the south than the north c transportation systems were less developed in the north than in the south d the southern economy was more diversified than the northern economy.
use the information shown in the boxes and your knowledge of social studies to answer the following question.
the emergence of the abolitionist movement henry david thoreau s action against the u s government john brown s raid on harper s ferry virginia 20 what did these developments have in common.
f they established public education for all americans.
butt 24 a j g they introduced fairer voting procedures for state officials.
h they led to a continuation of slavery in the united states.
j they sought changes to end slavery.
name the civil war 1861 1865 history 1 the student understands traditional historical points of reference in u s history through 1877.
history 1a identify the major eras and events in u s history through 1877 including the civil war and describe their causes and effects.
history ib apply absolute and relative chronology through the sequencing of significant individuals events and time periods.
history 1c explain the significance of the following dates 1861 1865.
history 7c analyze the impact of slavery on different sections of the united states.
history 8 the student understands individuals issues and events of the civil war.
history 8a explain the roles played by significant individuals during the civil war including jefferson davis ulysses s grant robert e lee and abraham lincoln and heroes such as congressional medal of honor recipients william carney and philip bazaar.
history 8b explain the causes of the civil war including sectionalism states rights and slavery and significant events of the civil war including the firing on fort sumter the battles of antietam gettysburg and vicksburg the announcement of the emancipation proclamation lee s surrender at appomattox court house and the assassination of abraham lincoln.
history 8c analyze abraham lincoln s ideas about liberty equality union and government as contained in his first and second inaugural addresses and the gettysburg address and contrast them with the ideas contained in jefferson davis s inaugural address.
geography 10a locate places and regions of importance in the united states during the 19th century.
economics 12a economics 12d identify economic differences among different regions of the united states.
analyze the causes and effects of economic differences among different regions of the united states at selected times in u s history.
government 17b explain constitutional issues arising over the issue of states rights including the civil war.
citizenship 21a identify different points of view of political parties and interest groups on important historical and contemporary issues.
citizenship 22a analyze the leadership qualities of elected and appointed leaders of the united states such as abraham lincoln.
citizenship 22b describe the contributions of significant political social and military leaders of the united states such as stonewall jackson.
culture 24a describe the historical development of the abolitionist movement.
culture 26a describe developments in art music and literature that are unique to american culture such as the battle hymn of the republic.
in this chapter you will learn how americans endured their greatest test since independence the civil war.
more americans died in the civil war than in any other conflict.
after four years of fighting the war brought an end to slavery and firmly established the supremacy of the federal government over the states.
