chapter 11 the triumphs and travails of the jeffersonian republic 1800 1812 the jeffersonian revolution of 1800 jefferson won by a majority of 73 electoral votes to 65 see map 11 1.
in defeat the colorless and presumably unpopular adams polled more electoral strength than he had gained four years earlier except for new york.
vt 4 nh ny pa dr 8 f 7 northwest terr.
indiana territory ma ct nj ri de va ky md dr 5 f 5 nc r 13 f 4 tn sc mississippi territory ga candidate party electoral vote jefferson democratic republican burr 53 53 adams federalist pinckney jay 47 46 map 11 1 presidential election of 1800 with electoral vote by state new york was the key state in this election and aaron burr helped swing it away from the federalists with tactics that anticipated the political machines of a later day.
federalists complained that burr travels every night from one meeting of republicans to another haranguing.
them to the most zealous exertions.
he can stoop so low as to visit every low tavern that may happen to be crowded with his dear fellow citizens but burr proved that the price was worth it.
we have beat you burr told kid gloved federalists after the election by superior management interactive map the empire state fell into the jeffersonian basket and with it the election largely because aaron burr a master wire puller turned new york to jefferson by the narrowest of margins.
the virginian polled the bulk of his strength in the south and west particularly in those states where universal white manhood suffrage had been adopted.
decisive in jeffersons victory was the three fths clause of the constitution.
by counting three fths of the slave population for the purposes of congressional and electoral college representation the constitution gave white southern voters a bonus that helped jefferson win the white house.
northern critics fumed that jefferson was a negro president and an illegitimate embodiment of the slave power that the southern states wielded in the nation.
jeffersonian joy was dampened by an unexpected deadlock.
through a technicality jefferson the presidential candidate and burr his vice presidential running mate received the same number of electoral votes for the presidency.
under the constitution the tie could be broken only by the house of representatives see art.
this body was controlled for several more months by the lame duck federalists who preferred burr to the hated jefferson.
voting in the house moved slowly to a climax as exhausted representatives snored in their seats.
the agonizing deadlock was broken at last when a few federalists despairing of electing burr and hoping for moderation from jefferson refrained from voting.
the election then went to the rightful candidate.
john adams as fate would have it was the last federalist president of the united states.
his party sank slowly into political oblivion and ultimately disappeared completely in the days of andrew jackson.
jefferson later claimed that the election of 1800 was a revolution comparable to that of 1776 and historians have sometimes referred to the revolution of 1800.
but the election was no revolution in the sense of a massive popular upheaval or an upending of the political system.
in truth jefferson had narrowly squeaked through to victory.
a switch of some 250 votes in new york would have thrown the election to adams.
jefferson meant that his election represented a return to what he considered the original spirit of the revolution.
in his eyes hamilton and adams had betrayed the ide a lame duck has been humorously de ned as a politician whose political goose has been cooked in the recent elections.
the possibility of another such tie was removed by the twelfth amendment in 1804 see the appendix.
before then each elector had two votes with the second place nisher becoming vice president.
the thomas jefferson sally hemings controversy ebate over whether thomas jefferson had sexual relations with sally hemings a slave at monticello began as early as 1802 when james callender published the rst accusations and federalist newspapers gleefully broadcast them throughout the country.
two years later this print titled a philosophic cock attacked jefferson by depicting him as a rooster and hemings as a hen.
the rooster or cock was also a symbol of revolutionary france.
jeffersons enemies sought to discredit him for personal indiscretions as well as radical sympathies.
although he resolutely denied having an affair with hemings the charge that at rst seemed to be only a politically motivated defamation refused to go away.
in the 1870s two new oral sources of evidence came to light.
madison hemings sallys next to last child claimed that his mother had identied jefferson as the father of all ve of her children.
soon thereafter james par d tons biography of jefferson revealed that among jeffersons white descendants it was said that his nephew had fathered all or most of sallys children.
in the 1950s several large publishing projects on jeffersons life and writings uncovered new evidence and inspired renewed debate.
most convincing was dumas malones calculation that jefferson had been present at monticello nine months prior to the birth of each of sallys children.
speculation continued throughout the rest of the century with little new evidence until scientic advances made possible dna testing of the remains of jeffersons white and possible black descendants to determine paternity.
two centuries after callender rst cast aspersions on jeffersons morality cutting edge science helped establish the high probability that jefferson had fathered sallys youngest son and the likelihood that he was the father of all of her children.
chapter 11 the triumphs and travails of the jeffersonian republic 1800 1812 mrs benjamin tallmadge and son henry floyd and daughter maria jones colonel benjamin tallmadge and son william tallmadge by ralph earl 1790 the tallmadges were among the leading citizens of litcheld a federalist stronghold in the heavily federalist state of connecticut.
colonel benjamin tallmadge served with distinction in the revolutionary war became a wealthy merchant and banker and represented his state in congress from 1801 to 1817.
mary floyd tallmadge like her husband came from a prominent long island family.
the opulence of the tallmadges clothing and surroundings in these paintings abundantly testies to the wealth and the social pretensions of the federalist elite.
note the toy carriage near the feet of the tallmadge daughter a replica of the actual and elegant carriage owned by the tallmadge family.
a philadelphia woman wrote her sister in law about the pride she felt on the occasion of thomas jeffersons inauguration as third president of the united states in 1801 i have this morning witnessed one of the most interesting scenes a free people can ever witness.
the changes of administration which in every government and in every age have most generally been epochs of confusion villainy and bloodshed in this our happy country take place without any species of distraction or disorder.
als of 1776 and 1787.
jeffersons mission as he saw it was to restore the republican experiment to check the growth of government power and to halt the decay of virtue that had set in under federalist rule.
no less revolutionary was the peaceful and orderly transfer of power on the basis of an election whose results all parties accepted.
this was a remarkable achievement for a raw young nation especially after all the partisan bitterness that had agitated the country during adamss presidency.
it was particularly remarkable in that age comparable successions would not take place in britain for another generation.
after a decade of division and doubt americans could take justiable pride in the vigor of their experiment in democracy.
jefferson as president responsibility breeds moderation long tom jefferson was inaugurated president on march 4 1801 in the swampy village of washington the crude new national capital.
tall six feet two and a half inches with large hands and feet red hair the red fox and prominent cheekbones and chin he was an arresting gure.
having spent ve years as u s minister to france 1784 1789 he was uent in french and a sophisticated cosmopolitan citizen of the world yet he never lost the common touch.
believing that the customary pomp did not bet his democratic ideals he spurned a horse drawn coach and strode by foot to the capitol from his boardinghouse.
jeffersons inaugural address beautifully phrased was a classic statement of democratic principles.
the will of the majority is in all cases to prevail jefferson declared.
but he added that will to be rightful must be reasonable the minority possess their equal rights which equal law must protect and to violate would be oppression seeking to allay federalist fears of a bullin the china closet overturn jefferson ingratiatingly intoned we are all republicans we are all federalists as for foreign affairs he pledged honest friendship with all nations entangling alliances with none with its rustic setting washington lent itself admirably to the simplicity and frugality of the jeffersonian republicans.
in this respect it contrasted sharply with the elegant at mosphere of federalist philadelphia the former temporary capital.
extending democratic principles to etiquette jefferson established the rule of pell mell at ofcial dinners that is seating without regard to rank.
the resplendent british minister who had enjoyed precedence among the pro british federalists was insulted.
as president jefferson could be shockingly unconventional.
he would receive callers in sloppy attire once in a dressing gown and heel less slippers.
he president john f kennedy 1917 1963 once greeted a large group of nobel prize winners as the most extraordinary collection of talent of human knowledge that has ever been gathered together at the white house with the possible exception of when thomas jefferson dined alone.
started the precedent unbroken until woodrow wilsons presidency 112 years later of sending messages to congress to be read by a clerk.
personal appearances in the federalist manner suggested too strongly a monarchical speech from the throne.
besides jefferson was painfully conscious of his weak voice and unimpressive platform presence.
as if compelled by an evil twin jefferson was forced to reverse many of the political principles he had so vigorously championed.
there were in fact two thomas jeffersons.
one was the scholarly private citizen who philosophized in his study.
the other was the harassed public ofcial who made the disturbing discovery that bookish theories worked out differently in the noisy arena of practical politics.
the open minded virginian was therefore consistently inconsistent it is easy to quote one jefferson to refute the other.
jefferson inaugural pitcher 1801 this memento from the election of 1800 immortalized president thomas jeffersons words we are all republicans we are all federalists which turned out to be more hopeful than true.
jefferson was portrayed in the plain attire he favored shunning the sartorial pretensions affected by many federalists such as the elegantly dressed tallmadges shown on p 228.
chapter 11 the triumphs and travails of the jeffersonian republic 1800 1812 jeffersons cabinet at monticello jeffersons study gave physical evidence of his fondness for ideas and inventions.
he attached candles to his chair for light read from a revolving book stand and surrounded himself with an astronomical clock and an achromatic telescope through which he observed the eclipse of the sun in 1811.
on the table is a polygraph invented in london and promoted by charles willson peale in philadelphia.
jefferson used it to make copies of the letters he penned.
jeffersonians watched the federalist appointees grow old in ofce and grumbled that few die none resign jefferson quickly proved an able politician.
he was especially effective in the informal at mosphere of a dinner party.
there he wooed congressional representatives while personally pouring imported wines and serving the tasty dishes of his french cook.
in part jefferson had to rely on his personal charm because his party was so weak jointed.
denied the power to dispense patronage the democratic republicans could not build a loyal political following.
opposition to the federalists was the chief glue holding them together and as the federalists faded so did democraticrepublican unity.
the era of well developed welldisciplined political parties still lay in the future.
the triumph of thomas jeffersons democraticrepublicans and the eviction of the federalists marked the rst party overturn in american history.
the vanquished naturally feared that the victors would grab all the spoils of ofce for themselves.
but jefferson in keeping with his conciliatory inaugural address showed unexpected moderation.
to the dismay of his ofceseeking friends the new president dismissed few public servants for political reasons.
patronage hungry the toleration of thomas jefferson 1743 1826 was reected in his inaugural address if there be any among us who would wish to dissolve this union or to change its republican form let them stand undisturbed as monuments of the safety with which error of opinion may be tolerated where reason is left free to combat it.
jeffersonian restraint at the outset jefferson was determined to undo the federalist abuses begotten by the anti french hysteria.
the hated alien and sedition acts had already expired.
the incoming president speedily pardoned the martyrs who were serving sentences under the sedition act and the government remitted many nes.
shortly after the congress met the jeffersonians enacted the new naturalization law of 1802.
this act reduced the unreasonable requirement of fourteen years of residence to the previous and more reasonable requirement of ve years.
jefferson actually kicked away only one substantial prop of the hamiltonian system.
he hated the excise tax which bred bureaucrats and bore heavily on his farmer following and he early persuaded congress to repeal it.
his devotion to principle thus cost the federal government about a million dollars a year in urgently needed revenue.
swiss born and french accented albert gallatin watchdog of the treasury proved to be as able a sec john marshall and the supreme court retary of the treasury as hamilton.
gallatin agreed with jefferson that a national debt was a bane rather than a blessing and by strict economy succeeded in reducing it substantially while balancing the budget.
except for excising the excise tax the jeffersonians left the hamiltonian framework essentially intact.
they did not tamper with the federalist programs for funding the national debt at par and assuming the revolutionary war debts of the states.
they launched no attack on the bank of the united states nor did they repeal the mildly protective federalist tariff.
in later years they embraced federalism to such a degree as to recharter a bigger bank and to boost the protective tariff to higher levels.
paradoxically jeffersons moderation thus further cemented the gains of the revolution of 1800 by shrewdly absorbing the major federalist programs jefferson showed that a change of regime need not be disastrous for the defeated group.
his restraint pointed the way toward the two party system that was later to become a characteristic feature of american politics.
the dead clutch of the judiciary the deathbed judiciary act of 1801 was one of the last important laws passed by the expiring federalist congress.
it created sixteen new federal judgeships and other judicial ofces.
president adams remained at his desk until nine oclock in the evening of his last day in ofce supposedly signing the commissions of the federalist midnight judges actually only three commissions were signed on his last day.
this federalist sponsored judiciary act though a long overdue reform aroused bitter resentment.
packing these lifetime posts with anti jeffersonian partisans was in republican eyes a brazen attempt by the ousted party to entrench itself in one of the three powerful branches of government.
jeffersonians condemned the last minute appointees in violent language denouncing the trickery of the federalists as open deance of the peoples will expressed emphatically at the polls.
the newly elected republican congress bestirred itself to repeal the judiciary act of 1801 the year after its passage.
jeffersonians thus swept sixteen benches from under the recently seated midnight judges jeffersonians likewise had their knives sharpened for the scalp of chief justice john marshall whom adams had appointed to the supreme court as a fourth choice in john marshall on assuming the chief justiceship 1801 depicted here as a young man marshall was destined to serve on the supreme court for thirty four years and deeply molded constitutional law.
born in a log cabin on the virginia frontier he attended law lectures for just a few weeks at the college of william and mary his only formal education.
yet marshall would go on to prove himself a brilliant chief justice.
one admiring lawyer wrote of him his black eyes.
possess an irradiating spirit which proclaims the imperial powers of the mind that sits enthroned therein the dying days of his term.
the strong willed marshall with his rasping voice and steel trap mind was a cousin of thomas jefferson.
marshalls formal legal schooling had lasted only six weeks but he dominated the supreme court with his powerful intellect and commanding personality.
he shaped the american legal tradition more profoundly than any other single gure.
marshall had served at valley forge during the revolution.
while suffering there from cold and hunger he had been painfully impressed with the drawbacks of feeble central authority.
the experience made him a lifelong federalist committed above all else to strengthening the power of the federal government.
states rights jeffersonians condemned the crafty chapter 11 the triumphs and travails of the jeffersonian republic 1800 1812 judges twistications but marshall pushed ahead inexibly on his federalist course.
he served for about thirty days under a federalist administration and thirty four years under the administrations of jefferson and subsequent presidents.
the federalist party died out but marshall lived on handing down federalist decisions serenely for many more years.
for over three decades the ghost of alexander hamilton spoke through the lanky black robed judge.
one of the midnight judges of 1801 presented john marshall with a historic opportunity.
he was obscure william marbury whom president adams had named a justice of the peace for the district of columbia.
when marbury learned that his commission was being shelved by the new secretary of state james madison he sued for its delivery.
chief justice marshall knew that his jeffersonian rivals entrenched in the executive branch would hardly spring forward to enforce in his decision in marbury v madison chief justice john marshall 1755 1835 vigorously asserted his view that the constitution embodied a higher law than ordinary legislation and that the court must interpret the constitution the constitution is either a superior paramount law unchangeable by ordinary means or it is on a level with ordinary legislative acts and like other acts is alterable when the legislature shall please to alter it.
if the former part of the alternative be true then a legislative act contrary to the constitution is not law if the latter part be true then written constitutions are absurd attempts on the part of the people to limit a power in its own nature illimitable.
it is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is.
if then the courts are to regard the constitution and the constitution is superior to any ordinary act of the legislature the constitution and not such ordinary act must govern the case to which they are both applicable.
a writ to deliver the commission to his fellow federalist marbury.
he therefore dismissed marburys suit avoiding a direct political showdown.
but the wily marshall snatched a victory from the jaws of this judicial defeat.
in explaining his ruling marshall said that the part of the judiciary act of 1789 on which marbury tried to base his appeal was unconstitutional.
the act had attempted to assign to the supreme court powers that the constitution had not foreseen.
in this self denying opinion marshall greatly magnied the authority of the court and slapped at the jeffersonians.
until the case of marbury v madison 1803 controversy had clouded the question of who had the nal authority to determine the meaning of the constitution.
jefferson in the kentucky resolutions 1798 had tried to allot that right to the individual states.
but now his cousin on the court had cleverly promoted the contrary principle of judicial review the idea that the supreme court alone had the last word on the question of constitutionality.
in this landmark case marshall inserted the keystone into the arch that supports the tremendous power of the supreme court in american life.
marshalls decision regarding marbury spurred the jeffersonians to seek revenge.
jefferson urged the impeachment of an arrogant and tart tongued supreme court justice samuel chase who was so unpopular that republicans named vicious dogs after him.
early in 1804 impeachment charges against chase were voted by the house of representatives which then passed the question of guilt or innocence on to the senate.
the indictment by the house was based on high crimes and misdemeanors as specied in the constitution yet the evidence was plain that the intemperate judge had not been guilty of high crimes but only of unrestrained partisanship and a big mouth.
the senate failed to muster enough votes to convict and remove chase.
the precedent thus established was fortunate.
from that day to this no really serious attempt has been made to reshape the supreme court by the impeachment weapon.
jeffersons ill advised attempt at judge breaking was a reassuring victory for the independence of the judiciary and for the separation of powers among the three branches of the federal government.
the next invalidation of a federal law by the supreme court came fty four years later with the explosive dred scott decision see pp.
for impeachment see art.
iv in the appendix.
war against the barbary states of tripoli dissatised with his share of protection money informally declared war on the united states by cutting down the agstaff of the american consulate.
a gauntlet was thus thrown squarely into the face of jefferson the noninterventionist the pacist the critic of a big ship navy and the political foe of federalist shippers.
he reluctantly rose to the challenge by dispatching the infant navy to the shores of tripoli as related in the song of the u s marine corps.
after four jefferson a reluctant warrior one of jeffersons rst actions as president was to reduce the military establishment to a mere police force of twenty ve hundred ofcers and men.
critics called it penny pinching but jeffersons reluctance to invest in soldiers and ships was less about money than about republican ideals.
among his fondest hopes for america was that it might transcend the bloody wars and entangling alliances of europe.
the united states would set an example for the world forswearing military force and winning friends through peaceful coercion also the republicans distrusted large standing armies as standing invitations to dictatorship.
navies were less to be feared as they could not march inland and endanger liberties.
still the farm loving jeffersonians saw little point in building a eet that might only embroil the republic in costly and corrupting wars far from americas shores.
but harsh realities forced jeffersons principles to bend.
pirates of the north african barbary states see map 11 2 had long made a national industry of blackmailing and plundering merchant ships that ventured into the mediterranean.
preceding federalist administrations in fact had been forced to buy protection.
at the time of the french crisis of 1798 when americans were shouting millions for defense but not one cent for tribute twenty six barrels of blackmail dollars were being shipped to piratical algiers.
war across the atlantic was not part of the jeffersonian vision but neither was paying tribute to a pack of pirate states.
the showdown came in 1801.
the pasha map 11 2 the barbary states of north africa and the burning of the frigate philadelphia 1804 the tripolitan pirates had captured the u s ship philadelphia see p 216 and were preparing to use it against the americans.
in a daring exploit that ensured his lasting fame twenty four yearold u s naval ofcer stephen decatur slipped into the harbor of tripoli and burned the frigate to the waterline denying it to the pirates.
atlan tic ocean france 40 n portugal kingdom of italy spa i n ot kingdom of naples algiers m orocco a lgeri a 500 km.
to ma n em pir e tunis tunisia 500 mi.
med tripoli iterr anean sea cairo the barbary states major battle 30n egyp t tri poli 10e interactive map au stri an em pi re n 20e 30e 40e chapter 11 the triumphs and travails of the jeffersonian republic 1800 1812 years of intermittent ghting marked by spine tingling exploits jefferson succeeded in extorting a treaty of peace from tripoli in 1805.
it was secured at the bargain price of only 60 000 a sum representing ransom payments for captured americans.
small gunboats which the navy had used with some success in the tripolitan war fascinated jefferson.
pledged to tax reduction he advocated a large number of little coastal craft jeffs or the mosquito eet as they were contemptuously called.
he believed these fast but frail vessels would prove valuable in guarding american shores and need not embroil the republic in diplomatic incidents on the high seas.
about two hundred tiny gunboats were constructed democratically in small shipyards where votes could be made for jefferson.
often mounting only one unwieldy gun they were sometimes more of a menace to the crew than to the prospective enemy.
during a hurricane and tidal wave at savannah georgia one of them was deposited eight miles inland in a corneld to the derisive glee of the federalists.
they drank toasts to american gunboats as the best in the world on land.
the louisiana godsend a secret pact fraught with peril for america was signed in 1800.
napoleon bonaparte induced the king of spain to cede to france for attractive considerations the immense trans mississippi region of louisiana which included the new orleans area.
rumors of the transfer were partially con rmed in 1802 when the spaniards at new orleans withdrew the right of deposit guaranteed america by pinckneys treaty of 1795 see p 213.
deposit warehouse privileges were vital to frontier farmers who oated their produce down the mississippi to its mouth there to await oceangoing vessels.
a roar of anger rolled up the mighty river and into its tributary valleys.
american pioneers talked wildly of descending upon new orleans ries in hand.
had they done so the nation probably would have been engulfed in war with both spain and france.
thomas jefferson both pacist and antientanglement was again on the griddle.
louisiana in the senile grip of spain posed no real threat america could seize the territory when the time was ripe.
but louisiana in the iron st of napoleon the preeminent military genius of his age foreshadowed a dark and blood drenched future.
the united states would probably have to ght to dislodge him and because it alone was not strong enough to defeat his armies it would have to seek allies contrary to the deepening antialliance policy.
hoping to quiet the clamor of the west jefferson moved decisively.
early in 1803 he sent james monroe to paris to join forces with the regular minister there robert r livingston.
the two envoys were instructed to buy new orleans and as much land to its east as they could get for a maximum of 10 million.
if these proposals should fail and the situation became critical negotiations were to be opened with britain for an alliance.
the day that france takes possession of new orleans jefferson wrote we must marry ourselves to the british eet and nation that remark dramatically demonstrated jeffersons dilemma.
though a passionate hater of war and an enemy of entangling alliances he was proposing to make an alliance with his old foe britain against his old friend france in order to secure new orleans.
at this critical juncture napoleon suddenly decided to sell all of louisiana and abandon his dream of a new world empire.
two developments prompted his change of mind.
first he had failed in his efforts to reconquer the sugar rich island of santo domingo haiti for which louisiana was to serve as a source of foodstuffs.
rebellious enslaved africans inspired by the french revolutions promises of equality and ably led by the gifted toussaint louverture the opener had struck for their freedom in 1791.
their revolt was ultimately broken.
but then the islands second line of defense mosquitoes carrying yellow fever had swept away thousands of crack french troops.
santo domingo could not be had except perhaps at a staggering cost hence there was no need for louisianas food supplies.
damn sugar damn coffee damn colonies burst out napoleon.
second bonaparte was about to end the twenty month lull in his deadly con ict with britain.
because the british controlled the seas he feared that he might be forced to make them a gift of louisiana.
rather than drive america into the arms of britain by attempting to hold the area he decided to sell the huge wilderness to the americans and pocket the money for his schemes nearer home.
napoleon hoped that the united states strengthened by louisiana would one day be a military and naval power that would thwart the ambitions of the lordly british in the new world.
the predicaments of france in europe were again paving the way for americas diplomatic successes.
events now unrolled dizzily.
the american minister robert livingston pending the arrival of monroe was busily negotiating in paris for a window on the gulf the louisiana purchase toussaint louverture ca.
1743 1803 a self educated ex slave and military genius louverture was nally betrayed by the french who imprisoned him in a chilly dungeon in france where he coughed his life away.
indirectly he did much to set up the sale of louisiana to the united states.
his slave rebellion in haiti also briey established the rst black government in the new world striking fear into the hearts of slaveowners throughout the western hemisphere.
of mexico at new orleans.
suddenly out of a clear sky the french foreign minister asked him how much he would give for all of louisiana.
scarcely able to believe his ears he was partially deaf anyhow livingston nervously entered upon the negotiations.
after about a week of haggling while the fate of north america trembled in the balance treaties were signed on april 30 1803 ceding louisiana to the united states for about 15 million.
when news of the bargain reached america jefferson was startled.
he had authorized his envoys to offer not more than 10 million for new orleans and as much to the east in the floridas as they could get.
instead they had signed three treaties that pledged 15 million for new orleans plus an im mea surable tract entirely to the west an area that would more than double the size of the united states.
they had bought a wilderness to get a city.
once again the two jeffersons wrestled with each other the theorist and former strict constructionist versus the democratic visionary.
where in his beloved constitution was the president authorized to negotiate treaties incorporating a huge new expanse into the union an expanse containing tens of thousands of indian french spanish and black inhabitants.
there was no such clause.
yet jefferson also perceived that the vast domain now within his reach could form a sprawling empire of liberty that would ensure the health and long life of americas experiment in democracy.
conscience stricken jefferson privately proposed that a constitutional amendment be passed.
but his friends pointed out in alarm that in the interval napoleon for whom thought was action might suddenly withdraw the offer.
so jefferson shamefacedly submitted the treaties to the senate while admitting to his associates that the purchase was unconstitutional.
the senators were less nicky than jefferson.
reecting enthusiastic public support they registered their prompt approval of the transaction.
land hungry americans were not disposed to split constitutional hairs when confronted with perhaps the most magnificent real estate bargain in history 828 000 square miles at about three cents an acre.
in accepting the louisiana purchase jefferson thus compromised with conscience in a private letter it is the case of a guardian investing the money of his ward in purchasing an important adjacent territory and saying to him when of age i did this for your good i pretend to no right to bind you you may disavow me and i must get out of the scrape as i can i thought it my duty to risk myself for you.
chapter 11 the triumphs and travails of the jeffersonian republic 1800 1812 louisiana in the long view jeffersons bargain with napoleon was epochal.
overnight he had avoided a possible rupture with france and the consequent entangling alliance with eng land.
with the louisiana purchase america secured at one bloodless stroke the western half of the richest river valley in the world and further laid the foundations of a future major power.
the ideal of a great agrarian republic as envisioned by jefferson could now be realized in the vast valley of democracy at the same time the transfer established valuable precedents for future expansion the acquisition of foreign territory and peoples by purchase and their incorporation into the union not as vassal states but on a basis of equal membership.
this was imperialism with a new and democratic face as french louisianans learned when the washington government agreed to accept their legal code based on french civil law rather than eng lish common law.
to this day louisiana state law uniquely in the american system retains vestiges of its french origins.
indian peoples within the purchase area would not prove so fortunate.
the purchase also contributed to making operational the isolationist principles of washingtons farewell address.
avoiding entangling alliances had been only an ideal to be pursued rather than a realistic policy so long as america had potentially hostile and powerful neighbors.
by removing virtually the last remnant of signicant european power from the north american continent the united states was now at liberty to disengage almost entirely from the ancient system of old world rivalries.
the enormous extent of the new area was more fully unveiled by a series of explorations under jeffersons direction.
in the spring of 1804 jefferson sent his personal secretary meriwether lewis and a young army ofcer named william clark to explore the northern part of the louisiana purchase.
lewis and clarks corps of discovery ascended the great muddy missouri river from st louis and spent the winter of 1804 1805 with the mandan indians in present day north dakota.
then aided by the shoshone woman sacajawea the thirty three adventurers one had died from illness in iowa the groups only casualty struggled across the northern prairies and through the rockies nally descending the columbia river to the pacic coast.
lewis and clarks two and one half year expedition yielded a rich harvest of scientic observations meriwether lewis lewis is portrayed in this painting as he looked on his return from the great expedition through the louisiana purchase and the west.
maps knowledge of the indians in the region and hairraising wilderness adventure stories.
on the great plains they marveled at the immense herds of buffalo elk deer and antelope feeding in one common and boundless pasture lewis was lucky to come back alive.
when he and three other men left the expedition to explore the marias river in present day western montana a band of teenage blackfoot indians armed with crude muskets by british fur traders operating out of canada stole their horses.
lewis foolishly pursued the horse thieves on foot.
he shot one marauder through the belly but the indian returned the re.
being bareheaded lewis later wrote i felt the wind of his bullet the lewis and clark expedition gifts from the great white chief among the objectives of the lewis and clark expedition was to establish good relations with the indians in the newly acquired louisiana purchase.
the american explorers presented all chiefs with copies of these medals showing president jefferson on one side and the hands of an indian and a white man clasped in peace and friendship under a crossed peace pipe and hatchet on the other.
all chiefs also received an american ag and a military uniform jacket hat and feather.
other explorers also pushed into the uncharted west.
zebulon m pike trekked to the headwaters of the mississippi river in 1805 1806.
the next year pike ventured into the southern portion of louisiana territory where he sighted the colorado peak that bears his name.
chinook indians ca.
1805 william clark served as the artist and cartographer of the lewis and clark expedition.
here he sketched the skull molding practice that inspired lewis and clark to call these indians flatheads these people were distinct from the present day flathead indians of montana who got their name from the french.
very distinctly after kill ing another blackfoot and hanging one of the expeditions peace and friendship medals around the dead mans neck as a warning to other indians lewis and his terried companions beat it out of the marias country to rejoin the main party on the missouri river.
the explorers also demonstrated the viability of an overland trail to the pacic.
down the dusty track thousands of missionaries fur traders and pioneering settlers would wend their way in the ensuing decades bolstering americas claim to the oregon country.
the aaron burr conspiracies in the long run the louisiana purchase greatly expanded the fortunes of the united states and the power of the federal government.
in the short term the vast expanse of territory and the feeble reach of the government obliged to control it raised fears of secession and foreign intrigue see map 11 3.
aaron burr jeffersons rst term vice president played no small part in provoking and justifying such fears.
dropped from the cabinet in jeffersons second term burr joined with a group of federalist extremists to plot the secession of new eng land and new york.
alexander hamilton though no friend of jefferson exposed and foiled the conspiracy.
incensed burr challenged hamilton to a duel.
hamilton deplored the practice of dueling by that date illegal in several states but felt his honor was at stake.
he met burrs challenge at the appointed hour but refused to re.
burr killed 120w 110w ea gila r ns as r red r new spain ri r an de san antonio 6 gu lf o f m exic o 400 km.
spanish florida 400 mi.
map 11 3 exploring the louisiana purchase and the west seeking to avert friction with france by purchasing all of louisiana jefferson bought trouble because of the vagueness of the boundaries.
among the disputants were spain in the floridas spain and mexico in the southwest and great britain in canada.
hamilton with one shot.
burrs pistol blew the brightest brain out of the federalist party and destroyed its one remaining hope of effective leadership.
his political career as dead as hamiltons burr turned his disunionist plottings to the trans mississippi west.
there he struck up an allegiance with general james wilkinson the unscrupulous military governor of louisiana territory and a sometime secret agent in the pay of the spanish crown.
burrs schemes are still shrouded in mystery but he and wilkinson apparently planned to separate the western part of the united states from the east and expand their new confederacy with invasions of spanish controlled mexico and florida.
in the fall of 1806 burr and sixty followers oated in atboats down the mississippi river to meet wilkinsons army at natchez.
but when the general learned that jefferson had gotten wind of the plot he betrayed burr and ed to new orleans.
burr was arrested and tried for treason.
in what seemed to the jeffersonians to be bias in favor of the accused chief justice john marshall strictly hewing n original united states by treaty of 1783 louisiana purchase 1803 new orleans del.
s c nacogdoches n j philadelphia n c ga gr pike chihuahua ee o el paso tenn ss miss.
n 30n ky r louisiana purchase ip pi oc santa f 1805 180 6 ka pike taos siss do mis ra ar ic colo st r louis ohio r santa barbara san diego i monterey ohio washington d c va oc ur san francisco california r pikes peak pa baltimore indiana terr.
r i conn c 18 r misso p l at te mass.
ti 4 pacif sacrame n y mich terr.
an ke ean vt n h e e r pi nn clarks return ak k clar is and to r 60w me.
le w sn n 70w tl lewiss return oregon country 40n 80w te bia 90w a r c ol u m 100w british north america canada british territory spanish territory oregon country disputed fort mission interactive map to the constitution insisted that a guilty verdict required proof of overt acts of treason not merely treasonous intentions see art.
burr was acquitted and ed to europe where he urged napoleon to make peace with britain and launch a joint invasion of america.
burrs insurrectionary brashness demonstrated that it was one thing for the united states to purchase large expanses of western territory but quite another for it to govern them effectively.
a precarious neutrality jefferson was triumphantly reelected in 1804 with 162 electoral votes to only 14 votes for his federalist opponent.
but the laurels of jeffersons rst administration soon withered under the blasts of the new storm that broke in europe.
after unloading louisiana in 1803 napoleon deliberately provoked a renewal of his war with britain an awesome con ict that raged on for eleven long years.
america and the napoleonic wars intercourse or impartial dealings 1809 a cartoon by peter pencil shows jefferson being victimized by both britain left and france right.
for two years a maritime united states the number one neutral carrier since 1793 enjoyed juicy commercial pickings.
but a setback came in 1805.
at the bat tle of trafalgar one eyed horatio lord nelson achieved immortality by smashing the combined french and spanish eets off the coast of spain thereby ensuring britains supremacy on the seas.
at the battle of austerlitz in austria the battle of the three emperors napoleon crushed the combined austrian and russian armies thereby ensuring his mastery of the land.
like the tiger and the shark france and britain now reigned supreme in their chosen elements.
unable to hurt each other directly the two antagonists were forced to strike indirect blows.
britain ruled the waves and waived the rules.
the london government beginning in 1806 issued a series of orders in council.
these edicts closed the european ports under french control to foreign shipping including american unless the vessels rst stopped at a british port.
napoleon struck back ordering the seizure of all merchant ships including american that entered british ports.
there was no way to trade with either nation without facing the others guns.
american vessels were quite literally caught between the devil and the deep blue sea.
even more galling to american pride than the seizure of wooden ships was the seizure of esh andblood american seamen.
impressment the forcible enlistment of sailors was a crude form of conscription that the british among others had employed for over four centuries.
clubs and stretchers for men knocked unconscious were standard equipment of press gangs from his majestys man hungry ships.
some six thousand bona de u s citizens were impressed by the piratical man stealers of britain from 1808 to 1811 alone.
a number of these luckless souls died or were killed in his majestys ser vice leaving their kinfolk and friends bereaved and embittered.
britains determination was spectacularly highlighted in 1807 in what came to be known as the chesapeake affair.
a royal frigate overhauled a u s frigate the chesapeake about ten miles off the coast of virginia.
the british captain bluntly demanded the surrender of four alleged deserters.
london had never claimed the right to seize sailors from a foreign warship and the american commander though totally chapter 11 the triumphs and travails of the jeffersonian republic 1800 1812 unprepared to ght refused the request.
the british warship thereupon red three devastating broadsides at close range kill ing three americans and wounding eighteen.
four deserters were dragged away and the bloody hulk called the chesapeake limped back to port.
britain was clearly in the wrong as the london foreign ofce admitted.
but londons contrition availed little a roar of national wrath went up from infuriated americans.
jefferson the peace lover could easily have had war if he had wanted it.
the hated embargo national honor would not permit a slavish submission to british and french mistreatment.
yet a large scale foreign war was contrary to the settled policy of the new republic and in addition it would be futile.
the navy was weak thanks largely to jeffersons antinavalism and the army was even weaker.
a disastrous defeat would not improve americas plight.
the warring nations in europe depended heavily upon the united states for raw materials and foodstuffs.
in his eager search for an alternative to war jefferson seized upon this essential fact.
he reasoned that if america voluntarily cut off its exports the offending powers would be forced to bow hat in hand and agree to respect its rights.
responding to the presidential lash congress hastily passed the embargo act late in 1807.
this rigorous law forbade the export of all goods from the united states whether in american or foreign ships.
more than just a compromise between submission and shooting the embargo embodied jeffersons idea of peaceful coercion if it worked the embargo would vindicate the rights of neutral nations and point to a new way of conducting foreign affairs.
if it failed jefferson feared the republic would perish subjugated to the european powers or sucked into their ferocious war.
the american economy staggered under the effect of the embargo long before britain or france began to bend.
forests of dead masts gradually lled new eng the prairie dog sickened at the sting of the hornet 1806 in this anti jefferson satire criticizing his negotiations for the purchase of west florida in 1804 napoleon in the form of a hornet stings jefferson and makes him cough up 2 million in gold coins the amount of the secret appropriation that jefferson sought from congress.
the negotiations eventually failed.
the embargo launching of the ship fame by george ropes jr 1802 shipyards like this one stirring bitter resentment.
lands once bustling harbors docks that had once rumbled were deserted except for illegal trade and soup kitchens cared for some of the hungry unemployed.
jeffersonian republicans probably hurt the commerce of new eng land which they avowedly were trying to protect far more than britain and france together were doing.
farmers of the south and west the strongholds of jefferson suffered no less disastrously than new eng land.
they were alarmed by the mounting piles of unexportable cotton grain and tobacco.
jefferson seemed to be waging war on his fellow citizens rather than on the offending foreign powers.
a federalist circular in massachusetts against the embargo cried out let every man who holds the name of america dear to him stretch forth his hands and put this accursed thing this embargo from him.
be resolute act like sons of liberty of god and your country nerve your arm with vengeance against the despot jefferson who would wrest the inestimable germ of your independence from you and you shall be conquerors.
jeffersons embargo throttled thriving new england an enormous illicit trade mushroomed in 1808 especially along the canadian border where bands of armed americans on loaded rafts overawed or overpowered federal agents.
irate citizens cynically transposed the letters of embargo to read o grab me go bar em and mobrage while heartily cursing the dambargo jefferson nonetheless induced congress to pass iron toothed enforcing legislation.
it was so inquisitorial and tyrannical as to cause some americans to think more kindly of george iii whom jefferson had berated in the declaration of independence.
one indignant new hampshirite denounced the president with this ditty our ships all in motion once whitend the ocean they saild and returnd with a cargo now doomd to decay they are fallen a prey to jefferson worms and embargo.
the embargo even had the effect of reviving the moribund federalist party.
gaining new converts its leaders hurled their nullication of the embargo into the teeth of the virginia lordlings in washington.
in 1804 the discredited federalists had polled only 14 electoral votes out of 176 in 1808 the embargo year the gure rose to 47 out of 175.
new eng land seethed with chapter 11 the triumphs and travails of the jeffersonian republic 1800 1812 rivals for the presidency and for the soul of the young republic thomas jefferson and john adams died on the same day the fourth of july 1826 fty years to the day after both men had signed the declaration of independence.
adamss last words were thomas jefferson still survives.
but he was wrong for three hours earlier jefferson had drawn his last breath.
talk of secession and jefferson later admitted that he felt the foundations of government tremble under his feet.
an alarmed congress yielding to the storm of public anger nally repealed the embargo on march 1 1809 three days before jeffersons retirement.
a halfloaf substitute was provided by the non intercourse act.
this measure formally reopened trade with all the nations of the world except the two most important britain and france.
though thus watered down economic coercion continued to be the policy of the jeffersonians from 1809 to 1812 when the nation nally plunged into war.
why did the embargo jeffersons most daring act of statesmanship collapse after fteen dismal months.
first of all he underestimated the bulldog determination of the british as others have and overestimated the dependence of both belligerents on americas trade.
bumper grain crops blessed the british isles during these years and the revolutionary latin american republics unexpectedly threw open their ports for compensating commerce.
with most of europe under his control napoleon could afford to tighten his belt and go without american trade.
the french continued to seize american ships and steal their cargoes while their emperor mocked the united states by claiming that he was simply helping them enforce the embargo.
more critically perhaps jefferson miscalculated the unpopularity of such a self crucifying weapon and the difculty of enforcing it.
the hated embargo was not continued long enough or tightly enough to achieve the desired results and a leaky embargo was perhaps more costly than none at all.
curiously enough new eng land plucked a new prosperity from the ugly jaws of the embargo.
with shipping tied up and imported goods scarce the resourceful yankees reopened old factories and erected new ones.
the real foundations of modern americas industrial might were laid behind the protective wall of the embargo followed by nonintercourse and the war of 1812.
jefferson the avowed critic of factories may have unwittingly done more for american manufacturing than alexander hamilton industrys outspoken friend.
madisons gamble following washingtons precedent jefferson left the presidency after two terms happy to escape what he called the splendid misery of the highest ofce in the land.
he strongly favored the nomination and election of a kindred spirit as his successor his friend and fellow virginian the quiet intellectual and unassuming james madison.
madison took the presidential oath on march 4 1809 as the awesome conict in europe was roaring to its climax.
the scholarly madison was small of stature light of weight bald of head and weak of voice.
despite a distinguished career as a legislator he was crippled as president by factions within his party and his cabinet.
unable to dominate congress as jefferson had done madison often found himself holding the bag for risky foreign policies not of his own making.
the non intercourse act of 1809 a watered down version of jeffersons embargo aimed solely at britain and france was due to expire in 1810.
to madisons dismay congress dismantled the embargo completely with a bargaining mea sure known as macons bill no.
while reopening american trade with all the world macons bill dangled what congress hoped was an attractive lure.
if either britain or france repealed its commercial restrictions america would restore its embargo against the nonrepealing nation.
to madison the bill was a shameful capitulation.
it practically admitted that the united states could not survive without one of the belligerents as a commercial ally but it left determination of who that ally would be to the potentates of london and paris.
the crafty napoleon saw his chance.
since 1806 britain had justied its orders in council as retaliation for napoleons actions implying without promising outright that trade restrictions would be lifted if the french decrees disappeared.
now the french held out the same half promise.
in august 1810 word came from napoleons foreign minister that the french decrees might be repealed if britain also lifted its orders in council.
the ministers message was deliberately ambiguous.
napoleon had no intention of permitting unrestricted trade between america and britain.
rather president james madison britain and france divide up the world 1805 the great power rivalry symbolized here by british prime minister william pitt and french emperor napoleon wreathed the planet in years of warfare.
when it ended with napoleons nal defeat in 1815 britain was the unchallenged mistress of the worlds oceans.
he hoped to maneuver the united states into resuming its embargo against the british thus creating a partial blockade against his enemy that he would not have to raise a nger to enforce.
madison knew better than to trust napoleon but he gambled that the threat of seeing the united states trade exclusively with france would lead the british to repeal their restrictions and vice versa.
closing his insisted the editor of niles weekly register june 27 1812 the injuries received from france do not lessen the enormity of those heaped upon us by england.
in this straight betwixt two we had an unquestionable right to select our enemy.
we have given the preference to great britain.
on account of her more agrant wrongs.
eyes to the emperors obvious subterfuge he accepted the french offer as evidence of repeal.
the terms of macons bill gave the british three months to live up to their implied promise by revoking the orders in council and reopening the atlantic to neutral trade.
they did not.
in rm control of the seas london saw little need to bargain.
as long as the war with napoleon went on they decided america could trade exclusively with the british empire or with nobody at all.
madisons gamble failed.
the president saw no choice but to reestablish the embargo against britain alone a decision that he knew meant the end of american neutrality and that he feared was the nal step toward war.
tecumseh and the prophet not all of madisons party was reluctant to ght.
the complexion of the twelfth congress which met late in 1811 differed markedly from that of its predecessor.
recent elections had swept away many of the older chapter 11 the triumphs and travails of the jeffersonian republic 1800 1812 the battle of the thames 1813 here the shawnee leader tecumseh stood his ground against the superior american force and died.
a gifted organizer and military chieftain he had denounced the tribal custom of torturing prisoners and opposed the practice of allowing any one tribe to sell land that he believed belonged to all indians.
submission men and replaced them with young hotheads many from the south and west.
dubbed war hawks by their federalist opponents the newcomers were indeed on re for a new war with the old enemy.
the war hawks were weary of hearing how their fathers had whipped the british single handedly and they detested the manhandling of american sailors and the british orders in council that dammed the ow of american trade especially western farm products headed for europe.
western war hawks also yearned to wipe out a renewed indian threat to the pioneer settlers who were streaming into the trans allegheny wilderness.
as this when the war hawks won control of the house of representatives they elevated to the speakership thirty four year old henry clay of kentucky 1777 1852 the eloquent and magnetic harry of the west clamoring for war he thundered i prefer the troubled sea of war demanded by the honor and independence of this country with all its calamities and desolation to the tranquil and putrescent pool of ignominious peace.
white ood washed through the green forests more and more indians were pushed toward the setting sun.
two remarkable shawnee brothers tecumseh and tenskwatawa known to non indians as the prophet concluded that the time had come to stem this onrushing tide.
they began to weld together a far ung confederacy of all the tribes east of the mississippi inspiring a vibrant movement of indian unity and cultural renewal.
their followers gave up textile clothing for traditional buckskin garments.
their warriors forswore alcohol the better to ght a last ditch battle with the paleface invaders.
rejecting whites concept of ownership tecumseh urged his supporters never to cede land to whites unless all indians agreed.
meanwhile frontiersmen and their war hawk spokesmen in congress became convinced that british scalp buyers in canada were nourishing the indians growing strength.
in the fall of 1811 william henry in a speech at vincennes indiana territory tecumseh 1768 1813 said sell a country.
why not sell the air the clouds and the great sea as well as the earth.
did not the great spirit make them all for the use of his children.
crushing the indians in the old northwest william henry harrison 1773 1841 indian ghter and later president called tecumseh one of those uncommon geniuses who spring up occasionally to produce revolutions and overturn the established order of things.
if it were not for the vicinity of the united states he would perhaps be founder of an empire that would rival in glory that of mexico or peru.
harrison governor of indiana territory gathered an army and advanced on tecumsehs headquarters at the junction of the wabash and tippecanoe rivers in present day indiana.
tecumseh was absent recruiting supporters in the south but the prophet attacked harrisons army foolishly in tecumsehs eyes with a small force of shawnees.
the shawnees were routed and their settlement burned.
the battle of tippecanoe made harrison a national hero.
it also discredited the prophet and drove tecumseh into an alliance with the british.
when americas war with britain came tecumseh fought ercely for the redcoats until his death in 1813 at the battle of the thames.
with him perished the dream of an indian confederacy.
mr madisons war by the spring of 1812 madison believed war with britain to be inevitable.
the british arming of hostile indians pushed him toward this decision as did the whoops of the war hawks in his own party.
people like representative felix grundy of tennessee three of whose brothers had been killed in clashes with indians cried that there was only one way to remove the menace of the indians wipe out their canadian base.
on to canada on to canada was the war hawks chant.
southern expansionists less vocal cast a covetous eye on florida then weakly held by britains ally spain.
above all madison turned to war to restore condence in the republican experiment.
for ve years the republicans had tried to steer between the warring european powers to set a course between submission and battle.
theirs had been a noble vision but it had brought them only international derision and internal strife.
madison and the republicans came to believe that only a vigorous assertion of american rights could demonstrate the viability of american nationhood and of democracy as a form of government.
if america could not ght to protect itself its experiment in republicanism would be discredited in the eyes of a scof ng world.
one prominent republican called the war a test to determine whether the republican system adopted by the people is imbecile and transient or whether it the present state of our country partisan disunity over the war of 1812 threatened the nations very existence.
the prowar jeffersonian at the left is attacking the pillar of federalism the antiwar federalist at the right is trying to pull down democracy.
the spirit of washington warns that the countrys welfare depends on all three pillars including republicanism.
chapter 11 the triumphs and travails of the jeffersonian republic 1800 1812 has force and duration worthy of the enterprise thus not for the last time did war fever and democratic idealism make common cause.
madison asked congress to declare war on june 1 1812.
congress obliged him two weeks later the rst of just ve times in all of american history that congress has formally exercised its constitutional power to declare war see art.
the vote in the house was 79 to 49 for war in the senate 19 to 13.
the close tally revealed deep divisions over the wisdom of ghting.
the split was both sectional and partisan.
support for war came from the south and west but also from republicans in populous middle states such as pennsylvania and virginia.
federalists in both north and south damned the con ict but their stronghold was new eng land which greeted the declaration of war with mufed bells ags at half mast and public fasting.
why should seafaring new eng land oppose the war for a free sea.
the answer is that pro british federalists in the northeast sympathized with britain and resented the republicans sympathy with napoleon whom they regarded as the corsican butcher and the anti christ of the age the federalists also opposed the acquisition of canada which would merely add more agrarian states from the wild northwest.
this in turn would increase the voting strength of the jeffersonian republicans.
the bitterness of new eng land federalists against mr.
madisons war led them to treason or near treason.
they were determined wrote one republican versier to rule the nation if they could but see it damned if others should.
new eng land gold holders probably lent more dollars to the british exchequer than to the federal treasury.
federalist farmers sent huge quantities of supplies and foodstuffs to canada enabling british armies to invade new york.
new eng land governors stubbornly refused to permit their militias to serve outside their own states.
in a sense america had to ght two enemies simultaneously old eng land and new eng land.
thus perilously divided the barely united states plunged into armed con ict against britain then the worlds most powerful empire.
no sober american could have much reasonable hope of victory but by 1812 the jeffersonian republicans saw no other choice.
chronology peace treaty with tripoli battle of trafalgar battle of austerlitz 1805 pikes explorations judiciary act of 1801 1801 naval war with tripoli burr treason trial revised naturalization law judiciary act of 1801 repealed chesapeake affair embargo act madison elected president marbury v madison louisiana purchase non intercourse act replaces embargo act macons bill no.
2 napoleon announces falsely repeal of blockade decrees madison reestablishes nonimportation against britain battle of tippecanoe united states declares war on britain toussaint louverture launches haitian revolution jefferson defeats adams for presidency haiti emerges as rst independent black republic jefferson reelected president impeachment of justice chase 1804 lewis and clark expedition to learn more key terms revolution of 1800 226 patronage 230 judiciary act of 1801 231 midnight judges 231 marbury v madison 232 tripolitan war 234 louisiana purchase 236 corps of discovery 236 people to know orders in council 239 impressment 239 chesapeake affair 239 embargo act 240 non intercourse act 242 macons bill no.
2 242 war hawks 244 tippecanoe battle of 244 thomas jefferson sally hemings albert gallatin john marshall samuel chase napoleon bonaparte robert r livingston toussaint louverture meriwether lewis william clark aaron burr james madison tecumseh tenskwatawa the prophet to learn more catherine allgor parlor politics 2000 stephen e ambrose undaunted courage 1996 joseph ellis american sphinx the character of thomas jefferson 1997 john ferling adams vs jefferson the tumultuous election of 1800 2004 thomas fleming the louisiana purchase 2003 donald r hickey dont give up the ship.
myths of the war of 1812 2006 peter p hill napoleons troublesome americans francoamerican relations 1804 1815 2005 donald jackson thomas jefferson and the stony mountain exploring the west from monticello 1981 jon kukla a wilderness so immense 2003 marshall smelser the democratic republic 1801 1815 1968 anthony wallace jefferson and the indians 1999 gary wills negro president thomas jefferson and the slave power 2003 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the second war for independence and the upsurge of nationalism 1812 1824 the american continents.
are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any european powers.
t he war of 1812 was an especially divisive and illfought war.
there was no burning national anger as there had been in 1807 following the chesapeake outrage.
the supreme lesson of the con ict was the folly of leading a divided and apathetic people into war.
and yet despite the unimpressive military outcome and even less decisive negotiated peace americans came out of the war with a renewed sense of nationhood.
for the next dozen years an awakened spirit of nationalism would inspire activities ranging from protecting manufacturing to building roads to defending the authority of the federal government over the states.
on to canada over land and lakes on the eve of the war of 1812 the regular army was ill trained ill disciplined and widely scattered.
it had to be supplemented by the even more poorly trained militias which were sometimes distinguished by their speed of foot in leaving the battleeld.
some of the ranking generals were semisenile heirlooms from the revolutionary war rusting on their laurels and lacking in vigor and vision.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the contest over canada constitution and guerrire 1812 the guerrire was heavily outweighed and outgunned yet its british captain eagerly and foolishly sought combat.
his ship was destroyed.
historian henry adams later concluded that this duel raised the united states in one half hour to the rank of a rst class power in the world the buckler on the sword from the uss constitution commemorates the famous battle.
today the constitution berthed in boston harbor remains the oldest actively commissioned ship in the u s navy.
canada became an important battleground in the war of 1812 because british forces were weakest there see map 12 1.
a successful american offensive might have quashed british inuence among the indians and garnered new land for settlers.
but the americans offensive strategy was poorly conceived.
had the americans captured montreal the center of population and transportation every thing to the west might have died just as the leaves of a tree wither when the trunk is girdled.
but instead of laying ax to the trunk the americans frittered away their strength in the three pronged invasion of 1812.
the trio of invading forces that set out from detroit niagara and lake champlain were all beaten back shortly after they had crossed the canadian border.
by contrast the british and canadians displayed energy from the outset.
early in the war they captured the american fort of michilimackinac which commanded the upper great lakes and the indianinhabited area to the south and west.
their brilliant defensive operations were led by the inspired british general isaac brock and assisted in the american camp by general mud and general confusion when several american land invasions of canada were again hurled back in 1813 americans looked for success on the water.
man for man and ship for ship the american navy did much better than the army.
in comparison to british ships american craft on the whole were more skillfully handled had better gunners and were manned by non press gang crews who were burning to avenge numerous indignities.
similarly the american frigates notably the constitution old ironsides had thicker sides heavier repower and larger crews of which one sailor in six was a free black.
control of the great lakes was vital and an energetic american naval ofcer oliver hazard perry managed to build a eet of green timbered ships on the shores of lake erie manned by even greener seamen.
when he captured a british eet in a furious engagement on the lake he reported to his superior we have met the enemy and they are ours perrys victory and his slogan infused new life into the drooping american cause.
forced to withdraw from detroit and fort malden the retreating redcoats were overtaken by general harrisons army and beaten at the battle of the thames in october 1813.
despite these successes the americans by late 1814 far from invading canada were grimly defending their own soil against the invading british.
chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 table 13 1 election of 1824 candidates jackson adams crawford clay electoral vote popular vote popular percentage 153 544 108 740 46 618 47 136 42 16 31 89 12 95 12 99 and duelist had never established cordial personal relations.
but the two men had much in common politically both were fervid nationalists and advocates of the american system.
shortly before the nal balloting in the house clay met privately with adams and assured him of his support.
decision day came early in 1825.
the house of representatives met amid tense excitement with sick members being carried in on stretchers.
on the rst ballot thanks largely to clays behind the scenes inuence adams was elected president.
a few days later the victor announced that henry clay would be the new secretary of state.
the ofce of secretary of state was the prize plum then even more so than today.
three of the four preceding secretaries had reached the presidency and the high cabinet ofce was regarded as an almost certain pathway to the white house.
according to jacksons supporters adams had bribed clay with the position making himself the peoples second choice the victor over jackson the peoples rst choice.
masses of angry jacksonians most of them common folk raised a roar of protest against this corrupt bargain the clamor continued for nearly four years.
jackson condemned clay as the judas of the west and john randolph of virginia publicly assailed the alliance between the puritan adams and the black leg clay who he added shines and stinks like rotten mackerel by moonlight clay outraged challenged randolph to a duel though poor marksmanship and shaky nerves rendered the outcome bloodless.
no positive evidence has yet been unearthed to prove that adams and clay entered into a formal bargain.
clay was a natural choice for secretary of state and adams was both scrupulously honest and not given to patronage.
even if a bargain had been struck it was not necessarily corrupt.
deals of this nature have long been the stock in trade of politicians.
but the outcry over adamss election showed that change was in the wind.
what had once been common practice was now condemned as furtive elitist and subversive of democ racy.
the next president would not be chosen behind closed doors.
a yankee mist in the white house john quincy adams was a chip off the old family glacier.
short thickset and billiard bald he was even more frigidly austere than his presidential father john adams.
shunning people he often went for earlymorning swims sometimes stark naked in the thenpure potomac river.
essentially a closeted thinker rather than a politician he was irritable sarcastic and tactless.
yet few individuals have ever come to the presidency with a more brilliant record in statecraft especially in foreign affairs.
he ranks as one of the most successful secretaries of state yet one of the least successful presidents.
a man of scrupulous honor adams entered upon his four year sentence in the white house smarting under charges of bargain corruption and usurpation fewer than one third of the voters had voted for him.
as the rst minority president he would have found it difcult to win popular support even under the most favorable conditions.
he did not possess many of the usual arts of the politician and scorned those who did.
he had achieved high ofce by commanding respect rather than by courting popularity.
in an earlier era an aloof john adams had won the votes of propertied men by sheer ability.
but with the dawning age of backslapping and baby kissing democracy his coldsh son could hardly hope for success at the polls.
while adamss enemies accused him of striking a corrupt bargain his political allies wished that he would strike a few more.
whether through highmindedness or political ineptitude adams resolutely declined to oust efcient ofceholders in order to create vacancies for his supporters.
during his entire administration he removed only twelve public servants from the federal payroll.
such stubbornness caused president john quincy adams like a scandalous waste of public funds.
the south in particular bristled.
if the federal government should take on such heavy nancial burdens it would have to continue the hated tariff duties.
worse if it could meddle in local concerns like education and roads it might even try to lay its hand on the peculiar institution of black slavery.
adamss land policy likewise antagonized the westerners.
they clamored for wide open expansion and resented the presidents well meaning attempts to curb feverish speculation in the public domain.
the fate of the cherokee indians threatened with eviction from their holdings in georgia brought additional bitterness.
white georgians wanted the cherokees out.
the ruggedly honest adams attempted to deal fairly with the indians.
the georgia governor by threatening to resort to arms successfully resisted the efforts of the washington government to interpose federal authority on behalf of the cherokees.
another fateful chapter was thus written in the nullication of the national will and another nail was driven in adamss political cof n going whole hog for jackson in 1828 president john quincy adams 1767 1848 daguerreotype by phillip haas 1843 adams wrote in his diary in june 1819 nearly six years before becoming president i am a man of reserved cold austere and forbidding manners my political adversaries say a gloomy misanthropist and my personal enemies an unsocial savage countless adams followers to throw up their hands in despair.
if the president would not reward party workers with political plums why should they labor to keep him in ofce.
adamss nationalistic views gave him further woes.
much of the nation was turning away from post ghent nationalism and toward states rights and sectionalism.
but adams swam against the tide.
con rmed nationalist that he was adams in his rst annual message urged upon congress the construction of roads and canals.
he renewed george washingtons proposal for a national university and went so far as to advocate federal support for an astronomical observatory.
the public reaction to these proposals was prompt and unfavorable.
to many workaday americans grubbing out stumps astronomical observatories seemed andrew jacksons next presidential campaign started early on february 9 1825 the day of john quincy adamss controversial election by the house and it continued noisily for nearly four years.
even before the election of 1828 the temporarily united republicans of the era of good feelings had split into two camps.
one was the national republicans with adams as their standard bearer.
the other was the democratic republicans with the ery jackson heading their ticket.
rallying cries of the jackson zealots were bargain and corruption huzza for jackson and all hail old hickory jacksonites planted hickory poles for their hickory tough hero adamsites adopted the oak as the symbol of their oakenly independent candidate.
jacksons followers presented their hero as a roughhewn frontiersman and a stalwart champion of the common man.
they denounced adams as a corrupt aristocrat and argued that the will of the people had been thwarted in 1825 by the backstairs bargain of adams and clay.
the only way to right the wrong was to seat jackson who would then bring about reform by sweeping out the dishonest adams gang.
much of this talk was political hyperbole.
jackson was no frontier farmer but a wealthy planter.
he had chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 me nr 8 d 1 ny d 20 nr 16 michigan territory unorganized territory pa il oh in mo va ky vt 7 nh nj ma ri ct 4 de md nr 6 d 5 nc tn sc ar terr.
ms al ga la fl terr.
candidate party electoral vote jackson democrat 68 647 286 56 0 32 508 064 44 0 j q adams national republican popular vote territories unsettled etc.
rachel jackson a devoted wife who did not live to become rst lady rachel died a month after the election of 1828.
andrew jackson was convinced that his enemies vicious accusations that she was a bigamist and an adulteress had killed her.
the more complicated truth was that andrew jackson had married rachel robards condent that her divorce had been granted.
two years later when they discovered to their dismay that it had not been they made haste to correct the marital miscue.
been born in a log cabin but now lived in a luxurious manor off the labor of his many slaves.
and adams though perhaps an aristocrat was far from corrupt.
if anything his uncompromising morals were too elevated for the job.
mudslinging reached new lows in 1828 and the electorate developed a taste for bare knuckle politics.
adams would not stoop to gutter tactics but many of his backers were less squeamish.
they described jacksons mother as a prostitute and his wife as an adulteress they printed black bordered handbills shaped like cof ns recounting his numerous duels and brawls and trumpeting his hanging of six mutinous militiamen.
jackson men also hit below the belt.
president adams had purchased with his own money and for his own use a billiard table and a set of chessmen.
in the mouths of rabid jacksonites these items became gaming tables and gambling furniture for the presidential palace criticism was also directed at the large sums adams had received over the years in federal map 13 1 presidential election of 1828 with electoral vote by state jackson swept the south and west whereas adams retained the old federalist stronghold of the northeast.
yet jacksons inroads in the northeast were decisive.
he won twenty of new yorks electoral votes and all twenty eight of pennsylvanias.
if those votes had gone the other way adams would have been interactive map victorious by a margin of one vote.
salaries well earned though they had been.
he was even accused of having procured a servant girl for the lust of the russian tsar in short of having served as a pimp.
on voting day the electorate split on largely sectional lines.
jacksons strongest support came from the west and south see map 13 1.
the middle states and the old northwest were divided while adams won the backing of his own new eng land and the propertied better elements of the northeast.
but when the popular vote was converted to electoral votes general jack one anti jackson newspaper declared general jacksons mother was a common prostitute brought to this country by the british soldiers.
she afterwards married a mulatto man with whom she had several children of which number general jackson is one.
the election of andrew jackson sons triumph could not be denied.
old hickory had trounced adams by an electoral count of 178 to 83.
although a considerable part of jacksons support was lined up by machine politicians in eastern cities particularly in new york and pennsylvania the political center of gravity clearly had shifted away from the conser vative eastern seaboard toward the emerging states across the mountains.
in 1824 thomas jefferson 1743 1826 said of jackson when i was president of the senate he was a senator and he could never speak on account of the rashness of his feelings.
i have seen him attempt it repeatedly and as often choke with rage.
his passions are no doubt cooler now.
but he is a dangerous man.
old hickory as president the new president cut a striking gure tall lean with bushy iron gray hair brushed high above a prominent forehead craggy eyebrows and blue eyes.
his irritability and emaciated condition resulted in part from long term bouts with dysentery malaria tuberculosis and lead poisoning from two bullets that he carried in his body from near fatal duels.
his autobiography was written in his lined face.
jacksons upbringing had its shortcomings.
born in the carolinas and early orphaned mischievous andy grew up without parental restraints.
as a youth he displayed much more interest in brawling and cockghting than in his scanty opportunities for reading and spelling.
although he eventually learned to express himself in writing with vigor and clarity his grammar was always rough hewn and his spelling original like that of many contemporaries.
he sometimes misspelled a word two different ways in the same letter.
the youthful carolinian shrewdly moved up west to tennessee where ghting was prized above writing.
there through native intelligence force of personality and powers of leadership he became a judge and a member of congress.
af icted with a violent temper he early became involved in a number of duels stabbings and bloody frays.
his passions were so profound that on occasion he would choke into silence when he tried to speak.
the rst president from the west the rst nominated at a formal party convention in 1832 and only the second without a college education washington was the rst jackson was unique.
his university was adversity.
he had risen from the masses but he was not one of them except insofar as he shared many of their prejudices.
essentially a frontier aristocrat he owned many slaves cultivated broad acres and lived in one of the nest mansions in america the hermitage near nashville tennessee.
more westerner than easterner more country gentleman than common clay more courtly than crude he was hard to t into a neat category.
jacksons inauguration seemed to symbolize the ascendancy of the masses.
hickoryites poured into washington from far away sleeping on hotel oors and in hallways.
they were curious to see their hero take ofce and perhaps hoped to pick up a well paying ofce for themselves.
nobodies mingled with notables as the white house for the rst time was thrown open to the multitude.
a milling crowd of rubbernecking clerks and shopkeepers hobnailed artisans and grimy laborers surged in allegedly wrecking the china and furniture and threatening the peoples champion with cracked ribs.
jackson was hastily spirited through a side door and the white house miraculously emptied itself when the word was passed that huge bowls of well spiked punch had been placed on the lawns.
such was the inaugural brawl to conser vatives this orgy seemed like the end of the world.
king mob reigned triumphant as jacksonian vulgarity replaced jeffersonian simplicity.
fainthearted traditionalists shuddered drew their blinds and recalled with trepidation the opening scenes of the french revolution.
english novelist charles dickens 1812 1870 traveled to the united states just a few years after alexis de tocqueville see thinking globally alexis de tocqueville on democracy in america and europe pp.
he had his own views on the implications of americas vaunted equality the people are all alike too.
there is no diversity of character.
they travel about on the same errands say and do the same things in exactly the same manner and follow in the same dull cheerless round.
all down the long table there is scarcely a man who is in anything different from his neighbor.
thinking globally alexis de tocqueville on democracy in america and europe o n may 11 1831 a twenty six year old frenchman alexis de tocqueville stepped ashore in new york city and began his fateful acquaintance with andrew jacksons america.
for nine months he visited the cities of the atlantic seaboard from boston to washington trekked west to detroit and oated down the ohio and mississippi rivers to new orleans keenly observing the american scene.
four years later he published the rst volume of his monumental work democracy in america.
it remains to this day probably the most insightful analysis of american society ever written and provides an indispensable starting point for understanding both the nature of modern democracy and the american national character.
tocqueville was born in the french revolutionary era and he witnessed the so called july revolution in france in 1830 which widened the french electorate.
he was following closely the agitation in britain for a broader more democratic franchise which culminated in the landmark reform bill of 1832.
he also knew of the several independent democratic republics that had blossomed in latin america as the disruptions of the napoleonic wars weakened spains imperial grip venezuela proclaimed its independence in 1811 argentina in 1816 chile in 1818 mexico and peru in 1821.
brazil declared its independence from portugal in 1822 but remained a monarchy until becoming a republic in 1889.
those events convinced him that democracy was the irresistible wave of the future but he was far less certain about what that democratic future might mean for human happiness political stability and social justice.
thus he studied america to understand europes indeed the worlds fate.
in america i saw more than america he wrote.
i sought there the image of democracy itself.
in order to learn what we have to fear or to hope from its progress he announced his central insight in his books rst sentence among the novel objects that attracted my attention during my stay in the united states nothing struck me more forcibly than the general equality of condition among the people he acknowledged the gross inequality of slavery but he considered slavery to be something that was peculiar to america not to democracy the primary fact of equality he argued exercised a prodigious inuence on the whole course of society it is easy to understand why the scale and pervasiveness of american equality made such an impression on tocqueville.
mass democratic participation was already a well established fact when he arrived.
almost 1 2 million voters nearly 50 percent of the adult white male population had cast their ballots in the election that brought jackson to the white house in 1828.
in contrast frances july revolution had enfranchised fewer than 200 000 propertied males less than 1 percent of the total population in 1830.
and britains reform bill of 1832 would extend voting rights only to some 800 000 male property holders in a country with 50 percent more people than the united states.
tocqueville repeatedly remarked on the seething restless energy that american equality unleashed and he speculated on two possible futures for the united states.
they might be called respectively the centripetal and centrifugal scenarios.
in the rst scenario tocqueville thought that the doctrine of equality might breed a suffocating conformity that would eventually invoke the power of the state to enforce a stern and repressive consensus the kind of tyranny of the majority that had worried founders like james madison.
tocqueville thought he saw signs that such a future was already emerging.
i know of no country in which there is so little independence of mind and real freedom of discussion as in america he wrote.
in the second scenario equality might foster radical individualism a word that tocqueville coined to capture the unique psychology he encountered every where in america.
as social conditions become more equal he wrote people acquire the habit of always considering themselves as standing alone and they are apt to imagine that their whole destiny is in their own hands in this case gnawing individual loneliness and even social anarchy might dene americas future.
democracy makes every man forget his ancestors tocqueville wrote.
it throws him back forever upon himself alone and threatens in the end to conne him entirely within the solitude of his own heart tocqueville noted several factors that mitigated both of those grim prospects and held american democracy in a alexis de tocqueville 1805 1859 election day in philadelphia by john lewis krimmel 1815 the german immigrant krimmel recorded as early as 1815 the growing popular interest in elections that would culminate in jacksonian democracy a decade later.
although politics was serious business it also provided the occasion for much socializing and merriment.
even disfranchised free blacks women and children turned out for the festivities on election day.
healthy balance the absence of hostile countries on its borders a vigorously free press robust voluntary associations especially churches and political parties and crucially habits of the heart which sustained a sense of civic belonging and responsibility.
but tocqueville raised troubling questions about whether those factors would prove durable.
if not what would the ultimate fate of democracy be.
ironically today the united states has markedly lower rates of political participation than many other countries especially those in europe see table 13 2.
can it be that america the pioneering mass democracy that served as tocquevilles laboratory and his window on the future has proved to be less fertile soil for the development of democracy than the old world societies with which he compared it in the 1830s.
table 13 2 voter turnout by country 1840 2000 percentage of voting age population percentage of eligible voters 1841 1842 1841 1842 germany japan mexico united states united kingdom france percentage of voting age population percentage of eligible voters percentage of voting age population percentage of voting age population 1902 1898 1902 1898 1958 1961 1958 2001 1995 1998 voting age population includes individuals of any race and both genders.
for france and the united kingdom individuals over the age of twenty are included in population estimates.
for the united states the voting age population is an approximation of the total population over age twenty one.
virtually all blacks and all women were ineligible to vote in the united states.
landholding requirements severely limited eligibility in the united kingdom and france.
the voting age was reduced to eighteen in the united states france the united kingdom and germany in the second half of the twentieth century.
the voting age in mexico was eighteen for both the 1958 and 2000 elections.
the voting age in japan is twenty.
sources historical statistics of the united states vol.
5 state economy and society in western europe 1815 1975 international historical statistics 1750 2005 europe and international institute for democracy and electoral assistance.
chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 the spoils system once in power the democrats famously suspicious of the federal government demonstrated that they were not above striking some bargains of their own.
under jackson the spoils system that is rewarding political supporters with public ofce was introduced into the federal government on a large scale.
the basic idea was as old as politics.
its name came later from senator william marcys classic remark in 1832 to the victor belong the spoils of the enemy the system had already secured a rm hold in new york and pennsylvania where well greased machines ladled out the gravy of ofce.
jackson defended the spoils system on democratic grounds.
every man is as good as his neighbor he declared perhaps equally better as this was believed to be so and as the routine of ofce was thought to be simple enough for any upstanding american to learn quickly why encourage the development of an aristocratic bureaucratic ofceholding class.
better to bring in new blood he argued each generation deserved its turn at the public trough.
washington was due it is true for a housecleaning.
no party overturn had occurred since the defeat of the federalists in 1800 and even that had not produced wholesale evictions.
a few ofceholders their commissions signed by president washington were lingering on into their eighties drawing breath and salary but doing little else.
but the spoils system was less about nding new blood than about rewarding old cronies.
throw their rascals out and put our rascals in the democrats were essentially saying.
the questions asked of each appointee were not what can he do for the country but what has he done for the party or is he loyal to jackson scandal inevitably accompanied the new system.
men who had openly bought their posts by campaign contributions were appointed to high ofce.
illiterates incompetents and plain crooks were given positions of public trust men on the make lusted for the spoils rather than the toils of ofce.
samuel swartwout despite ample warnings of his untrustworthiness was awarded the lucrative post of collector of the customs of the port of new york.
nearly nine years later he swartwouted out for eng land leaving his accounts more than a million dollars short the rst person to steal a million from the washington government.
but despite its undeniable abuse the spoils system was an important element of the emerging two party order cementing as it did loyalty to party over compet ing claims based on economic class or geographic region.
the promise of patronage provided a compelling reason for americans to pick a party and stick with it through thick and thin.
the tricky tariff of abominations the touchy tariff issue had been one of john quincy adamss biggest headaches.
now andrew jackson felt his predecessors pain.
tariffs protected american industry against competition from european manufactured goods but they also drove up prices for all americans and invited retaliatory tariffs on american agricultural exports abroad.
the middle states had long been supporters of protectionist tariffs.
in the 1820s inuential new eng landers like daniel webster gave up their traditional defense of free trade to support higher tariffs too.
the wool and textile industries were booming and forward thinking yankees came to believe that their future prosperity would ow from the factory rather than from the sea.
in 1824 congress had increased the general tariff signicantly but wool manufacturers bleated for stillhigher barriers.
ardent jacksonites now played a cynical political game.
they promoted a high tariff bill expecting to be defeated which would give a black eye to president adams.
to their surprise the tariff passed in 1828 and andrew jackson inherited the political hot potato.
southerners as heavy consumers of manufactured goods with little manufacturing industry of their own were hostile to tariffs.
they were particularly shocked by what they regarded as the outrageous rates of the tariff of 1828.
hotheads branded it the black tariff or the tariff of abominations.
several southern states adopted formal protests.
in south carolina ags were lowered to half mast.
let the new eng land beware how she imitates the old cried one eloquent south carolinian.
why did the south react so angrily against the tariff.
southerners believed not illogically that the yankee tariff discriminated against them.
the bustling northeast was experiencing a boom in manufacturing the developing west was prospering from rising property values and a multiplying population and the energetic southwest was expanding into virgin cotton lands.
but the old south was falling on hard times and the tariff provided a convenient and plausible scapegoat.
southerners sold their cotton and other farm produce in a world market completely unprotected by the south and the tariff ment in washington to suppress slavery in the south.
if so now was the time and the tariff was the issue to take a strong stand on principle against all federal encroachments on states rights.
south carolinians took the lead in protesting against the tariff of abominations their legislature went so far as to publish in 1828 though without formal endorsement a pamphlet known as the south carolina exposition.
it had been secretly written by john c calhoun one of the few top ight political theorists ever produced by america.
as vice president he was forced to conceal his authorship.
the exposition denounced the recent tariff as unjust and south carolina belle sewing palmetto cockade the tariff of abominations of 1828 drove many people in south carolina the palmetto state to irt with secession.
anti tariff protesters wore palmetto blossoms real or sewn from fabric to symbolize their deance of the federal law.
the blue cockade indicated support for the ordinance of nullication.
tariffs but were forced to buy their manufactured goods in an american market heavily protected by tariffs.
protectionism protected yankee and middle state manufacturers.
the farmers and planters of the old south felt they were stuck with the bill.
but much deeper issues underlay the southern outcry in particular a growing anxiety about possible federal interference with the institution of slavery.
the congressional debate on the missouri compromise had kindled those anxieties and they were further fanned by an aborted slave rebellion in charleston in 1822 led by a free black named denmark vesey.
the south carolinians still closely tied to the british west indies also knew full well that their slaveowning west indian cousins were feeling the mounting pressure of british abolitionism on the london government.
abolitionism in america might similarly use the power of the govern john c calhoun 1782 1850 by john trumbull 1827 calhoun was a south carolinian educated at yale.
beginning as a strong nationalist and unionist he reversed himself and became the ablest of the sectionalists and disunionists in defense of the south and slavery.
as a foremost nullier he died trying to reconcile strong states rights with a strong union.
in his last years he advocated a siamese twin dual presidency probably unworkable with one president for the north and one for the south.
his former plantation home is now the site of clemson university.
chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 john c calhoun 1782 1850 leader of south carolinas offensive to nullify the tariff of 1832 saw nullication as a way of preserving the union while preventing secession of the southern states.
in his mind he was still a unionist even if also a southern sectionalist i never use the word nation in speaking of the united states.
i always use the word union or confederacy we are not a nation but a union a confederacy of equal and sovereign states.
during the crisis of 1832 some of his south carolina compatriots had different ideas.
medals were struck off in honor of calhoun bearing the words first president of the southern confederacy unconstitutional.
going a stride beyond the kentucky and virginia resolutions of 1798 it bluntly and explicitly proposed that the states should nullify the tariff that is they should declare it null and void within their borders.
nullies in south carolina the stage was set for a showdown.
through jacksons rst term the nulliers nullies they were called tried strenuously to muster the necessary two thirds vote for nullication in the south carolina legislature.
but they were blocked by a determined minority of unionists scorned as submission men back in washington congress tipped the balance by passing the new tariff of 1832.
though it pared away the worst abominations of 1828 it was still frankly protective and fell far short of meeting southern demands.
worse yet to many southerners it had a disquieting air of permanence.
the nullication crisis deepened.
south carolina was now nerved for drastic action.
nulliers and unionists clashed head on in the state election of 1832.
nullies deantly wearing palmetto ribbons on their hats to mark their loyalty to the palmetto state emerged with more than a two thirds majority.
the state legislature then called for a special convention.
several weeks later the delegates meeting in columbia solemnly declared the existing tariff to be null and void within south carolina.
as a further act of deance the convention threatened to take south car at a jefferson day dinner on april 13 1830 in the midst of the nullication controversy president andrew jackson 1767 1845 offered a toast our federal union it must be preserved.
john c calhoun rose to his feet to make a countertoast to the union next to our liberty most dear.
olina out of the union if washington attempted to collect the customs duties by force.
such tactics might have intimidated john quincy adams but andrew jackson was the wrong president to stare down.
the cantankerous general was not a diehard supporter of the tariff but he would not permit deance or disunion.
his military instincts rasped jackson privately threatened to invade the state and have the nulliers hanged.
in public he was only slightly less pugnacious.
he dispatched naval and military reinforcements to the palmetto state while quietly preparing a sizable army.
he also issued a ringing proclamation against nullication to which the governor of south carolina former senator robert y hayne responded with a counterproclamation.
the lines were drawn.
if civil war was to be avoided one side would have to surrender or both would have to compromise.
conciliatory henry clay of kentucky now in the senate stepped forward.
an unforgiving foe of jackson he had no desire to see his old enemy win new laurels by crushing the carolinians and returning with the scalp of calhoun dangling from his belt.
although himself a supporter of tariffs the gallant kentuckian therefore threw his inuence behind a compromise bill that would gradually reduce the tariff of 1832 by about 10 percent over a period of eight years.
by 1842 the rates would be back at the mildly protective level of 1816.
the compromise tariff of 1833 nally squeezed through congress.
debate was bitter with most of the opposition naturally coming from protectionist new eng land and the middle states.
calhoun and the south favored the compromise so it was evident that jackson would not have to use rearms and rope.
but at the same time and partly as a face saving device congress for the history of tariff rates see the appendix.
the nullication crisis passed the force bill known among carolinians as the bloody bill it authorized the president to use the army and navy if necessary to collect federal tariff duties.
south carolinians welcomed this opportunity to extricate themselves from a dangerously tight corner without loss of face.
to the consternation of the calhounites no other southern states had sprung to their support though georgia and virginia toyed with the idea.
moreover an appreciable unionist minority within south carolina was gathering guns organizing militias and nailing stars and stripes to agpoles.
faced with civil war within and invasion from without the columbia convention met again and repealed the ordinance of nullication.
as a nal but futile gesture of st shaking it nullied the unnecessary force bill and adjourned.
neither jackson nor the nullies won a clear cut victory in 1833.
clay was the true hero of the hour hailed in charleston and boston alike for saving the country.
armed con ict had been avoided but the fundamental issues had not been resolved.
when next the nullies and the union clashed compromise would prove more elusive.
the trail of tears jacksons democrats were committed to western expansion but such expansion necessarily meant confrontation with the current inhabitants of the land.
more than 125 000 native americans lived in the forests and prairies east of the mississippi in the 1820s.
federal policy toward them varied.
beginning in the 1790s the washington government ostensibly recognized the tribes as separate nations and agreed to acquire land from them only through formal treaties.
the indians were shrewd and stubborn negotiators but this availed them little when americans routinely violated their own covenants erasing and redrawing treaty line after treaty line on their maps as white settlement pushed west.
many white americans felt respect and admiration for the indians and believed that they could be assimilated into white society.
much energy therefore was devoted to civilizing and christianizing the indians.
the society for propagating the gospel among indians was founded in 1787 and many denominations sent missionaries into indian villages.
in 1793 congress appropriated 20 000 for the promotion of literacy and agricultural and vocational instruction among the indians.
jackson the great father an anonymous cartoonist satirizes jacksons alleged compassion for the indians but in fact his feelings toward native americans were complicated.
he made ruthless war on the creeks as a soldier but he also adopted a creek indian son who died of tuberculosis at the age of sixteen.
at least in part his motives for pursuing indian removal stemmed from his concern that if the indians were not removed from contact with the whites they would face certain annihilation.
although many tribes violently resisted white encroachment others followed the path of accommodation.
the cherokees of georgia made especially remarkable efforts to learn the ways of the whites.
they gradually abandoned their seminomadic life and adopted a system of settled agriculture and a notion of private property.
missionaries opened schools among the cherokees and the indian sequoyah devised a cherokee alphabet.
in 1808 the cherokee national council legislated a written legal code and in 1827 it adopted a chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 the trail of tears in the fall and winter of 1838 1839 the u s army forcibly removed about fteen thousand cherokees some of them in manacles from their ancestral homelands in the southeastern united states and marched them to indian territory present day oklahoma.
freezing weather and inadequate food supplies led to unspeakable suffering.
the escorting troops refused to slow the forced march so that the ill could recover and some four thousand cherokees died on the 116 day journey.
written constitution that provided for executive legislative and judicial branches of government.
some cherokees became prosperous cotton planters and even turned to slaveholding.
nearly thirteen hundred black slaves toiled for their native american masters in the cherokee nation in the 1820s.
for these efforts the cherokees along with the creeks choctaws chickasaws and seminoles were numbered by whites among the five civilized tribes all this embrace of civilization apparently was not good enough for whites.
in 1828 the georgia legislature declared the cherokee tribal council illegal and asserted its own jurisdiction over indian affairs and indian lands.
the cherokees appealed this move to the supreme court which thrice upheld the rights of the indians.
but president jackson who clearly wanted to open indian lands to white settlement refused to recognize the courts decisions.
in a cal lous jibe at the indians defender jackson allegedly snapped one hundred sixty years later in 1992 the state government of georgia formally pardoned the two white missionaries samuel austin worcester and elihu butler who gured prominently in the decision jackson condemned.
they had been convicted of living on cherokee lands without a license from the state government of georgia.
they had served sixteen months at hard labor on a chain gang and later had accompanied the cherokees on the trail of tears to oklahoma.
john marshall has made his decision now let him enforce it feeling some obligation to rescue this much injured race jackson proposed a bodily removal of the remaining eastern tribes chiey cherokees creeks choctaws chickasaws and seminoles beyond the mississippi.
emigration was supposed to be voluntary because it would be cruel and unjust to compel the aborigines to abandon the graves of their fathers jackson evidently consoled himself with the belief that one survivor of the indians forced march in 1838 1839 on the trail of tears to indian territory farther west remembered one each day and all are gone.
looks like maybe all dead before we get to new indian country but always we keep marching on.
women cry and make sad wails.
children cry and many men cry and all look sad when friends die but they say nothing and just put heads down and keep on toward west.
she his mother speak no more we bury her and go on.
removal of the indians the indians could preserve their native cultures in the wide open west.
jacksons policy led to the forced uprooting of more than 100 000 indians.
in 1830 congress passed the indian removal act providing for the transplanting of all indian tribes then resident east of the mississippi see map 13 2.
ironically the heaviest blows fell on the five civilized tribes.
in the ensuing decade countless indians died on forced marches notably the cherokees along the notorious trail of tears to the newly established indian territory where they were to be permanently free of white encroachments.
the bureau of indian affairs was established in 1836 to administer relations with americas original inhabitants.
but as the land hungry palefaces pushed west faster than anticipated the governments guarantees went up in smoke.
the permanent frontier lasted about fteen years.
suspicious of white intentions from the start sauk and fox braves from illinois and wisconsin ably led by black hawk resisted eviction.
they were bloodily crushed in the black hawk war of 1832 by regular troops including lieutenant jefferson davis of mississippi and by volunteers including captain abraham lincoln of illinois.
in florida the seminole indians joined by runaway black slaves retreated to the swampy everglades.
for seven years 1835 1842 they waged a bitter guerrilla war that took the lives of some fteen hundred soldiers.
the spirit of the seminoles was broken in 1837 when map 13 2 indian removals 1830 1846 interactive map lake michigan 90w oto and missouri sauk land granted to indians west of the mississippi river iowa sauk and fox 1 kickapoo i lli noi s wea and piankasha peoria and kaskaskia wea and piankasha miami m i ssou r i new york indians cherokee neutral lands quapaw.
ar k an sas ter r n red r.
ft smith ten n essee tenne ssee chickasaw ft towson cherokee r ft chickasaw arbuckle and choctaw ft washita north c aroli na mi s siss ft gibson ippi seneca n sr nsa cherokee vi rgi n ia kentucky a a rk creek and seminole osage r potawatomi a fort io r.
e sauk and fox cherokee outlet oh buffalo range south c aroli na creek al abama georgia la n choctaw at m i ssi ssi p p i c ft leavenworth shawnee i n dian ter r itory forest oh io i n diana o wyandot and delaware indian tribes home territories 1835 date and route of removal fox 40n l e c i r m ich igan ter r itory 80w eri ake ti sour mis omaha m exico lou i siana 30n 200 km.
f lor i da ter r new orleans 200 mi.
gulf of mexico seminole chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 black hawk and his son whirling thunder by john wesley jarvis 1833 chief black hawk and his son are depicted here in captivity.
after their surrender in the black hawk war of 1832 they were put on public display throughout the united states.
the american eld commander treacherously seized their leader osceola under a ag of truce.
the war dragged on for ve more years but the seminoles were doomed.
some ed deeper into the everglades where their descendants now live but about four fths of them were moved to present day oklahoma where several thousand of the tribe survive.
the bank war president jackson did not hate all banks and all businesses but he distrusted monopolistic banking and overbig businesses as did his followers.
a man of virulent dislikes he came to share the prejudices of his own west against the moneyed monster known as the bank of the united states.
what made the bank a monster in jacksons eyes.
the national government minted gold and silver coins in the mid nineteenth century but did not issue paper money.
paper notes were printed by private banks.
their value uctuated with the health of the bank and the amount of money printed giving private bankers considerable power over the nations economy.
no bank in america had more power than the bank of the united states.
in many ways the bank acted like a branch of government.
it was the principal depository for the funds of the washington government and controlled much of the nations gold and silver.
its notes unlike those of many smaller banks were stable in value.
a source of credit and stability the bank was an important and useful part of the nations expanding economy.
but the bank of the united states was a private institution accountable not to the people but to its elite circle of moneyed investors.
its president the brilliant but arrogant nicholas biddle held an immense and to many unconstitutional amount of power over the nations nancial affairs.
enemies of the bank dubbed him czar nicolas i and called the bank a hydra of corruption a serpent that grew new heads whenever old ones were cut off.
to some the banks very existence seemed to sin against the egalitarian credo of american democracy.
the conviction formed the deepest source of jacksons opposition.
the bank also won no friends in the west by foreclosing on many western farms and draining tribute into eastern coffers.
prot not public ser vice was its rst priority.
the bank war erupted in 1832 when daniel webster and henry clay presented congress with a bill to renew the bank of the united states charter.
the charter was not set to expire until 1836 but clay pushed for renewal four years early to make it an election issue in 1832.
as jacksons leading rival for the presidency clay with fateful blindness looked upon the bank issue as a sure re winner.
clays scheme was to ram a recharter bill through congress and then send it on to the white house.
if jackson signed it he would alienate his worshipful western followers.
if he vetoed it as seemed certain he would presumably lose the presidency in the forthcoming election by alienating the wealthy and inuential groups in the east.
clay seems not to have fully realized that the best people were now only a minority and that they generally feared jackson anyhow.
the recharter bill slid through congress on greased skids as planned but was killed by a scorching veto from jackson.
the old hero declared the monopolistic bank to be unconstitutional.
of course the supreme court had earlier declared it constitutional in the case of mcculloch v maryland 1819 but jackson acted as though he regarded the executive branch as superior to the judicial branch.
the old general growled privately the bank.
is trying to kill me but i will kill it beginnings of the bank war in mother banks sickroom pro bank men henry clay daniel webster and john c calhoun consult on the grave illness that is causing mother bank to cough up her deposits.
while nicholas biddle president of the bank of the united states ministers to the patient u s president andrew jackson looks on with pleasure.
jacksons veto message reverberated with constitutional consequences.
it not only squashed the bank bill but vastly amplied the power of the presidency.
all previous vetoes had rested almost exclusively on questions of constitutionality.
but though jackson invoked the constitution in his bank veto message he essentially argued that he was vetoing the bill because he personally found it harmful to the nation.
in effect he was claiming for the president alone a power equivalent to two thirds of the votes in congress.
if the legislative and executive branches were partners in government he implied the president was unmistakably the senior partner.
henry clays political instincts continued to fail him.
delighted with the nancial fallacies of jacksons banker nicholas biddle 1786 1844 wrote to henry clay august 1 1832 expressing his satisfaction i have always deplored making the bank a party question but since the president will have it so he must pay the penalty of his own rashness.
as to the veto message i am delighted with it.
it has all the fury of a chained panther biting the bars of his cage.
it is really a manifesto of anarchy.
and my hope is that it will contribute to relieve the country of the domination of these miserable jackson people.
chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 symptoms of a locked jaw an outraged and outmaneuvered henry clay vainly tries to muzzle andrew jackson after jacksons stinging message vetoing the bill to recharter the bank of the united states.
message but blind to its political appeal he arranged to have thousands of copies printed as a campaign document.
the presidents sweeping accusations may indeed have seemed demagogic to the moneyed interests of the east but they made perfect sense to the common people.
the bank issue was now thrown into the noisy arena of the presidential contest of 1832.
old hickory wallops clay in 1832 clay and jackson were the chief gladiators in the looming electoral combat.
the grizzled old general who had earlier favored one term for a president and rotation in ofce was easily persuaded by his cronies not to rotate himself out of ofce.
presidential power is a heady brew and can be habit forming.
the ensuing campaign was raucous.
the old heros adherents again raised the hickory pole and bellowed jackson forever go the whole hog admirers of clay shouted freedom and clay while his detractors harped on his dueling gambling cockghting and fast living.
novel features made the campaign of 1832 especially memorable.
for the rst time a third party entered the eld the newborn anti masonic party which opposed the inuence and fearsome secrecy of the masonic order.
energized by the mysterious disappearance and probable murder in 1826 of a new yorker who was threatening to expose the secret rituals of the masons the anti masonic party quickly became a potent political force in new york and spread its inuence throughout the middle atlantic and new eng land states.
the anti masons appealed to long standing american suspicions of secret societies which they condemned as citadels of privilege and monopoly a note that harmonized with the democratic chorus of the jacksonians.
but since jackson himself was a mason and publicly gloried in his membership the anti masonic party was also an anti jackson party.
the anti masons also attracted support from many evangelical protestant groups seeking to use political power to effect moral and religious reforms such as prohibiting mail delivery on sunday and otherwise keeping the sabbath holy.
this moral busybodiness was anathema to the jacksonians who were generally opposed to all government meddling in social and economic life.
a further novelty of the presidential contest in 1832 was the calling of national nominating conventions three of them to name candidates.
the anti masons and a group of national republicans added still another innovation when they adopted formal platforms publicizing their positions on the issues.
henry clay and his overcondent national republicans enjoyed impressive advantages.
ample funds owed into their campaign chest including 50 000 in life insurance from the bank of the united states.
most of the newspaper editors some of them bought with biddles bank loans dipped their pens in acid when they wrote of jackson.
yet jackson idol of the masses easily defeated the big money kentuckian.
a jacksonian wave again swept over the west and south surged into pennsylvania and new york and even washed into rock ribbed new eng land.
the popular vote stood at 687 502 to 530 189 for jackson the electoral count was a lopsided 219 to 49.
the bank of the united states expires fistght between old hickory and bully nick 1834 an aged president andrew jackson faces off against the banks director aristocratic nicholas biddle.
comically presented as sparring pugilists undressed in the style of the popular sport the two are assisted by their seconds daniel webster and henry clay for biddle vice president martin van buren for jackson.
burying biddles bank its charter denied the bank of the united states was due to expire in 1836.
but jackson was not one to let the nancial octopus die in peace.
he was convinced that he now had a mandate from the voters for its extermination and he feared that the slippery biddle might try to manipulate the bank as he did so as to force its recharter.
jackson therefore decided in 1833 to bury the bank for good by removing federal deposits from its vaults.
he proposed depositing no more funds with biddle and gradually shrinking existing deposits by using them to defray the day to day expenses of the government.
by slowly siphoning off the governments funds he would bleed the bank dry and ensure its demise.
removing the deposits involved nasty complications.
even the presidents closest advisers opposed this seemingly unnecessary possibly unconstitutional and certainly vindictive policy.
jackson his dander up was forced to reshufe his cabinet twice before he could nd a secretary of the treasury who would bend to his iron will.
a desperate biddle called in his banks loans evidently hoping to illustrate the banks importance by producing a minor nancial crisis.
a number of wobblier banks were driven to the wall by biddles panic but jacksons resolution was rm.
if anything the vengeful conduct of the dying monster seemed to justify the earlier accusations of its adversaries.
but the death of the bank of the united states left a nancial vacuum in the american economy and kicked off a lurching cycle of booms and busts.
surplus federal chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 funds were placed in several dozen state institutions the so called pet banks chosen for their pro jackson sympathies.
without a sober central bank in control the pet banks and smaller wildcat banks y bynight operations that often consisted of little more than a few chairs and a suitcase full of printed notes ooded the country with paper money.
jackson tried to rein in the runaway economy in 1836 the year biddles bank breathed its last.
wildcat currency had become so unreliable especially in the west that jackson authorized the treasury to issue a specie circular a decree that required all public lands to be purchased with hard or metallic money.
this drastic step slammed the brakes on the speculative boom a neck snapping change of direction that contributed to a nancial panic and crash in 1837.
but by then jackson had retired to his nashville home hailed as the hero of his age.
his successor would have to deal with the damage.
the birth of the whigs new political parties were gelling as the 1830s lengthened.
as early as 1828 the democratic republicans of jackson had unashamedly adopted the once tainted name democrats jacksons opponents fuming at his ironsted exercise of presidential power condemned him as king andrew i and began to coalesce as the whigs a name deliberately chosen to recollect eighteenth century british and revolutionary american opposition to the monarchy.
the whig party contained so many diverse elements that it was mocked at rst as an orga nized incompatibility hatred of jackson and his executive usurpation was its only apparent cement in its formative days.
the whigs rst emerged as an identiable group in the senate where clay webster and calhoun joined forces in 1834 to pass a motion censuring jackson for his single handed removal of federal deposits from the bank of the united states.
thereafter the whigs rapidly evolved into a potent national political force by attracting other groups alienated by jackson supporters of clays american system southern states righters offended by jacksons stand on nullication the larger northern industrialists and merchants and eventually many of the evangelical protestants associated with the anti masonic party.
whigs thought of themselves as conser vatives yet they were progressive in their support of active government programs and reforms.
instead of boundless territorial acquisition they called for internal improvements like canals railroads and telegraph lines and they supported institutions like prisons asylums and public schools.
the whigs welcomed the market economy drawing support from manufacturers in the north planters in the south and merchants and bankers in all sections.
but they were not simply a party of wealthy fat cats however dearly the democrats wanted to paint them as such.
by absorbing the anti masonic party the whigs blunted much of the democratic appeal to the common man.
the egalitarian anti masons portrayed jackson and particularly his new york successor martin van buren as imperious aristocrats.
this turned jacksonian rhetoric on its head now the whigs claimed to be the defenders of the common man and declared the democrats the party of cronyism and corruption.
the election of 1836 the smooth tongued and keen witted vice president martin van buren of new york was jacksons choice for appointment as his successor in 1836.
the hollowcheeked jackson now nearing seventy was too old and ailing to consider a third term.
but he was not loath to try to serve a third term through van buren something of a yes man leaving nothing to chance jackson carefully rigged the nominating convention and rammed his favorite down the throats of the delegates.
van buren was supported by the jacksonites without wild enthusiasm even though he had promised to tread generally in the military booted footsteps of his predecessor.
as the election neared the still ramshackle orga nization of the whigs showed in their inability to nominate a single presidential candidate.
their long shot strategy was instead to run several prominent favorite sons each with a different regional appeal and hope to scatter the vote so that no candidate would win a majority.
the deadlock would then have to be broken by the house of representatives where the whigs might have a chance.
with henry clay rudely elbowed aside the leading whig favorite son was heavy jawed general william henry harrison of ohio hero of the battle of tippecanoe see p 245.
the ne spun schemes of the whigs availed nothing however.
van buren the dapper little magician squirmed into ofce by the close popular vote of 765 483 to 739 795 but by the comfortable margin of 170 to 124 votes for all the whigs combined in the electoral college.
examining the evidence satiric bank note 1837 olitical humor can take more forms than the commonly seen caustic cartoon.
occasionally historians stumble upon other examples such as this fake bank note.
a jibe at andrew jacksons money policies it appeared in new york in 1837 after jacksons insistence on shutting down the bank of the united states resulted in the suspension of specie payments.
the clever creator of this satiric bank note for six cents left little doubt about the worthlessness of the note or jacksons responsibility for it.
the six p big woes for the little magician martin van buren eighth president was the rst to be born under the american ag.
short and slender bland and bald the adroit little new yorker has been described as a rst class second rate man an accomplished strategist and spoilsman the wizard of albany he was also a statesman of wide experience in both legislative and administrative life.
in intelligence education and training he was above the average of the presidents since jackson.
the myth of his mediocrity cents payable by the humbug glory bank whose symbols were a donkey and a hickory leaf for old hickory were redeemable in mint drops or glory at cost the banks cashier was cunning reuben possibly an anti semitic allusion to usurious jewish bankers.
can you identify other ways in which this document takes aim at jacksons banking policies.
what symbols did the notes creator assume the public would comprehend.
sprouted mostly from a series of misfortunes over which he had no control.
from the outset the new president labored under severe handicaps.
as a machine made candidate he incurred the resentment of many democrats those who objected to having a bastard politician smuggled into ofce beneath the tails of the old generals military coat.
jackson the master showman had been a dynamic type of executive whose administration had resounded with furious quarrels and cracked heads.
mild mannered martin van buren seemed to rattle about in the military boots of his testy predecessor.
the people felt let down.
inheriting andrew jacksons chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 mantle without his popularity van buren also inherited the ex presidents numerous and vengeful enemies.
van burens four years overowed with toil and trouble.
a pair of short lived rebellions in canada in 1837 mostly over political reform but aggravated by unregulated immigration from the united states stirred up ugly incidents along the northern frontier and threatened to trigger war with britain.
the presidents attempt to play a neutral game led to the wail woe to martin van buren the antislavery agitators in the north were also in full cry.
among other grievances they were condemning the prospective annexation of texas see p 295.
worst of all jackson bequeathed to van buren the makings of a searing depression.
much of van burens energy had to be devoted to the purely negative task of battling the panic and there were not enough rabbits in the little magicians tall silk hat.
hard times ordinarily blight the reputation of a president and van buren was no exception.
depression doldrums and the independent treasury the panic of 1837 was a symptom of the nancial sickness of the times.
its basic cause was rampant speculation prompted by a mania of get rich quickism.
gamblers in western lands were doing a land ofce business on borrowed capital much of it in the shaky currency of wildcat banks the speculative craze spread to canals roads railroads and slaves.
but speculation alone did not cause the crash.
jacksonian nance including the bank war and the specie circular gave an additional jolt to an already teetering structure.
failures of wheat crops ravaged by the hessian y deepened the distress.
grain prices were forced so high that mobs in new york city three weeks before van buren took the oath stormed warehouses and broke open our barrels.
the panic really began before jackson left ofce but its full fury burst about van burens bewildered head.
financial stringency abroad likewise endangered americas economic house of cards.
late in 1836 the failure of two prominent british banks created tremors and these in turn caused british investors to call in foreign loans.
the resulting pinch in the united states combined with other setbacks heralded the beginning of the panic.
europes economic distresses have often become americas distresses for every major american nancial panic has been affected by conditions overseas.
the long bill americans who bought on credit condent that they could make their payments later were caught off guard by the panic of 1837.
customers like the one shown here found themselves confronted with a long bill that they could not pay particularly when the banks holding their savings collapsed.
hardship was acute and widespread.
american banks collapsed by the hundreds including some pet banks which carried down with them several million in government funds.
commodity prices drooped sales of public lands fell off and customs revenues dried to a rivulet.
factories closed their doors and unemployed workers milled in the streets.
the whigs came forward with proposals for active government remedies for the economys ills.
they called for the expansion of bank credit higher tariffs and subsidies for internal improvements.
but van buren shackled by the jacksonian philosophy of keeping the governments paws off the economy spurned all such ideas.
the beleaguered van buren tried to apply vintage jacksonian medicine to the ailing economy through his controversial divorce bill convinced that some of the nancial fever was fed by the injection of federal van buren s presidency philip hone 1780 1851 a new york businessman described in his diary may 10 1837 a phase of the nancial crisis the savings bank also sustained a most grievous run yesterday.
they paid 375 depositors 81 000.
the press was awful the hour for closing the bank is six oclock but they did not get through the paying of those who were in at that time till nine oclock.
i was there with the other trustees and witnessed the madness of the people women nearly pressed to death and the stoutest men could scarcely sustain themselves but they held on as with a deaths grip upon the evidences of their claims and exhausted as they were with the pressure they had strength to cry pay.
pay funds into private banks he championed the principle of divorcing the government from banking altogether.
by establishing a so called independent treasury the government could lock its surplus money in vaults in several of the larger cities.
government funds would thus be safe but they would also be denied to the banking system as reserves thereby shriveling available credit resources.
van burens divorce scheme was never highly popular.
his fellow democrats many of whom longed for the risky but lush days of the pet banks supported one foreign traveler decried the chaotic state of american currency following the demise of the bank of the united states and the panic of 1837 the greatest annoyance i was subjected to in travelling was in exchanging money.
it is impossible to describe the wretched state of the currency which is all bills issued by private individuals companies cities and states almost all of which are bankrupt or what amounts to the same thing they cannot redeem their issues.
and these do not pass out of the state or frequently out of the city in which they are issued.
it only lukewarmly.
the whigs condemned it primarily because it squelched their hopes for a revived bank of the united states.
after a prolonged struggle the independent treasury bill passed congress in 1840.
repealed the next year by the victorious whigs the scheme was reenacted by the triumphant democrats in 1846 and then continued until the republicans instituted a network of national banks during the civil war.
gone to texas americans greedy for land continued to covet the vast expanse of texas which the united states had abandoned to spain when acquiring florida in 1819.
the spanish authorities wanted to populate this virtually unpeopled area but before they could carry through their contemplated plans the mexicans won their independence in 1821.
a new regime in mexico city thereupon concluded arrangements in 1823 for granting a huge tract of land to stephen austin with the understanding that he would bring into texas three hundred american families.
immigrants were to be of the established roman catholic faith and upon settlement were to become properly mexicanized.
these two stipulations were largely ignored.
hardy texas pioneers remained americans at heart resenting the trammels imposed by a foreign government.
they were especially annoyed by the presence of mexican soldiers many of whom were ragged ex convicts.
energetic and prolic texan americans numbered about thirty thousand by 1835 see makers of america mexican or texican pp.
most of them were law abiding god fearing people but some of them had left the states only one or two jumps ahead of the sheriff.
g t t gone to texas became current descriptive slang.
among the adventurers were davy crockett the famous rieman and jim bowie the presumed inventor of the murderous knife that bears his name.
bowies blade was widely known in the southwest as the genuine arkansas toothpick a distinguished latecomer and leader was an ex governor of tennessee sam houston.
his life had been temporarily shattered in 1829 when his bride of a few weeks left him and he took up transient residence with the arkansas indians who dubbed him big drunk he subsequently took the pledge of temperance.
the pioneer individualists who came to texas were not easy to push around.
friction rapidly increased between mexicans and texans over issues such as slavery immigration and local rights.
slavery was a chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 particularly touchy topic.
mexico emancipated its slaves in 1830 and prohibited the further importation of slaves into texas as well as further colonization by troublesome americans.
the texans refused to honor these decrees.
they kept their slaves in bondage and new american settlers kept bringing more slaves into texas.
when stephen austin went to mexico city in 1833 to negotiate these differences with the mexican government the dictator santa anna clapped him in jail for eight months.
the explosion nally came in 1835 when santa anna wiped out all local rights and started to raise an army to suppress the upstart texans.
the lone star rebellion samuel sam houston 1793 1863 after a promising career in tennessee as a soldier lawyer congressman and governor houston became the chief leader and hero of the texas rebels.
elected to the u s senate and the governorship of texas he was forced into retirement when his love for the union caused him to spurn the confederacy in the civil war.
come and take it this mosaic done in 1959 by bert rees of austin texas shows one of the defenders cannon as well as their legendary battle ag of deance.
early in 1836 the texans declared their independence unfurled their lone star ag and named sam houston commander in chief.
santa anna at the head of about six thousand men swept ferociously into texas.
trapping a band of nearly two hundred pugnacious texans at the alamo in san antonio he wiped them out to a man after a thirteen day siege.
the texans commander colonel w b travis had declared i shall never surrender nor retreat.
victory or death a short time later a band of about four hundred surrounded and defeated american volunteers having thrown down their arms at goliad were butchered as pirates all these operations further delayed the mexican advance and galvanized american opposition.
the fall of the alamo the battle of the alamo 1836 long celebrated in song and story the battle was a military defeat but a spiritual victory for the texas rebels whose annihilation to a man inspired others and led eventually to independence from mexico.
slain heroes like jim bowie and davy crockett well known in life became legendary in death.
texan war cries remember the alamo remember goliad and death to santa anna swept up into the united states.
scores of vengeful americans seized their ries and rushed to the aid of relatives friends and compatriots.
general sam houstons small army retreated to the east luring santa anna to san jacinto near the site of the city that now bears houstons name see map 13 3.
the mexicans numbered about thirteen hundred men the texans about nine hundred.
suddenly on april 21 1836 houston turned.
taking full advantage of the mexican siesta the texans wiped out the pursuing force and captured santa anna who was found cowering in the tall grass near the battleeld.
confronted with thirsty bowie knives the quaking dictator was speedily induced to sign two treaties.
by their terms he agreed to withdraw mexican troops and to recognize the rio grande as the extreme southwestern boundary of texas.
when released he repudiated the agreement as illegal because it had been extorted under duress.
these events put the u s government in a sticky situation.
the texans though courageous could hardly have won their independence without the help in men and supplies from their american cousins.
the washington government as the mexicans bitterly com plained had a solemn obligation under international law to enforce its leaky neutrality statutes.
but american public opinion overwhelmingly favorable to the texans openly nullied the existing legislation.
the federal authorities were powerless to act and on the day before he left ofce in 1837 president jackson even extended the right hand of recognition to the lone star republic led by his old comrade in arms against the indians sam houston.
many texans wanted not just recognition of their independence but outright union with the united states.
what nation in its right mind they reasoned would refuse so lavish a dowry.
the radiant texas bride ofcially petitioning for annexation in 1837 presented herself for marriage.
but the expectant groom uncle sam was jerked back by the black hand of the slavery issue.
antislavery crusaders in the north were opposing annexation with increasing vehemence.
they contended that the whole scheme was merely a conspiracy cooked up by the southern slavocracy to bring new slave pens into the union.
at rst glance a slavery plot charge seemed plausible.
most of the early settlers in texas as well as american volunteers during the revolution had come from the states of the south and southwest.
but scholars have concluded that the settlement of texas was merely the normal and inexorable march of the westward makers of america or themexican great africantexican.
american migration m oses austin born a connecticut yankee in 1761 was determined to be spanish if thats what it took to acquire cheap land and freedom from pesky laws.
in 1798 he tramped into untracked missouri still part of spanish louisiana and pledged his allegiance to the king of spain.
he was not pleased when the louisiana purchase of 1803 restored him to american citizenship.
in 1820 with his old spanish passport in his saddlebag he rode into spanish texas and asked for permission to establish a colony of three hundred families.
austins request posed a dilemma for the texas governor.
the spanish authorities had repeatedly stamped out the bands of american horse thieves and squatters who periodically splashed across the red and sabine rivers from the united states into spanish territory.
yet the spanish had lured only some three thousand of their own settlers into texas during their three centuries of rule.
if the land were ever to be wrestled from the indians and civilized maybe austins plan could do it.
hoping that this band of the right sort of jos antonio navarro 1795 1871 a native of san antonio navarro signed the texas declaration of independence in 1836.
americans might prevent the further encroachment of the buckskinned border rufans the governor reluctantly agreed to austins proposal.
upon moses austins death in 1821 the task of realizing his dream fell to his twenty seven year old son stephen.
i bid an everlasting farewell to my native country stephen austin said and he crossed into texas on july 15 1821 determined to ful ll rigidly all the duties and obligations of a mexican citizen mexico declared its independence from spain early in 1821 and nalized its agreement with austin in 1823.
soon he learned uent spanish and was signing his name as don estvan f austin in his new colony between the brazos and colorado rivers he allowed no drunkard no gambler no profane swearer no idler and sternly enforced these rules.
not only did he banish several families as undesirables but he ordered the public ogging of unwanted interlopers.
austin fell just three families short of recruiting the three hundred households that his father had contracted to bring to texas.
the original settlers were still dubbed the old three hundred the texas equivalent of new eng lands mayower pilgrims or the first families of virginia mostly scots irish southerners from the trans appalachian frontier the old three hundred were cultured folk by frontier standards all but four of them were literate.
other settlers followed from europe as well as america.
within ten years the anglos many of them french and german outnumbered the mexican residents or tejanos ten to one and soon evolved a distinctive texican culture.
the wideranging horse patrols orga nized to attack indian camps became the texas rangers samuel maverick whose unbranded calves roamed the limitless prairies left his surname as a label for rebellious loners who refused to run with the herd and jared groce an alabama planter whose caravan of fty covered wagons and one hundred slaves arrived in 1822 etched the original image of the larger than life big time texas operator.
the original anglo texans brought with them the old scots irish frontiersmens hostility to authority.
they ignored mexican laws and ofcials including restrictions against owning or importing slaves.
when the mexican government tried to impose its will on the west side main plaza san antonio texas by william g m samuel 1849 detail even after annexation texas retained a strong spanish mexican avor as the architecture and activities here illustrate.
anglo texans in the 1830s they took up their guns.
like the american revolutionaries of the 1770s who at rst demanded only the rights of eng lishmen the texans began by asking simply for mexican recognition of their rights as guaranteed by the mexican constitution of 1824.
but bloodshed at the alamo in 1836 like that at lexington and concord in 1775 transformed protest into rebellion.
texas lay and still lies along the frontier where hispanic and anglo american cultures met mingled and clashed.
in part the texas revolution was a contest between those two cultures.
but it was also a contest about philosophies of government pitting liberal frontier ideals of freedom against the conser vative concept of centralized control.
stephen austin sincerely tried to mexicanize himself and his followers until the mexican government grew too arbitrary and authoritarian.
and not all the texas revolutionaries were anglos many tejanos fought for texas independence seven perished defending the alamo.
among the fty nine signers of the texas declaration of independence were several hispanics including the tejanos jos antonio navarro and francisco ruiz.
lorenzo de zavala an ardent mexican liberal who had long resisted the centralizing tendencies of mexicos dominant political party was designated vice president of the texas republics interim government in 1836.
like the austins these tejanos and mexicans had sought in texas an escape from overbearing governmental authority.
their role in the revolution underscores the fact that the uprising was a struggle between defenders of local rights and the agents of central authority as much as it was a ght between anglo and mexican cultures.
chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 movement.
most of the immigrants came from the south and southwest simply because these states were closer.
the explanation was proximity rather than conspiracy.
yet the fact remained that many texans were slaveholders and admitting texas to the union inescapably meant enlarging american slavery.
95w area claimed by texas and mexico land grant united states houstons strategic retreat arkansas mexican movement r red texan victory sab 100w tr in ry by os ed az im sant aa nn a1 nueces r x de te a n d by gr e rio claim ry n da bou bexar dec 10 goliad mar.
20 1836 refugio mar.
14 1836 san patricio feb 14 1836 crockett huntsville los adaes san augustine san jacinto gonzales apr.
21 1836 galveston oct 2 1835 brazoria victoria velasco matagorda la vaca port vaca indianola copano gu lf corpus christi of mexic o a 1836 urre mier dec 25 1842 mexico r o xic me new braunfels nacogdoches bevil s settlement austin la austins bastrop beaumont la grangecolony 30n lynchburg n 1836 usto ho new washington laredo agua dulce natchitoches edwards tenaha colony br cla texas alamo mar.
6 1836 san antonio castroville r r da fredericksburg n ine henderson ity un bo dallas as ceded to texas 1840 clarksville mexican victory.
35n indian territory matamoros brownsville 150 km.
25n map 13 3 the texas revolution 1836 general houstons strategy was to retreat and use defense in depth.
his line of supply from the united states was shortened as santa annas lengthened.
the mexicans were forced to bring up supplies by land because the texas navy controlled the sea.
this force consisted of only four small ships but it was big enough to do the job.
interactive map log cabins and hard cider of 1840 martin van buren was renominated by the democrats in 1840 albeit without terric enthusiasm.
the party had no acceptable alternative to what the whigs called martin van ruin the whigs hungering for the spoils of ofce scented victory in the breeze.
pangs of the panic were still being felt and voters blamed their woes on the party in power.
learning from their mistake in 1836 the whigs united behind one candidate ohios william henry harrison.
he was not their ablest statesman that would have been daniel webster or henry clay but he was believed to be their ablest vote getter.
the aging hero nearly sixty eight when the campaign ended was known for his successes against indians and the british at the battles of tippecanoe 1811 and the thames 1813.
harrisons views on current issues were only vaguely known.
old tippecanoe was nominated primarily because he was issueless and enemyless a tested recipe for electoral success that still appeals today.
john tyler of virginia an afterthought was selected as his vice presidential running mate.
the whigs eager to avoid offense published no ofcial platform hoping to sweep their hero into ofce with a frothy huzza for harrison campaign reminiscent of jacksons triumph in 1828.
a dull witted democratic editor played directly into whig hands.
stupidly insulting the west he lampooned harrison as an impoverished old farmer who should be content with a pension a log cabin and a barrel of hard cider the poor westerners champagne.
whigs gleefully adopted honest hard cider and the sturdy log cabin as symbols of their campaign.
harrisonites portrayed their hero as the poor farmer of north bend who had been called from his cabin and his plow to drive corrupt jackson spoilsmen from the presidential palace they denounced van buren as a supercilious aristocrat a simpering dandy who wore corsets and ate french food from golden plates.
as a jeering whig campaign song proclaimed old tip he wears a homespun shirt he has no rufed shirt wirt wirt.
but matt he has the golden plate and hes a little squirt wirt wirt.
the whig campaign was a masterpiece of inane hoopla.
log cabins were dished up in every conceivable form.
bawling whigs stimulated by fortied cider rolled huge inated balls from village to village and tippecanoe and tyler too campaign flag for william henry harrison 1840 as the two party system came into its own by 1840 presidential elections became more public contests.
lively political campaigns used banners posters and ags to whip up voters support.
although general harrison was hardly a simple log cabin living ohioan the whigs disseminated this logo to persuade the voters that the virginia born gentleman was really a homespun western farmer.
state to state balls that represented the snowballing majority for tippecanoe and tyler too in truth harrison was not lowborn but from one of the ffvs first families of virginia.
he was not poverty stricken.
he did not live in a one room log cabin but rather in a sixteen room mansion on a three thousand acre farm.
he did not swill down gallons of hard cider he evi dently preferred whiskey.
and he did not plow his elds with his own huge paws but such details had not mattered when general jackson rode to victory and they did not matter now.
the democrats who hurrahed jackson into the white house in 1828 now discovered to their chagrin that whooping it up for a backwoods westerner was a game two could play.
harrison won by the surprisingly close margin of 1 274 624 to 1 127 781 popular votes but by an overwhelming electoral margin of 234 to 60.
with hardly a real issue debated though with hard times blighting the incumbents fortunes van buren was washed out of washington on a wave of apple juice.
the hard ciderites had apparently received a mandate to tear down the white house and erect a log cabin.
although campaigners in 1840 did their best to bury substantive issues beneath the ballyhoo voters actually faced a stark choice between two economic visions of how to cope with the nations rst major depression.
whigs sought to expand and stimulate the economy while democrats favored retrenchment and an end to high ying banks and aggressive corporations.
martin van buren gags on hard cider this 1840 pull card shows van buren on the left as an aristocratic fop sipping champagne.
when the right hand card was pulled out van burens face soured as he discovered that his champagne was actually hard cider.
the cartoonist clearly sympathized with van burens opponent in the 1840 presidential election william henry harrison who waged the famous log cabin and hard cider campaign.
chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 william henry harrison campaign in philadelphia 1840 the parties of democratic incumbent martin van buren and his whig challenger the hero of tippecanoe took their electoral rivalry into the streets of cities like philadelphia launching modern style popular politics.
harrison won but a mere month after delivering the longest inaugural address ever two hours he succumbed to pneumonia and died.
he served the shortest term of any president thirty one days.
one of his forty eight grandchildren benjamin harrison became the twenty third president of the united states.
politics for the people the election of 1840 conclusively demonstrated two major changes in american politics since the era of good feelings.
the rst was the triumph of a populist democratic style.
democracy had been something of a taint in the days of the lordly federalists.
martha washington the rst first lady was shocked after a presidential reception to nd a greasy smear on the wallpaper left there she was sure by an uninvited lthy democrat the county election by george caleb bingham 1851 1852 the artist here gently satirizes the drinking and wheeling and dealing that sometimes marred the electoral process in the boisterous age of jacksonian politics.
but by the 1840s aristocracy was the taint and democracy was respectable.
politicians were now forced to curry favor with the voting masses.
lucky indeed was the aspiring ofce seeker who could boast of birth in a log cabin.
in 1840 daniel webster publicly apologized for not being able to claim so humble a birthplace though he quickly added that his brothers could.
hopelessly handicapped was the candidate who appeared to be too clean too well dressed too grammatical too highbrowishly intellectual.
in truth most high political ofces continued to be lled by leading citizens but now these wealthy and prominent men had to forsake all social pretensions and cultivate the common touch if they hoped to win elections.
snobbish bigwigs unhappy over the change sneered at coonskin congressmen and at the newly enfranchised bipeds of the forest to them the tyranny of king numbers was no less offensive than that the two party system of king george.
but these critics protested in vain.
the common man was at last moving to the center of the national political stage the sturdy american who donned coarse trousers rather than buff breeches who sported a coonskin cap rather than a silk top hat and who wore no mans collar often not even one of his own.
instead of the old divine right of kings america was now bowing to the divine right of the people.
the two party system the second dramatic change resulting from the 1840 election was the formation of a vigorous and durable two party system.
the jeffersonians of an earlier day had been so successful in absorbing the programs of their federalist opponents that a full blown two party system had never truly emerged in the subsequent era of good feelings.
the idea had prevailed that parties of any sort smacked of conspiracy and faction and were injurious to the health of the body politic in a virtuous republic.
by 1840 political parties had fully come of age a lasting legacy of andrew jacksons and martin van burens tenaciousness.
both national parties the democrats and the whigs grew out of the rich soil of jeffersonian republicanism and each laid claim to different aspects of the republican inheritance.
jacksonian democrats gloried the liberty of the individual and were ercely on guard against the inroads of privilege into government.
whigs trumpeted the natural harmony of society and the value of community and were willing to use government to realize their objectives.
whigs also berated those leaders and they considered jackson to be one whose appeals to self interest fostered con ict among individuals classes or sections.
democrats clung to states rights and federal restraint in social and economic affairs as their basic doctrines.
whigs tended to favor a renewed national bank protective tariffs internal improvements public schools and increasingly moral reforms such as the prohibition of liquor and eventually the abolition of slavery.
president andrew jackson advised a supporter in 1835 on how to tell the difference between democrats and whigs nullies and blue light federalists in doing so he neatly summarized the jacksonian philosophy the people ought to inquire of political candidates are you opposed to a national bank are you in favor of a strict construction of the federal and state constitutions are you in favor of rotation in ofce do you subscribe to the republican rule that the people are the sovereign power the ofcers their agents and that upon all national or general subjects as well as local they have a right to instruct their agents and representatives and they are bound to obey or resign in short are they true republicans agreeable to the true jeffersonian creed.
the two parties were thus separated by real differences of philosophy and policy.
but they also had much in common.
both were mass based catchall parties that tried deliberately to mobilize as many voters as possible for their cause.
although it is true that democrats tended to be more humble folk and whigs more prosperous both parties nevertheless commanded the loyalties of all kinds of americans from all social classes and in all sections.
the social diversity of the two parties had important implications.
it fostered horse trading compromises within each party that prevented either from assuming extreme or radical positions.
by the same token the geographical diversity of the two parties retarded the emergence of purely sectional political parties temporarily suppressing through compromise the ultimately uncompromisable issue of slavery.
when the two party system began to creak in the 1850s the union was mortally imperiled.
chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 chronology vesey slave conspiracy in charleston south carolina 1832 south carolina nullication crisis mexico opens texas to american settlers lack of electoral majority for presidency throws election into house of representatives compromise tariff of 1833 jackson removes federal deposits from bank of the united states house elects john quincy adams president tariff of 1828 tariff of abominations jackson elected president the south carolina exposition published indian removal act july revolution in france bank of the united states expires specie circular issued bureau of indian affairs established battle of the alamo battle of san jacinto texas wins independence from mexico van buren elected president seminole indians defeated and eventually removed from florida united states recognizes texas republic but refuses annexation panic of 1837 1838 cherokee indians removed on trail of tears independent treasury established harrison defeats van buren for presidency 1831 alexis de tocqueville tours united states bank war jackson vetoes bill to recharter bank of the united states reform bill in britain expands electorate tariff of 1832 black hawk war jackson defeats clay for presidency key terms corrupt bargain 273 spoils system 280 tariff of abominations 280 nullication crisis 282 compromise tariff of 1833 282 force bill 283 indian removal act 285 trail of tears 285 black hawk war 285 people to know bank war 286 anti masonic party 288 pet banks 290 specie circular 290 panic of 1837 292 alamo 294 goliad 294 san jacinto battle of 295 john quincy adams andrew jackson denmark vesey john c calhoun black hawk nicholas biddle daniel webster henry clay martin van buren stephen austin sam houston santa anna william henry harrison varying viewpoints what was jacksonian democracy.
a ristocratic eastern born historians of the nineteenth century damned jackson as a backwoods barbarian.
they criticized jacksonianism as democracy run riot an irresponsible ill bred outburst that overturned the electoral system and wrecked the national nancial structure.
in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries however another generation of historians came to the fore many of whom had grown up in the midwest and rejected the elitist views of their predecessors.
frederick jackson turner and his disciples saw the western frontier as the fount of democratic virtue and they hailed jackson as a true hero sprung from the forests of the west to protect the will of the people against the moneyed interests akin to the progressive reformers of their own day.
in his famous 1893 essay the signicance of the frontier in american history turner argued that the united states owed the survival of its democratic tradition to the rise of the west not to its roots in the more conser vative aristocratic east.
when arthur m schlesinger jr published the age of jackson in 1945 however the debate on jacksonianism shifted dramatically.
although he shared the turnerians admiration for jackson the democrat schlesinger cast the jacksonian era not as a sectional con ict but as a class con ict between poor farmers laborers and noncapitalists on the one hand and the business community epitomized by the second bank of the united states on the other.
in schlesingers eyes the jacksonians justiably attacked the bank as an institution dangerously independent of democratic oversight.
the political mobilization of the urban working classes in support of jackson particularly attracted schlesingers interest.
soon after schlesingers book appeared the discussion again shifted ground and entirely new interpretations of jacksonianism emerged.
richard hofstadter argued in the american political tradition and the men who made it 1948 that jacksonian democracy was not a rejection of capitalism as schlesinger insisted but rather the effort of aspiring entrepreneurs to secure laissez faire policies that would serve their own interests against their entrenched and monopolistic eastern competitors.
in the jacksonian persuasion 1957 marvin meyers portrayed the jacksonians as conser vative capitalists torn between erce commercial ambitions and a desire to cling to the virtues of the agrarian past.
in an effort to resolve this contradiction he argued they lashed out at scapegoats like the national bank blaming it for the very changes their own economic energies had unleashed.
lee benson contended in the concept of jacksonian democracy 1961 that the political con icts of the jacksonian era did not correspond so much to class divisions as to different ethnic and religious splits within american society.
using new quantitative methods of analysis benson found no consistent demarcations in class occupation or region between the jacksonians and their rivals.
local and cultural issues such as temperance and religion were far more inuential in shaping political life than the national nancial questions analyzed by previous historians.
in the 1980s sean wilentz and other scholars began to resurrect some of schlesingers argument about the importance of class to jacksonianism.
in chants democratic 1984 wilentz maintained that jacksonian politics could not be properly understood without reference to the changing national economy.
artisans watched in horror as new manufacturing techniques put many of them out of business and replaced their craftsmanship with the unskilled hands of wage laborers.
to these anxious small producers americas infatuation with impersonal institutions and large scale employers threatened the very existence of a republic founded on the principle that its citizens were virtuously self sufcient.
thus jacksons attack on the bank of the united states symbolized the antagonism these individuals felt toward the emergent capitalist economy and earned him their strong allegiance.
the scholarly cycle came full circle with the publication of charles sellerss the market revolution jacksonian america 1815 1846 1991.
in many ways this ambitious synthesis offered an updated version of schlesingers argument about class con ict.
american democracy and free market capitalism according to sellers were not twins born from the common parentage of freedom and opportunity reared in the wide open young republic and mutually supporting each other ever since.
rather sellers suggested they were really adversaries with jacksonians inventing mass democracy in order to hold capitalist expansion chapter 13 the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 in check.
like schlesingers thesis sellerss interpretation provoked a storm of controversy.
to supporters the concept of the market revolution see p 335 provided a useful organizing tool for seeing social cultural political and economic transformations as interdependent.
to critics sellerss book suffered from a hopelessly romantic view of preindustrial society and a pronounced ideological bias.
in an era of tightly contested elections they argued no party could expect to prevail by appealing exclusively to rich or poor along class lines.
published a decade and a half later what hath god wrought the transformation of america 1815 1848 2007 daniel walker howes equally sweeping synthesis of the period took a different view of the relationship between commercialization and democracy.
howe argued that mass political participation did not emerge as an antidote to the crushing yoke of industrialization rather it evolved out of the same forces that drove market expansion the twin revolutions in transportation and communications.
advances in printing and the proliferation of newspapers were prerequisites for mass political parties which depended on the largely partisan press to publicize their platforms and rally support.
the turnpikes canals and railroads that delivered local goods to increasingly distant markets also carried ministers to far off parishes setting off a religious revival that helped transform the political landscape.
new churches representing a multiplicity of faiths created venues for debates on issues ranging from abolition to womens rights issues that were intentionally kept out of the halls of congress.
howe argued that jacksons supporters did not object to new commercial opportunities.
at the same time that jackson worked to dismantle the bank of the united states he also funded transportation projects in the territories to promote westward expansion and built harbors along the eastern seaboard to fuel international trade.
according to howe jacksonians welcomed commerce but they disagreed with whigs over the direction of development favoring a more agrarian atomized economy.
to learn more glenn c altschuler and stuart m blumin rude republic americans and their politics in the nineteenth century 2001 andrew burstein the passions of andrew jackson 2003 daniel feller the jacksonian promise 1815 1840 1995 michael d green the politics of indian removal 1982 daniel walker howe what hath god wrought the transformation of america 1815 1848 2007 charles hudson the southeastern indians 1976 louis p masur 1831 year of eclipse 2001 edward pessen jacksonian america society personality and politics rev.
ed 1978 merrill d peterson the great triumvirate webster clay and calhoun 1987 alexis de tocqueville democracy in america 1835 1840 harry l watson liberty and power the politics of jacksonian america 1990 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at forging the national economy 1790 1860 the progress of invention is really a threat to monarchy.
whenever i see a railroad i look for a republic.
r alph waldo emerson 1866 t he new nation bounded into the nineteenth century in a burst of movement.
new eng land yankees pennsylvania farmers and southern yeomen all pushed west in search of land and opportunity soon to be joined by vast numbers of immigrants from europe who also made their way to the countrys fast growing cities.
and not only people were in motion.
newly invented machinery boomed the cultivation of crops and the manufacture of goods while workers labored ever longer harder and faster.
better roads faster steamboats farther reaching canals and ribboning rail road lines all moved people foodstuffs raw materials and manufactured goods from coast to coast from gulf to great lakes and from american shores to the wider world.
the prodigious momentum of burgeoning american capitalism gave rise to an economy that was remarkably dynamic market driven continentally scaled and internationally consequential.
the westward movement the rise of andrew jackson the rst president from beyond the appalachian mountains exemplied the inexorable westward march of the american people.
the west with its raw frontier was the most typically american part of america.
as ralph waldo emerson wrote in 1844 europe stretches to the alleghenies america lies beyond the republic was young and so were the people as late as 1850 half of americans were under the age of thirty.
they were also restless and energetic seemingly always on the move and always westward.
one tall tale of the frontier described chickens that voluntarily crossed their legs every spring waiting to be tied for the annual move west.
by 1840 the demographic center of the american population map had crossed the this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
chapter 12 the second war for independence and the upsurge of nationalism 1812 1824 90w 80w l superior american advances 1812 indiana terr.
american advances 1813 hig lake huron mic british advances 1814 american victory tecumseh killed in battle pan indian alliance collapses.
british victory annexed from spain 1812 thames river oct 5 1813 fort niagara plattsburgh l ontario new york vt n h mass.
m i c h i ga n terr.
lake fort maine mass.
montral dearborn approaches montreal but then retreats nov 1812 an american advances 1814 michilimackinac july 17 1812 70w b r it is h n o r t h a m e r ic a sorel c a n a da detroit aug 16 1812 per 81 3 ry 1 l erie conn r i no is w illi 40n missouri r a sh ab r i n d ia n a t er r.
illinois t er r.
fort meigs har rison 1813 r put in bay sept 10 1813 baltimore sept 13 1814 n j ohio washington d c aug 24 25 1814 kentucky s 1814 virginia r os ohio r u norgan ized ter r itory the american capital falls to a british amphibious force.
the government escapes but the british occupation force plunders and then burns washington d c delaware maryland ir.
north carolina tennessee ssi pp ark an sa pennsylvania ss i r mi s ten r ed r.
ness andrew jacksons combined cherokee indian and tennessee militia massacre the red stick creeks at horseshoe bend march 27 1814 ee r.
m i ssi ssi p p i t er r ito r y georgia south carolina british naval blockade 1814 1815 n fort jackson atlantic ocean louisiana 30n new orleans jan 8 1815 mobile pensacola span i sh f lor i da gulf of mexico 300 km.
map 12 1 battles in the war of 1812 interactive map european adversaries had vanquished him temporarily as it turned out in mid 1814 and had exiled the dangerous despot to the mediterranean isle of elba.
the united states which had so brashly provoked war behind the protective skirts of napoleon was now left to face the music alone.
thousands of britains victori ous veteran redcoats began to pour into canada from the continent.
assembling some ten thousand crack troops the british prepared in 1814 for a crushing blow into new york along the familiar lake river route.
in the absence of roads the invader was forced to bring supplies over the contest over canada the lake champlain waterway.
a weaker american eet commanded by the thirty year old thomas macdonough challenged the british.
the ensuing battle was desperately fought near plattsburgh on september 11 1814 on oating slaughterhouses.
the american agship at one point was in grave trouble.
but macdonough unexpectedly turning his ship about with cables confronted the enemy with a fresh broadside and snatched victory from the fangs of defeat.
the results of this heroic naval battle were momentous.
the invading british army was forced to retreat.
macdonough thus saved at least upper new york from conquest new eng land from further disaffection and the union from possible dissolution.
he also profoundly affected the concurrent negotiations of the anglo american peace treaty in europe.
washington burned and new orleans defended a second formidable british force numbering about four thousand landed in the chesapeake bay area in august 1814.
advancing rapidly on washington it easily dispersed some six thousand panicky militiamen at bladensburg the bladensburg races.
the invaders then entered the capital and set re to most of the public buildings including the capitol and the white house.
but while washington burned the americans at baltimore held rm.
the british eet hammered fort mchenry with their cannon but could not capture the city.
francis scott key a detained american anxiously watching the bombardment from a british ship was inspired by the doughty defenders to write the words of the star spangled banner set to the tune of a saucy english tavern refrain the song quickly attained popularity.
a third british blow of 1814 aimed at new orleans menaced the entire mississippi valley.
gaunt and hawk faced andrew jackson fresh from crushing the southwest indians at the battle of horseshoe bend was placed in command see map 12 5 on p 266.
his hodgepodge force consisted of seven thousand sailors regulars pirates and frenchmen as well as militiamen from louisiana kentucky and tennessee.
among the defenders were two louisiana regiments of free black volunteers numbering about four hundred men.
the americans threw up their entrenchment and in the words of a popular song behind it stood our little force none wished it to be greater for evry man was half a horse and half an alligator.
the overcondent british numbering some eight thousand battle seasoned veterans blundered badly.
they made the mistake of launching a frontal assault the fall of washington or maddy in full flight president madison maddy was forced into humiliating withdrawal from the capital in 1814 when british forces put the torch to washington d c chapter 12 the second war for independence and the upsurge of nationalism 1812 1824 andrew jackson 1767 1845 appealed to the governor of louisiana for help recruiting free blacks to defend new orleans in 1814 the free men of colour in your city are inured to the southern climate and would make excellent soldiers.
they must be for or against us distrust them and you make them your enemies place condence in them and you engage them by every dear and honorable tie to the interest of the country who extends to them equal rights and privileges with white men.
on january 8 1815 on the entrenched american riemen and cannoneers.
the attackers suffered the most devastating defeat of the entire war losing over two thousand killed and wounded in half an hour as compared with some seventy for the americans.
it was an astonishing victory for jackson and his men.
news of the american victory in the battle of new orleans struck the country like a clap of thunder according to one contemporary.
andrew jackson became a national hero as poets and politicians lined up to sing the praises of the defenders of new orleans.
it hardly mattered when word arrived that a peace treaty had been signed at ghent belgium ending the war two weeks before the battle.
the united states had fought for honor as much as material gain.
the battle of new orleans restored that honor at least in american eyes and unleashed a wave of nationalism and self condence.
its wrath aroused the royal navy had nally retaliated by throwing a ruinous naval blockade along americas coast and by landing raiding parties almost at will.
american economic life including shing was crippled.
customs revenues were choked off and near the end of the war the bankrupt treasury was unable to meet its maturing obligations.
the treaty of ghent tsar alexander i of russia feeling hard pressed by napoleons army and not wanting his british ally to fritter away its strength in america had proposed mediation between the clashing anglo saxon cousins as early as 1812.
the tsars feeler eventually set in motion the machinery that brought ve american peacemakers to the quaint belgian city of ghent in 1814.
the bickering group was headed by early rising puritanical john quincy adams son of john adams who deplored the late hour card playing of his high living colleague henry clay.
condent after their military successes the british envoys made sweeping demands for a neutralized indian buffer state in the great lakes region control of the great lakes and a substantial part of conquered maine.
the americans atly rejected these terms and the talks appeared stalemated.
but news of british reverses in upper new york and at baltimore and increasing war weariness in britain made london more willing to compromise.
preoccupied with redrafting napoleons map of europe at the congress of vienna 1814 1815 and eyeing still dangerous france the british lion resigned itself to licking its wounds.
the treaty of ghent signed on christmas eve 1814 was essentially an armistice.
both sides simply agreed to stop ghting and to restore conquered territory.
no mention was made of those grievances for which america had ostensibly fought the indian menace search and seizure orders in council impressment and conscations.
these discreet omissions have often been cited as further evidence of the insincerity of the war hawks.
rather they are proof that the americans had not managed to defeat the british.
with neither side able to impose its will the treaty negotiations like the war itself ended as a virtual draw.
relieved americans boasted not one inch of territory ceded or lost a phrase that contrasted strangely with the on to canada rallying cry at the wars outset.
federalist grievances and the hartford convention deant new eng land remained a problem.
it prospered during the con ict owing largely to illicit trade with the enemy in canada and to the absence of a british blockade until 1814.
but the embittered opposition of the federalists to the war continued unabated.
as the war dragged on new eng land extremists became more vocal.
a small minority of them proposed secession from the union or at least a separate peace with britain.
ugly rumors were aoat about blue light federalists treacherous new eng landers who supposedly ashed lanterns on the shore so that blockading british cruisers would be alerted to the attempted escape of american ships.
the treaty of ghent in a letter to her friend mercy otis warren abigail adams 1744 1818 fretted that the british were taking advantage of americans disagreement over the war of 1812 we have our resides our comfortable habitations our cities our churches and our country to defend our rights privileges and independence to preserve.
and for these are we not justly contending.
thus it appears to me.
yet i hear from our pulpits and read from our presses that it is an unjust a wicked a ruinous and unnecessary war.
a house divided upon itself and upon that foundation do our enemies build their hopes of subduing us.
the most spectacular manifestation of federalist discontent was the ill omened hartford convention.
late in 1814 when the capture of new orleans seemed imminent massachusetts issued a call for a convention at hartford connecticut.
the states of massachusetts connecticut and rhode island dispatched full delegations neighboring new hampshire and vermont sent partial representation.
this group of prominent men twenty six in all met in complete secrecy for about three weeks december 15 1814 to january 5 1815 to discuss their grievances and to seek redress for their wrongs.
in truth the hartford convention was actually less radical than the alarmists supposed.
though a minority of delegates gave vent to wild talk of secession the conventions nal report was quite moderate.
it demanded nancial assistance from washington to compensate for lost trade and proposed constitutional amendments requiring a two thirds vote in congress before an embargo could be imposed new states admitted or war declared.
most of the demands reected federalist fears that a once proud new eng land was falling subservient to an agrarian south and west.
delegates sought to abolish the three fths clause of the constitution which allowed the south to count a portion of its slaves in calculating proportional representation to limit presidents to a single term and to prohibit the election of two successive presidents from the same state.
this last clause was aimed at the muchresented virginia dynasty by 1814 a virginian had been president for all but four years in the republics quarter century of life.
massachusetts connecticut and rhode island contemplate abandoning the union engraving by william charles 1814 this anti federalist cartoon shows great britain welcoming back its yankee boys with open arms promising them plenty molasses and codsh plenty of goods to smuggle honours titles and nobility into the bargain chapter 12 the second war for independence and the upsurge of nationalism 1812 1824 ny mich terr.
vt 8 nh ma ri ct 4 nj ohio ind.
missouri terr.
pa the war of 1812 won a new respect for america among many britons.
michael scott a young lieutenant in the british navy wrote de va ky md dr 6 f 5 sc mississippi territory ga there was far more talk of nullication and secession in new eng land than in any other section including the south.
the outright outing of the jeffersonian embargo and the later crippling of the war effort were the two most damaging acts of nullication in america prior to the events leading to the civil war.
la candidate party electoral vote madison democratic republican 59 41 clinton federalist i dont like americans i never did and never shall like them.
i have no wish to eat with them drink with them deal with or consort with them in any way but let me tell the whole truth nor ght with them were it not for the laurels to be acquired by overcoming an enemy so brave determined and alert and in every way so worthy of ones steel as they have always proved.
nc tn map 12 2 presidential election of 1812 with electoral vote by state the federalists showed impressive strength in the north and their presidential candidate dewitt clinton the future father of the erie canal almost won.
if the 25 electoral votes of pennsylvania had gone to the new yorker he would have won 114 to 103.
interactive map three special envoys from massachusetts carried these demands to the burned out capital of washington.
the trio arrived just in time to be overwhelmed by the glorious news from new orleans followed by that from ghent.
as the rest of the nation congratulated itself on a glorious victory new eng lands wartime complaints seemed petty at best and treasonous at worst.
pursued by the sneers and jeers of the press the envoys sank away in disgrace and into obscurity.
the hartford resolutions as it turned out were the death dirge of the federalist party.
the federalists were never again to mount a successful presidential campaign see map 12 2.
federalist doctrines of disunity which long survived the party blazed a portentous trail.
until 1815 the second war for american independence the war of 1812 was a small war involving about 6 000 americans killed or wounded.
it was but a footnote to the mighty european conagration that had been ignited by the french revolution and napoleons imperial ambitions.
in 1812 when napoleon invaded russia with about 500 000 men madison tried to invade canada with about 5 000 men.
but if the american con ict was globally unimportant it had huge consequences for the united states.
the republic had shown that it would take sword in hand to resist what it regarded as grievous wrongs.
other nations developed a new respect for americas ghting prowess.
naval ofcers like perry and macdonough were the most effective type of negotiators the hot breath of their broadsides spoke the most eloquent diplomatic language.
americas emissaries abroad were henceforth treated with less scorn.
in a diplomatic sense if not in a military sense the con ict could be called the second war for american independence.
a new nation moreover was welded in the roaring furnace of armed conict.
sectionalism now identied with discredited new eng land federalists was dealt a black eye.
the painful events of the war glaringly revealed as perhaps nothing else could have done the legacies of the war of 1812 folly of sectional disunity.
in a sense the most conspicuous casualty of the war was the federalist party.
war heroes emerged especially the two indianghters andrew jackson and william henry harrison.
both of them were to become president.
left in the lurch by their british friends at ghent the indians were forced to make such terms as they could.
they reluctantly consented in a series of treaties to relinquish vast areas of forested land north of the ohio river.
manufacturing prospered behind the wooden wall of the british blockade.
in both an economic and a diplomatic sense the war of 1812 bred greater american independence.
the industries that were thus stimulated by the ghting rendered america less dependent on europes workshops.
canadian patriotism and nationalism also received a powerful stimulus from the clash.
many canadians felt betrayed by the treaty of ghent.
they were especially aggrieved by the failure to secure an indian buffer state or even mastery of the great lakes.
canadians fully expected the frustrated yankees to return and for a time the americans and british engaged in a oating arms race on the great lakes.
but in 1817 the rushbagot agreement between britain and the united states severely limited naval armament on the lakes.
better relations brought the last border fortications down in the 1870s with the happy result that the united states and canada came to share the worlds longest unfortied boundary 5 527 miles long.
after napoleons nal defeat at waterloo in june 1815 europe slumped into a peace of exhaustion.
deposed monarchs returned to battered thrones as the old world took the rutted road back to conservatism illiberalism and reaction.
but the american people were largely unaffected by these european developments.
turning their backs on the old world they faced resolutely toward the untamed west and toward the task of building their democracy.
nascent nationalism the most impressive by product of the war of 1812 was a heightened nationalism the spirit of nationconsciousness or national oneness.
america may not have fought the war as one nation but it emerged as one nation.
the changed mood even manifested itself in the birth of a distinctively national literature.
washington irving and james fenimore cooper attained international recognition in the 1820s signicantly as view of the capitol by charles burton 1824 this painting of the capitol building much smaller than it is today reveals the rustic conditions of the early days in the nations capital.
a series of architects worked on the capitol following william thorntons original design along neoclassical or greek revival lines.
after the british burned the building in 1814 bostons charles bulnch oversaw the reconstruction of the capitol nally completed in 1830.
chapter 12 the second war for independence and the upsurge of nationalism 1812 1824 the nations rst writers of importance to use american scenes and themes.
school textbooks often british in an earlier era were now being written by americans for americans.
in the world of magazines the highly intellectual north american review began publication in 1815 the year of the triumph at new orleans.
even american painters increasingly celebrated their native landscapes on their canvases.
a fresh nationalistic spirit could be recognized in many other areas as well.
the rising tide of nationconsciousness even touched nance.
a revived bank of the united states was voted by congress in 1816.
a more handsome national capital began to rise from the ashes of washington.
the army was expanded to ten thousand men.
the navy further covered itself with glory in 1815 when it administered a thorough beating to the piratical plunderers of north africa.
stephen decatur naval hero of the war of 1812 and of the barbary coast expeditions pungently captured the countrys nationalist mood in a famous toast made on his return from the mediterranean campaigns our country.
in her intercourse with foreign nations may she always be in the right but our country right or wrong the american system nationalism likewise manifested itself in manufacturing.
patriotic americans took pride in the factories that had recently mushroomed forth largely as a result of the self imposed embargoes and the war.
when hostilities ended in 1815 british competitors undertook to recover lost ground.
they began to dump the contents of their bulging warehouses on the united states often cutting their prices below cost in an effort to strangle the american war baby factories in the cradle.
the infant industries bawled lustily for protection.
to many red blooded americans it seemed as though the british having failed to crush yankee ghters on the battleeld were now seeking to crush yankee factories in the marketplace.
a nationalist congress out federalizing the old federalists responded by passing the path breaking tariff of 1816 the rst tariff in american history instituted primarily for protection not revenue.
its rates roughly 20 to 25 percent on the value of dutiable imports were not high enough to provide completely adequate safeguards but the law was a bold beginning.
a strongly protective trend was started that stimulated the appetites of the protected for more protection.
nationalism was further highlighted by a grandiose plan of henry clay for developing a protable home henry clay 1777 1852 by john neagle 1843 this painting hangs in the corridors of the house of representatives where clay worked as a glamorous eloquent and ambitious congressman for many years.
best known for promoting his nationalistic american system of protective tariffs for eastern manufactures and federally nanced canals and highways to benet the west clay is surrounded here by symbols of ourishing agriculture and burgeoning industries in the new nation.
still radiating the nationalism of war hawk days he threw himself behind an elaborate scheme known by 1824 as the american system.
this system had three main parts.
it began with a strong banking system which would provide easy and abundant credit.
clay also advocated a protective tariff behind which eastern manufacturing would ourish.
revenues gushing from the tariff would provide funds for the third component of the american system a network of roads and canals especially in the burgeoning ohio valley.
through these new arteries of transportation would ow foodstuffs and raw materials from the south and west to the north and east.
in exchange a stream legacies of the war of 1812 of manufactured goods would ow in the return direction knitting the country together economically and politically.
persistent and eloquent demands by henry clay and others for better transportation struck a responsive chord with the public.
the recent attempts to invade canada had all failed partly because of oath provoking roads or no roads at all.
people who have dug wagons out of hub deep mud do not quickly forget their blisters and backaches.
an outcry for better transportation rising most noisily in the road poor west was one of the most striking aspects of the nationalism inspired by the war of 1812.
but attempts to secure federal funding for roads and canals stumbled on republican constitutional scruples.
congress voted in 1817 to distribute 1 5 million to the states for internal improvements but president madison sternly vetoed this handout mea sure as unconstitutional.
the individual states were thus forced to venture ahead with construction programs of their own including the erie canal triumphantly completed by new york in 1825.
jeffersonian republicans who had gulped down hamiltonian loose constructionism on other important problems choked on the idea of direct federal support of intrastate internal improvements.
new eng land in particular strongly opposed federally constructed roads and canals because such outlets would further drain away population and create competing states beyond the mountains.
the so called era of good feelings james monroe six feet tall somewhat stooped courtly and mild mannered was nominated for the presidency in 1816 by the republicans.
they thus undertook to continue the so called virginia dynasty of washington jefferson and madison.
the fading federalists ran a candidate for the last time in their checkered history and he was crushed by 183 electoral votes to 34.
the vanquished federalist party was gasping its dying breaths leaving the eld to the triumphant republicans and one party rule.
in james monroe the man and the times auspiciously met.
as the last president to wear an old style cocked hat he straddled two generations the bygone age of the founding fathers and the emergent age of nationalism.
never brilliant and perhaps not great the serene virginian with gray blue eyes was in intellect and personal force the least distinguished of the rst eight presidents.
but the times called for sober admin nationalist pride ca.
1820 nationalist sentiments swelled in the wake of the war of 1812 as americans dened their countrys very identity with reference to its antimonarchical origins.
istration not dashing heroics.
and monroe was an experienced levelheaded executive with an ear tothe ground talent for interpreting popular rumblings.
emerging nationalism was further cemented by a goodwill tour monroe undertook early in 1817 ostensibly to inspect military defenses.
he pushed northward deep into new eng land and then westward to detroit viewing en route niagara falls.
even in federalist new eng land the enemys country he received a heartwarming welcome a boston newspaper was so bostons columbian centinel was not the only newspaper to regard president monroes early months as the era of good feelings.
washingtons national intelligencer observed in july 1817 never before perhaps since the institution of civil government did the same harmony the same absence of party spirit the same national feeling pervade a community.
the result is too consoling to dispute too nicely about the cause.
chapter 12 the second war for independence and the upsurge of nationalism 1812 1824 far carried away as to announce that an era of good feelings had been ushered in.
this happy phrase has been commonly used since then to describe the administrations of monroe.
the era of good feelings unfortunately was something of a misnomer.
considerable tranquility and prosperity did in fact smile upon the early years of monroe but the period was a troubled one.
the acute issues of the tariff the bank internal improvements and the sale of public lands were being hotly contested.
sectionalism was crystallizing and the con ict over slavery was beginning to raise its hideous head.
the panic of 1819 and the curse of hard times much of the goodness went out of the good feelings in 1819 when a paralyzing economic panic descended.
it brought deation depression bankruptcies bank failures unemployment soup kitchens and overcrowded pesthouses known as debtors prisons.
this was the rst national nancial panic since president washington took ofce.
many factors contributed to the catastrophe of 1819 but looming large was overspeculation in frontier lands.
the bank of the united states through its western branches had become deeply involved in this popular type of outdoor gambling.
financial paralysis from the panic which lasted in some degree for several years gave a rude setback to the nationalistic ardor.
the west was especially hard hit.
when the pinch came the bank of the united states forced the speculative wildcat western banks to the wall and foreclosed mortgages on countless farms.
all this was technically legal but politically unwise.
in the eyes of the western debtor the nationalist bank of the united states soon became a kind of nancial devil.
the panic of 1819 also created backwashes in the political and social world.
the poorer classes the onesuspender men and their families were severely strapped and in their troubles was sown the seed of jacksonian democracy.
hard times also directed attention to the inhumanity of imprisoning debtors.
in extreme cases often overplayed mothers were torn from their infants for owing a few dollars.
mounting agitation against imprisonment for debt bore fruit in remedial legislation in an increasing number of states.
growing pains of the west the onward march of the west continued nine frontier states had joined the original thirteen between 1791 and 1819.
with an eye to preserving the north south sectional balance most of these commonwealths had been admitted alternately free or slave.
see admission of states in the appendix.
why this explosive expansion.
in part it was simply a continuation of the generations old westward movement which had been going on since early colonial days.
in addition the siren song of cheap land the fairview inn or three mile house on old frederick road by thomas coke ruckle ca.
1829 this busy scene on the frederick road leading westward from baltimore was typical as pioneers ooded into the newly secured west in the early 1800s.
economic strains ohio fever had a special appeal to european immigrants.
eager newcomers from abroad were beginning to stream down the gangplanks in impressive numbers especially after the war of boycotts and bullets.
land exhaustion in the older tobacco states where the soil was mined rather than cultivated likewise drove people westward.
glib speculators accepted small down payments making it easier to buy new holdings.
the western boom was stimulated by additional developments.
acute economic distress during the embargo years turned many pinched faces toward the setting sun.
the crushing of the indians in the northwest and south by generals harrison and jackson pacied the frontier and opened up vast virgin tracts of land.
the building of highways improved the land routes to the ohio valley.
noteworthy was the cumberland road begun in 1811 which ran ultimately from western maryland to illinois.
the use of the rst steamboat on western waters also in 1811 heralded a new era of upstream navigation.
but the west despite the inow of settlers was still weak in population and inuence.
not potent enough politically to make its voice heard it was forced to ally itself with other sections.
thus strengthened it demanded cheap acreage and partially achieved its goal in the land act of 1820 which authorized a buyer to purchase eighty virgin acres at a minimum of 1 25 an acre in cash.
the west also demanded cheap transportation and slowly got it despite the constitutional qualms of the presidents and the hostility of easterners.
finally the west demanded cheap money issued by its own wildcat banks and fought the powerful bank of the united states to attain its goal see makers of america settlers of the old northwest pp.
slavery and the sectional balance sectional tensions involving rivalry between the slave south and the free north over control of the beckoning west were stunningly revealed in 1819.
in that year the territory of missouri knocked on the doors of congress for admission as a slave state.
this fertile and wellwatered area contained sufcient population to warrant statehood.
but the house of representatives stymied the plans of the missourians by passing the incendiary tallmadge amendment.
it stipulated that no more slaves should be brought into missouri and also provided for the gradual emancipation of children born to slave parents already there.
a roar of anger burst antislavery propaganda in the 1820s these drawstring bags are made of silk and transferprinted with before and after scenes of slavery.
on the left bag an african woman cradles her baby on the right one the grieving mother is childless and in chains while slaves are being whipped in the background.
these bags were purchased at an abolitionist fair held to raise money for the antislavery movement.
purses and the like sold well at these events because women were prominent in the movement.
from slaveholding southerners.
they were joined by many depression cursed pioneers who favored unhampered expansion of the west and by many northerners especially diehard federalists who were eager to use the issue to break the back of the virginia dynasty southerners saw in the tallmadge amendment which they eventually managed to defeat in the senate an ominous threat to sectional balance.
when the constitution was adopted in 1788 the north and south were running neck and neck in wealth and population.
but with every passing decade the north was becoming wealthier and also more thickly settled an advantage reected in an increasing northern majority in the house of representatives.
yet in the senate each state had two votes regardless of size.
with eleven states free and eleven slave the southerners had maintained equality.
they were therefore in a good position to thwart any northern effort to interfere with the expansion of slavery and they did not want to lose this veto.
the future of the slave system caused southerners profound concern.
missouri was the rst state entirely west of the mississippi river to be carved out of the louisiana purchase and the missouri emancipation amendment might set a damaging precedent for all the makers of america settlers of the old the great africannorthwest american migration t he old northwest beckoned to settlers after the war of 1812.
the withdrawal of the british protector weakened the indians grip on the territory.
then the transportation boom of the 1820s steamboats on the ohio the national highway stretching from pennsylvania the erie canal opened broad arteries along which the westward movement owed.
the rst wave of newcomers came mainly from kentucky tennessee and the upland regions of virginia and the carolinas.
most migrants were roughhewn white farmers who had been pushed from good land to bad by an expanding plantation economy.
like joseph cress of north carolina they were relieved to relinquish them old red lds where you get nothing in return for acres of new soil that is as black and rich you wold want it some settlers acquired land for the rst time.
john palmer whose family left kentucky for illinois in 1831 recalled his father telling him of land so cheap that we could all be landholders where men were all equal migrants from the south settled mainly in the southern portions of ohio indiana and illinois.
newcom tavern dayton ohio built in 1796 newcom tavern was a typical way station for the pioneers owing into the newly secured old northwest in the early 1800s.
today it is daytons oldest building.
as palmer testied the old northwest offered southern farmers an escape from the lowly social position they had endured as nonslaveholders in a slave society.
not that they objected to slavery or sympathized with blacks.
far from it by enacting black codes in their new territories they tried to prevent blacks from following them to paradise.
they wanted their own democratic community free of rich planters and african americans alike.
if southern butternuts as these settlers were called dominated settlement in the 1820s the next decade brought yankees from the northeast.
they were as land starved as their southern counterparts.
a growing population had gobbled up most of the good land east of the appalachians.
yankee settlers came to the old northwest especially to the northern parts of ohio indiana and illinois eager to make the region a protable breadbasket for the atlantic seaboard.
unlike the butternuts who wanted to quit forever the imposing framework of southern society northerners hoped to re create the world they had left behind.
building the erie canal a major engineering feat the erie canal created an articial waterway through upstate new york from the hudson river to the great lakes allowing people and goods to move to and from the old northwest more quickly and cheaply.
conict soon emerged between yankees and southerners.
as self sufcient farmers with little interest in producing for the market the southerners viewed the northern newcomers as inhospitable greedy and excessively ambitious.
yankee became a term of reproach a person who was cheated was said to have been yankeed northerners in turn viewed the southerners as uncivilized a coon dog and butcher knife tribe with no interest in education self improvement or agricultural innovation.
yankees eager to tame both the land and its people wanted to establish public schools and build roads canals and railroads and they advocated taxes to fund such progress.
southerners opposed all these reforms especially public schooling which they regarded as an attempt to northernize their children.
religion divided settlers as well.
northerners typically congregationalists and presbyterians wanted their ministers to be educated in seminaries.
southerners embraced the more revivalist baptist and methodist denominations.
they preferred poor humble preacher farmers to professionally trained preachers whom they viewed as too distant from the lord and the people.
as the baptist preacher alexander campbell put it the scheme of a learned priesthood.
has long since proved itself to be a grand device to keep men in ignorance and bondage not everyone of course tted neatly into these molds.
abraham lincoln with roots in kentucky came to adopt views more akin to those of the yankees than the southerners whereas his new eng land born archrival stephen douglas carefully cultivated the butternut vote for the illinois democratic party.
as the population swelled and the region acquired its own character the stark contrasts between northerners and southerners started to fade.
by the 1850s northerners dominated numerically and they succeeded in establishing public schools and fashioning internal improvements.
railroads and great lakes shipping tied the region ever more tightly to the northeast.
yankees and southerners sometimes allied as new kinds of cleavages emerged between rich and poor between city dwellers and farmers and once irish and german immigrants started pouring into the region between native protestants and newcomer catholics.
still echoes of the clash between yankees and butternuts persisted.
during the civil war the southern counties of ohio indiana and illinois where southerners had rst settled harbored sympathizers with the south and served as a key area for confederate military in ltration into the north.
decades later these same counties became a stronghold of the ku klux klan.
the old northwest may have become rmly anchored economically to the northeast but vestiges of its early dual personality persisted.
90w 70w or nc re ter l o r n h mass.
new york e pa washington d c r i conn n j del.
n kentucky an n carolina s an mex i c o vt virginia missouri as eri io ntar ohio ind.
ill ark e oc ic pacif l co o ad k l missouri compromise line 3630 r la ron an admitted as slave state 1821 adams ons treaty line 1819 e r hig hu ip maine e lel mic ss r pa r a l ssi pi 42nd mi unorganized territory su per ior r oce an.
ri r oregon country ke aw ou la l ss st mi 60w admitted as free state 1820 lake of the woods an disputed territory occupied jointly by great britain and united states 40n 80w ic 100w british north america canada nt 110w la 120w at 50n la k e m i c h i g 130w tennessee arkansas territory s carolina red r miss.
30n ala georgia r io la.
gr an florida territory de closed to slavery by missouri compromise open to slavery by missouri compromise free states and territories slave states and territories gu l f of m e x i c o ceded by spain 1819 400 km.
map 12 3 the missouri compromise and slavery 1820 1821 note the 36 30 line.
in the 1780s thomas jefferson had written of slavery in america indeed i tremble for my country when i reect that god is just that his justice cannot sleep forever that.
the almighty has no attribute which can take side with us in such a contest now at the time of the missouri compromise jefferson feared that his worst forebodings were coming to pass.
i considered it at once he said of the missouri question as the knell of the union rest of the area.
even more disquieting was another possibility.
if congress could abolish the peculiar institution in missouri might it not attempt to do likewise in the older states of the south.
the wounds of the constitutional convention of 1787 were once more ripped open.
burning moral questions also protruded even though the main issue was political and economic balance.
a small but growing group of antislavery agitators in the north seized the occasion to raise an outcry against the evils of slavery.
they were determined that the plague of human bondage should not spread further into the untainted territories.
the uneasy missouri compromise deadlock in washington was at length broken in 1820 by the time honored american solution of compromise actually a bundle of three compromises.
courtly interactive map henry clay of kentucky gifted conciliator played a leading role.
congress despite abolitionist pleas agreed to admit missouri as a slave state.
but at the same time free soil maine which until then had been a part of massachusetts was admitted as a separate state.
the balance between north and south was thus kept at twelve states each and remained there for fteen years.
although missouri was permitted to retain slaves all future bondage was prohibited in the remainder of the louisiana purchase north of the line of 36 30 the southern boundary of missouri see map 12 3.
this horse trading adjustment was politically evenhanded though denounced by extremists on each side as a dirty bargain both north and south yielded something both gained something.
the south won the prize of missouri as an unrestricted slave state.
the north won the concession that congress could forbid slavery in the remaining territories.
more gratifying to many northerners was the fact that the immense area north of 36 30 except missouri was forever closed to the blight of slavery.
yet the restriction on future the missouri compromise while the debate over missouri was raging thomas jefferson 1743 1826 wrote to a correspondent the missouri question.
is the most portentous one which ever yet threatened our union.
in the gloomiest moment of the revolutionary war i never had any apprehensions equal to what i feel from this source.
the question like a rebell in the night awakened and lled me with terror.
with slavery we have a wolf by the ears and we can neither hold him nor safely let him go.
john quincy adams 1767 1848 conded to his diary i take it for granted that the present question is a mere preamble a title page to a great tragic volume.
slavery in the territories was not unduly offensive to the slaveowners partly because the northern prairie land did not seem suited to slave labor.
even so a majority of southern congressmen still voted against the compromise.
neither north nor south was acutely displeased although neither was completely happy.
the missouri compromise lasted thirty four years a vital formative period in the life of the young republic and during that time it preserved the shaky compact of the states.
yet the embittered dispute over slavery heralded the future breakup of the union.
ever after the morality of the souths peculiar institution was an issue that could not be swept under the rug.
the missouri compromise only ducked the question it did not resolve it.
sooner or later thomas jefferson predicted it will burst on us as a tornado the missouri compromise and the concurrent panic of 1819 should have dimmed the political star of president monroe.
certainly both unhappy events had a dampening effect on the era of good feelings.
but smooth spoken james monroe was so popular and the federalist opposition so weak that in the presidential election of 1820 he received every electoral vote except one.
unanimity was an honor reserved for george washington.
monroe as it turned out was the only president in american history to be reelected after a term in which a major nancial panic began.
john marshall and judicial nationalism the upsurging nationalism of the post ghent years despite the ominous setbacks concerning slavery was further reected and reinforced by the supreme court.
the high tribunal continued to be dominated by the tall thin and aggressive chief justice john marshall.
one group of his decisions perhaps the most famous bolstered the power of the federal government at the expense of the states.
a notable case in this category was mcculloch v maryland 1819.
the suit involved an attempt by the state of maryland to destroy a branch of the bank of the united states by imposing a tax on its notes.
john marshall speaking for the court declared the bank constitutional by invoking the hamiltonian doctrine of implied powers see p 204.
at the same time he strengthened federal authority and slapped at state infringements when he denied the right of maryland to tax the bank.
with ringing emphasis he af rmed that the power to tax involves the power to destroy and that a power to create implies a power to preserve marshalls ruling in this case gave the doctrine of loose construction its most famous formulation.
the constitution he said derived from the consent of the people and thus permitted the government to act for their benet.
he further argued that the constitution was intended to endure for ages to come and consequently to be adapted to the various crises of human affairs finally he declared let the end be legitimate let it be within the scope of the constitution and all means which are appropriate which are plainly adapted to that end which are not prohibited but consist with the letter and spirit of the constitution are constitutional two years later 1821 the case of cohens v virginia gave marshall one of his greatest opportunities to defend the federal power.
the cohen brothers found guilty by the virginia courts of illegally selling lottery tickets appealed to the highest tribunal.
virginia won in the sense that the conviction of the cohens was upheld.
but in fact virginia and all the individual states lost because marshall resoundingly asserted the right of the supreme court to review the decisions of the state supreme courts in all questions involving powers of the federal government.
the states rights proponents were aghast.
hardly less signicant was the celebrated steamboat case gibbons v ogden 1824.
the suit grew out of an attempt by the state of new york to grant to a chapter 12 the second war for independence and the upsurge of nationalism 1812 1824 private concern a monopoly of waterborne commerce between new york and new jersey.
marshall sternly reminded the upstart state that the constitution conferred on congress alone the control of interstate commerce see art.
he thus struck with one hand another blow at states rights while upholding with the other the sovereign powers of the federal government.
interstate streams were cleared of this judicial snag the departed spirit of hamilton may well have applauded.
judicial dikes against democratic excesses another sheaf of marshalls decisions bolstered judicial barriers against democratic or demagogic attacks on property rights.
the notorious case of fletcher v peck 1810 arose when a georgia legislature swayed by bribery granted 35 million acres in the yazoo river country mississippi to private speculators.
the next legislature yielding to an angry public outcry canceled the crooked transaction.
but the supreme court with marshall presiding decreed that the legislative grant was a contract even though fraudulently secured and that the constitution forbids state laws impairing contracts art.
the decision was perhaps most noteworthy as further protecting property rights against popular pressures.
it was also one of the earliest clear assertions of the right of the supreme court to invalidate state laws con icting with the federal constitution.
a similar principle was upheld in the case of dartmouth college v woodward 1819 perhaps the best remembered of marshalls decisions.
the college had been granted a charter by king george iii in 1769 but the democratic new hampshire state legislature had seen t to change it.
dartmouth appealed the case employing as counsel its most distinguished alumnus when supreme court chief justice john marshall died a new york newspaper rejoiced the chief place in the supreme tribunal of the union will no longer be lled by a man whose political doctrines led him always.
to strengthen government at the expense of the people.
daniel webster 01.
the godlike daniel reportedly pulled out all the stops of his tear inducing eloquence when he declaimed it is sir as i have said a small college.
and yet there are those who love it marshall needed no dramatics in the dartmouth case.
he put the states rmly in their place when he ruled that the original charter must stand.
it was a contract and the constitution protected contracts against state encroachments.
the dartmouth decision had the fortunate effect of safeguarding business enterprise from domination by the state governments.
but it had the unfortunate effect of creating a precedent that enabled chartered corporations in later years to escape the handcuffs of needed public control.
if john marshall was a molding father of the constitution daniel webster was an expounding father.
time and again he left his seat in the senate stepped downstairs to the supreme court chamber then located in the capitol building and there expounded his federalistic and nationalistic philosophy before the daguerreotype of daniel webster 1782 1852 by southworth and hawes premier orator and statesman webster served many years in both houses of congress and also as secretary of state.
often regarded as presidential timber he was somewhat handicapped by an overfondness for good food and drink and was frequently in nancial difculties.
his devotion to the union was inexible.
one country one constitution and one destiny he proclaimed in 1837.
the marshall court r e nt l o ron i n maine ean k hu ss i r louisiana m purchase la l eri ario e r la ouri nt is s ic pacif s trea t y line 1 8 19 or e ssi pp s on mi.
oc bi a r oregon country 60w nc la k e s u p e r i ad a m 40n h treat y line 1818 an lum 70w disputed with britain la k e m i c h i g co 80w re u s br itis 90w aw joint occupation with britain 1818 1846 100w british north america canada ic 110w l 120w st 50n 130w n gi l a r e te n n ess red r united states 1783 io old louisiana purchase r tejas gr ca uil ah n ia co de or florida a an lif durango n at united states.
new mexico r arizpe r sr n ew sp ai n mexic o af t er 1 8 2 1 io e r sa ea 30n colo o ad oh an oc new california ark r nuevo santander nuevo leon 400 km.
gulf of mexico 400 mi.
map 12 4 u s british boundary settlement 1818 note that the united states gained considerable territory by securing a treaty boundary rather than the natural boundary of the missouri river watershed.
the line of 49 was extended westward to the pacic ocean under the treaty of 1846 with britain see p 405.
supreme bench.
the eminent chief justice so webster reported approvingly drank in the familiar arguments as a baby sucks in its mothers milk.
the two men dovetailed strikingly with each other.
websters classic speeches in the senate challenging states rights and nullication were largely repetitious of the arguments that he had earlier presented before a sympathetic supreme court.
marshalls decisions are felt even today.
in this sense his nationalism was the most tenaciously enduring of the era.
he buttressed the federal union and helped to create a stable nationally uniform environment for business.
at the same time marshall checked the excesses of popularly elected state legislatures.
in an age when white manhood suffrage was owering and america was veering toward stronger popular control marshall almost single handedly shaped the constitution along conser vative centralizing lines that ran somewhat counter to the dominant spirit of the new country.
through him the conser vative hamiltonians partly triumphed from the tomb.
spanish florida occupied by u s.
ceded to u s by spain 1819 interactive map sharing oregon and acquiring florida the robust nationalism of the years after the war of 1812 was likewise reected in the shaping of foreign policy.
to this end the nationalistic president monroe teamed with his nationalistic secretary of state john quincy adams the cold and scholarly son of the frosty and bookish ex president.
the younger adams a statesman of the rst rank happily rose above the ingrown federalist sectionalism of his native new eng land and proved to be one of the great secretaries of state.
to its credit the monroe administration negotiated the much underrated anglo american convention of 1818 with britain.
this pact permitted americans to share the coveted newfoundland sheries with their canadian cousins.
this multisided agreement also xed the vague northern limits of louisiana along the forty ninth parallel from the lake of the woods minnesota to the rocky mountains see map 12 4.
the chapter 12 the second war for independence and the upsurge of nationalism 1812 1824 la.
mississippi r treaty further provided for a ten year joint occupation of the untamed oregon country without a surrender of the rights or claims of either america or britain.
to the south lay semitropical spanish florida which many americans believed geography and providence had destined to become part of the united states.
americans already claimed west florida where uninvited american settlers had torn down the hated spanish ag in 1810.
congress ratied this grab in 1812 and during the war of 1812 against spains ally britain a small american army seized the mobile region.
but the bulk of florida remained tauntingly under spanish rule see map 12 5.
an epidemic of revolutions now broke out in south america notably in chile 1810 venezuela 1811 and argentina 1816 and americans instinctively cheered the birth of these sister republics though the checkered histories of the latin democracies soon provided grounds for disappointment.
but the upheavals in the southern continent forced spain to denude florida of troops in a vain effort to squelch the rebels.
general andrew jackson idol of the west and scourge of the indians saw opportunity in the undefended swamplands.
on the pretext that hostile seminole indians and horseshoe bend march 27 1814 m i ssi ssi p p i ter r ito r y georgia s c west f lo r i da baton rouge 90w 80w mobile new orleans jan 8 1815 fugitive slaves were using florida as a refuge jackson secured a commission to enter spanish territory punish the indians and recapture the runaways.
but he was to respect all posts under the spanish ag.
early in 1818 jackson swept across the florida border with all the fury of an avenging angel.
he hanged two indian chiefs without ceremony and after hasty military trials executed two british subjects for assisting the indians.
he also seized the two most important spanish posts in the area st marks and then pensacola where he deposed the spanish governor who was lucky enough to escape jacksons jerking noose.
jackson had clearly exceeded his instructions from washington.
alarmed president monroe consulted his cabinet.
its members were for disavowing or disciplining the overzealous jackson all except the lone wolf john quincy adams who refused to howl with the pack.
an ardent patriot and nationalist the inty new pensacola st marks gulf of mexico 30n east f lor i da 200 km.
to u s 1810 to u s 1812 1813 to u s 1819 jacksons route 1814 n jacksons route 1818 major battle map 12 5 the southeast 1810 1819 interactive map andrew jackson 1767 1845 by jean franois de valle 1815 this portrait of jackson as a major general in the u s army was painted by a french artist living in new orleans.
it is one of the earliest surviving portraits of jackson and depicts him at a time when he was known for his stern discipline iron will old hickory and good luck.
oregon and florida eng lander took the offensive and demanded huge concessions from spain.
in the mislabeled florida purchase treaty of 1819 also known as the adams ons treaty spain ceded florida as well as shadowy spanish claims to oregon in exchange for americas abandonment of equally murky claims to texas soon to become part of independent mexico.
the hitherto vague western boundary of louisiana was made to zigzag northwesterly toward the rockies to the forty second parallel and then to turn due west to the pacic dividing oregon from spanish holdings.
the menace of monarchy in america after the napoleonic nightmare the rethroned autocrats of europe banded together in a kind of monarchical protective association.
determined to restore the good old days they undertook to stamp out the democratic tendencies that had sprouted from soil they considered richly manured by the ideals of the french revolution.
the world must be made safe from democracy.
the crowned despots acted promptly.
with complete ruthlessness they smothered the embers of popular rebellions in italy 1821 and in spain 1823.
according to the european rumor factory they were also gazing across the atlantic.
russia austria prussia and france acting in partnership would presumably send powerful eets and armies to the revolted colonies of spanish america and there restore the autocratic spanish king to his ancestral domains.
many americans were alarmed.
naturally sympathetic to democratic revolutions they had cheered when the latin american republics rose from the ruins of monarchy.
americans feared that if the european powers intervened in the new world the cause of republicanism would suffer irreparable harm.
the physical security of the united states the mother lode of democracy would be endangered by the proximity of powerful and unfriendly forces.
the southward push of the russian bear from the chill region now known as alaska had already publicized the menace of monarchy to north america.
in 1821 the tsar of russia issued a decree extending russian jurisdiction over one hundred miles of the open sea down to the line of 51 an area that embraced most of the coast of present day british columbia.
the energetic russians had already established trading posts almost as far south as the entrance to san francisco bay.
fort ross ross is a corruption of russian still stands today on the coast of sonoma county cal ifornia.
the fear prevailed in the united states that the russians were planning to cut the republic off from cal i fornia its prospective window on the pacic.
great britain still ruler of the seas was now beginning to play a lone hand role on the complicated international stage.
in particular it recoiled from joining hands with the continental european powers in crushing the newly won liberties of the spanish americans.
these revolutionaries had thrown open their monopoly bound ports to outside trade and british shippers as well as americans had found the prots sweet.
accordingly in august 1823 george canning the haughty british foreign secretary approached the american minister in london with a startling proposition.
would the united states combine with britain in a joint declaration renouncing any interest in acquiring latin american territory and specically warning the european despots to keep their harsh hands off the latin american republics.
the american minister lacking instructions referred this fateful scheme to his superiors in washington.
monroe and his doctrine the tenacious nationalist secretary adams was hardheaded enough to be wary of britons bearing gifts.
why should the lordly british with the mightiest navy aoat need america as an ally an america that had neither naval nor military strength.
such a union argued adams was undignied like a tiny american cockboat sailing in the wake of the british man of war adams ever alert thought that he detected the joker in the canning proposal.
the british feared that the aggressive yankees would one day seize spanish territory in the americas perhaps cuba which would jeopardize britains possessions in the caribbean.
if canning could seduce the united states into joining with him in support of the territorial integrity of the new world americas own hands would be morally tied.
a self denying alliance with britain would not only hamper american expansion concluded adams but it was unnecessary.
he suspected correctly that the european powers had not hatched any de nite plans for invading the americas.
in any event the british navy would prevent the approach of hostile eets because the south american markets had to be kept open at all costs for british merchants.
it was presumably safe for chapter 12 the second war for independence and the upsurge of nationalism 1812 1824 president monroe thinking globally surrounded by his cabinet the president is depicted explaining the monroe doctrine.
secretary of state john quincy adams is the rst on the left secretary of war john c calhoun is the third from the right.
uncle sam behind the protective wooden petticoats of the british navy to blow a deant nationalistic blast at all of europe.
the distresses of the old world set the stage once again for an american diplomatic coup.
the monroe doctrine was born late in 1823 when the nationalistic adams won the nationalistic monroe over to his way of thinking.
the president in his regular annual message to congress on december 2 1823 incorporated a stern warning to the european powers.
its two basic features were 1 noncolonization and 2 nonintervention.
monroe rst directed his verbal volley primarily at the lumbering russian bear in the northwest.
he proclaimed in effect that the era of colonization in the americas had ended and that henceforth the hunting season was permanently closed.
what the great powers had they might keep but neither they nor any other old world governments could seize or otherwise acquire more.
at the same time monroe trumpeted a warning against foreign intervention.
he was clearly concerned with regions to the south where fears were felt for the edgling spanish american republics.
monroe bluntly directed the crowned heads of europe to keep their hated monarchical systems out of this hemisphere.
for its part the united states would not intervene in the war that the greeks were then ghting against the turks for their independence.
monroes doctrine appraised the ermined monarchs of europe were angered at monroes doctrine.
having resented the incendiary american experiment from the beginning they were now deeply offended by monroes high own declaration all the more so because of the gulf between americas pretentious pronouncements and its puny military strength.
but though offended by the upstart yankees the european powers found their hands tied and their frustration increased their annoyance.
even if they had worked out plans for invading the americas oregon and florida russian america 40w 160w n hudson bay 5440 51 british north america canada columbia r 60w missouri r m bear r great salt lake l co o r ad or.
pac i f ic oc ea n arkansas r io oh r u n i ted states mexico n 40 iss ippi r iss oregon country disputed by united states and great britain snake r independent 1821 300 600 km.
at l a n t i c o c e a n o ri 600 mi.
120w an gr map 12 6 the west and northwest 1818 1824 the british hudsons bay company moved to secure its claim to the oregon country in 1824 when it sent a heavily armed expedition led by peter skene ogden into the snake river country.
in may 1825 ogdens party descended the bear river and found it discharged into a large lake of 100 miles in length one of the rst documented sightings by white explorers of the great salt lake.
the mountain man jim bridger is usually credited with being the rst white man to see the lake.
de gulf of mexico british treaty line 1818 r ance of c 20n cuba spain spanish treaty line 1819 tsar s decree 1821 russian treaty line 1824 ic trop caribbean sea 100w 80w interactive map they would have been helpless before the booming broadsides of the british navy.
monroes solemn warning when issued made little splash in the newborn republics to the south.
anyone could see that uncle sam was only secondarily concerned about his neighbors because he was primarily concerned about defending himself against future invasion.
only a relatively few educated latin americans knew of the message and they generally recognized that the british navy not the paper pronouncement of james monroe stood between them and a hostile europe.
in truth monroes message did not have much contemporary signicance.
americans applauded it and then forgot it.
not until 1845 did president polk revive it and not until midcentury did it become an important national dogma.
even before monroes stiff message the tsar had decided to retreat.
this he formally did in the russoamerican treaty of 1824 which xed his southernmost limits at the line of 54 40 the present southern tip of the alaska panhandle see map 12 6.
the monroe doctrine might more accurately have been called the self defense doctrine.
president monroe was concerned basically with the security of his own country not of latin america.
the united states has never willingly permitted a powerful foreign nation to secure a foothold near its strategic caribbean vitals.
yet in the absence of the british navy or other allies the strength of the monroe doctrine has never been greater than americas power to eject the trespasser.
the doctrine as often noted was just as big as the nations armed forces and no bigger.
the monroe doctrine has had a long career of ups and downs.
it was never law domestic or international.
it was not technically speaking a pledge or an agreement.
it was merely a simple personalized statement of the policy of president monroe.
what one president says another may unsay.
and monroes successors have ignored revived distorted or expanded chapter 12 the second war for independence and the upsurge of nationalism 1812 1824 the original version chiey by adding interpretations.
like ivy on a tree it has grown with americas growth.
but the monroe doctrine in 1823 was largely an expression of the post 1812 nationalism energizing the united states.
although directed at a specic menace in 1823 and hence a kind of period piece the doctrine proved to be the most famous of all the long lived off spring of that nationalism.
while giving voice to a spirit of patriotism it simultaneously deepened the illusion of isolationism.
many americans falsely concluded then and later that the republic was in fact insulated from european dangers simply because it wanted to be and because in a nationalistic outburst monroe had publicly warned the old world powers to stay away.
chronology fletcher v peck ruling asserts right of supreme court to invalidate state laws deemed unconstitutional madison vetoes calhouns bonus bill rush bagot agreement limits naval armament on great lakes venezuela declares independence from spain united states declares war on britain madison reelected president jackson invades florida chile in rebellion since 1810 declares independence from spain anglo american convention 1812 american invasions of canada fail battle of the thames battle of lake erie panic of 1819 spain cedes florida to united states in adams ons treaty mcculloch v maryland dartmouth college v woodward battle of horseshoe bend napoleon exiled to elba british burn washington d c battle of plattsburgh treaty of ghent signed ending war of 1812 missouri compromise missouri and maine admitted to union land act of 1820 monroe reelected cohens v virginia austria intervenes to crush popular uprising in italy france intervenes to suppresses liberal government in spain secretary adams proposes monroe doctrine russo american treaty gibbons v ogden erie canal completed 1814 hartford convention congress of vienna battle of new orleans napoleons army defeated at waterloo second bank of the united states founded protectionist tariff of 1816 argentina declares independence from spain monroe elected president to learn more key terms war of 1812 248 new orleans battle of 252 congress of vienna 252 ghent treaty of 252 hartford convention 253 rush bagot agreement 255 tariff of 1816 256 american system 256 era of good feelings 258 panic of 1819 258 land act of 1820 258 tallmadge amendment 259 peculiar institution 262 people to know missouri compromise 263 mcculloch v maryland 263 loose construction 263 cohens v virginia 263 gibbons v ogden 263 fletcher v peck 264 dartmouth college v woodward 264 anglo american convention 265 florida purchase treaty adams ons treaty 267 monroe doctrine 268 russo american treaty 269 isaac brock oliver hazard perry thomas macdonough francis scott key james monroe george canning to learn more george dangereld the awakening of american nationalism 1815 1828 1965 r david edmunds tecumseh and the quest for indian leadership 1984 david heidler old hickorys war andrew jackson and the quest for empire 2003 james e lewis the american union and the problem of neighborhood 1998 arand otto mayr and robert c post eds yankee enterprise the rise of the american system of manufactures 1981 drew r mccoy the last of the fathers james madison and the republican legacy 1989 dexter perkins a history of the monroe doctrine 1955 jack n rakove james madison and the creation of the american republic 1990 robert remini henry clay statesman for the union 1991 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the rise of a mass democracy 1824 1840 in the full enjoyment of the gifts of heaven and the fruits of superior industry economy and virtue every man is equally entitled to protection by law but when the laws undertake to add to those natural and just advantages articial distinctions.
and exclusive privileges.
the humble members of society the farmers mechanics and laborers.
have a right to complain of the injustice of their government.
t he so called era of good feelings was never entirely tranquil but even the illusion of national consensus was shattered by the panic of 1819 and the missouri compromise of 1820.
economic distress and the slavery issue raised the political stakes in the 1820s and 1830s.
vigorous political con ict once feared came to be celebrated as necessary for the health of democracy.
new political parties emerged.
new styles of campaigning took hold.
a new chapter opened in the history of american and world politics as many european societies began haltingly to expand their electorates and broaden democratic practices.
the american political landscape of 1824 was similar in its broad outlines to that of 1796.
by 1840 it would be almost unrecognizable.
the deference apathy and virtually nonexistent party orga ni zations of the era of good feelings yielded to the boisterous democracy frenzied vitality and strong political parties of the jacksonian era.
the old suspicion of political parties as illegitimate disrupters of societys natural harmony gave way to an acceptance even a celebration of the sometimes wild contentiousness of political life.
in 1828 an energetic new party the democrats captured the white house.
by the 1830s the democrats faced an equally vigorous opposition party the whigs.
this two party system institutionalized divisions that had vexed the revolutionary generation and came to constitute an important part of the nations checks and balances on political power.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the corrupt bargain canvassing for a vote by george caleb bingham 1852 this painting shows the new politics of the jacksonian era.
politicians now had to take their message to the common man.
new forms of politicking emerged in this era as candidates used banners badges parades barbecues free drinks and baby kissing to get out the vote voter turnout rose dramatically.
only about one quarter of eligible voters cast a ballot in the presidential election of 1824 but that proportion doubled in 1828 and in the election of 1840 it reached 78 percent.
everywhere people exed their political muscles.
the corrupt bargain of 1824 the last of the old style elections was marked by the controversial corrupt bargain of 1824.
the woods were full of presidential timber as james monroe last of the virginia dynasty completed his second term.
four candidates towered above the others john quincy adams of massachusetts highly intelligent experienced and aloof henry clay of kentucky the gamy and gallant harry of the west william h crawford of georgia an able though ailing giant of a man and andrew jackson of tennessee the gaunt and gutsy hero of new orleans.
all four rivals professed to be republicans wellorga nized parties had not yet emerged their identities were so fuzzy in fact that south carolinas john c calhoun appeared as the vice presidential candidate on both the adams and jackson tickets.
the results of the noisy campaign were interesting but confusing.
jackson the war hero clearly had the strongest personal appeal especially in the west where his campaign against the forces of corruption and privilege in government resonated deeply.
he polled almost as many popular votes as his next two rivals combined but he failed to win a majority of the electoral vote see table 13 1.
in such a deadlock the house of representatives as directed by the twelfth amendment see the appendix must choose among the top three candidates.
clay was thus eliminated yet as speaker of the house he presided over the very chamber that had to pick the winner.
the inuential clay was in a position to throw the election to the candidate of his choice.
he reached his decision by process of elimination.
crawford recently felled by a paralytic stroke was out of the picture.
clay hated the military chieftain jackson his archrival for the allegiance of the west.
jackson in turn bitterly resented clays public denunciation of his florida foray in 1818.
the only candidate left was the puritanical adams with whom clay a free living gambler.
chapter 16 the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 harvesting cotton this currier ives print shows slaves of both sexes harvesting cotton which was then ginned baled carted to the riverbank and taken by paddle wheeler downriver to new orleans for shipment to new england or overseas.
perpetuate a type of medievalism that had died out in europe or was rapidly dying out.
mark twain later accused sir walter scott of having had a hand in starting the civil war.
the british novelist twain said aroused the southerners to ght for a decaying social structure a sham civilization the plantation system also shaped the lives of southern women.
the mistress of a great plantation commanded a sizable household staff of mostly female slaves.
she gave daily orders to cooks maids seamstresses laundresses and body servants.
relationships between mistresses and slaves ranged from affectionate to atrocious.
some mistresses showed tender regard for their bondswomen and some slave women took pride in their status as members of the household.
but slavery strained even the bonds of womanhood.
virtually no slaveholding women believed in abolition and relatively few protested when the husbands and children of their slaves were sold.
one plantation mistress harbored a special affection for her slave annica but noted in her diary that i whipt annica for insolence.
slaves of the slave system unhappily the moonlight and magnolia tradition concealed much that was worrisome distasteful and sordid.
plantation agriculture was wasteful largely because king cotton and his money hungry subjects despoiled the good earth.
quick prots led to excessive cultiva oddly enough by legislative enactment jousting became the ofcial state sport of maryland in 1962 tion or land butchery which in turn caused a heavy leakage of population to the west and northwest.
the economic structure of the south became increasingly monopolistic.
as the land wore thin many small farmers sold their holdings to more prosperous neighbors and went north or west.
the big got bigger and the small smaller.
when the civil war nally erupted a large percentage of southern farms had passed from the hands of the families that had originally cleared them.
another cancer in the bosom of the south was the nancial instability of the plantation system.
the temptation to overspeculate in land and slaves caused many planters including andrew jackson in his later years to plunge in beyond their depth.
although the black slaves might in extreme cases be fed for as little as ten cents a day there were other expenses.
the slaves thomas jefferson 1743 1826 wrote in 1786 what a stupendous what an incomprehensible machine is man.
who can endure toil famine stripes imprisonment death itself in vindication of his own liberty and the next moment.
inict on his fellow men a bondage one hour of which is fraught with more misery than ages of that which he rose in rebellion to oppose.
unlike george washington jefferson freed only a couple of his slaves in his will the rest were sold to pay off his large debts.
problems in the cotton south basil hall 1788 1844 an englishman visited part of the cotton belt on a river steamer 1827 1828.
noting the preoccupation with cotton he wrote all day and almost all night long the captain pilot crew and passengers were talking of nothing else and sometimes our ears were so wearied with the sound of cotton.
that we gladly hailed a fresh inundation of company in hopes of some change but alas.
whats cotton at was the rst eager inquiry.
ten cents a pound oh that will never do dug with yankee shovels.
the south furnished the corpse and the hole in the ground.
the cotton kingdom also repelled large scale european immigration which added so richly to the manpower and wealth of the north.
in 1860 only 4 4 percent of the southern population was foreign born as compared with 18 7 percent for the north.
german and irish immigration to the south was generally discouraged by the competition of slave labor by the high cost of fertile land and by european ignorance of cotton growing.
the diverting of non british immigration to the north caused the white south to become the most anglo saxon section of the nation.
the white majority represented a heavy investment of capital perhaps 1 200 each in the case of prime eld hands and they might deliberately injure themselves or run away.
an entire slave quarter might be wiped out by disease or even by lightning as happened in one instance to twenty ill fated blacks.
dominance by king cotton likewise led to a dangerous dependence on a one crop economy whose price level was at the mercy of world conditions.
the whole system discouraged a healthy diversication of agriculture and particularly of manufacturing.
southern planters resented watching the north grow fat at their expense.
they were pained by the heavy outward ow of commissions and interest to northern middlemen bankers agents and shippers.
true souls of the south especially by the 1850s deplored the fact that when born they were wrapped in yankee made swaddling clothes and that they spent the rest of their lives in servitude to yankee manufacturing.
when they died they were laid in cof ns held together with yankee nails and were buried in graves only a handful of southern whites lived in grecianpillared mansions.
below those 1 733 families in 1850 who owned a hundred or more slaves were the less wealthy slaveowners see figure 16 1.
they totaled in 1850 some 345 000 families representing about 1 725 000 white persons.
over two thirds of these families 255 268 in all owned fewer than ten slaves each.
all told only about one fourth of white southerners owned slaves or belonged to a slaveowning family.
the smaller slaveowners did not own a majority of the slaves but they made up a majority of the masters.
these lesser masters were typically small farmers.
with the striking exception that their households contained a slave or two or perhaps an entire slave family the style of their lives probably resembled that of small farmers in the north more than it did that of the southern planter aristocracy.
they lived in modest farmhouses and sweated beside their bondsmen in the cotton elds laboring callus for callus just as hard as their slaves.
beneath the slaveowners on the population pyramid was the great body of whites who owned no slaves at all.
by 1860 their numbers had swelled to 6 120 825 1 733 own 100 or more slaves 6 196 own 50 99 29 733 own 20 49 54 595 own 10 19 80 765 own 5 9 105 683 own 2 4 68 820 own 1 each figure 16 1 slaveowning families 1850 more than half of all slaveholding families owned fewer than four slaves.
in contrast 2 percent of slaveowners owned more than fty slaves each.
a tiny slaveholding elite held a majority of slave property in the south.
the great majority of white southerners owned no slaves at all.
chapter 16 the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 three quarters of all southern whites.
shouldered off the richest bottomlands by the mighty planters they scratched a simple living from the thinner soils of the backcountry and the mountain valleys see maps 16 1 and 16 2.
to them the riches of the cotton kingdom were a distant dream and they often sneered at the lordly pretensions of the cotton snobocracy these red necked farmers participated in the market economy scarcely at all.
as subsistence farmers they raised corn and hogs not cotton and often lived isolated lives punctuated periodically by extended socializing and sermonizing at religious camp meetings.
100w 90w indiana o illinois missouri territory o hi r 80w ohio richmond virginia kentucky arkansa memphis louisiana texas spain 30n columbia r n m issi s si ppi r tennessee s r red arkansas territory miss.
south carolina augusta birmingham macon alabama charleston georgia jackson savannah at l a n t i c ocean mobile baton rouge unorganized territory new orleans ri o gulf of mexico gr an southern cotton production de mex.
raleigh north carolina nashville major production areas other production areas indian territory r texas r 80w ohio richmond virginia kentucky a r k ans tennessee as memphis arkansas columbia louisiana miss.
birmingham alabama jackson augusta macon georgia south carolina charleston savannah at l a n t i c ocean mobile 30n raleigh north carolina nashville r red illinois o hi 300 mi.
r 100w indiana missouri 300 km.
o kansas territory 90w m issi s si ppi baton rouge new orleans florida ri gulf of mexico o g ra nde mexico southern cotton production major production areas other production areas map 16 1 southern cotton production and distribution of slaves 1820 interactive map the spread of the slave power 100w 90w 80w 300 km.
pennsylvania 300 mi.
ohio illinois 40n n j md.
indiana o missouri territory hi o r richmond columbia r louisiana m issi s si ppi n texas spain memphis r r tennessee as arkansas territory miss.
south carolina augusta birmingham macon alabama charleston georgia jackson savannah at l a n t i c ocean mobile 30n baton rouge unorganized territory new orleans ri o gr gulf of mexico percentage of slaves in total population by county an de mex.
raleigh north carolina nashville arkans over 50 under 10 30 49 no slaves or unsettled area 10 29 90w 80w iowa pennsylvania 100w n j ohio indiana 40n md.
indian territory o richmond virginia north carolina nashville a r k ans tennessee as arkansas louisiana columbia miss.
birmingham alabama jackson augusta macon georgia south carolina charleston savannah at l a n t i c ocean mobile 30n baton rouge florida new orleans ri o g ra nde mexico percentage of slaves in total population by county over 50 under 10 30 49 no slaves or unsettled area 10 29 raleigh memphis r r hi r kentucky m issi s si ppi texas missouri r red o illinois kansas territory del.
virginia kentucky red gulf of mexico map 16 2 southern cotton production and distribution of slaves 1860 the philosopher ralph waldo emerson a new englander declared in 1856 i do not see how a barbarous community and a civilized community can constitute a state.
i think we must get rid of slavery or we must get rid of freedom interactive map chapter 16 the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 some of the least prosperous nonslaveholding whites were scorned even by slaves as poor white trash known also as hillbillies crackers or clay eaters they were often described as listless shiftless and misshapen.
later investigations have revealed that many of them were not simply lazy but sick suffering from malnutrition and parasites especially hookworm.
all these whites without slaves had no direct economic stake in the preservation of slavery yet they were among the stoutest defenders of the slave system.
the answer is not far to seek.
the carrot on the stick ever dangling before their eyes was the hope of buying a slave or two and of parlaying their paltry holdings into riches all in accord with the american dream of upward social mobility.
they also took erce pride in their presumed racial superiority which would be watered down if the slaves were freed.
many of the poorer whites were hardly better off economically than the slaves some indeed were not so well off.
but even the most wretched whites could take perverse comfort from the knowledge that they outranked someone in status the still more wretched african american slave.
thus did the logic of economics join with the illogic of racism in buttressing the slave system.
in a special category among white southerners were the mountain whites more or less marooned in the valleys of the appalachian range that stretched from western virginia to northern georgia and alabama.
civilization had largely passed them by and they still lived under spartan frontier conditions.
they were a kind of living ancestry for some of them retained elizabethan speech forms and habits that had long since died out in britain.
as independent small farmers hundreds of miles distant from the heart of the cotton kingdom and arthur lee freeman petitioned the general assembly of virginia in 1835 for permission to remain in the state despite a law against the residency of free blacks.
after asserting his upstanding moral character he implored he therefore most respectfully and earnestly prays that you will pass a law permitting him on the score of long and meritorious service to remain in the state together with his wife and four children and not force him in his old age to seek a livelihood in a new country.
rarely if ever in sight of a slave these mountain whites had little in common with the whites of the atlands.
many of them including future president andrew johnson of tennessee hated both the haughty planters and their gangs of blacks.
they looked upon the impending strife between north and south as a rich mans war but a poor mans ght when the war came the tough bered mountain whites constituted a vitally important peninsula of unionism jutting down into the secessionist southern sea.
they ultimately played a signicant role in crippling the confederacy.
their attachment to the union party of abraham lincoln was such that for generations after the civil war the only concentrated republican strength in the solid south was to be found in the southern highlands.
free blacks slaves without masters precarious in the extreme was the standing of the souths free blacks who numbered about 250 000 by 1860.
in the upper south the free black population traced its origins to a wavelet of emancipation inspired by the idealism of revolutionary days.
in the deeper south many free blacks were mulattoes usually the emancipated children of a white planter and his black mistress.
throughout the south were some free blacks who had purchased their freedom with earnings from labor after hours.
many free blacks owned property especially in new orleans where a sizable mulatto community prospered.
some such as william t johnson the barber of natchez even owned slaves.
he was the master of fteen bondsmen his diary records that in june 1848 he ogged two slaves and a mule.
the free blacks in the south were a kind of third race these people were prohibited from working in certain occupations and forbidden from testifying against whites in court.
they were always vulnerable to being hijacked back into slavery by unscrupulous slave traders.
as free men and women they were walking examples of what might be achieved by emancipation and hence were resented and detested by defenders of the slave system.
free blacks were also unpopular in the north where about another 250 000 of them lived.
several states forbade their entrance most denied them the right to vote and some barred blacks from public schools.
in 1835 new hampshire farmers hitched their oxen to a small schoolhouse that had dared to enroll fourteen black children and dragged it into a swamp.
northern blacks slavery on the plantation were especially hated by the pick and shovel irish immigrants with whom they competed for menial jobs.
much of the agitation in the north against the spread of slavery into the new territories in the 1840s and 1850s grew out of race prejudice not humanitarianism.
antiblack feeling was in fact frequently stronger in the north than in the south.
the gifted and eloquent former slave frederick douglass an abolitionist and self educated orator of rare power was several times mobbed and beaten by northern rowdies.
it was sometimes observed that white southerners who were often suckled and reared by black nurses liked the black as an individual but despised the race.
the white northerner on the other hand often professed to like the race but disliked individual blacks.
plantation slavery in societys basement in the south of 1860 were nearly 4 million black human chattels.
their numbers had a market in people left held captive in a net a slave sits on the congo shore waiting to be sold and shipped.
right once in the united states slaves continued to be treated like commodities.
this woman suffers the humiliation of an inventory number pinned to her dress most likely for her sale at a slave auction or transport to a new owner.
quadrupled since the dawn of the century as the booming cotton economy created a seemingly unquenchable demand for slave labor.
legal importation of african slaves into america ended in 1808 when congress outlawed slave imports.
britain had abolished the slave trade but not slavery itself in 1807 a milestone in the continuing struggle to establish human rights as a principle of international law.
in the decades thereafter the royal navys west africa squadron seized hundreds of slave ships and freed thousands of grateful captives.
yet despite that effort as many as 3 million enslaved africans were shipped to brazil and the west indies in the several decades after 1807.
in the united states the price of black ivory was so high in the years before the civil war that uncounted thousands of blacks were smuggled into the south despite the death penalty for slavers.
although several slave traders were captured southern juries repeatedly acquitted them.
only one slave trader n p gordon was ever executed and this took place in new york in 1862 the second year of the civil war.
chapter 16 the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 ironically the suppression of the international slave trade fostered the growth of a vigorous internal slave trade as upper south states like virginia became major sources of supply for the booming cotton economy of the deep south.
most of the increase in the slave population in the united states came not from imports but from natural reproduction a fact that owed something to the accident of geography that the slave south lay outside the area where tropical diseases took such a grisly human toll.
the natural reproduction of enslaved african americans also distinguished north american slavery from slavery in more southerly new world societies and implied much about the tenor of the slave regime and the conditions of family life under slavery in the united states.
above all the planters regarded their slaves as investments into which they had sunk nearly 2 billion of their capital by 1860.
slaves were the primary form of wealth in the south and as such they were cared for as any asset is cared for by a prudent capitalist.
accordingly they were sometimes though by no means always spared dangerous work like putting a roof on a house.
if a neck was going to be broken the master preferred it to be that of a wage earning irish laborer rather than that of a prime eld hand worth 1 800 by 1860 a price that had quintupled since 1800.
tunnel blasting and swamp draining were often consigned to itinerant gangs of expendable irishmen because those perilous tasks were death on niggers and mules slavery was protable for the great planters though it hobbled the economic development of the region as a whole.
the prots from the cotton boom sucked ever more slaves from the upper to the lower south so that by 1860 the deep south states of south carolina florida mississippi alabama and louisiana each had a majority or near majority of blacks and accounted for about half of all slaves in the south.
breeding slaves in the way that cattle are bred was not openly encouraged.
but thousands of blacks from the soil exhausted slave states of the old south espe a slave auction abraham lincoln said in 1865 whenever i hear anyone arguing for slavery i feel a strong impulse to see it tried on him personally life under slavery cially tobacco depleted virginia were sold down the river to toil as eld gang laborers on the cotton frontier of the lower mississippi valley.
women who bore thirteen or fourteen babies were prized as rattlin good breeders and some of these fecund females were promised their freedom when they had produced ten.
white masters all too frequently would force their attentions on female slaves fathering a sizable mulatto population most of which remained enchained.
slave auctions were brutal sights.
the open selling of human esh under the hammer sometimes with cattle and horses was among the most revolting aspects of slavery.
on the auction block families were separated with distressing frequency usually for economic reasons such as bankruptcy or the division of property among heirs.
the sundering of families in this fashion was perhaps slaverys greatest psychological horror.
abolitionists decried the practice and harriet beecher stowe seized on the emotional power of in 1852 maria perkins a woman enslaved in virginia wrote plaintively to her husband about the disruption that the commercial trafc in slaves was visiting upon their family i write you a letter to let you know of my distress my master has sold albert to a trader on monday court day and myself and other child is for sale also and i want you to let hear from you very soon before next cort if you can i dont know when i dont want you to wait till christmas i want you to tell dr hamelton and your master if either will buy me they can attend to it know and then i can go after wards i dont want a trader to get me they asked me if i had got any person to buy me and i told them no they took me to the court houste too they never put me up a man buy the name of brady bought albert and is gone i dont know whare they say he lives in scottesville my things is in several places some is in staunton and if i should be sold i dont know what will become of them i dont expect to meet with the luck to get that way till i am quite heart sick nothing more i am and ever will be your kind wife maria perkins.
this theme by putting it at the heart of the plot of her acclaimed 1852 novel uncle toms cabin.
life under the lash white southerners often romanticized about the happy life of their singing dancing banjo strumming joyful darkies but how did the slaves actually live.
there is no simple answer to this question.
conditions varied greatly from region to region from large plantation to small farm and from master to master.
everywhere of course slavery meant hard work ignorance and oppression.
the slaves both men and women usually toiled from dawn to dusk in the elds under the watchful eyes and ready whip hand of a white overseer or black driver they had no civil or political rights other than minimal protection from arbitrary murder or unusually cruel punishment.
some states offered further protections such as banning the sale of a child under the age of ten away from his or her mother.
but all such laws were difcult to enforce since slaves were forbidden to testify in court or even to have their marriages legally recognized.
floggings were common for the whip was the substitute for the wage incentive system and the most visible symbol of the planters mastery.
strong willed slaves were sometimes sent to breakers whose technique consisted mostly in lavish laying on of the lash.
as an abolitionist song of the 1850s lamented to night the bond man lord is bleeding in his chains and loud the falling lash is heard on carolinas plains.
but savage beatings made sullen laborers and lash marks hurt resale values.
there are to be sure sadistic monsters in any population and the planter class contained its share.
but the typical planter had too much of his own prosperity riding on the backs of his slaves to beat them bloody on a regular basis.
by 1860 most slaves were concentrated in the black belt of the deep south that stretched from south carolina and georgia into the new southwest states of alabama mississippi and louisiana.
this was the region of the southern frontier into which the explosively growing cotton kingdom had burst in a few short decades.
as on all frontiers life was often rough and raw and in general the lot of the slave was harder here than in the more settled areas of the old south.
chapter 16 the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 the cruelty of slavery slaveowners used devices like this collar with bells to discipline and patrol their slaves.
this female slave shown toiling in new orleans has such a collar riveted around her neck designed to prevent her from hiding from her master or escaping.
a majority of blacks lived on larger plantations that harbored communities of twenty or more slaves.
in some counties of the deep south especially along the lower mississippi river blacks accounted for more than 75 percent of the population.
there the family life of slaves tended to be relatively stable and a distinctive african american slave culture developed.
forced separations of spouses parents and children were evidently more common on smaller plantations and in the upper south.
slave marriage vows sometimes proclaimed until death or distance do you part with impressive resilience blacks managed to sustain family life in slavery and most slaves were raised in stable two parent households.
continuity of family slave nurse and young white master southern whites would not allow slaves to own property or exercise civil rights but paradoxically they often entrusted them with the raising of their own precious children.
many a slave mammy served as a surrogate mother for the offspring of the planter class.
slave families slaves being marched from staunton virginia to tennessee by lewis miller 1853 in this folk painting of slaves in transit from the upper south to the new cotton lands of the lower south couples travel together and children accompany parents.
in reality the forced movement of slaves often involved the painful separation of family members.
identity across generations was evidenced in the widespread practice of naming children for grandparents or adopting the surname not of a current master but of a forebears master.
african americans also displayed their african cultural roots when they avoided marriage between rst cousins in contrast to the frequent intermarriage of close relatives among the ingrown planter aristocracy.
african roots were also visible in the slaves religious practices.
though heavily christianized by the itinerant evangelists of the second great awakening blacks in slavery molded their own distinctive religious forms from a mixture of christian and african elements.
they emphasized those aspects of the christian heritage that seemed most pertinent to their own situation especially the captivity of the israelites in egypt.
one of their most haunting spirituals implored tell old pharaoh let my people go and another lamented nobody knows de trouble ive had nobody knows but jesus african practices also persisted in the responsorial style of preaching in which the congregation frequently punctuated the ministers remarks with assents and tag identifying slaves and free blacks in charleston all slaves in charleston south carolina were reminded of their status as property by the tags they were forced to wear marked with their skills such as porter or mechanic or carpenter and the year the tag was issued.
after 1848 even free blacks had to wear tags ensuring that no african american could be anonymous in the city.
the badge above was issued to a freed slave in charleston south carolina sometime after 1848 amens an adaptation of the give and take between caller and dancers in the african ringshout dance.
the burdens of bondage slavery was intolerably degrading to the victims.
they were deprived of the dignity and sense of responsibility that come from independence and the right to make choices.
they were denied an education because reading brought ideas and ideas brought discontent.
many states passed laws forbidding their instruction and perhaps nine tenths of adult slaves at the beginning of the civil war were totally illiterate.
for all slaves indeed for virtually all blacks slave or free the american dream of bettering ones lot through study and hard work was a cruel and empty mockery.
not surprisingly victims of the peculiar institution devised countless ways to throw sand in its gears.
when workers are not voluntarily hired and adequately compensated they can hardly be expected to work with alacrity.
accordingly slaves often slowed the pace of their labor to the barest minimum that would chapter 16 the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 spare them the lash thus fostering the myth of black laziness in the minds of whites.
they lched food from the big house and pilfered other goods that had been produced or purchased by their labor.
they sabotaged expensive equipment stopping the work routine altogether until repairs were accomplished.
occasionally they even poisoned their masters food.
the slaves also universally pined for freedom.
many took to their heels as runaways frequently in search of a separated family member.
a black girl asked if her mother was dead replied yessir master she is dead but shes free others rebelled though never successfully.
in 1800 an armed insurrection led by a slave named gabriel in richmond virginia was foiled by informers and its leaders were hanged.
denmark vesey a free black led another ill fated rebellion in charleston south carolina in 1822.
also betrayed by informers vesey and more than thirty followers were publicly strung from the gallows.
in 1831 the semiliterate nat turner a visionary black preacher led an uprising that slaughtered about sixty virginians mostly women and children.
reprisals were swift and bloody and nat turners rebellion was soon extinguished.
an especially dramatic episode involved the enslaved africans who rebelled aboard the spanish slave ship amistad in 1839.
they seized command of the vessel off the coast of cuba and attempted to sail back to africa but were driven ashore on long island.
after two years of imprisonment and several trials former president john quincy adams nally secured their freedom in a brilliant moving argument before the 90w u s supreme court in 1841 and the africans returned to the british colony of sierra leone in west africa.
the dark taint of slavery also left its mark on whites.
it fostered the brutality of the whip the bloodhound and the branding iron.
white southerners increasingly lived in a state of imagined siege surrounded by potentially rebellious blacks inamed by abolitionist propaganda from the north.
their fears bolstered an intoxicating theory of biological racial superiority and turned the south into a reactionary backwater in an era of progress one of the last bastions of slavery in the western world.
the defenders of slavery were forced to degrade themselves along with their victims.
as booker t washington a distinguished black leader and former slave later observed whites could not hold blacks in a ditch without getting down there with them.
early abolitionism the inhumanity of the peculiar institution gradually caused antislavery societies to sprout forth.
abolitionist sentiment rst stirred at the time of the revolution especially among quakers see map 16 3.
because of the widespread loathing of blacks some of the earliest abolitionist efforts focused on transporting blacks bodily back to africa.
the american colonization society was founded for this purpose in 1817 and in 1822 the republic of liberia on the fever stricken west african coast was established for former slaves.
its capital monrovia was named after president monroe.
80w superior lake 70w 400 km.
british north america canada 40n lake michi the louisiana purchase 1803 on hu r 100w by state statutes in force gradual emancipation tario n y l on rie l e old northwest by state constitution vt e g an la k slavery prohibited by ordinance of 1787 slave states maine mass.
pa n n h mass.
1780 n j r i conn at l a n t i c ocean map 16 3 early emancipation in the north interactive map bellegrove plantation donaldsville louisiana built 1857 he sugar growing bellegrove plantation on the banks of the mississippi river ninety ve miles north of new orleans was laid out on a grander scale than many southern plantations.
in this rendering from an advertisement for bellegroves sale in 1867 the planter john orrs home was identied as a mansion and quarters for his eld hands proved extensive twenty double cabins built for slaves now for negroes and a dormitory described in the ad but not pictured here housing 150 laborers.
because of the unhealthy work involved in cultivating sugar cane such as the constant digging of drainage canals to keep the cane from rotting in standing water many planters hired immigrant usually irish labor to keep their valuable slaves out of physical danger.
the presence of a hospital between the slave cabins and the mansion indicates the very real threat to health.
the layout of bellegrove reects the organi t zation of production as well as the social relations on a sugar plantation.
the storehouse where preserved sugar awaited shipping stood closest to the mississippi river the principal transportation route whereas the sugar house the most important building on the plantation with its mill boilers and cooking vats for converting syrup into sugar dominated the caneelds.
although the big house and slave quarters stood in close proximity hedges surrounding the planters home shut out views of both sugar production and labor.
within the slave quarters the overseers larger house signied his superior status while the arrangement of cabins ensured his supervision of domestic as well as work life.
what else does the physical layout of the plantation reveal about settlement patterns sugar cultivation and social relationships along the mississippi.
chapter 16 the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 i not a man and a brother.
am i not a woman and a sister a popular appeal.
american abolitionists against the sin of slavery.
prominent among them was lanky tousle haired theodore dwight weld who had been evangelized by charles grandison finney in new yorks burned over district in the 1820s.
self educated and simple in manner and speech weld appealed with special power and directness to his rural audiences of untutored farmers.
spiritually inspired by finney weld was materially aided by two wealthy and devout new york merchants the brothers arthur and lewis tappan.
in 1832 they paid his way to lane theological seminary in cincinnati ohio which was presided over by the formidable lyman beecher father of a remarkable brood including novelist harriet beecher stowe reformer catharine beecher and preacher abolitionist henry ward beecher.
expelled along with several other students in 1834 for organizing an eighteen day debate on slavery weld and his fellow lane rebels full of the energy and idealism of youth fanned out across the old northwest preaching the antislavery gospel.
humorless and deadly earnest weld also assembled a potent propaganda pamphlet american slavery as it is 1839.
its compelling arguments made it among the most effective abolitionist tracts and greatly inuenced harriet beecher stowes uncle toms cabin.
radical abolitionism some fteen thousand freed blacks were transported there over the next four decades.
but most blacks had no wish to be transplanted into a strange civilization after having become partially americanized.
by 1860 virtually all southern slaves were no longer africans but native born african americans with their own distinctive history and culture.
yet the colonization idea appealed to some antislaveryites including abraham lincoln until the time of the civil war.
in the 1830s the abolitionist movement took on new energy and momentum mounting to the proportions of a crusade.
american abolitionists took heart in 1833 when their british counterparts inspired by the redoubtable william wilberforce a member of parliament and an evangelical christian reformer whose family had been touched by the preaching of george whiteeld see chapter 5 unchained the slaves in the west indies see thinking globally the struggle to abolish slavery pp.
wilberforce university in ohio an african american college that later sent many missionaries to africa is named for him.
as with wilberforce the religious spirit of the second great awakening now inamed the hearts of many on new years day 1831 a shattering abolitionist blast came from the bugle of william lloyd garrison a mild looking reformer of twenty six.
the emotionally high strung son of a drunken father and a spiritual child of the second great awakening garrison published in boston the rst issue of his militantly antislavery newspaper the liberator.
with this mighty paper broadside garrison triggered a thirty year war of words and in a sense red one of the opening barrages of the civil war.
stern and uncompromising garrison nailed his colors to the masthead of his weekly.
he proclaimed in strident tones that under no circumstances would he tolerate the poisonous weed of slavery but would stamp it out at once root and branch i will be as harsh as truth and as uncompromising as justice.
i am in earnest i will not equivocate i will not excuse i will not retreat a single inch and i will be heard.
other dedicated abolitionists rallied to garrisons standard and in 1833 they founded the american anti the abolitionist crusade william lloyd garrison 1805 1879 the most conspicuous and most vilied of the abolitionists garrison was a nonresistant pacist and a poor organizer.
he favored northern secession from the south and antagonized both sections with his intemperate language.
sojourner truth also known simply as isabella she held audiences spellbound with her deep resonant voice and the religious passion with which she condemned the sin of slavery.
this photo was taken about 1870.
slavery society.
prominent among them was wendell phillips a boston patrician known as abolitions golden trumpet a man of strict principle he would eat no cane sugar and wear no cotton cloth since both were produced by southern slaves.
black abolitionists distinguished themselves as living monuments to the cause of african american freedom.
their ranks included david walker whose incendiary appeal to the colored citizens of the world 1829 advocated a bloody end to white supremacy.
also noteworthy were sojourner truth a freed black woman in new york who fought tirelessly for black emancipation and womens rights and martin delany one of the few black leaders to take seriously the notion of the mass recolonization of africa.
in 1859 he visited west africas niger valley seeking a suitable site for relocation.
the greatest of the black abolitionists was frederick douglass.
escaping from bondage in 1838 at the age of twenty one he was discovered by the abolitionists in 1841 when he gave a stunning impromptu speech at an antislavery meeting in massachusetts.
thereafter he lectured widely for the cause despite frequent beatings and threats against his life.
in 1845 he published his classic autobiography narrative of the life of frederick douglass.
it depicted his remarkable origins as the son of a black slave woman and a white father his struggle to learn to read and write and his eventual escape to the north.
douglass was as exibly practical as garrison was stubbornly principled.
garrison often appeared to be more interested in his own righteousness than in the substance of the slavery evil itself.
he repeatedly thinking globally the struggle to abolish slavery w hen slaves in the french caribbean colony of haiti inspired by the revolutionary fervor that had seized mainland france rose up and demanded liberty equality and fraternity for themselves they became in 1794 the rst enslaved people in the new world to win their freedom.
although napoleon would rip it from them again when he reinstated slavery in 1802 another revolution in france in 1848 would ensure their permanent freedom.
table 16 1 documents the long 250 year struggle to abolish slavery throughout the world.
agitators outraged by the scourge of human bondage and committed to ending it known as abolitionists shared antislavery sentiments and strategies across national boundaries.
from the late seventeenth through the mid nineteenth century british and american abolitionists wove dense networks of mutual support.
they shared writings lecturers and funding and jointly sponsored conferences such as the worlds anti slavery convention of 1840 in london which became famous for inspiring the american womens rights movement when it refused to seat female delegates.
but the political fortunes of abolitionist movements and hence the timing of the longed for day of freedom varied sharply from nation to nation.
in france emancipation was twice tied to revolutions.
in great britain massive citizens petition campaigns orchestrated by venerable lifelong abolitionist leaders such as william wilberforce brought enormous popular pressure to bear on the government.
parliament eventually responded by outlawing the slave trade in 1807 and then three days before wilberforce died in 1833 prohibiting slavery itself throughout most of the british empire.
in the united states as in britain abolitionism became a robust social movement propelled not least by women and free blacks.
but the roots of the peculiar institution in worlds anti slavery convention london 1840 the convention assembled antislavery advocates from around the world but it refused to seat female delegates.
women were allowed to observe but not to take part in the ofcial proceedings.
the frustrations of the unseated american representatives led to the historic womans rights convention at seneca falls new york in 1848 see p 352.
the united states ran wide and deep.
even though the american slave trade was ended in 1808 it took the unions victory in a bloody civil war in 1865 to eradicate slavery once and for all.
elsewhere in the americas enslaved peoples secured their freedom gradually and in stark contrast to the united states peacefully.
emancipation typically became possible only after the achievement of independence from spain where abolitionism never gained much traction.
cuba still a spanish colony into the 1890s was among the last places in the new world to set its slaves free.
table 16 1 comparative abolition of slavery country date abolished mexico great britain france bolivia ecuador peru argentina venezuela russia netherlands united states paraguay cuba brazil korea china saudi arabia yemen notes the slave trade was prohibited in 1824 but slavery itself was not abolished until 1829 eight years after mexico gained independence from spain.
the slave trade was ended in 1807 but slavery was not abolished until 1833.
the abolition of slavery did not apply to british india where slavery persisted until 1860.
slavery was rst abolished in 1794 but was reestablished by napoleon bonaparte in 1802.
in 1848 the second republic replaced the july monarchy and abolished slavery in all french colonies.
all slaves born since independence 1825 were freed in 1831 but slavery was not abolished entirely until 1851.
at the time of independence in 1821 all children born to slaves after that date were declared free but slavery persisted until 1852.
at the time of independence in 1821 all children born to slaves after that date were declared free but slavery was not abolished entirely until 1854.
emancipation rst begun in 1813 was completed in 1854.
gradual emancipation began when independence was fully secured in 1821 but slavery was not completely abolished until 1854.
peter the great rst abolished slavery in 1723 by converting household slaves into serfs.
tsar alexander ii freed russias 22 million serfs in 1861.
slavery was abolished in all dutch colonies.
the slave trade was ended in 1808 but slavery was not abolished entirely until after the civil war with the ratication of the thirteenth amendment.
slavery was abolished earlier in the north in the decades after the revolution often through gradual emancipation.
gradual emancipation began in 1842 but slavery was not abolished until 1869.
gradual emancipation began in 1870 the spanish government freed the remaining slaves in 1886.
the slave trade was abolished in 1851.
a gradual emancipation law was rst passed in 1871 but slavery was not abolished entirely until 1888.
state owned slaves were emancipated in 1801.
although slavery was formally abolished in 1894 it persisted in some regions until the 1930s.
the emperor abolished slavery toward the end of the xing dynasty in 1910 but it persisted until the communist government proclaimed abolition in 1949.
slavery was abolished under pressure from the united nations and moderate arab states.
leaders of the newly proclaimed yemen arab republic abolished slavery after overthrowing the imamate in 1962.
the british east india company had sovereignty over india until 1858 when the british government took over and abolished slavery shortly thereafter.
sources martin a klein historical dictionary of slavery and abolition 2002 robert fogel without consent of contract 1994 herbert klein african slavery in latin america and the caribbean 1986 edward alpers gwyn campbell and michael salman eds slavery and resistance in africa and asia 2005 jerome alan cohen r randle edwards and fu mei chang chen essays on chinas legal tradition 1980.
chapter 16 the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 frederick douglass 1817 1895 the remarkable ex slave told of mr.
covey a white owner who bought a single female slave as a breeder she gave birth to twins at the end of the year at this addition to the human stock covey and his wife were ecstatic with joy.
no one dreamed of reproaching the woman or nding fault with the hired man bill smith the father of the children for mr.
covey himself had locked the two up together every night thus inviting the result.
frederick douglass 1817 1895 born a slave in maryland douglass escaped to the north and became the most prominent of the black abolitionists.
gifted as an orator writer and editor he continued to battle for the civil rights of his people after emancipation.
near the end of a distinguished career he served as u s minister to haiti.
demanded that the virtuous north secede from the wicked south.
yet he did not explain how the creation of an independent slave republic would bring an end to the damning crime of slavery.
renouncing politics on the fourth of july 1854 he publicly burned a copy of the constitution as a covenant with death and an agreement with hell a phrase he borrowed from a shaker condemnation of marriage.
critics including some of his former supporters charged that garrison was cruelly probing the moral wound in americas underbelly but offering no acceptable balm to ease the pain.
douglass on the other hand along with other abolitionists increasingly looked to politics to end the blight of slavery.
these political abolitionists backed the liberty party in 1840 the free soil party in 1848 and eventually the republican party in the 1850s.
in the end most abolitionists including even the paci stic garrison himself followed the logic of their beliefs and supported a frightfully costly fratricidal war as the price of emancipation.
high minded and courageous the abolitionists were men and women of goodwill and various colors who faced the cruel choice that people in many ages have had thrust upon them when is evil so enormous that it must be denounced even at the risk of precipitating bloodshed and butchery.
after hearing frederick douglass speak in bristol england in 1846 mary a estlin wrote to an american abolitionist t here is but one opinion of him.
wherever he goes he arouses sympathy in your cause and love for himself.
our expectations were highly roused by his narrative his printed speeches and the eulogisms of the friends with whom he has been staying but he far exceeds the picture we had formed both in outward graces intellectual power and culture and eloquence.
from clare taylor ed british and american abolitionists an episode in transatlantic understanding edinburgh university press 1974 p 282.
white southerners on the defensive the south lashes back antislavery sentiment was not unknown in the south and in the 1820s antislavery societies were more numerous south of the mason dixon line than north of it.
but after about 1830 the voice of white southern abolitionism was silenced.
in a last gasp of southern questioning of slavery the virginia legislature debated and eventually defeated various emancipation proposals in 1831 1832.
that debate marked a turning point.
thereafter all the slave states tightened their slave codes and moved to prohibit emancipation of any kind voluntary or compensated.
nat turners rebellion in 1831 sent a wave of hysteria sweeping over the snowy cotton elds and planters in growing numbers recollecting the massive slave revolt that had erupted in haiti in the 1790s slept with pistols by their pillows.
although garrison had no demonstrable connection with the turner conspiracy his liberator appeared at about the same time and he was bitterly condemned as a terrorist and an inciter of murder.
the state of georgia offered 5 000 for his arrest and conviction.
the nullication crisis of 1832 further implanted haunting fears in white southern minds conjuring up nightmares of black incendiaries and abolitionist devils.
jailings whippings and lynchings now greeted rational efforts to discuss the slavery problem in the south.
proslavery whites responded by launching a massive defense of slavery as a positive good.
in doing so they forgot their own sections previous doubts about the morality of the peculiar institution slavery they claimed was supported by the authority of the bible and the wisdom of aristotle.
it was good for the africans who were lifted from the barbarism of the jungle and clothed with the blessings of christian civilization.
slavemasters strongly encouraged religion in the slave quarters.
a catechism for blacks contained such passages as q.
who gave you a master and a mistress.
god gave them to me.
who says that you must obey them.
god says that i must.
white apologists also claimed that master slave relationships really resembled those of a family.
on originally the southern boundary of colonial pennsylvania.
many plantations especially those of the old south of virginia and maryland this argument had a certain plausibility.
a slaves tombstone bore this touching inscription john a faithful servant and true friend kindly and considerate loyal and affectionate the family he served honours him in death but in life they gave him love for he was one of them southern whites were quick to contrast the happy lot of their servants with that of the overworked northern wage slaves including sweated women and stunted children.
the blacks mostly toiled in the fresh air and sunlight not in dark and stuffy factories.
they did not have to worry about slack times or unemployment as did the hired hands of the north.
provided with a jail like form of social security they were cared for in sickness and old age unlike northern workers who were set adrift when they had outlived their usefulness.
these curious proslavery arguments only widened the chasm between a backward looking south and a forward looking north and indeed much of the rest of the western world.
the southerners reacted defensively to the pressure of their own fears and bristled before the merciless nagging of the northern abolitionists.
increasingly the white south turned in upon itself and grew hotly intolerant of any embarrassing questions about the status of slavery.
regrettably also the controversy over free people endangered free speech in the entire country.
piles of petitions poured in upon congress from the antislavery reformers and in 1836 sensitive southerners drove through the house the so called gag resolution.
it required all such antislavery appeals to be tabled without debate.
this attack on the right of petition aroused the sleeping lion in the aged ex president representative john quincy adams and he waged a successful eightyear ght for its repeal.
southern whites likewise resented the ooding of their mails with incendiary abolitionist literature.
even if blacks could not read they could interpret the inammatory drawings such as those that showed masters knocking out slaves teeth with clubs.
in 1835 a mob in charleston south carolina looted the post chapter 16 the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 in defense of slavery this pair of illustrations contrasts the supposedly benevolent slave regime of the south with the harshness of working life in england where starvation wages and unemployment blighted workers lives.
apologists for slavery frequently invoked this comparison between allegedly paternalistic slavemasters and the uncaring capitalists who captained the industrial revolution.
ofce and burned a pile of abolitionist propaganda.
capitulating to southern pressures the washington government in 1835 ordered southern postmasters to destroy abolitionist material and called on southern state ofcials to arrest federal postmasters who did not comply.
such was freedom of the press as guaranteed by the constitution.
the abolitionist impact in the north abolitionists especially the extreme garrisonians were for a long time unpopular in many parts of the north.
northerners had been brought up to revere the constitution and to regard the clauses on slavery as a lasting bargain.
the ideal of union hammered home by the thundering eloquence of daniel webster and others had taken deep root and garrisons wild talk of secession grated harshly on northern ears.
the north also had a heavy economic stake in dixieland.
by the late 1850s southern planters owed northern bankers and other creditors about 300 million and much of this immense sum would be lost as in fact it later was should the union dissolve.
new england textile mills were fed with cotton raised by the slaves and a disrupted labor system might cut off this vital supply and bring unemployment.
the union during these critical years was partly bound together with cotton threads tied by lords of the loom in collaboration with the so called lords of the lash.
it was not surprising that strong hostility developed in the north against the boat rocking tactics of the radical antislaveryites.
repeated tongue lashings by the extreme abolitionists provoked many mob outbursts in the north some led by respectable gentlemen.
a gang of young toughs broke into lewis tappans new york house in 1834 and demolished its interior while a crowd in the street cheered.
in 1835 garrison with a rope tied around him chronology was dragged through the streets of boston by the socalled broadcloth mob but escaped almost miraculously.
reverend elijah p lovejoy of alton illinois not content to assail slavery impugned the chastity of catholic women.
his printing press was destroyed four times and in 1837 he was killed by a mob and became the martyr abolitionist so unpopular were the antislavery zealots that ambitious politicians like lincoln usually avoided the taint of garrisonian abolition like the plague.
yet by the 1850s the abolitionist outcry had made a deep dent in the northern mind.
many citizens had come to see the south as the land of the unfree and the home of a hateful institution.
few northerners were prepared to abolish slavery outright but a growing number including lincoln opposed extending it to the western territories.
people of this stamp commonly called free soilers swelled their ranks as the civil war approached.
chronology whitneys cotton gin transforms southern economy british abolish slavery in west indies american anti slavery society founded gabriel slave rebellion in virginia abolitionist students expelled from lane theological seminary britain abolishes slave trade congress outlaws slave trade royal navy forms west africa squadron u s post ofce orders destruction of abolitionist mail broadcloth mob attacks garrison american colonization society formed house of representatives passes gag resolution missouri compromise mob kills abolitionist lovejoy in alton illinois vesey slave rebellion in charleston south carolina republic of liberia established in africa weld publishes american slavery as it is slave revolt aboard amistad walker publishes appeal to the colored citizens of the world douglass publishes narrative of the life of frederick douglass nat turner slave rebellion in virginia garrison begins publishing the liberator free soil party orga nized 1831 virginia legislature debates slavery and emancipation chapter 16 the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 key terms west africa squadron 379 breakers 381 black belt 381 responsorial 383 nat turners rebellion 384 amistad 384 american colonization society 384 liberia 384 people to know the liberator 386 american anti slavery society 386 appeal to the colored citizens of the world 387 narrative of the life of frederick douglass 387 mason dixon line 391 gag resolution 391 william t johnson nat turner william wilberforce theodore dwight weld william lloyd garrison david walker sojourner truth martin delany frederick douglass what was the true nature of slavery.
b y the early twentieth century the predictable accounts of slavery written by partisans of the north or south had receded in favor of a romantic vision of the old south conveyed through popular literature myth and increasingly scholarship.
that vision was persuasively validated by the publication of ulrich bonnell phillipss landmark study american negro slavery 1918.
phillips made three key arguments.
first he claimed that slavery was a dying economic institution unprotable to the slaveowner and an obstacle to the economic development of the south as a whole.
second he contended that slavery was a rather benign institution and that the planters contrary to abolitionist charges of ruthless exploitation treated their chattels with kindly paternalism.
third he reected the dominant racial attitudes of his time in his belief that blacks were inferior and submissive by nature and did not abhor the institution that enslaved them.
for nearly a century historians have debated these assertions sometimes heatedly.
more sophisticated economic analysis has refuted phillipss claim that slavery would have withered away without a war.
economic historians have demonstrated that slavery was a viable protable expanding economic system and that slaves constituted a worthwhile investment for their owners.
the price of a prime eld hand rose dramatically even in the 1850s.
no such denitive conclusion has yet been reached in the disputes over slave treatment.
frank tannenbaums classic comparative study slave and citizen 1947 argued that slavery was more humane in latin america than in the united states leaving a legacy of less sharply de ned racial castes there.
beginning in the late 1950s historians came increasingly to emphasize the harshness of the u s slave system.
one study stanley elkinss slavery 1959 went so far as to compare the peculiar institution to the nazi concentration camps of world war ii.
both were total institutions elkins contended which infantilized their victims.
more recently scholars such as eugene genovese have moved beyond debating whether slavery was kind or cruel.
without diminishing the deprivations and pains of slavery genovese has conceded that slavery embraced a strange form of paternalism a system that reected not the benevolence of southern slaveholders but their need to control and coax work out of their reluctant and often recalcitrant investments furthermore within this paternalistic system black slaves were able to make reciprocal demands of their white owners and to protect a cultural space of their own in which family and religion particu larly could ourish.
the crowning paradox of slaveholder paternalism was that in treating their property more humanely slaveowners implicitly recognized the hu to learn more manity of their slaves and thereby subverted the racist underpinnings upon which their slave society existed.
the revised conceptions of the master slave relationship also spilled over into the debate about slave personality.
elkins accepted phillipss portrait of the slave as a childlike sambo but saw it as a consequence of slavery rather than a congenital attribute of african americans.
kenneth stampp rejecting the sambo stereotype stressed the frequency and variety of slave resistance both mild and militant.
a third view imaginatively documented in the work of lawrence levine argued that the sambo character was an act an image that slaves used to confound their masters without incurring punishment.
levines black culture and black consciousness 1977 shares with books by john blassingame and herbert gutman an emphasis on the tenacity with which slaves maintained their own culture and kin relations despite the hardships of bondage.
most recently historians have attempted to avoid the polarity of repression versus autonomy.
they assert the debasing oppression of slavery while also acknowledging slaves ability to resist the dehumanizing effects of enslavement.
the challenge before historians today is to capture the vibrancy of slave culture and its legacy for african american society after emancipation without diminishing the brutality of life under the southern slave regime.
a new sensitivity to gender spurred by the growing eld of womens history has also expanded the horizons of slavery studies.
historians such as eliza beth fox genovese jacqueline jones and catherine clinton have focused on the ways in which slavery differed for men and women both slaves and slaveholders.
enslaved black women for example had the unique task of negotiating an identity out of their dual responsibilities as plantation laborer even sometimes caretaker of white women and children and anchor of the black family.
by tracing the interconnectedness of race and gender in the american south these historians have also shown how slavery shaped conceptions of masculinity and femininity within southern society further distinguishing its culture from that of the north.
scholarship on slavery continues to grow.
the newest work by philip d morgan and ira berlin has drawn attention to how both the institution of slavery and the experience of the enslaved changed over time.
they have contended that slavery was far from monolithic.
rather it adapted to particular geographic and environmental factors which inuenced the diet and work routines of slaves and shaped the degree of autonomy in family life and culture that slaves were able to carve out.
slavery also changed from one generation to the next.
as southern slaveholders responded to new social and economic conditions they gradually altered the legal status of slaves making slavery a hereditary condition outlawing manumission in many places rendering freedom for the enslaved increasingly difcult to attain and placing onerous restrictions on the work opportunities and mobility of free african americans.
to learn more erskine clarke dwelling place a plantation epic 2005 frederick douglass narrative of the life of frederick douglass 1845 john hope franklin from slavery to freedom 8th ed 2000 anya jabour scarletts sisters young women in the old south 2007 julie roy jeffrey the great silent army of abolitionism ordinary women in the antislavery movement 1998 walter johnson soul by soul life inside the antebellum slave market 2001 melton alonza mclaurin celia a slave 1991 joshua rothman notorious in the neighborhood sex and families across the color line in virginia 1787 1861 2003 james b stewart holy warriors 1976 gavin wright slavery and american economic development 2006 bertram wyatt brown honor and violence in the old south 1986 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at manifest destiny and its legacy 1841 1848 our manifest destiny is to overspread the continent allotted by providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions.
t erritorial expansion dominated american diplomacy and politics in the 1840s.
settlers swarming into the still disputed oregon country aggravated relations with britain which had staked its own claims in the pacic northwest.
the clamor to annex texas to the union provoked bitter tension with mexico which continued to regard texas as a mexican province in revolt.
and when americans began casting covetous eyes on mexicos northernmost province the great prize of cal i fornia open warfare erupted between the united states and its southern neighbor.
victory over mexico added vast new domains to the united states but it also raised thorny questions about the status of slavery in the newly acquired territories questions that would be answered in blood in the civil war of the 1860s.
earliest known use of the term manifest destiny sometimes called manifest desire the accession of tyler too a horde of hard ciderites descended upon washington early in 1841 clamoring for the spoils of ofce.
newly elected president harrison bewildered by the uproar was almost hounded to death by whig spoilsmen.
the real leaders of the whig party regarded old tippecanoe as little more than an impressive gurehead.
daniel webster as secretary of state and henry clay the uncrowned king of the whigs and their ablest spokesman in the senate would grasp the helm.
the aging general was nally forced to rebuke the overzealous clay and pointedly remind him that he william henry harrison was president of the united states.
unluckily for clay and webster their schemes soon hit a fatal snag.
before the new term had fairly started harrison contracted pneumonia.
wearied by ofcial functions and plagued by ofce seekers the enfeebled this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website john tyler accidental president old warrior died after only four weeks in the white house by far the shortest administration in american history following by far the longest inaugural address.
the tyler too part of the whig ticket hitherto only a rhyme now claimed the spotlight.
what manner of man did the nation now nd in the presidential chair.
six feet tall slender blue eyed and fair haired with classical features and a high forehead john tyler was a virginia gentleman of the old school gracious and kindly yet stubbornly attached to principle.
he had earlier resigned from the senate quite unnecessarily rather than accept distasteful instructions from the virginia legislature.
still a lone wolf he had forsaken the jacksonian democratic fold for that of the whigs largely because he could not stomach the dictatorial tactics of jackson.
tylers enemies accused him of being a democrat in whig clothing but this charge was only partially true.
the whig party like the democratic party was something of a catchall and the accidental president belonged to the minority wing which embraced a number of jeffersonian states righters.
tyler had in fact been put on the ticket partly to attract the vote of this fringe group many of whom were inuential southern gentry.
yet tyler high minded as he was should never have consented to run on the ticket.
although the dominant clay webster group had published no platform every alert politician knew what the unpublished platform contained.
and on virtually every major issue the obstinate virginian was at odds with the majority of his adoptive whig party which was pro bank pro protective tariff and pro internal improvements.
tyler too rhymed with tippecanoe but there the harmony ended.
as events turned out president harrison the whig served for only 4 weeks whereas tyler the ex democrat who was still largely a democrat at heart served for 204 weeks.
john tyler a president without a party after their hard won hard cider victory the whigs brought their not so secret platform out of clays waistcoat pocket.
to the surprise of no one it outlined a strongly nationalistic program.
financial reform came rst.
the whig congress hastened to pass a law ending the independent treasury system and president tyler disarmingly agreeable signed it.
clay next drove through congress a bill for a fiscal bank which would establish a new bank of the united states.
tylers hostility to a centralized bank was notorious and clay the great compromiser would have done well to conciliate him.
but the kentuckian robbed repeatedly of the presidency by lesser men was in an imperious mood and riding for a fall.
when the bank bill reached the presidential desk tyler atly vetoed it on both practical and constitutional grounds.
a drunken mob gathered late at night near the white house and shouted insultingly huzza for clay a bank.
a bank down with the veto the stunned whig leaders tried once again.
striving to pacify tylers objections to a fiscal bank they passed another bill providing for a fiscal corporation but the president still unbending vetoed the offensive substitute.
the democrats were jubilant they had been saved from another nancial monster only by the pneumonia that had felled harrison.
whig extremists seething with indignation condemned tyler as his accidency and as an executive ass widely burned in efgy he received numerous letters threatening him with death.
a wave of inuenza then sweeping the country was called the tyler grippe to the delight of democrats the stiff necked virginian was formally expelled from his party by a caucus of whig congressmen and a serious attempt to impeach him was broached in the house of representatives.
his entire cabinet resigned in a body except secretary of state webster who was then in the midst of delicate negotiations with eng land.
the proposed whig tariff also felt the prick of the presidents well inked pen.
tyler appreciated the necessity of bringing additional revenue to the treasury.
but old democrat that he was he looked with a frosty eye on the major tariff scheme of the whigs because it provided among other features for a distribution among the states of revenue from the sale of public lands in the west.
tyler could see no point in squandering federal money when the federal treasury was not overowing and he again wielded an emphatic veto.
chastened clayites redrafted their tariff bill.
they chopped out the offensive dollar distribution scheme and pushed down the rates to about the moderately protective level of 1832 roughly 32 percent on dutiable goods.
tyler had no fondness for a protective tariff but realizing the need for additional revenue he reluctantly signed the tariff of 1842.
in subsequent months the pressure for higher customs duties slackened as the country gradually edged its way out of the depression.
the whig slogan harrison two dollars a day and.
chapter 17 manifest destiny and its legacy 1841 1848 roast beef was reduced by unhappy democrats to ten cents a day and bean soup a war of words with britain hatred of britain during the nineteenth century came to a head periodically and had to be lanced by treaty settlement or by war.
the poison had festered ominously by 1842.
anti british passions were composed of many ingredients.
at bottom lay the bitter red coated memories of the two anglo american wars.
in addition the genteel pro british federalists had died out eventually yielding to the boisterous jacksonian democrats.
british travelers snif ng with aristocratic noses at the crude scene wrote acidly of american tobacco spitting slave auctioneering lynching eye gouging and other frances trollope 1780 1863 an english writer disillusioned by the failure of a utopian community she had joined in tennessee wrote scathingly of the americans in 1832 other nations have been called thinskinned but the citizens of the union have apparently no skins at all they wince if a breeze blows over them unless it be tempered with adulation.
unsavory features of the rustic republic.
travel books penned by these critics whose views were avidly read on both sides of the atlantic stirred up angry outbursts in america.
but the literary reworks did not end there.
british magazines added fuel to the ames when enlarging on the travel books they launched sneering attacks on yankee shortcomings.
american journals struck back with youre another arguments thus touching off the third war with eng land fortunately this britishamerican war was fought with paper broadsides and only ink was spilled.
british authors including charles dickens entered the fray with gall dipped pens for they were being denied rich royalties by the absence of an american copyright law.
sprawling america with expensive canals to dig and railroads to build was a borrowing nation in the nineteenth century.
imperial britain with its overowing coffers was a lending nation.
the well heeled creditor is never popular with the down at the heels debtor and the phrase bloated british bond holder rolled bitterly from many an american tongue.
when the panic of 1837 broke and several states defaulted on their bonds or repudiated them openly honest englishmen assailed yankee trickery.
one of them offered a new stanza for an old song yankee doodle borrows cash yankee doodle spends it and then he snaps his ngers at the jolly at simpleton who lends it.
troubles of a more dangerous sort came closer to home in 1837 when a short lived insurrection erupted the land of liberty 1847 this british cartoon reected the contemptuous view of american culture politics and diplomacy that was common in earlynineteenth century britain.
not until 1891 did congress extend copyright privileges to foreign authors.
tensions with britain manipulating the maine maps an explosive controversy of the early 1840s involved the maine boundary dispute.
the st lawrence river is icebound several months of the year as the british remembering the war of 1812 well knew.
they were determined as a defensive precaution against the yankees to build a road westward from the seaport of halifax to qubec.
but the proposed route ran through qubec 70w n 65w 50 100 km.
aw n re ce k oo r r ar oo st new brunswick st john r st l qubec.
it was supported by such a small minority of canadians that it never had a real chance of success.
yet hundreds of hot blooded americans hoping to strike a blow for freedom against the hereditary enemy furnished military supplies or volunteered for armed ser vice.
the washington regime tried arduously though futilely to uphold its weak neutrality regulations.
but again as in the case of texas it simply could not enforce unpopular laws in the face of popular opposition.
a provocative incident on the canadian frontier brought passions to a boil in 1837.
an american steamer the caroline was carrying supplies to the insurgents across the swift niagara river.
it was nally attacked on the new york shore by a determined british force which set the vessel on re.
lurid american illustrators showed the aming ship laden with shrieking souls plummeting over niagara falls.
the craft in fact sank short of the plunge and only one american was killed.
this unlawful invasion of american soil a counterviolation of neutrality had alarming aftermaths.
washington ofcials lodged vigorous but ineffective protests.
three years later in 1840 the incident was dramatically revived in the state of new york.
a canadian named mcleod after allegedly boasting in a tavern of his part in the caroline raid was arrested and indicted for murder.
the london foreign ofce which regarded the caroline raiders as members of a sanctioned armed force and not as criminals made clear that his execution would mean war.
fortunately mcleod was freed after establishing an alibi.
it must have been airtight for it was good enough to convince a new york jury.
the tension forthwith eased but it snapped taut again in 1841 when british ofcials in the bahamas offered asylum to 130 virginia slaves who had rebelled and captured the american ship creole.
britain had abolished slavery within its empire in 1833 raising southern fears that its caribbean possessions would become canada like havens for escaped slaves.
45n montral halifax maine nova scotia vt n h at l a n t i c ocean proposed road route webster ashburton treaty line given up by united states acquired by united states map 17 1 maine boundary settlement 1842 interactive map disputed territory claimed also by maine under the misleading peace treaty of 1783.
tough knuckled lumberjacks from both maine and canada entered the disputed no mans land of the tall timbered aroostook river valley.
ugly ghts ared up and both sides summoned the local militia.
the small scale lumberjack clash which was dubbed the aroostook war threatened to widen into a full dress shooting war.
as the crisis deepened in 1842 the london foreign ofce took an unusual step.
it sent to washington a nonprofessional diplomat the conciliatory nancier lord ashburton who had married a wealthy american woman.
he speedily established cordial relations with secretary webster who had recently been lionized during a visit to britain.
the two statesmen their nerves frayed by protracted negotiations in the heat of a washington summer nally agreed to compromise on the maine boundary see map 17 1.
on the basis of a rough splitthe difference arrangement the americans were to retain some 7 000 square miles of the 12 000 square miles of wilderness in dispute.
the british got less land but won the desired halifax qubec route.
during the negotiations the caroline affair malingering since 1837 was patched up by an exchange of diplomatic notes.
chapter 17 manifest destiny and its legacy 1841 1848 an overlooked bonus sneaked by in the small print of the same treaty the british in adjusting the u s canadian boundary farther west surrendered 6 500 square miles.
the area was later found to contain the priceless mesabi iron ore of minnesota.
the lone star of texas shines alone during the uncertain eight years since 1836 texas had led a precarious existence.
mexico refusing to recognize texass independence regarded the lone star republic as a province in revolt to be reconquered in the future.
mexican ofcials loudly threatened war if the american eagle should ever gather the edgling republic under its protective wings.
the texans were forced to maintain a costly military establishment.
vastly outnumbered by their mexican foe they could not tell when he would strike again.
mexico actually did make two halfhearted raids that though ineffectual foreshadowed more fearsome efforts.
confronted with such perils texas was driven to open negotiations with britain and france in the hope of securing the defensive shield of a protectorate.
in 1839 and 1840 the texans concluded treaties with france holland and belgium.
britain was intensely interested in an independent texas.
such a republic would check the southward surge of the american colossus whose bulging biceps posed a constant threat to nearby british possessions in the new world.
a puppet texas dancing to strings pulled by britain could be turned upon the yankees.
subsequent clashes would create a smoke screen diversion behind which foreign powers could move into the americas and challenge the insolent monroe doctrine.
french schemers were likewise attracted by the hoary game of divide and conquer.
these actions would result they hoped in the fragmentation and militarization of america.
dangers threatened from other foreign quarters.
british abolitionists were busily intriguing for a foothold in texas.
if successful in freeing the few blacks there they presumably would iname the nearby slaves of the south.
in addition british merchants regarded texas as a potentially important free trade area an offset to the tariff walled united states.
british manufacturers likewise perceived that those vast texas plains constituted one of the great cottonproducing areas of the future.
an independent texas would relieve british looms of their chronic depen dence on american ber a supply that might be cut off in time of crisis by embargo or war.
the belated texas nuptials partly because of the fears aroused by british schemers texas became a leading issue in the presidential campaign of 1844.
the foes of expansion assailed annexation while southern hotheads cried texas or disunion the pro expansion democrats under james k polk nally triumphed over the whigs under henry clay the hardy perennial candidate.
lame duck president tyler thereupon interpreted the narrow democratic victory with dubious accuracy as a mandate to acquire texas.
eager to crown his troubled administration with this splendid prize tyler deserves much of the credit for shepherding texas into the fold.
many conscience whigs feared that texas in the union would be red meat to nourish the lusty slave power aware of their opposition tyler despaired of securing the needed two thirds vote for a treaty in the senate.
he therefore arranged for annexation by a joint resolution.
this solution required only a simple majority in both houses of congress.
after a spirited debate the resolution passed early in 1845 and texas was formally invited to become the twenty eighth star on the american ag.
mexico angrily charged that the americans had despoiled it of texas.
this was to some extent true in 1836 but hardly true in 1845 for the area was no longer thomas j.
green 1801 1863 who served as a brigadier general in the texas revolution published a pamphlet in 1845 to make the case for american support of an independent texas both the government of the united states and texas are founded upon the same political code.
they have the same common origin the same language laws and religion the same pursuits and interests and though they may remain independent of each other as to government they are identied in weal and wo they will ourish side by side and the blight which affects the one will surely reach the other.
trouble over texas mexicos to be despoiled of.
as the years stretched out realistic observers could see that the mexicans would not be able to reconquer their lost province.
yet mexico left the texans dangling by denying their right to dispose of themselves as they chose.
by 1845 the lone star republic had become a danger spot inviting foreign intrigue that menaced the american people.
the continued existence of texas as an independent nation threatened to involve the united states in a series of ruinous wars both in america and in europe.
americans were in a lick all creation mood when they sang uncle sams song to miss texas if mexy backd by secret foes still talks of getting you gal why we can lick em all you know and then annex em too gal.
what other power would have spurned the imperial domain of texas.
the bride was so near so rich so fair so willing.
whatever the peculiar circumstances of the texas revolution the united states can hardly be accused of unseemly haste in achieving annexation.
nine long years were surely a decent wait between the beginning of the courtship and the consummation of the marriage.
oregon fever populates oregon the so called oregon country was an enormous wilderness.
it sprawled magnicently west of the rockies to the pacic ocean and north of cal i fornia to the line of 54 40 the present southern tip of the alaska panhandle.
all or substantial parts of this immense area were claimed at one time or another by four nations spain russia britain and the united states.
two claimants dropped out of the scramble.
spain though the rst to raise its banner in oregon bartered away its claims to the united states in the so called florida treaty of 1819.
russia retreated to the line of 54 40 by the treaties of 1824 and 1825 with america and britain.
these two remaining rivals now had the eld to themselves.
british claims to oregon were strong at least to that portion north of the columbia river.
they were based squarely on prior discovery and exploration on treaty rights and on actual occupation.
the most important colonizing agency was the far ung hudsons bay company which was trading protably with the indians of the pacic northwest for furs.
st louis in 1846 by henry lewis thousands of pioneers like these pulling away from st louis said farewell to civilization as they left the mississippi river and headed across the untracked plains to oregon in the 1840s.
chapter 17 manifest destiny and its legacy 1841 1848 pundt and koenigs general store omaha city nebraska 1858 settlers bound for colorado and california stopped here for provisions before venturing farther west across the open plains.
americans for their part could also point pridefully to exploration and occupation.
captain robert gray in 1792 had stumbled upon the majestic columbia river which he named after his ship and the famed lewis and clark expedition of 1804 1806 had ranged overland through the oregon country to the pacic.
this shaky american toehold was ultimately strength in winning oregon the americans had great faith in their procreative powers.
boasted one congressman in 1846 our people are spreading out with the aid of the american multiplication table.
go to the west and see a young man with his mate of eighteen after the lapse of thirty years visit him again and instead of two you will nd twenty two.
that is what i call the american multiplication table.
ened by the presence of missionaries and other settlers a sprinkling of whom reached the grassy willamette river valley south of the columbia in the 1830s.
these men and women of god in saving the soul of the indian were instrumental in saving the soil of oregon for the united states.
they stimulated interest in a faraway domain that countless americans had earlier assumed would not be settled for centuries.
scattered american and british pioneers in oregon continued to live peacefully side by side.
at the time of negotiating the anglo american convention of 1818 see pp.
265 266 the united states had sought to divide the vast domain at the forty ninth parallel.
but the british who regarded the columbia river as the st lawrence of the west were unwilling to yield this vital artery.
a scheme for peaceful joint occupation was thereupon adopted pending future settlement.
the handful of americans in the willamette valley was suddenly multiplied in the early 1840s when oregon fever seized hundreds of restless pioneers.
in increasing numbers their creaking covered wagons jolted over the two thousand mile oregon trail as the the oregon controversy human rivulet widened into a stream.
by 1846 about ve thousand americans had settled south of the columbia river some of them tough border rufans expert with bowie knife and revolving pistol the british in the face of this rising torrent of humanity could muster only seven hundred or so subjects north of the columbia.
losing out lopsidedly in the population race they were beginning to see the wisdom of arriving at a peaceful settlement before being engulfed by their neighbors.
a curious fact is that only a relatively small segment of the oregon country was in actual controversy by 1845.
the area in dispute consisted of the rough quadrangle between the columbia river on the south and east the forty ninth parallel on the north and the pacic ocean on the west.
britain had repeatedly offered the line of the columbia america had repeatedly offered the forty ninth parallel.
the whole fateful issue was now tossed into the presidential election of 1844 where it was largely overshadowed by the question of annexing texas.
for manifest destiny the two major parties nominated their presidential standard bearers in may 1844.
ambitious but often frustrated henry clay easily the most popular man in the country was enthusiastically chosen by the whigs at baltimore.
the democrats meeting there later seemed hopelessly deadlocked.
van burens opposition to annexing texas ensured his defeat given domination of the party by southern expansionists.
finally party delegates trotted out and nominated james k polk of tennessee americas rst dark horse or surprise presidential candidate.
polk may have been a dark horse but he was hardly an unknown or decrepit nag.
speaker of the house of representatives for four years and governor of tennessee for two terms he was a determined industrious ruthless and intelligent public servant.
sponsored by andrew jackson his friend and neighbor he was rather implausibly touted by democrats as yet another young hickory whigs attempted to jeer him into oblivion the average rate of progress in covered wagons was one to two miles an hour.
this amounted to about one hundred miles a week or about ve months for the entire journey.
thousands of humans in addition to horses and oxen died en route.
one estimate is seventeen deaths a mile for men women and children.
manifest destiny a caricature the spirit of manifest destiny swept the nation in the 1840s and threatened to sweep it to extremes.
this cartoon from 1848 lampoons proslavery democratic presidential candidate lewis cass as a veritable war machine bent on the conquest of territory ranging from new mexico to cuba and even peru.
with the taunt who is james k polk they soon found out.
the campaign of 1844 was in part an expression of the mighty emotional upsurge known as manifest destiny.
countless citizens in the 1840s and 1850s feeling a sense of mission believed that almighty god had manifestly destined the american people for a hemispheric career.
they would irresistibly spread their uplifting and ennobling democratic institutions over at least the entire continent and possibly over south america as well.
land greed and ideals empire and liberty were thus conveniently conjoined.
expansionist democrats were strongly swayed by the intoxicating spell of manifest destiny.
they came out at footedly in their platform for the reannexation of texas and the reoccupation of oregon all the way to 54 40.
outbellowing the whig logcabinites in the game of slogans they shouted all of oregon or none the slogan fifty four forty or ght was not coined until two years later in 1846.
they also condemned clay as a corrupt bargainer a dissolute the united states had given up its claims to texas in the so called florida purchase treaty adams ons treaty with spain in 1819 see p 267.
chapter 17 manifest destiny and its legacy 1841 1848 westward the course of empire takes its way this romantic tribute to the spirit of manifest destiny was commissioned by congress in 1860 and may still be seen in the capitol.
character and a slaveowner.
their own candidate polk also owned slaves a classic case of the pot calling the kettle black.
the whigs as noisemakers took no backseat.
they countered with such slogans as hooray for clay and polk slavery and texas or clay union and liberty they also spread the lie that a gang of tennessee slaves had been seen on their way to a southern market branded with the initials j k p james k polk.
on the crucial issue of texas the acrobatic clay tried to ride two horses at once.
the great compromiser appears to have compromised away the presidency when he wrote a series of confusing letters.
they seemed to say that while he personally favored annexing slaveholding texas an appeal to the south he also favored postponement an appeal to the north.
he might have lost more ground if he had not straddled but he certainly alienated the more ardent antislaveryites.
in the stretch drive dark horse polk nipped henry clay at the wire 170 to 105 votes in the electoral college and 1 338 464 to 1 300 097 in the popular column.
clay would have won if he had not lost new york state by a scant 5 000 votes.
there the tiny antislavery liberty party absorbed nearly 16 000 votes many of which would otherwise have gone to the unlucky kentuckian.
ironically the anti texas liberty party by spoiling clays chances and helping to ensure the elec tion of pro texas polk hastened the annexation of texas.
land hungry democrats ushed with victory proclaimed that they had received a mandate from the voters to take texas.
but a presidential election is seldom if ever a clear cut mandate on anything.
the only way to secure a true reection of the voters will is to hold a special election on a given issue.
the picture that emerged in 1844 was one not of mandate but of muddle.
what else could there have been when the results were so close the personalities so colorful and the issues so numerous including oregon texas the tariff slavery the bank and internal improvements.
yet this unclear mandate was interpreted by president tyler as a crystal clear charge to annex texas and he signed the joint resolution three days before leaving the white house.
polk the purposeful young hickory polk unlike old hickory jackson was not an impressive gure.
of middle height ve feet eight inches lean white haired worn long grayeyed and stern faced he took life seriously and drove himself mercilessly into a premature grave.
his burdens were increased by an unwillingness to delegate authority.
methodical and hard working but not bril polk takes command total against 130w 60n 120w 110w focus of dispute by 1846 300 km.
area of original dispute over oregon 300 mi.
alaska russia british north america canada 544 n.
treat y of 1818 mo b i a r oregon un ft country vancouver ta i ore ns a tr il ad a m s n willamette valley go 42n y ri pac i f ic ocean n ck ve u compromise line 1846 r r co 49n ro frase 50n n va liant he was shrewd narrow minded conscientious and persistent.
what he went for he fetched wrote a contemporary.
purposeful in the highest degree he developed a positive four point program and with remarkable success achieved it completely in less than four years.
one of polks goals was a lowered tariff.
his secretary of the treasury wispy robert j walker devised a tariff for revenue bill that reduced the average rates of the tariff of 1842 from about 32 percent to 25 percent.
with the strong support of low tariff southerners the walker tariff bill made its way through congress though not without loud complaints from the clayites especially in new eng land and the middle states who cried that american manufacturing would be ruined see table 17 1.
but these prophets of doom missed the mark.
the walker tariff of 1846 proved to be an excellent revenue producer largely because it was followed by boom times and heavy imports.
a second objective of polk was the restoration of the independent treasury unceremoniously dropped by the whigs in 1841.
pro bank whigs in congress raised a storm of opposition but victory at last rewarded the presidents efforts in 1846.
the third and fourth points on polks must list were the acquisition of cal i fornia and the settlement of the oregon dispute see map 17 2.
reoccupation of the whole of oregon had been promised northern democrats in the campaign of 1844.
but southern democrats once they had annexed texas rapidly cooled off.
polk himself a southerner had no intention of insisting on the 54 40 pledge of his own platform.
but feeling bound by the three offers of his predecessors to london he again proposed the compromise line of 49.
the british minister in washington on his own initiative brusquely spurned this olive branch.
the next move on the oregon chessboard was up to britain.
fortunately for peace the ministry began to experience a change of heart.
british anti expansionists r new eng land middle states west and northwest south and southwest for.
m i s s o u r i r yellow sto ne r united states k e region little eng landers were now persuaded that the columbia river was not after all the st lawrence of the west and that the turbulent american hordes might one day seize the oregon country.
why ght a hazardous war over this wilderness on behalf of an unpopular monopoly the hudsons bay company which had already furred out much of the area anyhow.
early in 1846 the british hat in hand came around and themselves proposed the line of 49.
president polk irked by the previous rebuff threw the decision squarely into the lap of the senate.
the senators speedily accepted the offer and approved the subsequent treaty despite a few diehard shouts of fifty four forty forever and every foot or not an inch the fact that the united states was then a month deep in a war with mexico doubtless inuenced the senates nal vote.
satisfaction with the oregon settlement among amer icans was not unanimous.
the northwestern states hotbed of manifest destiny and fty four fortyism joined the antislavery forces in condemning what they regarded as a base betrayal by the south.
why all colu m table 17 1 house vote on tariff of 1846 ons tr e a t y o f 18 1 sna 40n mexico map 17 2 the oregon controversy 1846 interactive map chapter 17 manifest destiny and its legacy 1841 1848 fort vancouver oregon country ca.
1846 fort vancouver on the columbia river near its conuence with the willamette river was the economic hub of the oregon country during the early years of settlement.
founded as a hudsons bay company fur trading outpost the fort was handed over to the americans when britain ceded the oregon country to the united states in 1846 of texas but not all of oregon.
because retorted the expansionist senator benton of missouri great britain is powerful and mexico is weak so polk despite all the campaign bluster got neither fty four forty nor a ght.
but he did get something that in the long run was better a reasonable compromise without a rie being raised.
misunderstandings with mexico faraway california was another worry of polks.
he and other disciples of manifest destiny had long coveted its verdant valleys and especially the spacious bay of san francisco.
this splendid harbor was widely regarded as americas future gateway to the pacic ocean.
the population of cal i fornia in 1845 was curiously mixed.
it consisted of perhaps thirteen thousand sunblessed spanish mexicans and as many as seventy ve thousand dispirited indians.
there were fewer than a thousand foreigners mostly americans some of whom had left their consciences behind them as they rounded cape horn.
given time these transplanted yankees might yet bring cal i fornia into the union by playing the texas game polk was eager to buy cal i fornia from mexico but relations with mexico city were dangerously embittered.
among other friction points the united states had claims against the mexicans for some 3 million in damages to american citizens and their property.
the revolution riddled regime in mexico had formally agreed to assume most of this debt but had been forced to default on its payments.
causes of the mexican war the landowner and his foreman by julio michard 1839 this california rancheros way of life was soon to be extinguished when california became part of the united states in 1848 and thousands of american gold seekers rushed into the state the following year.
a more serious bone of contention was texas.
the mexican government after threatening war if the united states should acquire the lone star republic had recalled its minister from washington following annexation.
diplomatic relations were completely severed.
deadlock with mexico over texas was further tightened by a question of boundaries.
during the long era of spanish mexican occupation the southwestern boundary of texas had been the nueces river.
but the expansive texans on rather far fetched grounds were claiming the more southerly rio grande instead.
polk for his part felt a strong moral obligation to defend texas in its claim once it was annexed.
the mexicans were far less concerned about this boundary quibble than was the united states.
in their eyes all of texas was still theirs although temporarily in revolt and a dispute over the two rivers seemed pointless.
yet polk was careful to keep american troops out of virtually all of the explosive no mans land between the nueces and the rio grande as long as there was any real prospect of peaceful adjustment.
the golden prize of cal i fornia continued to cause polk much anxiety.
disquieting rumors now known to have been ill founded were circulating that britain was about to buy or seize cal i fornia a grab that americans could not tolerate under the monroe doctrine.
in a last desperate throw of the dice polk dispatched john slidell to mexico city as minister late in 1845.
the new envoy among other alternatives was instructed to offer a maximum of 25 million for cal i fornia and territory to the east.
but the proud mexican people would not even permit slidell to present his insulting proposition.
american blood on american.
soil a frustrated polk was now prepared to force a showdown.
on january 13 1846 he ordered four thousand men under general zachary taylor to march from the nueces river to the rio grande provocatively near mexican forces.
polks presidential diary reveals that he expected at any moment to hear of a clash.
when none occurred after an anxious wait he informed his cabinet on may 9 1846 that he proposed to ask congress to declare war on the basis of 1 unpaid claims and 2 slidells rejection.
these at best were rather imsy pretexts.
two cabinet members spoke up and said that they would feel better satised if mexican troops should re rst.
that very evening as fate would have it news of bloodshed arrived.
on april 25 1846 mexican troops had crossed the rio grande and attacked general taylors command with a loss of sixteen americans killed or wounded.
chapter 17 manifest destiny and its legacy 1841 1848 polk further aroused sent a vigorous war message to congress.
he declared that despite all our efforts to avoid a clash hostilities had been forced upon the country by the shedding of american blood upon the american soil a patriotic congress overwhelmingly voted for war and enthusiastic volunteers cried ho for the halls of the montezumas and mexico or death inamed by the war fever even antislavery whig bastions melted and joined with the rest of the nation though they later condemned jimmy polks war as james russell lowell of massachusetts lamented massachusetts god forgive her shes akneelin with the rest.
in his message to congress polk was making history not writing it.
like many presidents with ambitious foreign policy goals he felt justied in bending the truth if that was what it took to bend a reluctant public toward war.
if he had been a historian polk would have explained that american blood had been shed on soil that the mexicans had good reason to regard as their own.
a gangling rough featured whig congressman from illinois one abraham lincoln introduced certain resolutions that requested information as to the precise spot on american soil where american blood had been shed.
he pushed his spot resolutions with such persistence that he came to be known as the spotty lincoln who could die of spotted fever the more extreme antislavery agitators of the north many of them whigs branded the president a liar polk the mendacious did polk provoke war.
cal i fornia was an imperative point in his program and mexico would not sell it at any price.
the only way to get it was to use force or wait for an internal american revolt.
yet delay seemed dangerous for the claws of the british lion might snatch the ripening cal i fornia fruit from the talons of the on june 1 1860 less than a year before he became president abraham lincoln 1809 1865 wrote the act of sending an armed force among the mexicans was unnecessary inasmuch as mexico was in no way molesting or menacing the united states or the people thereof and.
it was unconstitutional because the power of levying war is vested in congress and not in the president.
american eagle.
grievances against mexico were annoying yet tolerable in later years america endured even worse ones.
but in 1846 patience had ceased to be a virtue as far as polk was concerned.
bent on grasping cal i fornia by fair means or foul he pushed the quarrel to a bloody showdown.
both sides in fact were spoiling for a ght.
feisty americans especially southwestern expansionists were eager to teach the mexicans a lesson.
the mexicans in turn were burning to humiliate the bullies of the north possessing a considerable standing army heavily overstaffed with generals they boasted of invading the united states freeing the black slaves and lassoing whole regiments of americans.
they were hoping that the quarrel with britain over oregon would blossom into a full dress war as it came near doing and further pin down the hated yanquis.
a conquest of mexicos vast and arid expanses seemed fantastic especially in view of the bungling american invasion of canada in 1812.
both sides were red by moral indignation.
the mexican people could ght with the aming sword of righteousness for had not the insolent yankee picked a ght by polluting their soil.
many earnest americans on the other hand sincerely believed that mexico was the aggressor.
the mastering of mexico polk wanted cal i fornia not war.
but when war came he hoped to ght it on a limited scale and then pull out when he had captured the prize.
the dethroned mexican dictator santa anna then exiled with his teenage bride in cuba let it be known that if the american blockading squadron would permit him to slip into mexico he would sell out his country.
incredibly polk agreed to this discreditable intrigue.
but the doublecrossing santa anna once he returned to mexico proceeded to rally his countrymen to a desperate defense of their soil.
american operations in the southwest and in cal ifornia were completely successful see map 17 3.
in 1846 general stephen w kearny led a detachment of seventeen hundred troops over the famous santa fe trail from fort leavenworth to santa fe.
this sunbaked outpost with its drowsy plazas was easily captured.
but before kearny could reach cal i fornia the fertile province was won.
when war broke out captain john c frmont the dashing explorer just happened to be there with several dozen well armed men.
in help causes of the mexican war ing to overthrow mexican rule in 1846 he collaborated with american naval ofcers and with the local americans who had hoisted the banner of the short lived california bear flag republic.
general zachary taylor meanwhile had been spearheading the main thrust.
known as old rough and ready because of his iron constitution and incredibly unsoldierly appearance he sometimes wore a mexican straw hat he fought his way across the rio grande into mexico.
after several gratifying victories he reached buena vista.
there on february 22 23 1847 his weakened force of ve thousand men was attacked by some twenty thousand march weary troops under santa anna.
the mexicans were nally repulsed with extreme difculty and overnight zachary taylor became the hero of buena vista one kentuckian was heard to say that old zack would be elected president in 1848 by spontaneous combustion sound american strategy now called for a crushing blow at the enemys vitals mexico city.
general taylor though a good leader of modest sized forces could not win decisively in the semideserts of northern mexico.
the command of the main expedition which pushed inland from the coastal city of veracruz early in 1847 was entrusted to general wineld scott.
a handsome giant of a man scott had emerged as a hero from the war of 1812 and had later earned the nickname old fuss and feathers because of his resplendent uniforms and strict discipline.
he was severely handicapped in the mexican campaign by inadequate interactive map map 17 3 major campaigns of the mexican war 120w 100w 110w wisconsin t r m de n woo l1 sl o fl.
corpus christi at louisiana new orleans sc san luis potos mexican victory 20n n gulf of mexico monterrey sept 19 24 1846 mexico city sept 13 14 1847 tampico occupied nov 14 1846 sc mazatln u s movements t ot san ta anna mexican movements mexican cession 1848 ga miss.
fort sam houston buena vista feb 22 23 1847 u s naval blockade ala matamoros disputed area u s victory arkansas san antonio chihuahua 400 km.
tennessee r indian.
territory t e x as an donipha n ri o gr ea sacramento feb 28 1847 united states el brazito dec 25 1846 30n as kentucky r oc san san pasqual diego dec 6 1846 santa fe occupied aug 18 1846 valverde dec 12 1846 ns pi kearny sip mexico sis taos revolt feb 3 4 1847 ind.
missouri r ka los angeles san gabriel jan 8 1847 ra rny 1848 ar colo do a ke ohio m is bents fort n to ck sto fic paci illinois fort leavenworth monterey occupied july 7 1846 iowa fr yerba buena san francisco occupied july 10 1846 e r on platt ri 4 5 sou bear flag revolt june 14 1845 mic h ter r unorganized territory mis frmont 1846 oregon territory 1846 40n 90w mrida ott 1847 cerro gordo april 17 18 1847 veracruz occupied march 29 1847 chapter 17 manifest destiny and its legacy 1841 1848 numbers of troops by expiring enlistments by a more numerous enemy by mountainous terrain by disease and by political backbiting at home.
yet he succeeded in battling his way up to mexico city by september 1847 in one of the most brilliant campaigns in american military annals.
he proved to be the most distinguished general produced by his country between the revolution and the civil war.
fighting mexico for peace polk was anxious to end the shooting as soon as he could secure his territorial goals.
accordingly he sent along with scotts invading army the chief clerk of the state department nicholas p trist who among other weaknesses was af icted with an overuid pen.
trist and scott arranged for an armistice with santa anna at a cost of 10 000.
the wily dictator pocketed the bribe and then used the time to bolster his defenses.
war news from mexico by richard caton woodville the newfangled telegraph kept the nation closely informed of events in far off mexico.
negotiating a treaty with a sword in one hand and a pen in the other was ticklish business.
polk disgusted with his blundering envoy abruptly recalled trist.
the wordy diplomat then dashed off a sixty ve page letter explaining why he was not coming home.
the president was furious.
but trist grasping a eeting opportunity to negotiate signed the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo on february 2 1848 and forwarded it to washington.
the terms of the treaty were breathtaking.
they con rmed the american title to texas and yielded the enormous area stretching westward to oregon and the ocean and embracing coveted cal i fornia.
this total expanse including texas was about one half of mexico.
the united states agreed to pay 15 million for the land and to assume the claims of its citizens against mexico in the amount of 3 250 000 see makers of america the californios pp.
polk submitted the treaty to the senate.
although trist had proved highly annoying he had generally the peace settlement with mexico followed his original instructions.
and speed was imperative.
the antislavery whigs in congress dubbed mexican whigs or conscience whigs were denouncing this damnable war with increasing heat.
having secured control of the house in 1847 they were even threatening to vote down supplies for the armies in the eld.
if they had done so scott probably would have been forced to retreat and the fruits of victory might have been tossed away.
another peril impended.
a swelling group of expansionists intoxicated by manifest destiny was clamoring for all of mexico.
if america had seized it the nation would have been saddled with an expensive and vexatious policing problem.
farseeing southerners like calhoun alarmed by the mounting anger of antislavery agitators realized that the south would do well not to be too greedy.
the treaty was nally approved by the senate 38 to 14.
oddly enough it was condemned both by those opponents who wanted all of mexico and by opponents who wanted none of it.
victors rarely pay an indemnity especially after a costly con ict has been forced on them.
yet polk who had planned to offer 25 million before ghting the war arranged to pay 18 250 000 after winning it.
cynics have charged that the americans were pricked by guilty consciences apologists have pointed proudly to the anglo saxon spirit of fair play a decisive factor was the need for haste while there was still a responsible mexican government to carry out the treaty and before political foes in the united states notably the antislavery zealots sabotaged polks expansionist program.
early in 1848 the new york evening post demanded now we ask whether any man can coolly contemplate the idea of recalling our troops from the mexican territory we at present occupy.
resign this beautiful country to the custody of the ignorant cowards and proigate rufans who have ruled it for the last twenty ve years.
why humanity cries out against it.
civilization and christianity protest against this reux of the tide of barbarism and anarchy.
such was one phase of manifest destiny.
prot and loss in mexico as wars go the mexican war was a small one.
it cost some thirteen thousand american lives most of them taken by disease.
but the fruits of the ghting were enormous.
americas total expanse already vast was increased by about one third counting texas an addition even greater than that of the louisiana purchase.
a sharp stimulus was given to the spirit of manifest destiny for as the proverb has it the appetite comes with eating.
the mexican war proved to be the blood spattered schoolroom of the civil war.
the campaigns provided priceless eld experience for most of the ofcers destined to become leading generals in the forthcoming con ict including captain robert e lee and lieutenant ulysses s grant.
the military academy at west point founded in 1802 fully justied its existence through the well trained ofcers.
useful also was the navy which did valuable work in throwing a crippling blockade around mexican ports.
a new academy at annapolis had just been established by navy secretary and historian george bancroft in 1845.
the marine corps in existence since 1798 won new laurels and to this day sings in its stirring hymn about the halls of montezuma the army waged war without defeat and without a major blunder despite formidable obstacles and a half dozen or so achingly long marches.
chagrined british critics as well as other foreign skeptics reluctantly revised upward their estimate of yankee military prowess.
opposing armies moreover emerged with increased respect for each other.
the mexicans though poorly led fought heroically.
at chapultepec near mexico city the teenage lads of the military academy there los nios perished to a boy.
long memoried mexicans have never forgotten that their northern enemy tore away about half of their country.
the argument that they were lucky not to lose all of it and that they had been paid something for their land has scarcely lessened their bitterness.
the war also marked an ugly turning point in relations between the united states and latin america as a whole.
hitherto uncle sam had been regarded with some complacency even friendliness.
henceforth he was increasingly feared as the colossus of the north suspicious neighbors to the south condemned him as a greedy and untrustworthy bully who might next despoil them of their soil.
makers of america theafricanthe great californios american migration i n 1848 the united states swollen with the spoils of war reckoned the costs and benets of the con ict with mexico.
thousands of americans had fallen in battle and millions of dollars had been invested in a war machine.
for this expenditure of blood and money the nation was repaid with ample land and with people the former citizens of mexico who now became whether willingly or not americans.
the largest single addition to american territory in history the mexican cession stretched the united states from sea to shining sea.
it secured texas brought in vast tracts of the desert southwest and included the great prize the fruited valleys and port cities of cal i fornia.
there at the conclusion of the mexican war dwelled some thirteen thousand californios descendants of the spanish and mexican conquerors who had once ruled cal i fornia.
the spanish had rst arrived in cal i fornia in 1769 extending their new world empire and outracing russian traders to bountiful san francisco bay.
father junipero serra an enterprising franciscan friar soon mission san gabriel founded in 1771 established twenty one missions along the coast see map 17 4.
indians in the iron grip of the missions were encouraged to adopt christianity and were often forced to toil endlessly as farmers and herders in the process suffering disease and degradation.
these frequently maltreated mission indians occupied the lowest rungs on the ladder of spanish colonial society.
upon the loftiest rungs perched the californios.
pioneers from the mexican heartland of new spain they had trailed serra to cal i fornia claiming land and civil ofces in their new home.
yet even the proud californios had deferred to the all powerful franciscan missionaries until mexico threw off the spanish colonial yoke in 1821 whereupon the infant mexican government turned an anxious eye toward its frontier outpost.
mexico now emptied its jails to send settlers to the sparsely populated north built and garrisoned fortresses and most important transferred authority from the missions to secular that is governmental authorities.
this secularization program attacked and 38 n san rafael san francisco e s i san francisco solano san francisco de ass r r san jos a santa clara santa cruz san juan bautista san carlos borromeo soledad d a v a n e 36 n monterey san antonio de padua san miguel pac i f ic ocean mission presidio fort san luis obispo california indians dancing at the mission in san jos by sykes 1806 eroded the immense power of the missions and of their franciscan masters with their bawling herds of cattle debased indian workers millions of acres of land and lucrative foreign trade.
the frocked friars had commanded their efdoms so self condently that earlier reform efforts had dared to go no further than levying a paltry tax on the missions and politely requesting that the missionaries limit their oggings of indians to fteen lashes per week.
but during the 1830s the power of the missions weakened and much of their land and their assets were conscated by the californios.
vast ranchos ranches formed and from those citadels the californios ruled in their turn until the mexican war.
the californios glory faded in the wake of the american victory even though in some isolated places they clung to their political ofces for a decade or two.
overwhelmed by the inrush of anglo gold diggers some eighty seven thousand after the discovery at sutters mill in 1848 and undone by the waning of the pastoral economy the californios saw their recently acquired lands and their recently established political power slip through their ngers.
when the civil war broke out in 1861 so harshly did the word yankee ring in their ears that many californios supported the south.
by 1870 the californios brief ascendancy had utterly vanished a short and sad tale of riches to rags in la pursima concepcin 34 n santa ynez santa barbara el camino ral royal road san buenaventura san fernando rey 60 km.
san gabriel 60 mi.
122w n san juan capistrano san luis rey san diego de alcal 120w map 17 4 spanish missions and presidios interactive map the face of the anglo onslaught.
half a century later beginning in 1910 hundreds of thousands of young mexicans would ock into cal i fornia and the southwest.
they would enter a region liberally endowed with spanish architecture and artifacts bearing the names of spanish missions and californio ranchos.
but they would nd it a land dominated by anglos a place far different from that which their californio ancestors had settled so hopefully in earlier days.
chapter 17 manifest destiny and its legacy 1841 1848 storming the fortress of chapultepec mexico 1847 the american success at chapultepec contributed heavily to the nal victory over mexico.
one american commander lined up several irish american deserters on a gallows facing the castle and melodramatically dropped the trapdoors beneath them just as the united states ag was raised over the captured battlement.
according to legend the ag was raised by first lieutenant george pickett later immortalized as the leader of picketts charge in the civil war battle of gettysburg 1863.
most ominous of all the war rearoused the snarling dog of the slavery issue and the beast did not stop yelping until drowned in the blood of the civil war.
abolitionists assailed the mexican con ict as one provoked by the southern slavocracy for its own evil purposes.
as james russell lowell had hosea biglow drawl in his yankee dialect they jest want this californy sos to lug new slave states in to abuse ye an to scorn ye an to plunder ye like sin.
in line with lowells charge the bulk of the american volunteers were admittedly from the south and southwest.
but as in the case of the texas revolution the basic explanation was proximity rather than conspiracy.
quarreling over slavery extension also erupted on the oors of congress.
in 1846 shortly after the shooting started polk had requested an appropriation of 2 million with which to buy a peace.
representative david wilmot of pennsylvania fearful of the southern slavocracy introduced a fateful amendment.
it stipulated that slavery should never exist in any of the territory to be wrested from mexico.
the disruptive wilmot amendment twice passed the house but not the senate.
southern members unwilling to be robbed of prospective slave states fought the restriction tooth and nail.
antislavery men in congress and out battled no less bitterly for the exclusion of slaves.
the wilmot proviso never became federal law but it was eventually endorsed by the legislatures of all but one of the free states and it came to symbolize the burning issue of slavery in the territories.
in a broad sense the opening shots of the mexican war were the opening shots of the civil war.
president polk left the nation the splendid physical heritage of cal i fornia and the southwest but also the ugly moral heritage of an embittered slavery dispute.
mexico will poison us said the philosopher ralph waldo emerson.
even the great champion of the south john c calhoun had prophetically warned that mexico is to us the forbidden fruit.
the penalty of eating it would be to subject our institutions to political death mexicans could later take some satisfaction in knowing that the territory wrenched from them had proved to be a venomous apple of discord that could well be called santa annas revenge.
to learn more chronology canadian rebellion and caroline incident aroostook war breaks out over maine boundary antislavery liberty party orga nized harrison dies after four weeks in ofce tyler assumes presidency walker tariff independent treasury restored united states settles oregon dispute with britain united states and mexico clash over texas boundary kearny takes santa fe frmont conquers cal i fornia wilmot proviso passes house of representatives webster ashburton treaty 1846 mexican war polk defeats clay in manifest destiny election battle of buena vista scott takes mexico city united states annexes texas treaty of guadalupe hidalgo key terms tariff of 1842 397 caroline 399 creole 399 aroostook war 399 manifest destiny 403 fifty four forty or ght 403 liberty party 404 walker tariff 405 people to know spot resolutions 408 california bear flag republic 409 buena vista battle of 409 guadalupe hidalgo treaty of 410 conscience whigs 411 wilmot proviso 414 john tyler james k polk stephen w kearny john c frmont wineld scott nicholas p trist david wilmot to learn more iris engstrand et al culture y cultura consequences of the u s mexican war 1846 1848 1998 john mack faragher sugar creek life on the illinois prairie 1986 sam w haynes and christopher morris eds manifest destiny and empire american antebellum expansionism 1997 robert w johannsen to the halls of the montezumas the mexican war in the american imagination 1985 theodore j karamanski fur trade and exploration opening the far northwest 1821 1852 1983 james mccaffrey army of manifest destiny the american soldier in the mexican war 1992 dale morgan ed overland in 1846 diaries and letters of the california oregon trail 1963 martha sandweiss print and legend photography and the american west 2002 michael l tate indians and emigrants encounters on the overland trails 2006 jose na zoraida vzquez the united states and mexico 1985 richard bruce winders crisis in the southwest the united states mexico and the struggle over texas 2002 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at renewing the sectional struggle 1848 1854 secession.
peaceable secession.
sir your eyes and mine are never destined to see that miracle.
t he year 1848 highlighted by a rash of revolutions in europe was lled with unrest in america.
the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo had ofcially ended the war with mexico but it had initiated a new and perilous round of political warfare in the united states.
the vanquished mexicans had been forced to relinquish an enormous tract of real estate including texas cal ifornia and all the area between.
the acquisition of this huge domain raised anew the burning issue of extending slavery into the territories.
northern antislaveryites had rallied behind the wilmot proviso which atly prohibited slavery in any territory acquired in the mexican war.
southern senators had blocked the passage of the proviso but the issue would not die.
ominously debate over slavery in the area of the mexican cession threatened to disrupt the ranks of both whigs and democrats and split national politics along northsouth sectional lines.
the popular sovereignty panacea each of the two great political parties was a vital bond of national unity for each enjoyed powerful support in both north and south.
if they should be replaced by two purely sectional groupings the union would be in peril.
to politicians the wisest strategy seemed to be to sit on the lid of the slavery issue and ignore the boiling beneath.
even so the cover bobbed up and down ominously in response to the agitation of zealous northern abolitionists and impassioned southern re eaters anxious democrats were forced to seek a new standard bearer in 1848.
president polk broken in health by overwork and chronic diarrhea had pledged himself to a single term.
the democratic national convention at baltimore turned to an aging leader this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the election of 1848 general lewis cass a veteran of the war of 1812.
although a senator and diplomat of wide experience and considerable ability he was sour visaged and somewhat pompous.
his enemies dubbed him general gass and quickly noted that cass rhymed with jackass.
the democratic platform in line with the lid sitting strategy was silent on the burning issue of slavery in the territories.
but cass himself had not been silent.
his views on the extension of slavery were well known because he was the reputed father of popular sovereignty.
this was the doctrine that stated that the sovereign people of a territory under the general principles of the constitution should themselves determine the status of slavery.
popular sovereignty had a persuasive appeal.
the public liked it because it accorded with the democratic tradition of self determination.
politicians liked it because it seemed a comfortable compromise between the free soilers bid for a ban on slavery in the territories and southern demands that congress protect slavery in the territories.
popular sovereignty tossed the slavery problem into the laps of the people in the various territories.
advocates of the principle thus hoped to dissolve the most stubborn national issue of the day into a series of local issues.
yet popular sovereignty had one fatal defect it might serve to spread the blight of slavery.
political triumphs for general taylor the whigs meeting in philadelphia cashed in on the taylor fever they nominated frank and honest zachary taylor the hero of buena vista who had never held civil ofce or even voted for president.
henry clay the living embodiment of whiggism should logically have been nominated.
but clay had made too many speeches and too many enemies.
as usual the whigs pussyfooted in their platform.
eager to win at any cost they dodged all troublesome issues and merely extolled the homespun virtues of their candidate.
the self reliant old frontier ghter had not committed himself on the issue of slavery extension.
but as a wealthy resident of louisiana living on a sugar plantation he owned scores of slaves.
ardent antislavery men in the north distrusting both cass and taylor orga nized the free soil party.
aroused by the conspiracy of silence in the democratic and whig platforms the free soilers made no bones general zachary taylor 1784 1850 this democratic campaign cartoon of 1848 charges that taylors reputation rested on mexican skulls.
about their own stand.
they came out foursquare for the wilmot proviso and against slavery in the territories.
going beyond other antislavery groups they broadened their appeal by advocating federal aid for internal improvements and by urging free government homesteads for settlers.
the new party assembled a strange assortment of new fellows in the same political bed.
it attracted industrialists miffed at polks reduction of protective tariffs.
it appealed to democrats resentful of polks settling for part of oregon while insisting on all of texas a disparity that suggested a menacing southern dominance in the democratic party.
it harbored many northerners whose hatred was directed not so much at slavery as at blacks and who gagged at the prospect of sharing the.
chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 gatherings and in their ecstasy engaged in frenzies of rolling dancing barking and jerking.
many of the saved soon backslid into their former sinful ways but the revivals boosted church membership and stimulated a variety of humanitarian reforms.
responsive easterners were moved to do missionary work in the west with indians in hawaii and in asia.
methodists and baptists reaped the most abundant harvest of souls from the elds fertilized by revivalism.
both sects stressed personal conversion contrary to predestination a relatively democratic control of church affairs and a rousing emotionalism.
as a frontier jingle ran the devil hates the methodists because they sing and shout the best.
powerful peter cartwright 1785 1872 was the best known of the methodist circuit riders or traveling frontier preachers.
this ill educated but sinewy servant of the lord ranged for a half century from tennessee to illinois calling upon sinners to repent.
with bellowing voice and ailing arms he converted thousands of souls to the lord.
not only did he lash the devil with his tongue but with his sts he knocked out rowdies who tried to break up his meetings.
his christianity was de nitely muscular.
bell voiced charles grandison finney was the greatest of the revival preachers.
trained as a lawyer finney abandoned the bar to become an evangelist after a deeply moving conversion experience as a young man.
tall and athletically built finney held huge crowds spellbound with the power of his oratory and the pungency of his message.
he led massive revivals in rochester and new york city in 1830 and 1831.
finney preached a version of the old time religion but he was also an innovator.
he devised the anxious bench where repentant sinners could sit in full view of the in his lecture hindrances to revivals delivered in the 1830s charles grandison finney 1792 1875 proposed the excommunication of drinkers and slaveholders charles grandison finney 1792 1875 1834 the charismatic finney appears here at age fortytwo at the height of his career as an evangelist.
a mesmerizer of audiences he was said to have converted over a half million people.
in 1834 finney had just led a series of enormously successful revivals in cities along the erie canal.
the next year he would establish a theology department at the newly founded oberlin college in ohio where he helped train a generation of ministers and served as president from 1851 to 1866.
let the churches of all denominations speak out on the subject of temperance let them close their doors against all who have anything to do with the death dealing abomination and the cause of temperance is triumphant.
a few years would annihilate the trafc.
just so with slavery.
it is a great national sin.
it is a sin of the church.
the churches by their silence and by permitting slaveholders to belong to their communion have been consenting to it.
the church cannot turn away from this question.
it is a question for the church and for the nation to decide and god will push it to a decision.
the birth of the mormons congregation and he encouraged women to pray aloud in public.
holding out the promise of a perfect christian kingdom on earth finney denounced both alcohol and slavery.
he eventually served as president of oberlin college in ohio which he helped to make a hotbed of revivalist activity and abolitionism.
a key feature of the second great awakening was the feminization of religion in terms of both church membership and theology.
middle class women the wives and daughters of businessmen were the rst and most fervent enthusiasts of religious revivalism.
they made up the majority of new church members and they were most likely to stay within the fold when the tents were packed up and the traveling evangelists left town.
perhaps womens greater ambivalence than men about the changes wrought by the expanding market economy made them such eager converts to piety.
it helped as well that evangelicals preached a gospel of female spiritual worth and offered women an active role in bringing their husbands and families back to god.
that accomplished many women turned to saving the rest of society.
they formed a host of benevolent and charitable orga ni zations and spearheaded crusades for most if not all of the eras ambitious reforms.
denominational diversity revivals also furthered the fragmentation of religious faiths.
western new york where many descendants of new eng land puritans had settled was so blistered by sermonizers preaching hell re and damnation that it came to be known as the burned over district.
millerites or adventists who mustered several hundred thousand adherents rose from the superheated soil of the burned over district in the 1830s.
named after the eloquent and commanding william miller they interpreted the bible to mean that christ would return to earth on october 22 1844.
donning their go to meeting clothes they gathered in prayerful assemblies to greet their redeemer.
the failure of jesus to descend on schedule dampened but did not destroy the movement.
like the first great awakening the second great awakening tended to widen the lines between classes and regions.
the more prosperous and conser vative denominations in the east were little touched by revivalism and episcopalians presbyterians congregationalists and unitarians continued to rise mostly from the wealthier better educated levels of society.
methodists baptists and the members of the other new sects spawned by the swelling evangelistic fervor tended to come from less prosperous less learned communities in the rural south and west.
religious diversity further reected social cleavages when the churches faced up to the slavery issue.
by 1844 1845 both the southern baptists and the southern methodists had split with their northern brethren over human bondage.
the methodists came to grief over the case of a slaveowning bishop in georgia whose second wife added several household slaves to his estate.
in 1857 the presbyterians north and south parted company.
the secession of the southern churches foreshadowed the secession of the southern states.
first the churches split then the political parties split and then the union split.
a desert zion in utah the smoldering spiritual embers of the burned over district kindled one especially ardent ame in 1830.
in that year joseph smith a rugged visionary proud of his prowess at wrestling reported that he had received some golden plates from an angel.
when deciphered they constituted the book of mormon and the church of jesus christ of latter day saints the mormons was launched.
it was a native american product a new religion destined to spread its inuence worldwide.
after establishing a religious oligarchy smith ran into serious opposition from his non mormon neighbors rst in ohio and then in missouri and illinois.
his cooperative sect antagonized rank and le americans who were individualistic and dedicated to free enterprise.
the mormons aroused further anger by voting as a unit and by openly but understandably drilling their militia for defensive purposes.
accusations of polygamy likewise arose and increased in intensity for joseph smith was reputed to have several wives.
continuing hostility nally drove the mormons to desperate mea sures.
in 1844 joseph smith and his brother were murdered and mangled by a mob in carthage illinois and the movement seemed near collapse.
the falling torch was seized by a remarkable mormon moses named brigham young.
stern and austere in contrast to smiths charm and affability the barrelchested brigham young had received only eleven days of formal schooling.
but he quickly proved to be an aggressive leader an eloquent preacher and a gifted administrator.
determined to escape further persecution chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 mormon trekkers crossing the mississippi on the ice driven out of illinois after the murder of founder joseph smith in 1844 the mormons wintered near council bluffs iowa territory before beginning the long overland trek to utah.
young in 1846 1847 led his oppressed and despoiled latter day saints over vast rolling plains to utah as they sang come come ye saints overcoming pioneer hardships the mormons soon made the desert bloom like a new eden by means of ingenious and cooperative methods of irrigation.
the crops of 1848 threatened by hordes of crickets were saved when ocks of gulls appeared as if by a miracle to gulp down the invaders.
a monument to the seagulls stands in salt lake city today.
semiarid utah grew remarkably.
by the end of 1848 some ve thousand settlers had arrived and other large bands were to follow them see map 15 1.
many dedicated mormons in the 1850s actually made the thirteenhundred mile trek across the plains pulling two wheeled carts.
under the rigidly disciplined management of brigham young the community became a prosperous frontier theocracy and a cooperative commonwealth.
young married as many as twenty seven women some of them wives in name only and begot fty six children.
the population was further swelled by thousands of immigrants from europe where the mormons had established a ourishing missionary movement.
a crisis developed when the washington government was unable to control the hierarchy of brigham young who had been made territorial governor in 1850.
a federal army marched in 1857 against the mormons who harassed its lines of supply and rallied to die in their last dusty ditch.
fortunately the quarrel was polygamy was an issue of such consequence that it was bracketed with slavery in the republican national platform of 1856 it is both the right and the imperative duty of congress to prohibit in the territories those twin relics of barbarism polygamy and slavery.
oregon territory sn ak er.
fort bridger salt lake city utah territory c littlefield las vegas r th pla tte iss our i r iowa r winter quarters council bluffs.
platte r r carthage nauvoo illinois moab arkansas indian territory r lees ferry missouri tempe ipp arkansas luna mesa n.
gila r e tenn red r mormon trek 1846 1847 thatcher pomerene california trail st david n siss new mexico territory nd holbrook mis e a o c san bernardino i r tuba city barstow 120w ado olor fort laramie no m rio g ra i c p a c i f parowan beaver mountain meadow cedar city st george california minnesota territory unorganized territory fort hall 40n mormon station 90w 100w 110w washington territory mormon corridor texas 30n 200 mi.
fort map 15 1 the mormon world after joseph smiths murder at carthage in 1844 the mormons abandoned their thriving settlement at nauvoo illinois which had about twenty thousand inhabitants in 1845 and set out for the valley of the great salt lake then still part of mexico.
when the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo see p 410 in 1848 brought the vast utah territory into the united states the mormons rapidly expanded their desert colony which they called deseret especially along the mormon corridor that stretched from salt lake to southern california.
free schools for a free people tax supported primary schools were scarce in the early years of the republic.
they had the odor of pauperism about them since they existed chiey to educate the children of the poor the so called ragged schools.
advocates of free public education met stiff opposition.
a midwestern legislator cried that he wanted only this simple epitaph when he died here lies an enemy of public education mormon settlements non mormon settlement mexico nally adjusted without serious bloodshed.
the mormons later ran afoul of the antipolygamy laws passed by congress in 1862 and 1882 and their unique marital customs delayed statehood for utah until 1896.
proposed state of deseret boundaries as of 1853 200 km.
interactive map well to do conser vative americans gradually saw the light.
if they did not pay to educate other folkses brats the brats might grow up into a dangerous ignorant rabble armed with the vote.
taxation for education was an insurance premium that the wealthy paid for stability and democracy.
tax supported public education though miserably lagging in the slavery cursed south triumphed between 1825 and 1850.
hard toiling laborers wielded increased inuence and demanded instruction for their children.
most important was the gaining of manhood suffrage for whites in jacksons day.
a free vote cried aloud for free education.
a civilized nation that was both ignorant and free declared thomas jefferson never was and never will be the famed little red schoolhouse with one room one stove one teacher and often eight grades became chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 the country school by winslow homer 1871 stark and simple by latter day standards the one room schoolhouse nevertheless contributed richly to the development of the young republic.
the shrine of american democracy.
regrettably it was an imperfect shrine.
early free schools stayed open only a few months of the year.
schoolteachers most of them men in this era were too often ill trained ill tempered and ill paid.
they frequently put more stress on lickin with a hickory stick than on larnin these knights of the blackboard often boarded around in the community and some knew scarcely more than their older pupils.
they usually taught only the three rs readin ritin and rithmetic to many rugged americans suspicious of book larnin this was enough.
reform was urgently needed.
into the breach stepped horace mann 1796 1859 a brilliant and idealistic graduate of brown university.
as secretary of the massachusetts board of education he campaigned effectively for more and better schoolhouses longer school terms higher pay for teachers and an expanded curriculum.
his inuence radiated out to other states and impressive improvements were chalked up.
yet education remained an expensive luxury for many communities.
as late as 1860 the nation counted only about a hundred public secondary schools and nearly a million white adult illiterates.
black slaves in the south abraham lincoln 1809 1865 wrote of his education 1859 there were some schools so called in indiana but no qualication was ever required of a teacher beyond readin writin and cipherin to the rule of three.
there was absolutely nothing to excite ambition for education.
of course when i came of age i did not know much.
still somehow i could read write and cipher to the rule of three but that was all.
i have not been to school since.
the little advance i now have upon this store of education i have picked up from time to time under the pressure of necessity.
i was raised to work which i continued till i was twenty two.
the growth of higher education were legally forbidden to receive instruction in reading or writing and even free blacks in the north as well as the south were usually excluded from the schools.
educational advances were aided by improved textbooks notably those of noah webster 1758 1843 a yale educated connecticut yankee who was known as the schoolmaster of the republic his reading lessons used by millions of children in the nineteenth century were partly designed to promote patriotism.
webster devoted twenty years to his famous dictionary published in 1828 which helped to standardize the american language.
equally inuential was ohioan william h mcguffey 1800 1873 a teacher preacher of rare power.
his grade school readers rst published in the 1830s sold 122 million copies in the following decades.
mcguffeys readers hammered home lasting lessons in morality patriotism and idealism.
higher goals for higher learning higher education was likewise stirring.
the religious zeal of the second great awakening led to the planting of many small denominational liberal arts colleges chiey in the south and west.
too often they were academically anemic established more to satisfy local pride than genuinely to advance the cause of learning.
like their more venerable ivy draped brethren the new colleges offered a narrow tradition bound curriculum of latin greek mathematics and moral philosophy.
on new and old campuses alike there was little intellectual vitality and much boredom.
the rst state supported universities sprang up in the south beginning with north carolina in 1795.
federal land grants nourished the growth of state institutions of higher learning.
conspicuous among the early group was the university of virginia founded in 1819.
it was largely the brainchild of thomas jefferson who designed its beautiful architecture and who at times watched its construction through a telescope from his hilltop home.
he dedicated the university to freedom from religious or political shackles and modern languages and the sciences received unusual emphasis.
womens higher education was frowned upon in the early decades of the nineteenth century.
a womans place was believed to be in the home and training in needlecraft seemed more important than training in algebra.
in an era when the clinging vine bride was the ideal coeducation was regarded as frivolous.
preju an editorial in the popular womens magazine godeys ladys book in 1845 probably written by editor sarah josepha hale 1788 1879 argued for better education for women as a benet to all of society the mass of mankind are very ignorant and wicked.
wherefore is this.
because the mother whom god constituted the rst teacher of every human being has been degraded by men from her high ofce or what is the same thing been denied those privileges of education which only can enable her to discharge her duty to her children with discretion and effect.
if half the effort and expense had been directed to enlighten and improve the minds of females which have been lavished on the other sex we should now have a very different state of society.
dices also prevailed that too much learning injured the feminine brain undermined health and rendered a young lady unt for marriage.
the teachers of susan b anthony the future feminist refused to instruct her in long division.
womens schools at the secondary level began to attain some respectability in the 1820s thanks in part to the dedicated work of emma willard 1787 1870.
in 1821 she established the troy new york female seminary.
oberlin college in ohio jolted traditionalists in 1837 when it opened its doors to women as well as men.
oberlin had already created shock waves by admitting black students.
in the same year mary lyon established an outstanding womens school mount holyoke seminary later college in south hadley massachusetts.
mossback critics scoffed that theyll be educatin cows next adults who craved more learning satised their thirst for knowledge at private subscription libraries or increasingly at tax supported libraries.
house tohouse peddlers also did a lush business in feeding the public appetite for culture.
traveling lecturers helped to carry learning to the masses through the lyceum lecture associations which numbered about three thousand by 1835.
the lyceums provided platforms for speakers in such areas as science literature and moral philosophy.
talented talkers like ralph waldo emerson chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 the women graduates of the oberlin college class of 1855 oberlin was the rst coeducational institution of higher education in the united states accepting women in 1837 two years after it had welcomed african americans.
feminists continued to press for coeducation and by 1872 ninety seven american universities accepted women.
at some of these institutions however such as radcliffe college of harvard university and barnard college of columbia university women were educated in associated schools not alongside male students.
journeyed thousands of miles on the lyceum circuits casting their pearls of civilization before appreciative audiences.
magazines ourished in the pre civil war years but most of them withered after a short life.
the north american review founded in 1815 was the long lived leader of the intellectuals.
godeys ladys book founded in 1830 survived until 1898 and attained the enormous circulation for those days of 150 000.
it was devoured devotedly by millions of women many of whom read the dog eared copies of their relatives and friends.
an age of reform as the young republic grew reform campaigns of all types ourished in sometimes bewildering abundance.
some reformers were simply crackbrained cranks.
but most were intelligent inspired idealists usually touched by the re of evangelical religion then licking through the pews and pulpits of american churches.
the opti mistic promises of the second great awakening inspired countless souls to do battle against earthly evils.
these modern idealists dreamed anew the old puritan vision of a perfected society free from cruelty war intoxicating drink discrimination and ultimately slavery.
women were particularly prominent in these reform crusades especially in their own struggle for suffrage.
for many middle class women the reform campaigns provided a unique opportunity to escape the con nes of the home and enter the arena of public affairs.
in part the practical activist christianity of these reformers resulted from their desire to reaf rm traditional values as they plunged ever further into a world disrupted and transformed by the turbulent forces of a market economy.
mainly middle class descendants of pioneer farmers they were often blissfully unaware that they were witnessing the dawn of the industrial era which posed unprecedented problems and called for novel ideas.
they either ignored the factory workers for example or blamed their problems on bad habits.
with naive single mindedness reformers sometimes applied social reform in presenting her case to the massachusetts legislature for more humane treatment for the mentally ill dorothea dix 1802 1887 quoted from the notebook she carried with her as she traveled around the state lincoln.
a woman in a cage.
one idiotic subject chained and one in a close stall for seventeen years.
one often doubly chained hand and foot another violent several peaceable now.
the insane disadvantageously placed in the jail.
in the almshouse two females in stalls.
lie in wooden bunks lled with straw always shut up.
one of these subjects is supposed curable.
the overseers of the poor have declined giving her a trial at the hospital as i was informed on account of expense.
conventional virtue to refurbishing an older order while events hurtled them headlong into the new.
imprisonment for debt continued to be a nightmare though its extent has been exaggerated.
as late as 1830 hundreds of penniless people were languishing in lthy holes sometimes for owing less than one dollar.
the poorer working classes were especially hard hit by this merciless practice.
but as the embattled laborer won the ballot and asserted himself state legislatures gradually abolished debtors prisons.
criminal codes in the states were likewise being softened in accord with more enlightened european practices.
the number of capital offenses was being reduced and brutal punishments such as whipping and branding were being slowly eliminated.
a refreshing idea was taking hold that prisons should reform as well as punish hence reformatories houses of correction and penitentiaries for penance.
sufferers of so called insanity were still being treated with incredible cruelty.
the medieval concept had been that the mentally deranged were cursed with unclean spirits the nineteenth century idea was that they were willfully perverse and depraved to be treated only as beasts.
many crazed persons were chained in jails or poor houses with sane people.
into this dismal picture stepped a formidable new eng land teacher author dorothea dix 1802 1887.
a physically frail woman af icted with persistent lung trouble she possessed in nite compassion and willpower.
she traveled some sixty thousand miles in eight years and assembled her damning reports on insanity and asylums from rsthand observations.
though she the stepping mill auburn prison new york 1823 reformers like dorothea dix believed that idleness was a scourge and prescribed rigorous exercise regimens for prisoners.
at the experimental prison in auburn chained prisoners were obliged to turn this wheel for long periods of time.
chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 never raised her voice dixs message was loud and clear.
her classic petition of 1843 to the massachusetts legislature describing cells so foul that visitors were driven back by the stench turned legislative stomachs and hearts.
her persistent prodding resulted in improved conditions and in a gain for the concept that the demented were not willfully perverse but mentally ill agitation for peace also gained momentum in the pre civil war years.
in 1828 the american peace society was formed with a ringing declaration of war on war.
a leading spirit was william ladd who orated when his legs were so badly ulcerated that he had to sit on a stool.
his ideas were nally to bear some fruit in the international orga ni zations for collective security of the twentieth century.
the american peace crusade linked with a european counterpart was making promising progress by midcentury but it was set back by the bloodshed of the crimean war in europe and the civil war in america.
demon rum the old deluder the ever present drink problem attracted dedicated reformers.
custom combined with a hard and monotonous life led to the excessive drinking of hard liquor even among women clergymen and members of congress.
weddings and funerals all too often became disgraceful brawls and occasionally a drunken mourner would fall into the open grave with the corpse.
heavy drinking decreased the efciency of labor and poorly safeguarded machinery operated under the inuence of alcohol increased the danger of accidents occurring at work.
drunkenness also fouled the sanctity of the family threatening the spiritual welfare and physical safety of women and children.
after earlier and feebler efforts the american temperance society was formed in boston in 1826.
within a few years about a thousand local groups sprang into existence.
they implored drinkers to sign the temperance pledge and orga nized childrens clubs known as the cold water army temperance crusaders also made effective use of pictures pamphlets and lurid lecturers some of whom were reformed drunkards.
a popular temperance song ran weve done with our days of carousing our nights too of frolicsome glee for now with our sober minds choosing weve pledged ourselves never to spree.
temperance banner lithograph by kellogg and comstock ca.
1848 1850 among the many evils of alcohol reformers fulminated especially against its corrupting effects on family life.
here a young man is torn between a drink bearing temptress and a maiden who exemplies the virtues of womanly purity.
the most popular anti alcohol tract of the era was t s arthurs melodramatic novel ten nights in a barroom and what i saw there 1854.
it described in shocking detail how a once happy village was ruined by sam slades tavern.
the book was second only to stowes uncle toms cabin as a best seller in the 1850s and it enjoyed a highly successful run on the stage.
its touching theme song began with the words of a little girl father dear father come home with me now the clock in the belfry strikes one.
early foes of demon drink adopted two major lines of attack.
one was to stiffen the individuals will to resist the wiles of the little brown jug.
the moderate the feminist movement takes form reformers thus stressed temperance rather than teetotalism or the total elimination of intoxicants.
but less patient zealots came to believe that temptation should be removed by legislation.
prominent among this group was neal s dow of maine a blue nosed reformer who as a mayor of portland and an employer of labor had often witnessed the debauching effect of alcohol to say nothing of the cost to his pocketbook of work time lost because of drunken employees.
dow the father of prohibition sponsored the so called maine law of 1851.
this drastic new statute hailed as the law of heaven americanized prohibited the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquor.
other states in the north followed maines example and by 1857 about a dozen had passed various prohibitory laws.
but these gures are deceptive for within a decade some of the statutes were repealed or declared unconstitutional if not openly outed.
it was clearly impossible to legislate thirst for alcohol out of existence especially in localities where public sentiment was hostile.
yet on the eve of the civil war the prohibitionists had registered inspiring gains.
there was much less drinking among women than earlier in the century and probably much less per capita consumption of hard liquor.
women in revolt when the nineteenth century opened it was still a mans world both in america and in europe.
a wife was supposed to immerse herself in her home and subordinate herself to her lord and master her husband.
like black slaves she could not vote like black slaves she could be legally beaten by her overlord with a reasonable instrument when she married she could not retain title to her property it passed to her husband.
yet american women though legally regarded as perpetual minors fared better than their european cousins.
french visitor alexis de tocqueville noted that in his native france rape was punished only lightly whereas in america it was one of the few crimes punishable by death.
despite these relative advantages women were still the submerged sex in america in the early part of the century.
but as the decades unfolded women increasingly surfaced to breathe the air of freedom and self determination.
in contrast to women in colonial times many women now avoided marriage altogether about 10 percent of adult women remained spinsters at the time of the civil war.
stellar suffragists elizabeth cady stanton left and susan b anthony right were two of the most persistent battlers for rights.
their national woman suffrage association fought for womens equality in courts and workplaces as well as at the polls.
gender differences were strongly emphasized in nineteenth century america largely because the burgeoning market economy was increasingly separating women and men into sharply distinct economic roles.
women were thought to be physically and emotionally weak but also artistic and re ned.
endowed with nely tuned moral sensibilities they were the keepers of societys conscience with special responsibility to teach the young how to be good and productive citizens of the republic.
men were considered strong but crude always in danger of slipping into some savage or beastly way of life if not guided by the gentle hands of their loving ladies.
the home was a womans special sphere the centerpiece of the cult of domesticity even reformers like catharine beecher who urged her sisters to seek employment as teachers endlessly celebrated the role chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 of the good homemaker.
but some women increasingly felt that the gloried sanctuary of the home was in fact a gilded cage.
they yearned to tear down the bars that separated the private world of women from the public world of men.
clamorous female reformers most of them white and well to do began to gather strength as the century neared its halfway point.
most were broad gauge battlers while demanding rights for women they joined in the general reform movement of the age ghting for temperance and the abolition of slavery.
like men they had been touched by the evangelical spirit that offered the promise of earthly reward for human endeavor.
neither foul eggs nor foul words when hurled by disapproving men could halt women heartened by these doctrines.
the womens rights movement was mothered by some arresting characters.
prominent among them was lucretia mott a sprightly quaker whose ire had been aroused when she and her fellow female delegates to the london antislavery convention of 1840 were not recognized.
elizabeth cady stanton a mother of seven who had insisted on leaving obey out of her marriage ceremony shocked fellow feminists by going so far as to advocate suffrage for women.
quaker reared susan b anthony a militant lecturer for womens rights fearlessly exposed herself to rotten garbage and vulgar epithets.
she became such a conspicuous advocate of female rights that progressive women every where were called suzy bs what it would be if some ladies had their own way the men in this antifeminist cartoon are sewing tending the baby and washing clothes.
the scene seemed absurd then but not a century later.
other feminists challenged the mans world.
dr elizabeth blackwell a pioneer in a previously forbidden profession for women was the rst female graduate of a medical college.
precocious margaret fuller edited a transcendentalist journal the dial and took part in the struggle to bring unity and republican government to italy.
she died in a shipwreck off new yorks fire island while returning to the united states in 1850.
the talented grimk sisters sarah and angelina championed antislavery.
lucy stone retained her maiden name after marriage hence the latter day lucy stoners who follow her example.
amelia bloomer revolted against the current street sweeping female attire by donning a short skirt with turkish trousers bloomers they were called amid much bawdy ridicule about bloomerism and loose habits a jeering male rhyme of the times jabbed gibbey gibbey gab the women had a confab and demanded the rights to wear the tights gibbey gibbey gab.
un inching feminists met in 1848 in a memorable womans rights convention at seneca falls new york.
the deant stanton read a declaration of sentiments which in the spirit of the declaration of independence declared that all men and women are created equal one resolution formally demanded the ballot for females.
amid scorn and denunciation from press and dress as reform mong the many social movements that swept nineteenth century america dress reform emerged in the 1840s as a critique of materialism and the constraints that fashion imposed on women.
medical professionals social reformers and transcendentalist intellectuals all argued that corsets constrict ing vital organs and voluminous skirts dragging along garbage strewn streets unfairly restricted womens mobility prevented women from bearing healthy children and even induced serious sickness and death.
the bloomer costume depicted in this illustration from harpers new monthly magazine in 1851 included turkish style trousers a jacket and a short overskirt that came to the knees.
named after reformer amelia bloomer 1818 1894 who publicized the new style in her magazine the lily the bloomer dress was rst adopted by utopian communities such as the owenites in new harmony indiana and the oneidans in new york.
radical social a critic henry david thoreau also advocated rational dress as a way of rejecting the articial desires created by industrialization.
but while applauded by reformers new style dress was viciously ridiculed by mainstream society as this print demonstrates.
critics claimed that women blurred gender distinctions by adopting male attire endangering the family and even american civilization.
after only a decade practitioners gave up wearing bloomers in public adopting plain and simplied clothing instead.
but owenites some mormons womens rights advocates farmers and travelers on the overland trail continued to wear bloomers in private.
how did dress reform intersect with other religious and social movements of the era.
why did bloomers upset so many antebellum americans.
have there been other historical eras when new styles of dress came to symbolize broader social change.
chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 when early feminist lucy stone 1818 1893 married fellow abolitionist henry b blackwell 1825 1909 in west brookeld massachusetts in 1855 they added the following vow to their nuptial ceremony while acknowledging our mutual affection by publicly assuming the relation of husband and wife yet in justice to ourselves and a great principle we deem it a duty to declare that this act on our part implies no.
promise of voluntary obedience to such of the present laws of marriage as refuse to recognize the wife as an independent rational being while they confer upon the husband an injurious and unnatural superiority.
pulpit the seneca falls meeting launched the modern womens rights movement.
the crusade for womens rights was eclipsed by the campaign against slavery in the decade before the civil war.
still any white male even an idiot over the age of twenty one could vote while no woman could.
yet women were gradually being admitted to colleges and some states beginning with mississippi in 1839 were even permitting wives to own property after marriage.
wilderness utopias bolstered by the utopian spirit of the age various reformers ranging from the high minded to the lunatic fringe set up more than forty communities of a cooperative communistic or communitarian nature.
seeking human betterment a wealthy and idealistic scottish textile manufacturer robert owen founded in 1825 a communal society of about a thousand people at new harmony indiana.
little harmony prevailed in the colony which in addition to hard working visionaries attracted a sprinkling of radicals work shy theorists and outright scoundrels.
the colony sank in a morass of contradiction and confusion.
brook farm in massachusetts comprising two hundred acres of grudging soil was started in 1841 with the brotherly and sisterly cooperation of about twenty intellectuals committed to the philosophy of transcen dentalism see p 361.
they prospered reasonably well until 1846 when they lost by re a large new communal building shortly before its completion.
the whole venture in plain living and high thinking then collapsed in debt.
the brook farm experiment inspired nathaniel hawthornes classic novel the blithedale romance 1852 whose main character was modeled on the feminist writer margaret fuller.
a more radical experiment was the oneida community founded in new york in 1848.
it practiced free love complex marriage birth control through male continence or coitus reservatus and the eugenic selection of parents to produce superior offspring.
this curious enterprise ourished for more than thirty years largely because its artisans made superior steel traps and oneida community silver plate see makers of america the oneida community pp.
various communistic experiments mostly small in scale have been attempted since jamestown.
but in competition with democratic free enterprise and free land virtually all of them sooner or later failed or changed their methods.
among the longest lived sects were the shakers founded in eng land in 1747 and brought to america in 1774 by mother ann lee.
she moved her tiny band of followers to upstate new york the rst of a score or so of american shaker communities.
the shakers attained a membership of about six thousand in 1840 but since their monastic customs prohibited both marriage and sexual relations they were virtually extinct by 1940.
the dawn of scientic achievement early americans confronted with pioneering problems were more interested in practical gadgets than in pure science.
jefferson for example was a gifted amateur inventor who won a gold medal for a new type of plow.
noteworthy also were the writings of the mathematician nathaniel bowditch 1733 1838 on practical navigation and of the oceanographer matthew f maury 1806 1873 on ocean winds and currents.
these writers promoted safety speed and economy.
but as far as basic science was concerned americans were best known for borrowing and adapting the ndings of europeans.
yet the republic was not without scientic talent.
the most inuential american scientist of the rst half of the nineteenth century was professor benjamin sil utopian communities women planting corn by olof krans 1894 1896 the shakers emphasis on simplicity and ingenuity and their segregation of the sexes were captured in this painting of the bishop hill community in illinois.
the prongs on the poles measured the distance between rows and the knots on the rope showed the women how far apart to plant the corn.
liman 1779 1864 a pioneer chemist and geologist who taught and wrote brilliantly at yale college for more than fty years.
professor louis agassiz 1807 1873 a distinguished french swiss immigrant served for a quarter of a century at harvard college.
a pathbreaking student of biology who sometimes carried snakes in his pockets he insisted on original research and deplored the reigning overemphasis on memory work.
professor asa gray 1810 1888 of harvard college the columbus of american botany published over 350 books monographs and papers.
his textbooks set new standards for clarity and interest.
lovers of american bird lore owed much to the french descended naturalist john j audubon 1785 1851 who painted wildfowl in their natural habitat.
his magnicently illustrated birds of america attained considerable popularity.
the audubon society for the protection of birds was named after him although as a young man he shot much feathered game for sport.
medicine in america despite a steady growth of medical schools was still primitive by modern standards.
bleeding remained a common cure and a curse as well.
smallpox plagues were still dreaded and the an outbreak of cholera occurred in new york city in 1832 and a wealthy businessman philip hone 1780 1851 wrote in his diary for the fourth of july the alarm about the cholera has prevented all the usual jollication under the public authority.
the board of health reports today twenty new cases and eleven deaths since noon yesterday.
the disease is here in all its violence and will increase.
god grant that its ravages may be conned and its visit short.
makers of america oneida thethe great africancommunity american migration j ohn humphrey noyes 1811 1886 the founder of the oneida community repudiated the old puritan doctrines that god was vengeful and that sinful mankind was doomed to dwell in a vale of tears.
noyes believed in a benign deity in the sweetness of human nature and in the possibility of a perfect christian community on earth.
the more we get acquainted with god he declared the more we shall nd it our special duty to be happy that sunny thought was shared by many earlynineteenth century american utopians a word derived from greek that slyly combines the meanings of a good place and no such place.
but noyes added some wrinkles of his own.
the key to happiness he taught was the suppression of selshness.
true christians should possess no private property nor should they indulge in exclusive emotional relationships which bred jealousy quarreling and covetousness.
material things and sexual partners alike noyes preached should be shared.
marriage should not be monogamous.
instead all members of the community should be free to love one another in complex marriage noyes called his system bible communism tall and slender with piercing blue eyes and reddish hair the charismatic noyes began voicing these ideas in his hometown of putney vermont in the 1830s.
he soon attracted a group of followers who called themselves the putney association a kind of extended family whose members farmed ve hundred acres by day and sang and prayed together in the evenings.
they sustained their spiritual intensity by submitting to mutual criticism in which the person being criticized would sit in silence while other members frankly discussed his or her faults and merits.
i was metaphorically stood upon my head and allowed to drain till all the self righteousness had dripped out of me one man wrote of his experience with mutual criticism.
the putney association also indulged in sexual practices that outraged the surrounding communitys sense of moral propriety.
indicted for adultery in 1847 noyes led his followers to oneida in the supposedly more tolerant region of new yorks burned over district the following year.
several af liated communities were also established the most important of which was at wallingford connecticut.
the oneidans struggled in new york until they were joined in the 1850s by sewell newhouse a clever inventor of steel animal traps.
the manufacture of newhouses traps and other products such as sewing silk and various types of bags put the oneida community on a sound nancial footing.
by the 1860s oneida was a ourishing commonwealth of some three hundred people.
men and women shared equally in all the communitys tasks from eld to factory to kitchen.
the members lived under one roof in mansion house a sprawling building that boasted central heating a wellstocked library and a common dining hall as well as the big hall where members gathered nightly for prayer and entertainment.
children at the age of three were removed from direct parental care and raised communally in the childrens house until the age of thirteen or fourteen when they took up jobs in the communitys industries.
they imbibed their religious doctrines with their school lessons i spirit with me never shall stay we spirit makes us happy and gay.
oneidas apparent success fed the utopian dreams of others and for a time it became a great tourist attraction.
visitors from as far away as europe came to picnic on the shady lawns speculating on the sexual secrets that mansion house guarded while their hosts fed them strawberries and cream and entertained them with music.
but eventually the same problems that had driven noyes and his band from vermont began to shadow their lives at oneida.
their new york neighbors grew increasingly horried at the oneidans licentious sexual practices including the selective breeding program by which the community matched mates and gave permission or orders to procreate without regard to the niceties of matrimony.
it was somewhat startling to me one straight laced visitor commented to hear miss speak about her baby yielding to their neighbors criticisms the oneidans gave up complex marriage in 1879.
soon other communistic practices withered away as well.
the communal dining hall became a restaurant where meals were bought with money something many oneidans had never used before.
in 1880 the oneidans abandoned communism altogether and became a joint stock company specializing in the manufacture of silver tableware.
led by noyess son pierrepont oneida community ltd grew into the worlds leading manufacturer of stainless steel knives forks and spoons with annual sales by the 1990s of some half a billion dollars.
as for mansion house it still stands in central new york but it now serves as a museum and private residence.
the big hall is the site of oneida ltd s annual shareholders meetings.
ironically what grew from noyess religious vision was not utopia but a mighty capitalist corporation.
mansion house a sprawling resplendent building it formed the center of the oneida communitys life and was a stunning specimen of mid nineteenth century architectural and engineering achievement.
the founding father john humphrey noyes 1811 1886.
a bag bee on the lawn of mansion house the edgling community supported itself in part by manufacturing bags.
men and women shared equally in the bag making process.
chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 left passenger pigeons by john audubon right john j audubon 1785 1851 an astute naturalist and a gifted artist audubon drew the birds of america in loving detail.
ironically he had to go to britain in the 1820s to nd a publisher for his pioneering depictions of the unique beauty of american wildlife.
born in haiti and educated in france he achieved fame as americas greatest ornithologist.
the passenger pigeons shown here once numbered in the billions in north america but were extinct by 1900 thanks to aggressive hunting and trapping.
this was perhaps the greatest mass slaughter of wildlife in history.
yellow fever epidemic of 1793 in philadelphia took several thousand lives.
bring out your dead was the daily cry of the corpse wagon drivers.
people every where complained of ill health malaria the rheumatics the miseries and the chills.
illness often resulted from improper diet hurried eating perspiring and cooling off too rapidly and ignorance of germs and sanitation.
we was sick every fall regular wrote the mother of future president james gareld.
life expectancy was still dismayingly short about forty years for a white person born in 1850 and less for blacks.
the suffering from decayed or ulcerated teeth was enormous tooth extraction was often practiced by the muscular village blacksmith.
self prescribed patent medicines were common one dose for people two for horses and included robertsons infallible worm destroying lozenges.
fad diets proved popular including the whole wheat bread and crackers regimen of sylvester graham.
among home remedies was the rubbing of tumors with dead toads.
the use of medicine by regular doctors was often harmful and dr oliver wendell holmes declared in 1860 that if the medicines as then employed were thrown into the sea humans would be better off and the sh worse off.
victims of surgical operations were ordinarily tied down often after a stiff drink of whiskey.
the surgeon then sawed or cut with breakneck speed undeterred by the piercing shrieks of the patient.
a priceless boon landmarks in painting and music early advertising hawkers of patent medicines pioneered the techniques of modern advertising.
here a painkiller is promoted by invoking the totally irrelevant image of molly pitcher.
the legendary subject of a poem by john greenleaf whittier pitcher reputedly took her fallen husbands place at a cannon during the revolutionary war battle of monmouth in 1778.
what this exploit had to do with anesthetics is by no means clear but it supposedly sold the product.
for medical progress came in the early 1840s when several american doctors and dentists working independently successfully employed laughing gas and ether as anesthetics.
artistic achievements architecturally america contributed little of note in the rst half of the century.
the rustic republic still under pressure to erect shelters in haste was continu ing to imitate european models.
public buildings and other important structures followed greek and roman lines which seemed curiously out of place in a wilderness setting.
a remarkable greek revival came between 1820 and 1850 partly stimulated by the heroic efforts of the greeks in the 1820s to wrest independence from the terrible turk about midcentury strong interest developed in a revival of gothic forms with their emphasis on pointed arches and large windows.
talented thomas jefferson architect of revolution was probably the ablest american architect of his generation.
he brought a classical design to his virginia hilltop home monticello perhaps the most stately mansion in the nation.
the quadrangle of the university of virginia at charlottesville another of jeffersons creations remains one of the nest examples of classical architecture in america.
the art of painting continued to be handicapped.
it suffered from the dollar grabbing of a raw civilization from the hustle bustle and absence of leisure from the lack of a wealthy class to sit for portraits and then pay for them.
some of the earliest painters were forced to go to eng land where they found both training and patrons.
america exported artists and imported art.
painting like the theater also suffered from the puritan prejudice that art was a sinful waste of time and often obscene.
john adams boasted that he would not give a sixpence for a bust of phidias or a painting by raphael when edward everett the eminent boston scholar and orator placed a statue of apollo in his home he had its naked limbs draped.
competent painters nevertheless emerged.
gilbert stuart 1755 1828 a spendthrift rhode islander and one of the most gifted of the early group wielded his brush in britain in competition with the best artists.
he produced several portraits of washington all of them somewhat idealized and dehumanized.
truth to tell by the time he posed for stuart the famous general had lost his natural teeth and some of the original shape of his face.
charles willson peale 1741 1827 a marylander painted some sixty portraits of washington who patiently sat for about fourteen of them.
john trumbull 1756 1843 who had fought in the revolutionary war recaptured its scenes and spirit on scores of striking canvases.
during the nationalistic upsurge after the war of 1812 american painters of portraits turned increasingly from human landscapes to romantic mirrorings of local landscapes.
the hudson river school excelled in this type of art.
at the same time portrait painters gradually encountered some unwelcome competition chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 the oxbow by thomas cole 1836 this rendering of the oxbow of the connecticut river near northampton massachusetts after a thunderstorm is considered one of coles 1801 1848 masterpieces.
a leader of the so called hudson river school cole wandered on foot over the mountains and rivers of new york state and new england making pencil studies from which he painted in his studio during the winter.
he and other members of this group transformed their realistic sketches into lyrical romantic celebrations of the beauty of the american wilderness.
from the invention of a crude photograph known as the daguerreotype perfected about 1839 by a frenchman louis daguerre.
music was slowly shaking off the restraints of colonial days when the prim puritans had frowned upon nonreligious singing.
rhythmic and nostalgic darky tunes popularized by whites were becoming immense hits by midcentury.
special favorites were the uniquely american minstrel shows featuring white actors with blackened faces.
dixie later adopted by the confederates as their battle hymn was written in 1859 ironically in new york city by an ohioan.
the most famous black songs also ironically came from a white pennsylvanian stephen c foster 1826 1864.
his one excursion into the south occurred in 1852 after he had published old folks at home foster made a valuable contribution to american folk music by capturing the plaintive spirit of the slaves.
an odd and pathetic gure he nally lost both his art and his popularity and died in a charity ward after drowning his sorrows in drink.
the blossoming of a national literature who reads an american book sneered a british critic of 1820.
the painful truth was that the nations roughhewn pioneering civilization gave little encouragement to polite literature.
much of the reading matter was imported or plagiarized from britain.
busy conquering a continent the americans poured most of their creative efforts into practical outlets.
praiseworthy were political essays like the federalist of hamilton jay and madison pamphlets like tom paines common sense and political orations like the masterpieces of daniel webster.
in the category of nonreligious books published before 1820 benjamin franklins autobiography 1818 is one of the few that achieved genuine distinction.
his narrative is a classic in its simplicity clarity and inspirational quality.
even so it records only a fragment of old bens long fruitful and amorous life.
leading transcendentalists a genuinely american literature received a strong boost from the wave of nationalism that followed the war of independence and especially the war of 1812.
by 1820 the older seaboard areas were sufciently removed from the survival mentality of tree chopping and butter churning that literature could be supported as a profession.
the knickerbocker group in new york blazed brilliantly across the literary heavens thus enabling america for the rst time to boast of a literature to match its magnicent landscapes.
washington irving 1783 1859 born in new york city was the rst american to win international recognition as a literary gure.
steeped in the traditions of new netherland he published in 1809 his knickerbockers history of new york with its amusing caricatures of the dutch.
when the family business failed irving was forced to turn to the goose feather pen.
in 1819 1820 he published the sketch book which brought him immediate fame at home and abroad.
combining a pleasing style with delicate charm and quiet humor he used eng lish as well as american themes and included such immortal dutch american tales as rip van winkle and the legend of sleepy hollow europe was amazed to nd at last an american with a feather in his hand not in his hair.
later turning to spanish locales and biography irving did much to interpret america to europe and europe to america.
he was said the englishman william thackeray the rst ambassador whom the new world of letters sent to the old james fenimore cooper 1789 1851 was the rst american novelist as washington irving was the rst general writer to gain world fame and to make new world themes respectable.
marrying into a wealthy family he settled down on the frontier of new york.
reading one day to his wife from an insipid eng lish novel cooper remarked in disgust that he could write a better book himself.
his wife challenged him to do so and he did.
after an initial failure cooper launched out upon an illustrious career in 1821 with his second novel the spy an absorbing tale of the american revolution.
his stories of the sea were meritorious and popular but his fame rests most enduringly on the leatherstocking tales.
a dead eye rieman named natty bumppo one of natures noblemen meets with indians in stirring adventures like the last of the mohicans.
james fenimore coopers novels had a wide sale among europeans some of whom came to think of all american people as born with tomahawk in hand.
actually cooper was exploring the viability and destiny of americas republican experiment by contrasting the unde led values of natural men children of the wooded wilderness with the articiality of modern civilization.
a third member of the knickerbocker group in new york was the belated puritan william cullen bryant 1794 1878 transplanted from massachusetts.
at age sixteen he wrote the meditative and melancholy thanatopsis published in 1817 which was one of the rst high quality poems produced in the united states.
critics could hardly believe that it had been written on this side of the water although bryant continued with poetry he was forced to make his living by editing the inuential new york evening post.
for over fty years he set a model for journalism that was dignied liberal and conscientious.
trumpeters of transcendentalism a golden age in american literature dawned in the second quarter of the nineteenth century when an amazing outburst shook new england.
one of the mainsprings of this literary owering was transcendentalism especially around boston which preened itself as the athens of america the transcendentalist movement of the 1830s resulted in part from a liberalizing of the straightjacket puritan theology.
it also owed much to foreign inuences including the german romantic philosophers and the religions of asia.
the transcendentalists rejected the prevailing theory derived from john locke that all knowledge comes to the mind through the senses.
truth rather transcends the senses it cannot be found by observation alone.
every person possesses an inner light that can illuminate the highest truth and put him or her in direct touch with god or the oversoul these mystical doctrines of transcendentalism deed precise de nition but they underlay concrete beliefs.
foremost was a stiff backed individualism in matters religious as well as social.
closely associated was a commitment to self reliance self culture and self discipline.
these traits naturally bred hostility to authority and to formal institutions of any kind as well as to all conventional wisdom.
finally came exaltation of the dignity of the individual whether black or white the mainspring of a whole array of humanitarian reforms.
best known of the transcendentalists was bostonborn ralph waldo emerson 1803 1882.
tall slender chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 ralph waldo emerson 1803 1882 public lecturing provided a way for emerson to put his ideas before a larger audience than his readers and to support his family.
his philosophical observations included such statements as the less government we have the better the fewer laws and the less conded power to be great is to be misunderstood every hero becomes a bore at last shallow men believe in luck and when you strike a king you must kill him and intensely blue eyed he mirrored serenity in his noble features.
trained as a unitarian minister he early forsook his pulpit and ultimately reached a wider audience by pen and platform.
he was a never failing favorite as a lyceum lecturer and for twenty years took a western tour every winter.
perhaps his most thrilling public effort was a phi beta kappa address the amer in 1849 henry david thoreau 1817 1862 published resistance to civil government later renamed civil disobedience asserting all men recognize the right of revolution the right to refuse allegiance to and to resist the government when its tyranny or its inefciency are great and endurable.
but almost all say that such is not the case now.
i say when a sixth of the population of a nation which has undertaken to be the refuge of liberty are slaves and a whole country is unjustly overrun and conquered by a foreign army and subjected to military law i think that it is not too soon for honest men to rebel and revolutionize.
what makes this duty more urgent is the fact that the country so overrun is not our own but ours is the invading army.
ican scholar delivered at harvard college in 1837.
this brilliant appeal was an intellectual declaration of independence for it urged american writers to throw off european traditions and delve into the riches of their own backyards.
hailed as both a poet and a philosopher emerson was not of the highest rank as either.
he was more inuential as a practical philosopher and through his fresh and vibrant essays enriched countless thousands of humdrum lives.
catching the individualistic mood of the republic he stressed self reliance self improvement self condence optimism and freedom.
the secret of emersons popularity lay largely in the fact that his ideals reected those of an expanding america.
by the 1850s he was an outspoken critic of slavery and he ardently supported the union cause in the civil war.
henry david thoreau 1817 1862 was emersons close associate a poet a mystic a transcendentalist and a nonconformist.
condemning a government that supported slavery he refused to pay his massachusetts poll tax and was jailed for a night.
a gifted prose writer he is well known for walden or life in the woods 1854.
the book is a record of thoreaus two years of simple existence in a hut that he built on the edge of walden pond near concord massachusetts.
a stiff necked in the story probably apocryphal is that emerson visited thoreau at the jail and asked why are you here the reply came why are you not here prominent writers henry david thoreau 1817 1862 1856 thoreaus lyrical essays about nature made him a spiritual father of the later conservation movement.
dividualist he believed that he should reduce his bodily wants so as to gain time for a pursuit of truth through study and meditation.
thoreaus walden and his essay on the duty of civil disobedience exercised a strong inuence in furthering idealistic thought both in amer in 1876 the london saturday review referred to walt whitman 1819 1892 as the author of a volume of so called poems which were chiey remarkable for their absurd extravagances and shameless obscenity and who has since we are glad to say been little heard of among decent people.
in 1888 whitman wrote i had my choice when i commenced.
i bid neither for soft eulogies big money returns nor the approbation of existing schools and conventions.
i have had my say entirely my own way and put it unerringly on record the value thereof to be decided by time.
walt whitman 1819 1892 ca.
1860 whitmans love affair with america and the american people inspired later poets such as allen ginsberg and whitmanesque came to describe any poetry that celebrates the possibilities of american life and unbridled personal freedom.
ica and abroad.
his writings later encouraged mahatma gandhi to resist british rule in india and still later inspired the development of american civil rights leader martin luther king jr s thinking about nonviolence.
bold brassy and swaggering was the open collared gure of brooklyns walt whitman 1819 1892.
in his famous collection of poems leaves of grass 1855 he gave free rein to his gushing genius with what he called a barbaric yawp highly romantic emotional and unconventional he dispensed with titles stanzas rhymes and at times even regular meter.
he handled sex with shocking frankness although he laundered his verses in later editions and his book was banned in boston.
whitmans leaves of grass was at rst a nancial failure.
the only three enthusiastic reviews that it received were written by the author himself anonymously.
but in time the once withered leaves of grass revived and honored won for whitman an enormous following in both america and europe.
his fame increased immensely among whitmaniacs after his death.
leaves of grass gained for whitman the informal title poet laureate of democracy singing with chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 transcendental abandon of his love for the masses he caught the exuberant enthusiasm of an expanding amer ica that had turned its back on the old world all the past we leave behind we debouch upon a newer mightier world varied world fresh and strong the world we seize world of labor and the march pioneers.
o pioneers.
here at last was the native art for which critics had been crying.
glowing literary lights certain other literary giants were not actively associated with the transcendentalist movement though not completely immune to its inuences.
professor henry wadsworth longfellow 1807 1882 who for many years taught modern languages at harvard college was one of the most popular poets ever produced in america.
handsome and urbane he lived a generally serene life except for the tragic deaths of two wives the second of whom perished before his eyes when her dress caught re.
writing for the genteel classes he was adopted by the less cultured masses.
his wide knowledge of european literature supplied him with many themes but some of his most admired poems evangeline the song of hiawatha and the courtship of miles standish were based on american traditions.
immensely popular in europe longfellow was the only american ever to be honored with a bust in the poets corner of westminster abbey.
a ghting quaker john greenleaf whittier 1807 1892 with piercing dark eyes and swarthy complexion was the uncrowned poet laureate of the antislavery crusade.
less talented as a writer than longfellow he was vastly more important in inuencing social action.
his poems cried aloud against inhumanity injustice and intolerance against the outworn rite the old abuse the pious fraud transparent grown.
undeterred by insults and the stoning of mobs whittier helped arouse a callous america on the slavery issue.
a supreme conscience rather than a sterling poet or intellect whittier was one of the moving forces of his generation whether moral humanitarian or spiritual.
gentle and lovable he was preeminently the poet of human freedom.
many sided professor james russell lowell 1819 1891 who succeeded professor longfellow at harvard ranks as one of americas better poets.
he was also a distinguished essayist literary critic editor and diplomat a diffusion of talents that hampered his poetical output.
lowell is remembered as a political satirist in his biglow papers especially those of 1846 dealing with the mexican war.
written partly as poetry in the yankee dialect the papers condemned in blistering terms the alleged slavery expansion designs of the polk administration.
the scholarly dr oliver wendell holmes 1809 1894 who taught anatomy with a sparkle at harvard medical school was a prominent poet essayist novelist lecturer and wit.
a nonconformist and a fascinating conversationalist he shone among a group of literary lights who regarded boston as the hub of the universe his poem the last leaf in honor of the last white indian of the boston tea party came to apply to himself.
dying at the age of eighty ve he was the last leaf among his distinguished contemporaries.
two women writers whose work remains enormously popular today were also tied to this new england literary world.
louisa may alcott 1832 1888 grew up in concord massachusetts in the bosom of transcendentalism alongside neighbors emerson thoreau and fuller.
her philosopher father bronson alcott occupied himself more devotedly to ideas than earning a living leaving his daughter to write little women 1868 and other books to support her mother and sisters.
not far away in amherst massachusetts poet emily dickinson 1830 1886 lived as a recluse but created her own original world through precious gems of poetry.
in deceptively spare language and simple rhyme schemes she explored universal themes of nature love death and immortality.
although she refused during her lifetime to publish any of her poems when she died nearly two thousand of them were found among her papers and eventually made their way into print.
the most noteworthy literary gure produced by the south before the civil war unless edgar allan poe is regarded as a southerner was novelist william gilmore simms 1806 1870.
quantitatively at least he was great eighty two books owed from his ever moist pen winning for him the title the cooper of the south his themes dealt with the southern frontier in colonial oliver wendell holmes had a son with the same name who became a distinguished justice of the supreme court 1902 1932 and who lived to be ninety four less two days.
a literary renaissance louisa may alcott 1832 1888 1856 in search of independence for herself and nancial security for her family alcott worked as a seamstress governess teacher and housemaid until her writing nally brought her success.
her much loved largely autobiographical novel little women has remained in print continuously from 1868 until our own day.
days and with the south during the revolutionary war.
but he was neglected by his own section even though he married into the socially elite and became a slaveowner.
the high toned planter aristocracy would never accept the son of a poor charleston storekeeper.
literary individualists and dissenters not all writers in these years believed so keenly in human goodness and social progress.
edgar allan poe 1809 1849 who spent much of his youth in virginia was an eccentric genius.
orphaned at an early age cursed with ill health and married to a child wife of thirteen who fell fatally ill of tuberculosis he suffered hunger cold poverty and debt.
failing at suicide he took refuge in the bottle and dissipated his talent early.
poe was a gifted lyric poet as the raven attests.
a master stylist he also excelled in the short story espe cially of the horror type in which he shared his alcoholic nightmares with fascinated readers.
if he did not invent the modern detective novel he at least set new high standards in tales like the gold bug poe was fascinated by the ghostly and ghastly as in the fall of the house of usher and other stories.
he reected a morbid sensibility distinctly at odds with the usually optimistic tone of american culture.
partly for this reason poe has perhaps been even more prized by europeans than by americans.
his brilliant career was cut short when he was found drunk in a baltimore gutter and shortly thereafter died.
two other writers reected the continuing calvinist obsession with original sin and with the neverending struggle between good and evil.
in somber salem massachusetts writer nathaniel hawthorne 1804 1864 grew up in an at mosphere heavy with the memories of his puritan forebears and the tragedy of his fathers premature death on an ocean voyage.
his masterpiece was the scarlet letter 1850 which describes the puritan practice of forcing an adulteress to wear a scarlet a on her clothing.
the tragic tale chronicles the psychological effects of sin on the guilty heroine and her secret lover the father of her baby a minister of the gospel in puritan boston.
in the marble faun 1860 hawthorne dealt with a group of young american artists who witness a mysterious murder in rome.
the book explores the concepts of the omnipresence of evil and the dead hand of the past weighing upon the present.
herman melville 1819 1891 an orphaned and illeducated new yorker went to sea as a youth and served eighteen adventuresome months on a whaler.
a whale ship was my yale college and my harvard he wrote.
jumping ship in the south seas he lived among cannibals from whom he providently escaped uneaten.
his fresh and charming tales of the south seas were immediately popular but his masterpiece moby dick 1851 was not.
this epic novel is a complex allegory of good and evil told in terms of the con ict between a whaling captain ahab and a giant white whale moby dick.
captain ahab having lost a leg to the marine monster lives only for revenge.
his pursuit nally ends when moby dick rams and sinks ahabs ship leaving only one survivor.
the whales exact identity and ahabs motives remain obscure.
in the end the sea like the terrifyingly impersonal and unknowable universe of melvilles imagination simply rolls on.
moby dick was widely ignored at the time of its publication people were accustomed to more straightforward and upbeat prose.
a disheartened melville chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 capturing a sperm whale painted by william page from a sketch by c b hulsart 1835 this painting and melvilles moby dick vividly portray the hazards of whaling.
despite the dangers it proved to be an important industry from colonial times to the end of the nineteenth century continued to write unprotably for some years part of the time eking out a living as a customs inspector and then died in relative obscurity and poverty.
ironically his brooding masterpiece about the mysterious white whale had to wait until the more jaded twentieth century for readers and for proper recognition.
portrayers of the past a distinguished group of american historians was emerging at the same time that other writers were winning distinction.
energetic george bancroft 1800 1891 who as secretary of the navy helped found the naval academy at annapolis in 1845 has deservedly received the title father of american history he published a spirited superpatriotic history of the united states to 1789 in six originally ten volumes 1834 1876 a work that grew out of his vast researches in dusty archives in europe and america.
two other historians are read with greater plea sure and prot today.
william h prescott 1796 1859 who accidentally lost the sight of an eye while in college conserved his remaining weak vision and published classic accounts of the conquest of mexico 1843 and peru 1847.
francis parkman 1823 1893 whose eyes were so defective that he wrote in darkness with the aid of a guiding machine penned a brilliant series of volumes beginning in 1851.
in epic style he chronicled the struggle between france and britain in colonial times for the mastery of north america.
early american historians of prominence were almost without exception new eng landers largely because the boston area provided well stocked libraries and a stimulating literary tradition.
these writers numbered abolitionists among their relatives and friends and hence were disposed to view unsympathetically the slavery cursed south.
this made in new eng land interpretation dominated the writing of american history until the close of the nineteenth century when pressure for national reconciliation overcame regional bias.
the history of the united states has been written by boston one pro southern historian bitterly complained and largely written wrong key terms chronology shaker movement founded in manchester eng land 1770s first shaker communities established in new york thomas paine publishes the age of reason university of north carolina founded second great awakening begins jefferson founds university of virginia cooper publishes the spy his rst successful novel emma willard establishes troy new york female seminary new harmony commune established american temperance society founded noah webster publishes dictionary american peace society founded 1830 joseph smith founds mormon church godeys ladys book rst published lyceum movement ourishes oberlin college admits female students mary lyon establishes mount holyoke seminary emerson delivers the american scholar address london antislavery convention refuses to recognize female delegates brook farm commune established dorothea dix petitions massachusetts legislature on behalf of the insane 1846 mormon migration to utah seneca falls womans rights convention held oneida community established hawthorne publishes the scarlet letter melville publishes moby dick maine passes rst law prohibiting liquor whitman publishes leaves of grass finney conducts revivals in eastern cities key terms the age of reason 341 deism 341 unitarians 341 second great awakening 341 burned over district 343 mormons 343 lyceum 347 american temperance society 350 maine law of 1851 351 people to know womans rights convention at seneca falls 352 new harmony 354 brook farm 354 oneida community 354 shakers 354 hudson river school 359 minstrel shows 360 transcendentalism 361 the american scholar 362 peter cartwright charles grandison finney joseph smith brigham young horace mann dorothea dix neal s dow lucretia mott elizabeth cady stanton susan b anthony lucy stone amelia bloomer robert owen john j audubon stephen c foster james fenimore cooper ralph waldo emerson henry david thoreau walt whitman henry wadsworth longfellow louisa may alcott emily dickinson nathaniel hawthorne herman melville francis parkman chapter 15 the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 reform who.
e arly chronicles of the antebellum period universally lauded the eras reformers portraying them as idealistic altruistic crusaders intent on improving american society.
after world war ii however some historians began to detect selsh and even conser vative motives underlying the apparent benevolence of the reformers.
this view described the advocates of reform as anxious upper class men and women threatened by the ferment of life in antebellum america.
the pursuit of reforms like temperance asylums prisons and mandatory public education represented a means of asserting social control in this vein one historian described a reform movement as the anguished protest of an aggrieved class against a world they never made in michael katzs treatment of early educational reform proponents were community leaders who sought a school system that would ease the traumas of americas industrialization by inculcating business oriented values and discipline in the working classes.
the wave of reform activity in the 1960s prompted a reevaluation of the reputations of the antebellum reformers.
these more recent interpretations found much to admire in the authentic religious commitments of reformers and especially in the participation of women who sought various social improvements as an extension of their function as protectors of the home and family.
the scholarly treatment of abolitionism is a telling example of how reformers and their campaigns have risen and fallen in the estimation of histor ians.
to northern historians writing in the late nineteenth century abolitionists were courageous men and women so devoted to uprooting the evil of slavery that they were willing to dedicate their lives to a cause that often ostracized them from their communities.
by the mid twentieth century an interpretation more favorable to the south prevailed one that blamed the fanaticism of the abolitionists for the civil war.
but as the racial climate in the united states began to change during the 1960s historians once again showed sympathy for the abolitionist struggle and by the end of the twentieth century abolitionist men and women were revered as ideologically committed individuals dedicated not just to freeing the enslaved but to saving the moral soul of america.
scholars animated by the modern feminist movement have inspired a reconsideration of womens reform activity.
it had long been known of course that women were active participants in charitable orga nizations.
but not until nancy cott kathryn sklar mary ryan and other historians began to look more closely at what cott has called the bonds of womanhood did the links between womens domestic lives and their public benevolent behavior fully emerge.
car roll smith rosenberg showed in her study of the new york female moral reform society for example that members who set out at rst to convert prostitutes to evangelical protestantism and to close down the citys many brothels soon developed an ideology of female autonomy that rejected male dominance.
when men behaved in immoral or illegal ways women reformers claimed that they had the right even the duty to leave the con nes of their homes and actively work to purify society.
more recently historians nancy hewitt and lori ginzberg have challenged the assumption that all women reformers embraced a single denition of female identity.
instead they have emphasized the importance of class differences in shaping womens reform work which led inevitably to tensions within female ranks.
giving more attention to the historical evolution of female reform ideology ginzberg has also detected a shift from an early focus on moral uplift to a more class based appeal for social control.
historians of the suffrage movement have emphasized another kind of exclusivity among women reformers the boundaries of race.
ellen dubois has shown that after a brief alliance with the abolitionist movement many female suffrage reformers abandoned the cause of black liberation in an effort to achieve their own goal with less controversy.
whatever historians may conclude about the liberating or leashing character of early reform it is clear by now that they have to contend with the ways in which class gender and race divided reformers making the plural reform movements the more accurate depiction of the impulse to improve that pervaded american society in the early nineteenth century.
to learn more to learn more robert abzug cosmos crumbling american reform and the religious imagination 1994 nathan o hatch the democratization of american christianity 1989 joseph hawes children in urban society 1971 paul johnson a shopkeepers millennium society and revivals in rochester new york 1815 1837 1978 joseph f kett rites of passage adolescence in america 1976 spencer klaw without sin the life and death of the oneida community 1993 steven mintz and susan kellogg domestic revolutions a social history of american family life 1988 william rorabaugh the alcoholic republic 1979 ronald walters american reformers 1815 1860 1978 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at part three testing the new nation 1820 1877 t he civil war of 1861 to 1865 was the awesome trial by re of american nationhood and of the american soul.
all americans knew said abraham lincoln that slavery was somehow the cause of this war the war tested in lincolns ringing phrase at gettysburg whether any nation dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.
can long endure how did this great and bloody con ict come about.
and what were its results.
american slavery was by any measure a peculiar institution slavery was rooted in both racism and economic exploitation and depended for its survival on brutal repression.
yet the american slave population was the only enslaved population in history that grew by means of its own biological reproduction a fact that suggests to many historians that conditions under slavery in the united states were somehow less punitive than those in other slave societies.
indeed a distinctive and durable african american culture managed to ourish under slavery further suggesting that the slave regime provided some space for african american cultural development.
but however benignly it might be painted slavery still remained a cancer in the heart of american democracy a moral outrage that mocked the nations claim to be a model of social and returning from the cotton fields in south carolina african american slaves planted and picked virtually all the cotton that formed the foundation of the nineteenth century southern economy.
the white south ferociously defended its peculiar institution of slavery which ended at last only in the res of the civil war.
testing the new nation the 1st virginia regiment these virginia militiamen were photographed in 1859 while attending the trial of the abolitionist john brown for treason against the state of virginia.
two years later their regiment formed part of the confederate army that struck for southern independence.
political enlightenment.
as time went on more and more voices called more and more stridently for its abolition.
the nation lived uneasily with slavery from the outset.
thomas jefferson was only one among many in the founding generation who felt acutely the con ict between the high principle of equality and the ugly reality of slavery.
the federal government in the early republic took several steps to check the growth of slavery.
it banned slavery in the old northwest in 1787 prohibited the further importation of slaves after 1808 and declared in the missouri compromise of 1820 that the vast western territories secured in the louisiana purchase were forever closed to slavery north of the state of missouri.
antislavery sentiment even abounded in the south in the immediate post revolutionary years.
but as time progressed and especially after eli whitneys invention of the cotton gin in the 1790s the southern planter class became increasingly dependent on slave labor to wring prots from the sprawling plantations that carpeted the south.
as cotton cultivation spread westward the souths stake in slavery grew deeper and the abolitionist outcry grew louder.
the controversy over slavery signicantly intensied following the war with mexico in the 1840s.
mexico will poison us predicted the philosopher ralph waldo emerson and he proved to be distressingly prophetic.
the lands acquired from mexico most of the present day american southwest from texas to cal i fornia reopened the question of extending slavery into the western territories.
the decade and a half that followed the mexican war from 1846 to 1861 witnessed a series of ultimately ineffective efforts to come to grips with that question including the ill starred compromise of 1850 the con ict breeding kansas nebraska act of 1854 and the supreme courts inammatory decision in the dred scott case of 1857.
ultimately the slavery question was settled by force of arms in the civil war itself.
the civil war as lincoln observed was assuredly about slavery.
but as lincoln also repeatedly insisted the war was about the viability of the union as well and about the strength of democracy itself.
could a democratic government built on the principle of popular consent rightfully deny some of its citizens the same right to independence that the american revolutionaries had exercised in seceding from the british empire in 1776.
southern rebels calling the con ict the war for southern independence asked that question forcefully but ultimately it too was answered not in the law courts or in the legislative halls but on the battleeld.
the civil war unarguably established the supremacy of the union and it ended slavery as well.
but as the victorious union set about the task of reconstruction after the wars end in 1865 a combination of weak northern will and residual southern power frustrated the goal of making the emancipated blacks full edged american citizens.
the civil war in the end brought nothing but freedom but over time freedom proved a powerful tool indeed.
the south and the slavery controversy 1793 1860 those who deny freedom to others deserve it not for themselves and under a just god cannot long retain it.
abraham lincoln 1859 a t the dawn of the republic slavery faced an uncertain future.
touched by revolutionary idealism some southern leaders including thomas jefferson were talking openly of freeing their slaves.
others predicted that the iron logic of economics would eventually expose slaverys unprotability speeding its demise.
but the introduction of eli whitneys cotton gin in 1793 scrambled all those predictions.
whitneys invention made possible the wide scale cultivation of short staple cotton.
the white ber rapidly became the dominant southern crop eclipsing tobacco rice and sugar.
the explosion of cotton cultivation created an insatiable demand for labor chaining the slave to the gin and the planter to the slave.
as the nineteenth century opened the reinvigoration of southern slavery carried fateful implications for blacks and whites alike and threatened the survival of the nation itself.
cotton is king as time passed the cotton kingdom developed into a huge agricultural factory pouring out avalanches of the uffy ber.
quick prots drew planters to the loamy bottomlands of the gulf states.
as long as the soil was still vigorous the yield was bountiful and the rewards were high.
caught up in an economic spiral the planters bought more slaves and land to grow more cotton so as to buy still more slaves and land.
northern shippers reaped a large part of the prots from the cotton trade.
they would load bulging bales of cotton at southern ports transport them to eng land sell their eecy cargo for pounds sterling and buy needed manufactured goods for sale in the united states.
to a large degree the prosperity of both north and south and of eng land too rested on the bent backs of enslaved bondsmen.
this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website the cotton empire so did the young nations growing wealth.
cotton accounted for half the value of all american exports after 1840 and export earnings provided much of the capital that stoked the republics economic growth.
the south produced more than half of the entire worlds supply of cotton a fact that held foreign nations in partial bondage.
britain was then the leading industrial power.
its most important single manufacture in the 1850s was cotton cloth from which about one fth of its population directly or indirectly drew its livelihood.
about 75 percent of this precious supply of ber came from the white carpeted acres of the south.
southern leaders were fully aware that britain was tied to them by cotton threads and this dependence gave them a heady sense of power.
in their eyes cotton was king the gin was his throne and the black bondsmen were his henchmen.
if war should ever break out between north and south northern warships would presumably cut off the outow of cotton.
fiberfamished british factories would then close their gates starving mobs would force the london government to break the blockade and the south would triumph.
cotton was a powerful monarch indeed.
the planter aristocracy before the civil war the south was in some respects not so much a democracy as an oligarchy or a government by the few in this case heavily inuenced by a planter aristocracy.
in 1850 only 1 733 families owned more than 100 slaves each and this select group provided the cream of the political and social leadership of the section and nation.
here was the mint julep south of the tall columned and white painted plantation mansion the big house where dwelt the cottonocracy the planter aristocrats with their blooded horses and chippendale chairs enjoyed a lions share of southern wealth.
they could educate their children in the nest schools often in the north or abroad.
their money provided the leisure for study reection and statecraft as was notably true of men like john c calhoun a yale graduate and jefferson davis a west point graduate.
they felt a keen sense of obligation to serve the public.
it was no accident that virginia and the other southern states produced a higher proportion of front rank statesmen before 1860 than the dollar grubbing north.
but even in its best light dominance by a favored aristocracy was basically undemocratic.
it widened the gap between rich and poor.
it hampered tax supported public education because the rich planters could and did send their children to private institutions.
a favorite author of elite southerners was sir walter scott whose manors and castles graced by brave ivanhoes and fair rowenas helped them idealize a feudal society even when many of their economic activities were undeniably capitalistic.
southern aristocrats who sometimes staged jousting tournaments strove to interior of the cotton bureau in new orleans by edgar degas 1873 although this painting dates from 1873 french impressionist painter edgar degas 1834 1917 captured the insouciant self condence of cotton traders in the pre civil war era.
as cotton cultivation spread into the new states of the trans appalachian southwest the entire cotton kingdom paid tribute to new orleans queen city of the south and the port through which millions of cotton bales owed out to british textile mills.
chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 90w 80w wis n h 200 mi.
n y boston mich conn r i chicago mississippi r mo.
n st louis pittsburgh ind.
louisville ky w va va ark.
tenn n j 39n del.
cincinnati ohio indianapolis new york pa cleveland ill me.
n c washington d c md.
at l a n t i c ocean center of population by decade map 14 1 westward movement of center of population 1790 2000 the triangles indicate the points at which a map of the united states weighted for the population of the country in a given year would balance.
note the remarkable equilibrium of the north south pull from 1790 to about 1940 and the strong spurt west and south thereafter.
the 1980 census revealed that the nations center of population had at last moved west of the mississippi river.
the map also shows the slowing of the westward movement between 1890 and 1940 the period of heaviest immigration from europe which ended up mainly in east coast cities.
interactive map alleghenies see map 14 1.
by the eve of the civil war it had marched across the ohio river.
legend portrays an army of muscular axmen triumphantly carving civilization out of the western woods.
but in reality life was downright grim for most pioneer families.
poorly fed ill clad housed in hastily erected shanties abraham lincolns family lived for a year in a three sided lean to made of brush and sticks they were perpetual victims of disease depression and premature death.
above all unbearable loneliness haunted them especially the women who were often cut off from human contact even their neighbors for days or even weeks while con ned to the cramped orbit of a dark cabin in a secluded clearing.
breakdowns and even madness were all too frequently the opportunities that the frontier offered to pioneer women.
frontier life could be tough and crude for men as well.
no holds barred wrestling which permitted such niceties as the biting off of noses and the gouging out of eyes was a popular entertainment.
pioneering americans marooned by geography were often ill informed superstitious provincial and ercely individualistic.
ralph waldo emersons popular lecture essay self reliance struck a deeply responsive chord.
popular literature of the period abounded with portraits of unique isolated gures like james fenimore coopers heroic natty bumppo and herman melvilles restless captain ahab just as jacksonian politics aimed to emancipate the lone wolf enterprising businessperson.
yet even in this heyday of rugged individualism there were important exceptions.
pioneers in tasks clearly beyond their own individual resources would call upon their neighbors for logrolling and barn raising and upon their governments for help in building internal improvements.
shaping the western landscape the westward movement also molded the physical environment.
pioneers in a hurry often exhausted the land in the tobacco regions and then pushed on leaving behind barren and rain gutted elds.
in the kentucky bottomlands cane as high as fteen feet posed a seemingly insurmountable barrier to the plow.
but set opening the west major doughertys indian agency on the missouri river by karl bodmer 1833 the swiss born and paris trained artist karl bodmer painted this scene while accompanying german prince maximilian on his expedition across the american west.
from st louis the party traveled up the missouri river by steamboat under the protection of john jacob astors fur company.
bodmer painted scenes along the way especially of indians and their surroundings.
trading posts like this one both promoted commerce with the indians and served settlers heading west.
tlers soon discovered that when the cane was burned off european bluegrass thrived in the charred caneelds.
kentucky bluegrass as it was somewhat inaccurately called made ideal pasture for livestock and lured thousands more american homesteaders into kentucky.
the american west felt the pressure of civilization in additional ways.
by the 1820s american fur trappers were setting their traplines all over the vast rocky mountain region.
the fur trapping empire was based on the rendezvous french for meeting system.
each summer traders ventured from st louis to a verdant rocky mountain valley made camp and waited for the trappers and indians to arrive with beaver pelts to swap for manufactured goods from the east.
this trade thrived for some two decades by the time beaver hats had gone out of fashion the hapless beaver had all but disappeared from the region.
trade in buffalo robes also ourished leading eventually to the virtually total annihilation of the massive bison herds that once blanketed the western prairies.
still farther west on the cal i fornia coast other traders bought up prodigious quantities of sea otter pelts driv ing the oncebountiful otters to the point of near extinction.
some historians have called this aggressive and often heedless exploitation of the wests natural bounty ecological imperialism.
yet americans in this period also revered nature and admired its beauty.
indeed the spirit of nationalism fed a growing belief in the uniqueness of the american wilderness.
searching for the united states distinctive characteristics in this nation conscious age many observers found the wild unspoiled character of the land especially in the west to be among the young nations de ning attributes.
other countries might have impressive mountains or sparkling rivers but none had the pristine natural beauty of america unspoiled by human hands and reminiscent of a time before the dawn of civilization.
this attitude toward wilderness became in time a kind of national mystique chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 inspiring literature and painting and eventually kindling a powerful conservation movement.
george catlin a painter and student of native american life was among the rst americans to advocate the preservation of nature as a deliberate national policy.
in 1832 he observed sioux indians in south dakota recklessly slaughtering buffalo in order to trade the animals tongues for the white mans whiskey.
appalled at this spectacle and fearing for the preservation of indians and buffalo alike catlin proposed the creation of a national park.
his idea later bore fruit with the creation of a national park system the worlds rst beginning with yellowstone park in 1872.
the march of the millions as the american people moved west they also multiplied at an amazing rate.
by midcentury the population was still doubling approximately every twenty ve years as in fertile colonial days see figure 14 1.
by 1860 the original thirteen states had more than doubled in number thirty three stars graced the american ag.
the united states was the fourth most populous nation in the western world exceeded only by three european countries russia france and austria.
urban growth continued explosively.
in 1790 there had been only two american cities that could boast populations of twenty thousand or more souls philadelphia and new york.
by 1860 there were forty three and about three hundred other places claimed over ve thousand inhabitants apiece.
new york was the metropolis new orleans the queen of the south and chicago the swaggering lord of the midwest destined to be hog butcher for the world such overrapid urbanization unfortunately brought undesirable by products.
it intensied the problems of smelly slums feeble street lighting inadequate policing impure water foul sewage ravenous rats and improper garbage disposal.
hogs poked their scavenging snouts about many city streets as late as the 1840s.
bos mouth of the platte river 900 miles above st louis by george catlin 1832 catlins west unfolded as a vast panorama of at open space peopled only by the indians shown in the foreground.
catlin believed that capturing the unending prairie on canvas required a new aesthetic the sublime horizontal and an acceptance of a landscape bereft of man built features without anything rising above the horizon which was a perfect straight line around us like that of the blue and boundless ocean an inux of immigrants year white nonwhite percent nonwhite total population 3 172 000 757 000 3 929 000 4 306 000 1 002 000 5 308 000 5 862 000 1 378 000 7 240 000 7 867 000 1 772 000 9 639 000 10 537 000 2 329 000 12 866 000 14 196 000 2 874 000 17 070 000 19 553 000 3 639 000 23 192 000 26 922 000 4 521 000 31 443 000 10m 20m 30m 40m figure 14 1 population increase including slaves and indians 1790 1860 increasing european immigration and the closing of the slave trade gradually whitened the population beginning in 1820.
this trend continued into the early twentieth century.
ton in 1823 pioneered a sewer system and new york in 1842 abandoned wells and cisterns for a piped in water supply.
the city thus unknowingly eliminated the breeding places of many disease carrying mosquitoes.
a continuing high birthrate accounted for most of the increase in population but by the 1840s the tides of immigration were adding hundreds of thousands more.
before this decade immigrants had been owing in at a rate of sixty thousand a year but suddenly the inux tripled in the 1840s and then quadrupled in the 1850s.
during these two feverish decades over a million and a half irish and nearly as many germans swarmed down the gangplanks see table 14 1.
why did they come.
the immigrants came partly because europe seemed to be running out of room.
the population of the old world more than doubled in the nineteenth century and europe began to generate a seething pool of apparently surplus people.
they were displaced and footloose in their homelands before they felt the tug of the american magnet.
indeed at least as many people moved about within europe as crossed the atlantic.
america beneted from these people churning changes cleveland in 1853 by j w hill looking west across the cuyahoga river down superior street the painting features the warehouses canals and industries that fed the citys prosperity and supported its thirty thousand residents.
chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 table 14 1 irish and german immigration by decade 1830 1900 years irish germans 1831 1840 1841 1850 1851 1860 1861 1870 1871 1880 1881 1890 1891 1900 207 381 780 719 914 119 435 778 436 871 655 482 388 416 152 454 434 626 951 667 787 468 718 182 1 452 970 505 152 3 818 766 5 000 519 total but did not set them all in motion.
nor was the united states the sole beneciary of the process of the nearly 60 million people who abandoned europe in the century after 1840 about 25 million went somewhere other than the united states.
yet america still beckoned most strongly to the struggling masses of europe and the majority of migrants headed for the land of freedom and opportunity there was freedom from aristocratic caste and state church there was abundant opportunity to secure broad acres and better ones condition.
much read letters sent home by immigrants america letters often described in glowing terms the richer life low a german immigrant living in cincinnati wrote to his relatives in germany in 1847 a lot of people come over here who were well off in germany but were enticed to leave their fatherland by boastful and imprudent letters from their friends or children and thought they could become rich in america.
this deceives a lot of people since what can they do here.
if they stay in the city they can only earn their bread at hard and unaccustomed labor.
if they want to live in the country and dont have enough money to buy a piece of land that is cleared and has a house then they have to settle in the wild bush and have to work very hard to clear the trees out of the way so they can sow and plant.
but people who are healthy strong and hardworking do pretty well.
taxes no compulsory military ser vice and three meat meals a day the introduction of transoceanic steamships also meant that the immigrants could come speedily and cheaply.
the journey to the united states now took ten or twelve days instead of ten or twelve weeks on a sailing vessel and was much less expensive than a voyage to more distant immigrant destinations such as australia argentina or south africa.
the united states also received a far more diverse array of immigrants than did other countries.
argentina for example had a higher proportion of immigrants relative to its population than did the united states but they came mostly from spain and italy.
in contrast the united states beckoned to immigrants from dozens of different nations.
the emerald isle moves west ireland already groaning under the heavy hand of british overlords was prostrated in the mid 1840s.
a terrible rot attacked the potato crop on which the people had become dangerously dependent and about onefourth of them were swept away by disease and hunger.
starved bodies were found dead by the roadsides with grass in their mouths.
all told about 2 million perished.
tens of thousands of destitute souls eeing the land of famine for the land of plenty ocked to america in the black forties irelands great export has been population and the irish take their place beside the jews and the africans as a dispersed people see makers of america the irish pp.
these uprooted newcomers too poor to move west and buy the necessary land livestock and equipment swarmed into the larger seaboard cities.
noteworthy were boston and particularly new york which rapidly became the largest irish city in the world.
before many decades had passed more people of hibernian blood lived in america than on the ould sod of erins isle.
the luckless irish immigrants received no redcarpet treatment.
forced to live in squalor they were rudely crammed into the already vile slums.
they were scorned by the older american stock especially proper protestant bostonians who regarded the scruffy catholic arrivals as a social menace.
barely literate biddies bridgets took jobs as kitchen maids.
broad shouldered paddies patricks were pushed into pick and shovel drudgery on canals and railroads where thousands left their bones as victims of disease irish and german immigration margaret mccarthy a recent arrival to america captured much of the complexity of the immigrant experience in a letter she wrote from new york to her family in ireland in 1850 this is a good place and a good country but there is one thing thats ruining this place.
the emigrants have not money enough to take them to the interior of the country which obliges them to remain here in new york and the like places which causes the less demand for labor and also the great reduction in wages.
for this reason i would advise no one to come to america that would not have some money after landing here that would enable them to go west in case they would get no work to do here.
and accidental explosions.
it was said that an irishman lay buried under every railroad tie.
as wage depressing competitors for jobs the irish were hated by native workers.
no irish need apply was a sign commonly posted at factory gates and was often abbreviated to nina.
the irish for similar reasons ercely resented the blacks with whom they shared societys basement.
race riots between black and irish dockworkers ared up in several port cities and the irish were generally cool to the abolitionist cause.
the friendless famine irish were forced to fend for themselves.
the ancient order of hibernians a semisecret society founded in ireland to ght rapacious landlords served in america as a benevolent society aiding the downtrodden.
it also helped to spawn the molly maguires a shadowy irish miners union that rocked the pennsylvania coal districts in the 1860s and 1870s.
the irish tended to remain in low skill occupations but gradually improved their lot usually by acquiring modest amounts of property.
the education of children was cut short as families struggled to save money to purchase a home.
but for humble irish peasants cruelly cast out of their homeland property ownership counted as a grand success politics quickly attracted these gregarious gaelic newcomers.
they soon began to gain control of powerful city machines notably new yorks tammany hall and reaped the patronage rewards.
before long beguilingly brogued irishmen dominated police departments an early nineteenth century french traveler recorded his impressions of america and ireland i have seen the indian in his forests and the negro in his chains and thought as i contemplated their pitiable condition that i saw the very extreme of human wretchedness but i did not then know the condition of unfortunate ireland.
in many big cities where they now drove the paddy wagons that had once carted their brawling forebears to jail.
american politicians made haste to cultivate the irish vote especially in the politically potent state of new york.
irish hatred of the british lost nothing in the transatlantic transplanting.
as the irish americans increased in number nearly 2 million arrived between 1830 and 1860 ofcials in washington glimpsed political gold in those emerald green hills.
politicians often found it politically protable to re verbal volleys at london a process vulgarly known as twisting the british lions tail the german forty eighters the inux of refugees from germany between 1830 and 1860 was hardly less spectacular than that from ireland.
during these troubled years over a million and a half germans stepped onto american soil see makers of america the germans pp.
the bulk of them were uprooted farmers displaced by crop failures and other hardships.
but a strong sprinkling were liberal political refugees.
saddened by the collapse of the democratic revolutions of 1848 they had decided to leave the autocratic fatherland and ee to america the brightest hope of democracy.
germanys loss was americas gain.
zealous german liberals like the lanky and public spirited carl schurz a relentless foe of slavery and public corruption contributed richly to the elevation of american political life.
unlike the irish many of the germanic newcomers possessed a modest amount of material goods.
most of them pushed out to the lush lands of the middle west notably wisconsin where they settled and established model farms.
like the irish they formed an inuential makers of america irish the the great africanamerican migration f or a generation from 1793 to 1815 war raged across europe.
ruinous as it was on the continent the ghting brought unprecedented prosperity to the longsuffering landsmen of ireland groaning since the twelfth century under the yoke of eng lish rule.
for as europes elds lay fallow irrigated only by the blood of its farmers ireland fed the hungry armies that ravened for food as well as territory.
irish farmers planted every available acre interspersing the lowly potato amongst their elds of grain.
with prices for food products ever mounting tenant farmers reaped a temporary respite from their perpetual struggle to remain on the land.
most landlords were satised by the prosperity and so relaxed their pressure on tenants others stymied by the absence of british police forces that had been stripped of manpower to ght in europe had little means to enforce eviction notices.
but the peace that brought solace to battle scarred europe changed all this.
after 1815 war inated wheat prices plummeted by half.
hard pressed landlords resolved to leave vast elds unplanted.
assisted now by a strengthened british constabulary they vowed to sweep the pesky peasants from the retired acreage.
many of those forced to leave sought work in eng land some went to america.
then in 1845 a blight that ravaged the potato crop sounded the nal knell for the irish peasantry.
the resultant famine spread desolation throughout the island.
in ve years more than a million people died.
another million sailed for america.
of the emigrants most were young and literate in eng lish the majority under thirty ve years old.
families typically pooled money to send strong young sons to the new world where they would earn wages to pay the fares for those who waited at home.
these famine irish mostly remained in the port cities of the northeast abandoning the farmers life for the dingy congestion of the urban metropolis.
the disembarking irish were poorly prepared for urban life.
they found progress up the economic ladder painfully slow.
their work as domestic servants or construction laborers was dull and arduous and mortality rates were astoundingly high.
escape from the potato famine hardly guaranteed a long life to an irish american a gray bearded irishman was a rare sight in nineteenth century america.
most of the new arrivals toiled as day laborers.
a fortunate few owned boardinghouses or saloons where their dispirited countrymen sought solace in the bottle.
for irish born women opportunities were still scarcer they worked mainly as domestic servants.
but it was their roman catholicism more even than their penury or their perceived fondness for alcohol that earned the irish the distrust and resentment of their native born protestant american neighbors.
the cornerstone of social and religious life for irish immigrants was the parish.
worries about safeguard outward bound the quay at dublin 1854 thousands ed famine in ireland by coming to america in the 1840s and 1850s.
st patricks day parade in america union square ca.
1870 this painting shows a st patricks day parade in new york city.
the religious festival was celebrated with greater fanfare in america than in ireland itself as irish immigrants used it to boost their ethnic solidarity and assert their distinctive identity in their adopted country.
ing their childrens faith inspired the construction of parish schools nanced by the pennies of struggling working class irish parents.
if irelands green elds scarcely equipped her sons and daughters for the scrap and scramble of economic life in americas cities life in the old country nevertheless had instilled in them an aptitude for politics.
irish catholic resistance against centuries of eng lish anglican domination had instructed many old country irish in the ways of mass politics.
that political experience readied them for the boss system of the political machines in americas northeastern cities.
the bosss local representatives met each newcomer soon after he landed in america.
asking only for votes the machine supplied coal in wintertime food and help with the law.
irish voters soon became a bulwark of the democratic party reliably supporting the party of jefferson and jackson in cities like new york and boston.
as irish americans like new yorks honest john kelly themselves became bosses white collar jobs in government ser vice opened up to the irish.
they became building inspectors aldermen and even policemen an astonishing irony for a people driven from their homeland by the nightsticks and bayonets of the british police.
chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 body of voters whom american politicians shamelessly wooed.
but the germans were less potent politically because their strength was more widely scattered.
the hand of germans in shaping american life was widely felt in still other ways.
the conestoga wagon the kentucky rie and the christmas tree were all german contributions to american culture.
germans had ed from the militarism and wars of europe and consequently came to be a bulwark of isolationist sentiment in the upper mississippi valley.
better educated on the whole than the stump grubbing americans they warmly supported public schools including their kindergarten childrens garden.
they likewise did much to stimulate art and music.
as outspoken champions of freedom they became relentless enemies of slavery during the fevered years before the civil war.
yet the germans often dubbed damned dutchmen were occasionally regarded with suspicion by their old stock american neighbors.
seeking to preserve their language and culture they sometimes settled in compact colonies and kept aloof from the surrounding community.
accustomed to the continental sunday and uncurbed by puritan tradition they made merry on the sabbath and drank huge quantities of an amber beverage called bier beer which dates its real popularity in america to their coming.
their old world drinking habits like those of the irish spurred advocates of temperance in the use of alcohol to redouble their reform efforts.
flare ups of antiforeignism the invasion by this so called immigrant rabble in the 1840s and 1850s inamed the prejudices of american nativists they feared that these foreign hordes would outbreed outvote and overwhelm the old native stock.
not only did the newcomers take jobs from native americans but the bulk of the displaced irish were roman catholics as were a substantial minority of the germans.
the church of rome was still widely regarded by many old line americans as a foreign church convents were commonly referred to as popish brothels roman catholics were now on the move.
seeking to protect their children from protestant indoctrination in the public schools they began in the 1840s to construct an entirely separate catholic educational system an enormously expensive undertaking for a poor immigrant community but one that revealed the strength of its religious commitment.
they had formed crooked voting a bitter nativist cartoon charging irish and german immigrants with stealing elections.
a negligible minority during colonial days and their numbers had increased gradually.
but with the enormous inux of the irish and germans in the 1840s and 1850s the catholics became a powerful religious group.
in 1840 they had ranked fth behind the baptists methodists presbyterians and congregationalists.
by 1850 with some 1 8 million communicants they had bounded into rst place a position they have never lost.
older stock americans were alarmed by these mounting gures.
they professed to believe that in due time the alien riffraff would establish the catholic church at the expense of protestantism and would introduce popish idols the noisier american nativists rallied for political action.
in 1849 they formed the order of the star spangled banner which soon developed into the formidable american party more commonly known as the know nothing party a name derived from its secretiveness.
nativists agitated for rigid restrictions on immigration and naturalization and for laws authorizing the deportation of alien paupers.
they also promoted a lurid literature of exposure much of it pure ction.
the authors sometimes posing as escaped nuns described the shocking sins they imagined the cloisters concealed including the secret burial of babies.
one of these sensational books maria monks awful disclosures 1836 sold over 300 000 copies.
dawn of the industrial revolution even uglier was occasional mass violence.
as early as 1834 a catholic convent near boston was burned by a howling mob and in ensuing years a few scattered attacks fell upon catholic schools and churches.
the most frightful are up occurred during 1844 in philadelphia where the irish catholics fought back against the threats of the nativists the city of brotherly love did not quiet down until two catholic churches had been burned and some thirteen citizens had been killed and fty wounded in several days of ghting.
these outbursts of intolerance though infrequent and generally localized in the larger cities remain an unfortunate blot on the record of americas treatment of minority groups.
immigrants were undeniably making america a more pluralistic society one of the most ethnically and racially varied in the history of the world and perhaps it was small wonder that cultural clashes would occur.
why in fact were such episodes not even more frequent and more violent.
part of the answer lies in the robustness of the american economy.
the vigorous growth of the economy in these years both attracted immigrants in the rst place and ensured that once arrived they could claim their share of american wealth without jeopardizing the wealth of others.
their hands and brains in fact helped fuel economic expansion.
immigrants and the american economy in short needed one another.
without the newcomers a preponderantly agricultural united states might well have been condemned to watch in envy as the industrial revolution swept through nineteenth century europe.
creeping mechanization a group of gifted british inventors beginning about 1750 perfected a series of machines for the mass production of textiles.
this harnessing of steam multiplied the power of human muscles some ten thousandfold and ushered in the modern factory system and with it the so called industrial revolution.
it was accompanied by a no less spectacular transformation in agricultural production and in the methods of transportation and communication.
the factory system gradually spread from britain the worlds workshop to other lands.
it took a generation or so to reach western europe and then the united states.
why was the youthful american republic eventually to become an industrial giant so slow to embrace the machine.
strong antiforeignism was reected in the platform of the american know nothing party in 1856 americans must rule america and to this end native born citizens should be selected for all state federal or municipal ofces of government employment in preference to naturalized citizens.
for one thing land was cheap in america.
landstarved descendants of land starved peasants were not going to coop themselves up in smelly factories when they might till their own acres in gods fresh air and sunlight.
labor was therefore generally scarce and enough nimble hands to operate the machines were hard to nd until immigrants began to pour ashore in the 1840s.
money for capital investment moreover was not plentiful in pioneering america whose industrial revolution like that of many a developing country in later centuries awaited an inux of foreign capital which in turn awaited assurance of secure property rights sufcient infrastructure an adequate work force and political stability.
without such capital raw materials lay undeveloped undiscovered or unsuspected.
the republic was one day to become the worlds leading coal producer but much of the coal burned in colonial times was imported all the way from britain.
the young country also had difculty producing goods of high enough quality and cheap enough cost to compete with mass produced european products.
long established british factories in particular provided cutthroat competition.
their superiority was attested by the fact that a few unscrupulous yankee manufacturers out to make a dishonest dollar stamped their own products with fake eng lish trademarks.
the british also enjoyed a monopoly of the textile machinery whose secrets they were anxious to hide from foreign competitors.
parliament enacted laws in harmony with the mercantile system forbidding the export of the machines or the emigration of mechanics able to reproduce them.
although a number of small manufacturing enterprises existed in the early republic the future industrial colossus was still snoring.
not until well past the middle of the nineteenth century did the value of the output of the factories exceed that of the farms.
makers of america the germans the great africanamerican migration b etween 1820 and 1920 a sea of germans lapped at americas shores and seeped into its very heartland.
their numbers surpassed those of any other immigrant group even the prolic and often detested irish.
yet this germanic ood unlike its gaelic equivalent stirred little panic in the hearts of native born americans because the germans largely stayed to themselves far from the madding crowds and nativist fears of northeastern cities.
they prospered with astonishing ease building towns in wisconsin agricultural colonies in texas and religious communities in pennsylvania.
they added a decidedly germanic avor to the heady brew of reform and community building that so animated antebellum america.
these germans actually hailed from many different old world lands because there was no unied nation of germany until 1871 when the ruthless and crafty prussian otto von bismarck assembled the german state out of a mosaic of independent principali little germany cincinnatis over the rhine district in 1887 ties kingdoms and duchies.
until that time germans came to america as prussians bavarians hessians rhinelanders pomeranians and westphalians.
they arrived at different times and for many different reasons.
some particularly the so called forty eighters the refugees from the abortive democratic revolutions of 1848 hungered for the democracy they had failed to win in germany.
others particularly jews pietists and anabaptist groups like the amish and the mennonites coveted religious freedom.
and they came not only to america.
like the italians later many germans sought a new life in brazil argentina and chile.
but the largest number ventured into the united states.
typical german immigrants arrived with fatter purses than their irish counterparts.
small landowners or independent artisans in their native countries they did not have to settle for bottom rung industrial employment in the grimy factories of the northeast and instead could afford to push on to the open spaces of the american west.
in wisconsin these immigrants found a home away from home a place with a climate soil and geography much like central europes.
milwaukee a crude frontier town before the germans arrival became the german athens it boasted a german theater german beer gardens a german volunteer re company and a german eng lish academy.
in distant texas german settlements like new braunfels and friedrichsburg ourished.
when the famous landscape architect and writer frederick law olmsted stumbled upon these prairie outposts of teutonic culture in 1857 he was shocked to be welcomed by a gure in a blue annel shirt and pendant beard quoting tacitus these german colonies in the frontier southwest mixed high european elegance with texas ruggedness.
olmsted described a visit to a german household where the settlers drank coffee in tin cups upon dresden saucers and sat upon barrels for seats to hear a beethoven symphony on the grand piano these germanic colonizers of americas heartland also formed religious communities none more distinctive or durable than the amish settlements of pennsylvania indiana and ohio.
the amish took their name from their founder and leader the swiss anabaptist jacob amman.
like other anabaptist groups they shunned extravagance and reserved baptism for adults repudiating the tradition of infant baptism practiced by most europeans.
for this they were persecuted even imprisoned in europe.
seeking escape from their oppression some ve hundred amish ventured to pennsylvania in the 1700s followed by three thousand in the years from 1815 to 1865.
in america they formed enduring religious communities isolated enclaves where they could shield themselves from the corruption and the conveniences of the modern world.
to this day the german speaking amish still travel in horse drawn carriages and farm without heavy machinery.
no electric lights brighten the darkness that nightly envelops their tidy farmhouses no ringing telephones punctuate the rev marriage plate bucks county pennsylvania ca.
1806 the germans who settled the pennsylvania dutch communities in the eighteenth century preserved ancient traditions of handicraft and art as exemplied by this whimsical marriage plate made by a sixteen year old potter named john leidy.
the inscription reads rather would i single live than the wife the breeches trousers give erent tranquility of their mealtime prayer no ornaments relieve the austere simplicity of their black garments.
the amish remain a stalwart traditional community in a rootless turbulent society a living testament to the religious ferment and social experiments of the antebellum era.
amish country near lancaster pennsylvania for more than two centuries the amish people have preserved their traditional way of life.
chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 whitney ends the fiber famine samuel slater has been acclaimed the father of the factory system in america and seldom can the paternity of a movement more properly be ascribed to one person.
a skilled british mechanic of twenty one he was attracted by bounties being offered to british workers familiar with the textile machines.
after memorizing the plans for the machinery he escaped in disguise to america where he won the backing of moses brown a quaker capitalist in rhode island.
laboriously reconstructing the essential apparatus with the aid of a blacksmith and a carpenter he put into operation in 1791 the rst efcient american machinery for spinning cotton thread.
the ravenous mechanism was now ready but where was the cotton ber.
handpicking one pound of lint from three pounds of seed was a full days work for one slave and this process was so expensive that american made cotton cloth was relatively rare.
another mechanical genius massachusetts born eli whitney now made his mark.
after graduating from yale he journeyed to georgia to serve as a private tutor while preparing for the law.
there he was told that the poverty of the south would be relieved if someone could only invent a workable device for separating the seed from the short staple cotton ber.
within ten days in 1793 he built a crude machine called the cotton gin short for engine that was fty times more effective than the handpicking process.
few machines have ever wrought so wondrous a change.
the gin affected not only the history of america but that of the world.
almost overnight the raising of cotton became highly protable and the south was tied hand and foot to the throne of king cotton.
human bondage had been dying out but the insatiable demand for cotton reriveted the chains on the limbs of the downtrodden southern blacks.
south and north both prospered.
slave driv ing planters cleared more acres for cotton pushing the cotton kingdom westward off the depleted tidewater plains over the piedmont and onto the black loam bottomlands of alabama and mississippi.
humming gins poured out avalanches of snowy ber for the spindles of the yankee machines though for decades to come the mills of britain bought the lions share of southern cotton.
the american phase of the industrial revolution which rst blossomed in cotton textiles was well on its way.
factories at rst ourished most actively in new eng land though they branched out into the more populous areas of new york new jersey and pennsylvania.
the south increasingly wedded to the production of francis cabot lowells mill waltham massachusetts 1826 and cotton industry carding drawing and roving engraving 1835 built in 1814 lowells mill left was a marvel of manufacturing efciency.
it combined all phases of production including spinning and weaving under one roof.
the mills labor force right was composed primarily of young women from the local farming communities.
the upsurge of manufacturing a pioneer woman batting cotton making cotton batts from the raw ber was the rst step in making homespun cloth.
mechanical looms and sewing machines would soon make this traditional womens work obsolete.
cotton could boast of comparatively little manufacturing.
its capital was bound up in slaves its local consumers for the most part were desperately poor.
new eng land was singularly favored as an industrial center for several reasons.
its narrow belt of stony soil made farming difcult and hence made manufacturing attractive.
a relatively dense population provided labor and accessible markets shipping brought in capital and snug seaports made easy the import of raw materials and the export of the nished products.
finally the rapid rivers notably the merrimack in massachusetts provided abundant water power to turn the cogs of the machines.
by 1860 more than 400 million pounds of southern cotton poured annually into the gaping maws of over a thousand mills mostly in new eng land.
marvels in manufacturing americas factories spread slowly until about 1807 when there began the fateful sequence of the embargo nonintercourse and the war of 1812.
stern necessity dictated the manufacture of substitutes for normal imports while the stoppage of european commerce was temporarily ruinous to yankee shipping.
both capital and labor were driven from the waves onto the factory oor as new eng land in the striking phrase of john eli whitneys cotton gin whitneys revolutionary little machine was artfully simple.
wire hooks on a rotating cylinder pulled the cotton bers through slots too narrow to allow seeds to pass.
a set of brushes then removed the bers.
whitneys gin made possible the mass cultivation of upland or short staple cotton which was unprotable to raise when its seeds had to be laboriously removed by hand.
before whitneys invention cotton growing had been largely conned to long staple or sea island cotton which could grow only in hot humid coastal areas.
with the advent of the cotton gin short staple cotton cultivation spread across the southern interior and so did slavery.
chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 daguerreotype of a young girl with a sample of cotton dress fabric ca.
1850s the growing availability of inexpensive american made calico or printed cotton cloth vastly expanded womens wardrobes.
randolph exchanged the trident for the distaff.
generous bounties were offered by local authorities for homegrown goods buy american and wear american became popular slogans and patriotism prompted the wearing of baggy homespun garments.
president madison donned some at his inauguration where he was said to have been a walking argument for the better processing of native wool.
but the manufacturing boomlet broke abruptly with the peace of ghent in 1815.
british competitors unloaded their dammed up surpluses at ruinously low prices and american newspapers were so full of british advertisements for goods on credit that little space was left for news.
in one rhode island district all 150 mills were forced to close their doors except the original slater plant.
responding to pained outcries congress provided some relief when it passed the mildly protective tariff of 1816 among the earliest political contests to control the shape of the economy.
as the factory system ourished it embraced numerous other industries in addition to textiles.
prominent among them was the manufacturing of rearms and here the wizardly eli whitney again appeared with an extraordinary contribution.
frustrated in his earlier efforts to monopolize the cotton gin he turned to the mass production of muskets for the u s army.
up to this time each part of a rearm had been hand tooled and if the trigger of one broke the trigger of another might or might not t.
about 1798 whitney seized upon the idea of having machines make each part so that all the triggers for example would be as much alike as the successive imprints of a copperplate engraving.
journeying to washington he reportedly dismantled ten of his new muskets in the presence of skeptical ofcials scrambled the parts together and then quickly reassembled ten different muskets.
the principle of interchangeable parts was widely adopted by 1850.
it gave rise to a host of other innovations including samuel colts fabled revolver and it ultimately became the basis of modern massproduction assembly line methods.
it gave to the north the vast industrial plant that ensured military preponderance over the south.
ironically the yankee eli whitney by perfecting the cotton gin gave slavery a said abraham lincoln 1809 1865 in a lecture in 1859 the patent system secured to the inventor for a limited time exclusive use of his invention and thereby added the fuel of interest to the re of genius in the discovery and production of new and useful things.
ten years earlier lincoln had received patent no.
6469 for a scheme to buoy steamboats over shoals.
it was never practically applied but he remains the only president ever to have secured a patent.
inventions and industrialization renewed lease on life and perhaps made the civil war more likely.
at the same time by popularizing the principle of interchangeable parts whitney helped factories to ourish in the north giving the union a decided advantage when that showdown came.
the sewing machine invented by elias howe in 1846 and perfected by isaac singer gave another strong boost to northern industrialization.
the sewing machine became the foundation of the ready made clothing industry which took root about the time of the civil war.
it drove many a seamstress from the shelter of the private home to the factory where like a human robot she tended the clattering mechanisms.
each momentous new invention seemed to stimulate still more imaginative inventions.
for the decade ending in 1800 only 306 patents were registered in washington but the decade ending in 1860 saw the amazing total of 28 000.
yet in 1838 the clerk of the pat manufacturing guns ca.
1860 a rare daguerreotype showing an operator working the lock frame jigging machine in samuel colts state of the art hartford connecticut gun factory.
ent ofce resigned in despair complaining that all worthwhile inventions had been discovered.
technical advances spurred equally important changes in the form and legal status of business organizations.
the principle of limited liability aided the concentration of capital by permitting the individual investor in cases of legal claims or bankruptcy to risk no more than his own share of the corporations stock.
fifteen boston families formed one of the earliest investment capital companies the boston associates.
they eventually dominated the textile railroad insurance and banking business of massachusetts.
laws of free incorporation rst passed in new york in 1848 meant that businessmen could create corporations without applying for individual charters from the legislature.
samuel f b morses telegraph was among the inventions that tightened the sinews of an increasingly complex business world.
a distinguished but povertystricken portrait painter morse nally secured from congress to the accompaniment of the usual jeers an appropriation of 30 000 to support his experiment with talking wires in 1844 morse strung a wire forty miles from washington to baltimore and tapped out the historic message what hath god wrought the invention brought fame and fortune to morse as he put distantly separated people in almost instant communication with one another.
by the eve of the civil war a web of singing wires spanned nearly the entire continent revolutionizing news gathering diplomacy and nance.
thus by the time of the fabled london worlds fair in 1851 known as the great exhibition american products were prominent among the worlds commercial wonders.
fairgoers crowded into the dazzling crystal palace to see mccormicks reaper morses telegraph colts rearms and charles goodyears vulcanized rubber goods.
workers and wage slaves one ugly outgrowth of the factory system was an increasingly acute labor problem.
hitherto manufacturing had been done in the home or in the small shop where the master craftsman and his apprentice rubbing elbows at the same bench could maintain an intimate and friendly relationship.
the industrial revolution submerged this personal association in the impersonal ownership of stuffy factories in spindle cities around these like tumors the slumlike hovels of the wage slaves tended to cluster.
chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 the master craftsman dignity and pride of workmanship are evident in this tidy wheelwrights shop.
smallscale intimate workplaces like this were eventually overshadowed by the mass production impersonal factory system as in the illustrations on pages 325 and 327.
clearly the early factory system did not shower its benets evenly on all.
while many owners grew plump workingpeople often wasted away at their workbenches.
hours were long wages were low and meals were skimpy and hastily gulped.
workers were forced to toil in unsanitary buildings that were poorly ventilated lighted and heated.
they were forbidden by law to form labor unions to raise wages for such cooperative activity was regarded as a criminal conspiracy.
not surprisingly only twenty four recorded strikes occurred before 1835.
especially vulnerable to exploitation were child workers.
in 1820 a signicant portion of the nations industrial toilers were children under ten years of age.
victims of factory labor many children were mentally blighted emotionally starved physically stunted and even brutally whipped in special whipping rooms in samuel slaters mill of 1791 the rst machine tenders were seven boys and two girls all under twelve years of age.
by contrast the lot of most adult wage workers improved markedly in the 1820s and 1830s.
in the full ush of jacksonian democracy many of the states granted the laboring man the vote.
brandishing the ballot he rst strove to lighten his burden through workingmens parties.
eventually many workers gave their loyalty to the democratic party of andrew jackson whose attack on the bank of the united states and against all forms of privilege reected their anxieties about the emerging capitalist economy.
in addition to such goals as the ten hour day higher wages and tolerable working conditions they demanded public educa one observer in 1836 published a newspaper account of conditions in some of the new england factories the operatives work thirteen hours a day in the summer time and from daylight to dark in the winter.
at half past four in the morning the factory bell rings and at ve the girls must be in the mills.
so fatigued.
are numbers of girls that they go to bed soon after receiving their evening meal and endeavor by a comparatively long sleep to resuscitate their weakened frames for the toil of the coming day.
examining the evidence the invention of the sewing machine istorians of technology examine not only the documentary evidence of plans and patents left behind by inventors but surviving machines themselves.
in 1845 elias howe a twenty six yearold apprentice to a boston watchmaker invented a sewing machine that could make 250 stitches a minute ve times what the swiftest hand sewer could do.
a year later howe received a patent for his invention but because the hand cranked machine could only stitch straight seams for a short distance before requiring resetting it had limited commercial appeal.
howe took his sewing machine abroad where he worked with british manufacturers to improve it and then returned to america and combined his patent with those of other inventors including isaac m singer.
hundreds of thousands of sewing machines h were produced beginning in the 1850s for the commercial manufacture of clothing books shoes and many other products and also for home use.
the sewing machine became the rst widely advertised consumer product.
due to its high cost the singer company introduced an installment buying plan which helped place sewing machines in most middleclass households.
why was the sewing machine able to nd eager customers in commercial workshops and home sewing rooms alike.
how might the sewing machine have changed other aspects of american life such as work patterns clothing styles and retail selling.
what other advances in technology might have been necessary for the invention of the sewing machine.
chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 tion for their children and an end to the inhuman practice of imprisonment for debt.
employers abhorring the rise of the rabble in politics fought the ten hour day to the last ditch.
they argued that reduced hours would lessen production increase costs and demoralize the workers.
laborers would have so much leisure time that the devil would lead them into mischief.
a red letter gain was at length registered for labor in 1840 when president van buren established the ten hour day for federal employees on public works.
in ensuing years a number of states gradually fell into line by reducing the hours of working people.
day laborers at last learned that their strongest weapon was to lay down their tools even at the risk of prosecution under the law.
dozens of strikes erupted in the 1830s and 1840s most of them for higher wages some for the ten hour day and a few for such unusual goals as the right to smoke on the job.
the workers usually lost more strikes than they won for the employer could resort to such tactics as the importing of strikebreakers often derisively called scabs or rats and often fresh off the boat from the old world.
labor long raised its voice against the unrestricted inpouring of wage depressing and union busting immigrant workers.
labors early and painful efforts at orga ni zation had netted some 300 000 trade unionists by 1830.
but such encouraging gains were dashed on the rocks of hard times following the severe depression of 1837.
as unemployment spread union membership shriveled.
yet toilers won a promising legal victory in 1842.
the supreme court of massachusetts ruled in the case of violence broke out along the new york waterfront in 1836 when laborers striking for higher wages attacked scabs philip hones 1780 1851 diary records the mayor who acts with vigour and rmness ordered out the troops who are now on duty with loaded arms.
these measures have restored order for the present but i fear the elements of disorder are at work the bands of irish and other foreigners instigated by the mischievous councils of the tradesunion and other combinations of discontented men are acquiring strength and importance which will ere long be difcult to quell.
commonwealth v hunt that labor unions were not illegal conspiracies provided that their methods were honorable and peaceful this enlightened decision did not legalize the strike overnight throughout the country but it was a signicant signpost of the times.
trade unions still had a rocky row to hoe stretching ahead for about a century before they could meet management on relatively even terms.
women and the economy women were also sucked into the clanging mechanism of factory production.
farm women and girls had an important place in the preindustrial economy spinning yarn weaving cloth and making candles soap butter and cheese.
new factories such as the textile mills of new eng land undermined these activities cranking out manufactured goods much faster than they could be made by hand at home.
yet these same factories offered employment to the very young women whose work they were displacing.
factory jobs promised greater economic independence for women as well as the means to buy the manufactured products of the new market economy.
factory girls typically toiled six days a week earning a pittance for dreary limb numbing earsplitting stints of twelve or thirteen hours from dark to dark the boston associates nonetheless proudly pointed to their textile mill at lowell massachusetts as a showplace factory.
the workers were virtually all new england farm girls carefully supervised on and off the job by watchful matrons.
escorted regularly to church from their company boardinghouses and forbidden to form unions they had few opportunities to share dissatisfactions over their grueling working conditions.
but factory jobs of any kind were still unusual for women.
opportunities for women to be economically self supporting were scarce and consisted mainly of nursing domestic ser vice and especially teaching.
the dedicated catharine beecher unmarried daughter of a famous preacher and sister of harriet beecher stowe tirelessly urged women to enter the teaching profession.
she eventually succeeded beyond her dreams as men left teaching for other lines of work and schoolteaching became a thoroughly feminized occupation.
other work opportunities for women beckoned in household ser vice.
perhaps one white family in ten employed servants at midcentury most of whom were poor white immigrant or black women.
about 10 percent of white women were working for pay outside their own homes in 1850 and estimates are that about working women the sewing floor of thompsons skirt factory 1859 the burgeoning textile industry provided employment for thousands of women in antebellum america and also produced the clothes that women wore.
this view of a new york city shop in 1859 illustrates the transition from hand sewing on the right to machine stitching on the left.
it also vividly illustrates the contrast between the kinds of sewing circles in which women had traditionally sought companionship to the impersonal mass production line of the modern manufacturing plant.
note especially the stark exhortation on the wall strive to excel contrast this impersonal scene with the workplace depicted on page 322.
20 percent of all women had been employed at some time prior to marriage the vast majority of workingwomen were single.
upon marriage they left their paying jobs and took up their new work without wages as wives and mothers.
in the home they were enshrined in a cult of domesticity a widespread cultural creed that gloried the customary functions of the homemaker.
from their pedestal married women commanded immense moral power and they increasingly made decisions that altered the character of the family itself.
womens changing roles and the spreading industrial revolution brought some important changes in the life of the nineteenth century home the traditional womens sphere love not parental arrangement more and more frequently determined the choice of a spouse yet parents often retained the power of veto.
families thus became more closely knit and affectionate providing the emotional refuge that made the threatening impersonality of big city industrialism tolerable to many people.
most striking families grew smaller.
the average household had nearly six members at the end of the eighteenth century but fewer than ve members a century later.
the fertility rate or number of births a woman worker in the lowell mills wrote a friend in 1844 you wish to know minutely of our hours of labor.
we go in to the mill at ve oclock at seven we come out to breakfast at half past seven we return to our work and stay until half past twelve.
at one or quarter past one four months in the year we return to our work and stay until seven at night.
then the evening is all our own which is more than some laboring girls can say who think nothing is more tedious than a factory life.
chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 among women ages fourteen to forty ve dropped sharply among white women in the years after the revolution and in the course of the nineteenth century as a whole fell by half.
birth control was still a taboo topic for polite conversation and contraceptive technology was primitive but clearly some form of family limitation was being practiced quietly and effectively in countless families rural and urban alike.
women undoubtedly played a large part perhaps the leading part in decisions to have fewer children.
this newly assertive role for women has been called domestic feminism because it signied the growing power and independence of women even while they remained wrapped in the cult of domesticity smaller families in turn meant child centered families since where children are fewer parents can lavish more care on them individually.
european visitors to the united states in the nineteenth century often complained about the unruly behavior of american brats but though american parents may have increasingly spared the rod they did not spoil their children.
lessons were enforced by punishments other than the hickory stick.
when the daughter of novelist harriet beecher stowe neglected to do her homework her mother sent her from the dinner table and gave her only bread and water in her own apartment what europeans saw as permissiveness was in reality the consequence of an emerging new idea of child rearing in which the childs will was not to be simply broken but rather shaped.
in the little republic of the family as in the republic at large good citizens were raised not to be meekly obedient to authority but to be independent individuals who could make their own decisions on the basis of internalized moral standards.
thus the outlines of the modern family were clear by midcentury it was small affectionate and child centered and it provided a special arena for the talents of women.
feminists of a later day might decry the sti ing at mosphere of the nineteenth century home but to many women of the time it seemed a big step upward from the conditions of grinding toil often alongside men in the elds in which their mothers had lived.
western farmers reap a revolution in the fields york pennsylvania family with negro servant ca.
1828 this portrait of a pennsylvania family presents a somewhat idealized picture of the home as the womans sphere.
the wife and mother sits at the center of activity while she reads to the children the husband and father stands by somewhat superuously.
a black servant cares for an infant in the corner suggesting the prosperous status of this household.
as smoke belching factories altered the eastern skyline ourishing farms were changing the face of the west.
the trans allegheny region especially the ohioindiana illinois tier was fast becoming the nations breadbasket.
before long it would become a granary to the world.
pioneer families rst hacked a clearing out of the forest and then planted their painfully furrowed elds to corn.
the yellow grain was amazingly versatile.
it could be fed to hogs corn on the hoof or distilled into liquor corn in the bottle.
both these products could be transported more easily than the bulky grain itself and they became the early western farmers staple market items.
so many hogs were butchered traded advances in agriculture mccormicks miraculous reaper this illustration shows an early test of cyrus mccormicks mechanical reaper near his home in virginia in 1831.
the reaper was best suited however to the horizonless elds of wheat on the rolling prairies of the midwest.
by the 1850s mccormicks chicago factory was cranking out more than twenty thousand reapers a year for midwestern farmers.
or shipped at cincinnati that the city was known as the porkopolis of the west.
most western produce was at rst oated down the ohio mississippi river system to feed the lusty appetite of the booming cotton kingdom.
but western farmers were as hungry for prots as southern slaves and planters were for food.
these tillers spurred on by the easy availability of seemingly boundless acres sought ways to bring more and more land into cultivation.
ingenious inventors came to their aid.
one of the rst obstacles that frustrated the farmers was the thickly matted soil of the west which snagged and mccormick reaper works 1850s contrast this scene of mass production with the workplace depicted in the master craftsman on page 322.
chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 snapped fragile wooden plows.
john deere of illinois in 1837 nally produced a steel plow that broke the stubborn soil.
sharp and effective it was also light enough to be pulled by horses rather than oxen.
in the 1830s virginia born cyrus mccormick contributed the most wondrous contraption of all a mechanical mower reaper.
the clattering cogs of mccormicks horse drawn machine were to the western farmers what the cotton gin was to the southern planters.
seated on his red chariot reaper a single husbandman could do the work of ve men with sickles and scythes.
no other american invention cut so wide a swath as the mccormick reaper.
it made ambitious capitalists out of humble plowmen who now scrambled for more acres on which to plant more elds of billowing wheat.
subsistence farming gave way to food production for both domestic and foreign markets as largescale extensive specialized cash crop agriculture came to dominate the trans allegheny west.
with it followed mounting indebtedness as farmers bought more land and more machinery to work it.
soon hustling farmer businesspeople were annually harvesting a larger crop than the south which was becoming self sufcient in food production could devour.
they began to dream of markets elsewhere in the mushrooming factory towns of the east or across the faraway atlantic.
but they were still largely landlocked.
commerce moved north and south on the river systems.
before it could begin to move east west in bulk a transportation revolution would have to occur.
highways and steamboats in 1789 when the constitution was launched primitive methods of travel were still in use.
waterborne commerce whether along the coast or on the rivers was slow uncertain and often dangerous.
stagecoaches and wagons lurched over bone shaking roads.
passengers would be routed out to lay nearby fence rails across muddy stretches and occasionally horses would drown in muddy pits while wagons sank slowly out of sight.
cheap and efcient carriers were imperative if raw materials were to be transported to factories and if nished products were to be delivered to consumers.
on december 3 1803 a rm in providence rhode island sent a shipment of yarn to a point sixty miles away notifying the purchaser that the consignment could be expected to arrive in the course of the winter a promising improvement came in the 1790s when a private company completed the lancaster turnpike in pennsylvania.
it was a broad hard surfaced highway that thrust sixty two miles westward from philadelphia to lancaster.
as drivers approached the tollgate they were confronted with a barrier of sharp pikes which were turned aside when they paid their toll.
hence the term turnpike.
the lancaster turnpike proved to be a highly successful venture returning as high as 15 percent annual dividends to its stockholders.
it attracted a rich trade to philadelphia and touched off a turnpikebuilding boom that lasted about twenty years.
it also stimulated western development.
the turnpikes beckoned to the canvas covered conestoga wagons whose creakings heralded a westward advance that would know no real retreat.
western road building always expensive encountered many obstacles.
one pesky roadblock was the noisy states righters who opposed federal aid to local projects.
eastern states also protested against being bled of their populations by the westward reaching arteries.
westerners scored a notable triumph in 1811 when the federal government started construction of the national road also known as the cumberland road in honor of its starting point in cumberland maryland.
although construction was interrupted by the war of 1812 and by states righters complaints about federal grants for internal improvements the road reached vandalia illinois 591 miles to the west in 1839.
later extensions brought it from baltimore on chesapeake bay to the banks of the mississippi river in st louis.
the steamboat craze which overlapped the turnpike craze was touched off by an ambitious painterengineer named robert fulton.
he installed a powerful steam engine in a vessel that posterity came to know as the clermont but that a dubious public dubbed fultons folly on a historic day in 1807 the quaint little ship belching sparks from its single smokestack churned steadily from new york city up the hudson river toward albany.
it made the run of 150 miles in 32 hours.
the success of the steamboat was sensational.
people could now in large degree defy wind wave tide and downstream current.
within a few years fulton had changed all of americas navigable streams into two way arteries thereby doubling their carrying ca the transportation revolution mississippi in time of peace by mrs frances flora bond palmer 1865 by the mid nineteenth century steamboats had made the mississippi a bustling river highway as it remains today.
hitherto keelboats had been pushed up the mississippi with quivering poles and raucous profanity at less than one mile an hour a process that was prohibitively expensive.
now the steamboats could churn rapidly against the current ultimately attaining speeds in excess of ten miles an hour.
the mighty mississippi had met its master.
by 1820 there were some sixty steamboats on the mississippi and its tributaries by 1860 about one thousand some of them luxurious river palaces.
keen rivalry among the swift and gaudy steamers led to memorable races.
excited passengers would urge the captain to pile on wood at the risk of bursting the boilers which all too often exploded with tragic results for the oating retraps.
when the steamer sultana blew up in april 1865 the explosion killed seventeen hundred passengers including many union prisoners of war being repatriated to the north.
chugging steamboats played a vital role in the opening of the west and south both of which were richly endowed with navigable rivers.
like bunches of grapes on a vine population clustered along the banks of the broad owing streams.
cotton growers and other farmers made haste to take up and turn over the nowprotable soil.
not only could they oat their produce out to market but hardly less important they could ship in at low cost their shoes hardware and other manufactured necessities.
clintons big ditch in new york a canal cutting craze paralleled the boom in turnpikes and steamboats see map 14 2.
a few canals had been built around falls and elsewhere in colonial days but ambitious projects lay in the future.
resourceful new yorkers cut off from federal aid by states righters themselves dug the erie canal linking the great lakes with the hudson river.
they were blessed with the driv ing leadership of governor dewitt clinton whose grandiose project was scof ngly called clintons big ditch or the governors gutter begun in 1817 the canal eventually ribboned 363 miles.
on its completion in 1825 a garlanded canal boat glided from buffalo on lake erie to the hudson n he al le g e connecticut r.
n ad raleigh cape fear r wilmington columbia.
ea e ac r santee ad r a l ro norfolk c te natchez ala ba ma ce mississippi re d r era chesapeake bay roan ok south carolina augusta fed montgomery lynchburg ti r pp i ssi mi ssi ra d r sa r zt at v oa yr alle r ee h na he ee r igb n c at b tom vicksburg richmond buchanan north carolina oad n va.
maryland e cumberland gap knoxville r s es nn washington d c virginia gre s sa an ark florence delaware and raritan c delaware ohio c staunton es le ad tennessee vil.
portsmouth kentucky r ern ro nash wild nashville new york city new brunswick lancaster tpk.
rd r i conn s.
trenton rbe fo lancaster philadelphia bedford new hagerstown jersey baltimore chesapeake and ohio r and erie io c oh boonesboro r cum berland sr n nn providence wheeling zanesville marietta cumberland lexington kentucky arkansas za pe boston worcester oc louisville pennsylvania state c system ro ri es ou maysville evansville missouri pittsburgh columbus cincinnati vandalia binghamton pennsylvania ohio tr ss haute st louis olean new york tl springfield l road nationa terre c u m b e r l a n d franklin r ft cleveland ohio and erie c r coastal an toledo y lowell mass.
an an n ash indianapolis springfield mi ab wayne r sh ba indiana a w w illinois illi r c mi ami a nd erie c 4 0 n s oi ie d er r i e erie e e troy albany chenango c portland n h hudson r genesee valley c harrison r la ke m ic ron la salle vt ck ima merr hu hig ke erie c buffalo lak l champlain c lockport chicago maine nc re oswego c ario champlain c o n toswego rome utica la k e welland c detroit w la carthage black r michigan iowa st.
british north america canada la wisconsin 70w r 8 0 w 9 0 w georgia charleston n columbus canal savannah alabama navigable river louisiana major road 30 n new orleans gulf of mexico st augustine florida 200 km.
map 14 2 major rivers roads and canals 1825 1860 interactive map river and on to new york harbor.
there with colorful ceremony governor clinton emptied a cask of water from the lake to symbolize the marriage of the waters the water from clintons keg baptized the empire state.
mule drawn passengers and bulky freight could now be handled with thrift and dispatch at the dizzy speed of ve miles an hour.
the cost of shipping a ton of grain from buffalo to new york city fell from 100 to 5 and the time of transit from about twenty days to six.
ever widening economic ripples followed the completion of the erie canal.
the value of land along the route skyrocketed and new cities such as rochester and syracuse blossomed.
industry in the state boomed.
the new protability of farming in the old northwest canals and railroads 80w qubec me.
montral vt wis r chicago n h detroit ind.
ill l o l e eri ntar io boston n y pa new york pittsburgh n j philadelphia ohio del.
washington d c cincinnati va 40n st joseph r louisville o i oh ky n n c tenn ea mo.
richmond oc st louis s c ala miss.
charleston ga savannah la.
jacksonville tex.
houston fla n at new orleans ic ark.
r i conn nt iowa mich la ss ip minn terr.
ron l michi gan l ssi hu mi 70w br it ish no r t h amer ica canada la k e s u p e r i o r pi notably in ohio michigan indiana and illinois attracted thousands of european immigrants to the unaxed and untaxed lands now available.
flotillas of steamships soon plied the great lakes connecting with canal barges at buffalo.
interior waterside villages like cleveland detroit and chicago exploded into mighty cities.
other profound economic and political changes followed the canals completion.
the price of potatoes in new york city was cut in half and many dispirited new eng land farmers no longer able to face the ruinous competition abandoned their rocky holdings and went elsewhere.
some became mill hands thus speeding the industrialization of america.
others nding it easy to go west over the erie canal took up new farmland south of the great lakes where they were joined by thousands of new yorkers and other northerners.
still others shifted to fruit vegetable and dairy farming.
the transformations in the northeast canal consequences showed how long established local market structures could be swamped by the emerging behemoth of a continental economy.
and as american products began to ow into international markets even far off europeans began to feel the effects of americas economic vitality.
before long italian and polish peasants displaced from their marginal farms by the arrival of cheap american grains would come to america to build new lives.
g ulf of mexico railroads 1850 railroads built 1850 1860 free state or territory slave state or territory 400 km.
open to slavery 400 mi.
the iron horse the most signicant contribution to the development of such an economy proved to be the railroad.
it was fast reliable cheaper than canals to construct and not frozen over in winter.
able to go almost anywhere even through the allegheny barrier it deed terrain and weather.
the rst railroad appeared in the united states in 1828 and new lines spread with amazing swiftness.
andrew jackson rode to his rst presidential inauguration in 1829 in a horse drawn carriage.
at the end of his second term eight years later he departed from washington in a railway car.
by 1860 on the eve of the civil war the united states boasted thirty thousand miles of railroad track three fourths of it in the rapidly industrializing north see map 14 3.
at rst the railroad faced strong opposition from vested interests especially canal backers.
anxious to protect its investment in the erie canal the new york legislature in 1833 prohibited the railroads from carrying freight at least temporarily.
early railroads map 14 3 the railroad revolution note the explosion of new railroad construction in the 1850s and its heavy concentration in the north.
interactive map were also considered a dangerous public menace for ying sparks could set re to nearby haystacks and houses and appalling railway accidents could turn the wooden miniature hells into aming funeral pyres for their riders.
railroad pioneers had to overcome other obstacles as well.
brakes were so feeble that the engineer might miss the station twice both arriving and backing up.
arrivals and departures were conjectural and numerous differences in gauge the distance between the rails meant frequent changes of trains for passengers.
in 1840 there were seven transfers between philadelphia and charleston.
but gauges gradually chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 poster timetable for baltimore susquehanna railroad 1840 advertising the baltimore susquehannas train schedule alone was not sufcient to get passengers to their destinations.
a typical trip often entailed coordinating legs on other railroad lines stagecoaches and canal boats.
became standardized better brakes did brake safety devices were adopted and the pullman sleeping palace was introduced in 1859.
america at long last was being bound together with braces of iron later to be made of steel.
cables clippers and pony riders other forms of transportation and communication were binding together the united states and the world.
a crucial development came in 1858 when cyrus field called the greatest wire puller in history orga nized a joint anglo american canadian venture to stretch a cable under the deep north atlantic waters from newfoundland to ireland.
although this initial cable went dead after three weeks of public rejoicing a heavier cable laid in 1866 permanently linked the american and european continents.
the united states merchant marine encountered rough sailing during much of the early nineteenth century.
american vessels had been repeatedly laid up by the embargo the war of 1812 and the panics of 1819 and 1837.
american naval designers made few contributions to maritime progress.
a pioneer american steamer the savannah crept across the atlantic in 1819 but it used sail most of the time and was pursued for a day by a british captain who thought it a re.
in the 1840s and 1850s a golden age dawned for american shipping.
yankee naval yards notably donald mckays at boston began to send down the ways sleek new craft called clipper ships.
long narrow and majestic they glided across the sea under towering communication and trade chariot of fame clipper ship by duncan mcfarlane 1854 masts and clouds of canvas.
in a fair breeze they could outrun any steamer.
the stately clippers sacriced cargo space for speed and their captains made kill ings by hauling high value cargoes in record times.
they wrested much of the tea carrying trade between the far east and britain from their slower sailing british competitors and they sped thousands of impatient adventurers to the goldelds of cal i fornia and australia.
but the hour of glory for the clipper was relatively brief.
on the eve of the civil war the british had clearly won the world race for maritime ascendancy with their iron tramp steamers teakettles.
although slower and less romantic than the clipper these vessels were steadier roomier more reliable and hence more protable.
no story of rapid american communication would be complete without including the far west.
by 1858 horse drawn overland stagecoaches immortalized by mark twains roughing it were a familiar sight.
their dusty tracks stretched from the banks of the muddy missouri river clear to cal i fornia see map 14 4.
even more dramatic was the pony express established in 1860 to carry mail speedily the two thousand lonely miles from st joseph missouri to sacramento cal i fornia.
daring lightweight riders leaping onto wiry ponies saddled at stations approximately ten miles as late as 1877 stagecoach passengers were advised in print never shoot on the road as the noise might frighten the horses.
dont point out where murders have been committed especially if there are women passengers.
expect annoyances discomfort and some hardships.
britis h n orth a m e ric a c a n a da 110w b on r ta o tr a il le gr e en il s tr a te el paso del norte b ut sa c r a m e nt o r l sa l 30n ill eri e nauvoo as st louis an oh io r ky tenn r ft smith territory rl ove ohio ind.
independence mo.
rail dt ark.
texas ala ga la.
san antonio gr galveston gulf of mexico an n mich united states indian ld fie rio chihuahua r on trail trail r ron i tra gila hu red r field ov erland wis r s new mexico territory pi an on arr il cim g tra taos n i s s cro santa fe fe trail ft smith sa nta ip iowa morm ft leavenworth s a n t a fe e.
iss l t p la t e r kansas tr territory or la k iss uri r a rk tte l ins ns bu ic if n c a pa ce o san diego s nt rai so ft kearney pla r go e at salt lake city great e basin ng calif sa r o to l do ra ke o l a o c tl ish d span ol los angeles ft laramie n p la o tte re r ta i santa barbara trail un r great salt lifo lake ca express overland mail y n po utah sacramento sutters fort territory rmon is mo m r ra il at mo san francisco ni ft hall gr 40n y ke superi minn nebraska territory ck sna ft lane la k e unorg.
m ro il r a tr oregon territory r.
ri r mis s ou.
e n r wsto yello ter or eg on portland milk in gt n colum was h ft vancouver astoria 80w 90w 100w la k e m i c h i g a 120w ia r de mexico 400 km.
map 14 4 main routes west before the civil war mark twain described his stagecoach trip to california in the 1860s in roughing it we began to get into country now threaded here and there with little streams.
these had high steep banks on each side and every time we ew down one bank and scrambled up the other our party inside got mixed somewhat.
first we would all be down in a pile at the forward end of the stage.
and in a second we would shoot to the other end and stand on our heads.
as the dust rose from the tumult we would all sneeze in chorus and the majority of us would grumble and probably say some hasty thing like take your elbow out of my ribs cant you quit crowding apart could make the trip in an amazing ten days.
these unarmed horsemen galloped on summer or winter day or night through dust or snow past indians and bandits.
the speeding postmen missed only one trip though the whole enterprise lost money heavily and folded after only eighteen legend leaving months.
just as the clippers had succumbed to steam so were the express riders unhorsed by samuel morses clacking keys which began tapping messages to cal ifornia in 1861.
the swift ships and the eet ponies ush334 interactive map ered out a dying technology of wind and muscle.
in the future machines would be in the saddle.
the transport web binds the union more than anything else the desire of the east to tap the west stimulated the transportation revolution.
until about 1830 the produce of the western region forging a continental economy drained southward to the cotton belt or to the heapedup wharves of new orleans.
the steamboat vastly aided the reverse ow of nished goods up the watery western arteries and helped bind west and south together.
but the truly revolutionary changes in commerce and communication came in the three decades before the civil war as canals and railroad tracks radiated out from the east across the alleghenies and into the blossoming heartland.
the ditch diggers and tie layers were attempting nothing less than a conquest of nature itself.
they would offset the natural ow of trade on the interior rivers by laying down an impressive grid of internal improvements the builders succeeded beyond their wildest dreams.
the mississippi was increasingly robbed of its trafc as goods moved eastward on chugging trains puf ng lake boats and mule tugged canal barges.
governor clinton had in effect picked up the mighty father of waters and ung it over the alleghenies forcing it to empty into the sea at new york city.
by the 1840s the city of buffalo handled more western produce than new orleans.
between 1836 and 1860 grain shipments through buffalo increased a staggering sixtyfold.
new york city became the seaboard queen of the nation a gigantic port through which a vast hinterland poured its wealth and to which it daily paid economic tribute.
by the eve of the civil war a truly continental economy had emerged.
the principle of division of labor which spelled productivity and prots in the factory applied on a national scale as well.
each region now specialized in a particular type of economic activity.
the south raised cotton for export to new england and britain the west grew grain and livestock to feed factory workers in the east and in europe the east made machines and textiles for the south and the west.
the economic pattern thus woven had fateful political and military implications.
many southerners regarded the mississippi as a silver chain that naturally linked together the upper valley states and the cotton kingdom.
they would become convinced as secession approached in the 1850s that some or all of these states would have to secede with them or be strangled.
but they would overlook the man made links that increasingly bound the upper mississippi valley to the east in intimate commercial union.
southern rebels would have to ght not only northern armies but the tight bonds of an interdependent continental economy.
economically the two northerly sections were siamese twins.
the market revolution no less revolutionary than the political upheavals of the antebellum era was the market revolution that transformed a subsistence economy of scattered farms and tiny workshops into a national network of industry and commerce see map 14 5.
greater mechanization and a more robust market oriented economy raised new legal questions about winners and losers.
how tightly should patents protect inventions.
should the government regulate monopolies.
who should own the technologies and networks that made america hum in the 1840s and 1850s.
under chief justice john marshall the u s supreme court vigilantly protected contract rights by requiring state governments to grant irrevocable charters.
monopolies easily developed as new companies found it difcult to break into markets.
after marshall died in 1835 the climate began to change and the winds of economic opportunity blew more freely.
when the proprietors of bostons charles river bridge which included harvard college sued the owners of the new warren bridge for unconstitutionally violating their original contract the new chief justice roger b taney sided with the newcomers and argued that the rights of the community outweighed any exclusive corporate rights.
taneys decision opened new entrepreneurial channels and encouraged greater competition.
so did the passage of more liberal state incorporation laws beginning in the 1830s granting investors the benet of limited liability if their companies were sued or went bankrupt.
as more and more americans mill workers as well as farmhands women as well as men linked their economic fate to the burgeoning market economy the self sufcient households of colonial days were transformed.
most families had once raised all their own food spun their own wool and bartered with their neighbors for the few necessities they could not make themselves.
in growing numbers they now scattered to work for wages in the mills or they planted just a few crops for sale at market and used the money to buy goods made by strangers in far off factories.
as storebought fabric candles and soap replaced homemade products a quiet revolution occurred in the household division of labor and status.
traditional womens work was rendered superuous and devalued.
the home itself once a center of economic production in which all family members cooperated grew into a place of refuge from the world of work a refuge that became increasingly the special and separate sphere of women.
chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 revolutionary advances in manufacturing and transportation brought increased prosperity to all americans but they also widened the gulf between the rich and the poor.
millionaires had been rare in the early days of the republic but by the eve of the civil war several specimens of colossal nancial success were strutting across the national stage.
spectacular was the case of fur trader and real estate speculator john jacob astor who left an estate of 30 million on his death in 1848.
cities bred the greatest extremes of economic inequality.
unskilled workers then as always fared worst.
many of them came to make up a oating mass of drifters buffeted from town to town by the shifting prospects for menial jobs.
these wandering workers accounted at various times for up to half the population of the brawling industrial centers.
although their numbers were large they left little behind them but the homely fruits of their transient labor.
largely unstoried and unsung they are among the forgotten men and women of american history.
many myths about social mobility grew up over the buried memories of these unfortunate day laborers.
mobility did exist in industrializing america but not in the proportions that legend often portrays.
ragsto riches success stories were relatively few.
yet america with its dynamic society and wideopen spaces undoubtedly provided more opportu map 14 5 industry and agriculture 1860 still a nation of farmers on the eve of the civil war americans had nevertheless made an impressive start on their own industrial revolution especially in the northeast.
first oil well 1859 titusville pa wis n h manchester mass.
o ky tenn n c knoxville memphis ark.
atlanta n ea oc ala 30n richmond ga industry f flour and meal natchez texas mobile la.
new orleans houston fla mexico g ul f of m ex i c o agriculture corn and wheat dairy cattle and hay tobacco and hemp range and ranch cattle cotton orchard fruits rice and sugar cane lumber and timber 400 km.
n n albuquerque t louisville f a indian territory del.
f va l los angeles oh.
i st louis mo.
n j baltimore t ic pac i f new mexico territory kansas city r i.
i tphiladelphia cincinnati ill kansas territory f cleveland pittsburgh pa ind.
new bedford t s providence new yorkconn.
newark ic utah territory boston st detroit chicago des moines t s i a salt lake city n y mich milwaukee iowa albany troy rochester f 40n calif vt t minneapolis me.
nebraska territory san francisco 70w a unorg.
terr oregon territory 80w british north america canada g n to portland in 90w e was h 100w c 110w interactive map t textiles s shoes and clothing i iron and steelworks mining principal manufacturing cities product value silver and gold t over 100 000 000 iron ore over 10 000 000 bituminous coal other major city copper anthracite coal social mobility in industrializing america chicago 1857 a modest village of a few hundred souls in the 1830s chicago was a teeming metropolis just two decades later one of the fastest growing cities in the world.
a food and livestock processing center and transportation hub it served the vast farming area of the western plains a remarkably productive agricultural region and breadbasket to the world.
nity than did the contemporary countries of the old world which is why millions of immigrants packed their bags and headed for new world shores.
moreover a rising tide lifts all boats and the improvement in overall standards of living was real.
wages for unskilled workers in a labor hungry america rose about 1 percent a year from 1820 to 1860.
this general prosperity helped defuse the potential class con ict that might otherwise have exploded and that did explode in many european countries.
the famed english writer charles dickens 1812 1870 traveled to the united states in 1842 and was sharply critical of certain aspects of the national character another prominent feature is the love of smart dealing which gilds over many a swindle and gross breach of trust many a defalcation embezzlement public and private and enables many a knave to hold his head up with the best who well deserves a halter.
copyright 2010 cengage learning inc all rights reserved.
may not be copied scanned or duplicated in whole or in part.
chapter 14 forging the national economy 1790 1860 chronology ca.
1843 era of clipper ships samuel morse invents telegraph anti catholic riot in philadelphia whitney develops interchangeable parts for muskets 1845 potato famine in ireland robert fultons rst steamboat embargo spurs american manufacturing elias howe invents sewing machine cumberland road construction begins erie canal construction begins first general incorporation laws in new york democratic revolutions collapse in germany erie canal completed american or know nothing party formed first railroad in united states london worlds fair 1830s cyrus mccormick invents mechanical mower reaper cumberland road completed cyrus field lays rst transatlantic cable anti catholic riot in boston pony express established john deere develops steel plow first transcontinental telegraph president van buren establishes ten hour day for federal employees permanent transatlantic cable established ca.
1750 industrial revolution begins in britain samuel slater builds rst u s textile factory eli whitney invents cotton gin massachusetts declares labor unions legal in commonwealth v hunt key terms self reliance 306 rendezvous 307 ecological imperialism 307 ancient order of hibernians 311 molly maguires 311 tammany hall 311 know nothing party 314 awful disclosures 314 cotton gin 318 patent ofce 321 people to know limited liability 321 commonwealth v hunt 324 cult of domesticity 325 mccormick reaper 328 turnpike 328 erie canal 329 clipper ships 332 pony express 333 transportation revolution 334 market revolution 335 samuel slater eli whitney elias howe isaac singer samuel f b morse john deere cyrus mccormick robert fulton dewitt clinton cyrus field john jacob astor to learn more to learn more john bodnar the transplanted a history of immigrants in urban america 1985 christopher clark social change in america from the revolution through the civil war 2006 thomas c cochran frontiers of change early industrialism in america 1981 hasia diner erins daughters in america 1983 david h hounshell from the american system to mass production 1800 1932 the development of manufacturing technology in the united states 1984 paul e johnson sam patch the famous jumper 2003 bruce levine the spirit of 1848 german immigrants labor conict and the coming of the civil war 1992 david nye consuming power a social history of american energies 1998 michael omalley keeping watch a history of american time 1996 carol sheriff the articial river 1996 augustus j veenendaal american railroads in the nineteenth century 2003 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the ferment of reform and culture 1790 1860 we americans will walk on our own feet we will work with our own hands we will speak our own minds.
r alph waldo emerson the american scholar 1837 a third revolution accompanied the reformation of american politics and the transformation of the american economy in the mid nineteenth century.
it consisted of a diffuse yet deeply felt commitment to improve the character of ordinary americans to make them more upstanding god fearing and literate.
some high minded souls were disillusioned by the roughand tumble realities of democratic politics.
others notably women were excluded from the political game altogether.
as the young republic grew increasing numbers of americans poured their considerable energies into an astonishing variety of religious revivals and reform movements.
reform campaigns of all types ourished in sometimes bewildering abundance.
there was not a reading man who was without some scheme for a new utopia in his waistcoat pocket claimed ralph waldo emerson.
reformers promoted better public schools and rights for women as well as miracle medicines polygamy celibacy rule by prophets and guidance by spirits.
societies were formed against alcohol tobacco profanity and the transit of mail on the sabbath.
eventually overshadowing all other reforms was the great crusade against slavery see pp.
many reformers drew their crusading zeal from religion.
beginning in the late 1790s and boiling over into the early nineteenth century the second great awakening swept through americas protestant churches transforming the place of religion in american life and sending a generation of believers out on their missions to perfect the world.
reviving religion church attendance was still a regular ritual for about three fourths of the 23 million americans in 1850.
alexis de tocqueville declared that there was no country in the world where the christian religion retains a greater inuence over the souls of men than in amer this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website religious revivalism ica yet the religion of these years was not the old time religion of colonial days.
the austere calvinist rigor had long been seeping out of the american churches.
the rationalist ideas of the french revolutionary era had done much to soften the older orthodoxy.
thomas paines widely circulated book the age of reason 1794 had shockingly declared that all churches were set up to terrify and enslave mankind and monopolize power and prot american anticlericalism was seldom that virulent but many of the founding fathers including jefferson and franklin embraced the liberal doctrines of deism that paine promoted.
deists relied on reason rather than revelation on science rather than the bible.
they rejected the concept of original sin and denied christs divinity.
yet deists believed in a supreme being who had created a knowable universe and endowed human beings with a capacity for moral behavior.
deism helped to inspire an important spinoff from the severe puritanism of the past the unitarian faith which began to gather momentum in new eng land at the end of the eighteenth century.
unitarians held that god existed in only one person hence unitarian and not in the orthodox trinity god the father god the son and god the holy spirit.
although denying the deity of jesus unitarians stressed the essential goodness of human nature rather than its vileness they proclaimed their belief in free will and the possibility of salvation through good works they pictured god not as a stern creator but as a loving father.
embraced by many leading thinkers including ralph waldo emerson the unitarian movement appealed mostly to intellectuals whose rationalism and optimism contrasted sharply with the hell re doctrines of calvinism especially predestination and human depravity.
a boiling reaction against the growing liberalism in religion set in about 1800.
a fresh wave of roaring revivals beginning on the southern frontier but soon rolling even into the cities of the northeast sent the second great awakening surging across the land.
sweeping up even more people than the first great awakening see p 98 almost a century earlier the second awakening was one of the most momentous episodes in the history of american religion.
this tidal wave of spiritual fervor left in its wake countless converted souls many shattered and reorga nized churches and numerous new sects.
it also encouraged an effervescent evangelicalism that bubbled up into innumerable areas of american life including prison reform the temperance cause the womens movement and the crusade to abolish slavery.
the second great awakening was spread to the masses on the frontier by huge camp meetings as many as twenty ve thousand people would gather for an encampment of several days to drink the hell re gospel as served up by an itinerant preacher.
thousands of spiritually starved souls got religion at these religious camp meeting by j maze burbank 1839 at huge daylong encampments repentant sinners dedicated themselves to lives of personal rectitude and social reform.
fire and brimstone preachers like the one depicted here inspired convulsions speaking in tongues and ecstatic singing and dancing among the converted.
out of this religious upheaval grew many of the movements for social improvement in the pre civil war decades including the abolitionist crusade.
