united states and the soviet union had added this dread new weapon to their arsenals.
with new long range ballistic missiles being perfected it was only a matter of time before russia and the united states would be capable of destroying each other completely.
peace as winston churchill noted now depended on a balance of terror.
throughout the 1950s eisenhower sought a way out of the nuclear dilemma.
in april 1953 shortly after stalins death he gave a speech in which he called on the russians to join him in a new effort at disarmament pointing out that every warship launched every rocket fired signifies in the final sense a theft from those who hunger and are not fed those who are cold and are not clothed when the soviets ignored this appeal the president tried again in december 1953.
addressing the un general assembly he outlined an atoms for peace plan whereby the united states and the soviet union would donate fissionable material to a new un agency to be used for peaceful purposes.
despite ikes appeal to serve the needs rather than the fears of mankind the russians again rebuffed him.
undaunted eisenhower tried once more.
at a summit conference in geneva switzerland in 1955 ike proposed to nikita khrushchev just emerging as stalins successor after a two year struggle for power a way to break the disarmament deadlock.
open skies as reporters dubbed the plan would overcome the traditional russian objection to on site inspection by having both superpowers open their territory to mutual aerial surveillance.
unfortunately khrushchev dismissed open skies as a very transparent espionage device and the conference ended without any significant breakthrough in the cold war.
after his reelection in 1956 the president renewed his efforts toward nuclear arms control.
concern over atmospheric fallout from nuclear testing had led presidential candidate adlai stevenson to propose a mutual ban on such experiments.
at first eisenhower rejected the test ban idea arguing that it could be effective only as part of a comprehensive disarmament agreement but the russians supported it.
finally in 1958 the president changed his mind after american and soviet scientists developed a system to detect nuclear testing in the atmosphere without on site inspection.
in october 1958 eisenhower and khrushchev each voluntarily suspended further weapons tests pending the outcome of a conference held at geneva to work out a test ban treaty.
although the geneva conference failed to make progress neither the united states nor the soviet union resumed testing for the remainder of ikes term in office.
the suspension of testing halted the nuclear pollution of the worlds atmosphere but it did not lead to the improvement in soviet american relations that eisenhower sought.
instead the soviet feat in launching sputnik the first artificial satellite to orbit the earth intensified the cold war.
see the feature essay in chapter 29 the reaction to sputnik pp.
fearful that the russians were several years ahead of the united states in the development of intercontinental ballistic missiles icbms democrats criticized eisenhower for not spending enough on defense and warned that a dangerous missile gap would open up by the early 1960s a time when the russians might have such a commanding lead in icbms that they could launch a first strike and destroy america.
despite the presidents belief that the american missile program was in good shape he allowed increased defense spending to speed up the building of american icbms and the new polaris submarine launched intermediate range missile irbm.
conclusion the continuing cold war nikita khrushchev took full advantage of the furor over sputnik to put the united states on the defensive.
we will bury you he boasted telling americans your grandchildren will live under communism the most serious threat of all came in november 1958 when the russian leader declared that within six months he would sign a separate peace treaty with east germany calling for an end to american british and french occupation rights in berlin.
eisenhower met the second berlin crisis as firmly as truman had the first.
he refused to abandon the city but also tried to avoid a military showdown.
prudent diplomacy forced khrushchev to extend his deadline indefinitely.
after a trip to the united states culminating in a personal meeting with eisenhower at camp david the russian leader agreed to attend a summit conference in paris in may 1960.
this much heralded meeting never took place.
on may 1 two weeks before the leaders were to convene in paris the soviets shot down an american u 2 plane piloted by francis gary powers.
the united states had been flying over russia since 1956 in the high altitude spy planes gaining vital information about the soviet missile program that showed there was little basis for the publics fear that the russians had opened up a dangerous missile gap.
after initially denying any knowledge eisenhower took full responsibility for powerss overflight and khrushchev responded with a scathing personal denunciation and a refusal to meet with the american president.
conclusion the continuing cold war the breakup of the paris summit marked the end of eisenhowers attempts to moderate the cold war.
the disillusioned leader told an aide that he saw nothing worthwhile left for him to do now until the end of his presidency but eisenhower did make a final effort for peace by delivering a somber warning about the danger of massive military spending in his farewell address to the american people.
in the councils of government we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence whether sought or unsought by the military industrial complex he declared.
the potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist rarely has an american president been more prophetic.
in the next few years the level of defense spending would skyrocket as the cold war escalated.
the military industrial complex reached its acme of power in the 1960s when the united states realized the full implications of trumans doctrine of containment.
eisenhower had succeeded in keeping the peace for eight years but he had failed to halt the momentum of the cold war he had inherited from harry truman.
ikes efforts to ease tension with the soviet union were dashed by his own distrust of communism and by khrushchevs belligerent rhetoric and behavior.
still he had begun to relax tensions a process that would survive the troubled 1960s and after several false starts would finally begin to erode the cold war by the end of the 1980s.
russians view the wreckage of the u 2 reconnaissance plane piloted by francis powers that was shot down over soviet territory on may 1 1960.
although eisenhower originally disavowed any knowledge of powerss mission khrushchev produced photographs of soviet military and industrial sites which he said had been taken by the u 2 pilot.
powers was held in a soviet prison for two years before he was released in exchange for a russian spy.
chapter 28 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 28 the onset of the cold war on myhistorylab time line 1945 truman meets stalin at potsdam conference july world war ii ends with japanese surrender august winston churchill gives iron curtain speech truman doctrine announced to congress march truman orders loyalty program for government employees march george marshall outlines marshall plan june truman signs national security act july 1948 soviets begin blockade of berlin june truman scores upset victory in presidential election nato treaty signed in washington april soviet union tests its first atomic bomb august truman authorizes building of hydrogen bomb january senator joseph mccarthy claims communists in government february north korea invades south korea june 1951 truman recalls macarthur from korea 1952 dwight d eisenhower elected president 1953 julius and ethel rosenberg executed for atomic1954 secrets spying june korean war truce signed at panmunjom july fall of dien bien phu to vietminh ends french control of indochina england and france touch off suez crisis 1957 russia launches sputnik satellite 1959 fidel castro takes power in cuba 1960 american u 2 spy plane shot down over russia chapter review the cold war begins how did the cold war begin.
iceland western bloc the cold war at home how did the cold war affect life in america.
communist bloc soviet zone nonaligned nations finland iron curtain norway sweden 500 miles the cold war began as the united states and the soviet union discovered that their interests in europe conflicted.
each feared the other and acting on its fears took steps that heightened the others fears.
atomic weapons made the mistakes of miscalculation far greater than in the past and everyone more fearful.
p 666 the cold war spawned fears of communist subversion.
it led to a campaign to ensure loyalty and fostered mccarthyism an exaggerated effort to find communists in every corner of american life.
although mccarthyism eventually burned itself out it contributed to eisenhowers election in 1952 which ended twenty years of democratic control of the white house.
p 674 containment eisenhower wages the cold war 500 kilometers north sea ireland den.
sovie unio united kingdom neth.
poland belg.
atlantic ocean germany czech.
france aus.
romania bl a yugoslavia portugal bulg.
italy spain alb.
morocco greece morocco fr.
algeria fr.
tunisia fr.
medi terranea n sea what was containment and why was it adopted.
containment was the american policy of preventing soviet power and influence from expanding.
it was adopted to preserve american interests without excessively risking war.
p 668 the cold war expands how did the cold war expand from europe to asia.
china lu ya r the united states and the soviet union took opposite sides in the chinese civil war.
shortly after the communist victory in china communist north korea battled anticommunist south korea.
the united states sided with south korea.
the soviet union and communist china backed north korea.
p 671 north korea pyongyang truce line panmunjom seoul inchon landing sept 15 1950 how successful was eisenhower at dealing with the foreign policy issues facing the united states.
when he became president in 1953 eisenhower was deeply experienced in military and diplomatic affairs.
while he failed to halt the momentum of the cold war as president he kept the peace for eight years and began to relax tensions with the soviet union.
p 680 study resources key terms definitions potsdam conference the final wartime meeting of the leaders of the united states britain and the soviet union was held at potsdam outside berlin in july 1945.
their failure to agree about the future of europe led to the cold war.
p 664 iron curtain winston churchill coined the phrase iron curtain to refer to the boundary in europe that divided soviet dominated eastern and central europe from western europe.
p 666 baruch plan in 1946 bernard baruch presented an american plan to control and eventually outlaw nuclear weapons.
the plan called for un control of nuclear weapons in three stages before the united states gave up its stockpile.
soviet insistence on immediate nuclear disarmament without inspection doomed the baruch plan and led to a nuclear arms race between the united states and the soviet union.
p 668 containment first proposed by george kennan in 1947 containment became the basic strategy of the united states throughout the cold war.
kennan argued that firm american resistance would eventually compel moscow to adopt more peaceful policies.
p 669 truman doctrine in 1947 president truman asked congress for money to aid the greek and turkish governments that were then threatened by communist rebels.
truman asserted that the united states was committed to support free people everywhere against communist attack or rebellion.
p 669 north atlantic treaty organization nato in 1949 the united states canada and ten european nations formed this military mutualdefense pact.
p 670 berlin airlift in 1948 in response to a soviet land blockade of berlin the united states carried out a massive effort to supply the 2 million berlin citizens by air.
the airlift forced the soviets to end the blockade in 1949 p 671 national security act congress passed the national security act in 1947 in response to perceived threats from the soviet union after world war ii.
it established the department of defense and created the central intelligence agency cia and national security council.
p 671 nsc 68 national security council planning paper no.
68 redefined americas national defense policy.
adopted in 1950 it committed the united states to a massive military buildup to meet the challenge posed by the soviet union.
p 672 taft hartley act this 1947 anti union legislation outlawed the closed shop and secondary boycotts.
it also authorized the president to seek injunctions to prevent strikes that threatened national security.
p 675 mccarthyism a sensationalist campaign by senator joseph mccarthy against supposed communists in government that began in 1950 and ended when the senate censured him in 1954 p 677 marshall plan in 1947 a massive aid program to rebuild the war torn economies of western europe.
the plan was motivated by both humanitarian concerns and fear of communism.
p 670 critical thinking questions 1.
why was the soviet union suspicious of the united states.
in what ways did the marshall plan demonstrate american generosity.
in what ways did it reflect american self interest.
how was the cold war in asia similar to the cold war in europe.
how was it different.
to what extent was mccarthyism justified.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 28 on myhistorylab the cold war begins the cold war at home read the document churchills iron curtain speech march 5 1946 p 667 read the document huac 1947 p 677 containment read the document george f kennan the long telegram 1946 p 668 read the document 1947 p 669 george marshall the marshall plan watch the video p 679 view the closer look berlin airlift p 672 view the map the korean war 1950 1953 p 673 mccarthyism and the politics of ike for president campaign ad 1952 eisenhower wages the cold war read the document dwight d eisenhower letters on dien bien phu 1954 p 681 the cold war expands watch the video fear p 678 ronald reagan testimony before complete the assignment middle east p 682 indicates study plan media assignment america enters the affluence and anxiety contents and learning objectives the postwar boom pg.
690 the struggle over civil rights pg.
698 how did the american economy evolve after world war ii.
how did the civil rights movement develop in the 1940s and 1950s.
the good life.
692 how did american culture change after the war.
feature essay the reaction to sputnik farewell to reform pg.
696 what was the primary justification for the passage of the interstate highway act of 1956.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab chapter 29 affluence and anxiety levittown the flight to the suburbs on may 7 1947 william levitt announced plans to build two thousand rental houses in a former potato field on long island thirty miles from midtown manhattan.
using mass production techniques he had learned while erecting navy housing during the war levitt quickly built four thousand homes and rented them to young veterans eager to leave crowded city apartments or their parents homes to begin raising families.
a change in government financing regulations led him to begin offering his houses for sale in 1948 for a small amount down and a low monthly payment.
young couples many of them the original renters quickly bought the first four thousand by the time levittown as he called the new community was completed in 1951 it contained more than seventeen thousand homes.
so many babies were born in levittown that it soon became known as fertility valley and the rabbit hutch levitt eventually built two more levittowns one in pennsylvania and one in new jersey each contained the same curving streets neighborhood parks and playgrounds and community swimming pools characteristic of the first development.
the secret of levittowns appeal was the basic house a 720 square foot cape cod design built on a concrete slab.
it had a kitchen two bedrooms and bath a living room complete with a fireplace and 16 foot picture window and an expansion attic with room for two more bedrooms.
levitt built only one interior but there were four different facades to break the monotony.
the original house sold for 6 990 in 1948 even the improved model a ranch style house sold for less than 10 000 in 1951.
levitts houses were ideal for young people just starting out in life.
they were cheap comfortable and efficient and each home came with a refrigerator cooking range and washing machine.
despite the conformity of the houses the three levittowns were surprisingly diverse communities residents had a wide variety of religious ethnic and occupational backgrounds.
african americans however were rigidly excluded.
in time as the more successful families moved on to larger homes in more expensive neighborhoods the levittowns became enclaves for lower middle class families.
evittown symbolized the most significant social trend of the postwar era in the united states the flight to the suburbs.
the residential areas surrounding cities such as new york and chicago nearly doubled in the 1950s.
while central cities remained relatively stagnant during the decade suburbs grew by 46 percent by 1960 some sixty million people one third of the nation lived in suburban rings around the cities.
this massive shift in population from the central city was accompanied by a baby boom that started during world war ii.
young married couples began to have three four or even five children compared with only one or two children in american families during the 1930s.
these larger families led to a 19 percent growth in the nations population between 1950 and 1960 the highest growth rate since 1910.
l the houses of levittown spread over twelve hundred acres of former potato fields on long island new york.
the economy boomed as residential construction soared.
by 1960 one fourth of all existing homes were less than ten years old and factories were turning out large quantities of appliances and television sets for the new households.
a multitude of new consumer products ranging from frozen foods to filter cigarettes from high fidelity phonographs to cars equipped with automatic transmissions and tubeless tires appeared in stores and showrooms.
in the suburbs the corner grocery gave way to the supermarket carrying a vast array of items that enabled homemakers to provide their families with a more varied diet.
a new affluence replaced the poverty and hunger of the great depression for most americans but many had haunting memories chapter 29 affluence and anxiety listen to the audio file events abroad added to the feeling of anxiety in the postwar years.
nuclear war became a frighteningly real possibility.
the rivalry with the soviet union had led to the second red scare with charges of treason and disloyalty being leveled at loyal americans.
many americans joined senator joseph mccarthy in searching for the communist enemy at home rather than abroad.
loyalty oaths and book burning revealed how insecure americans had become in the era of the cold war.
the 1950s also witnessed a growing demand by african americans for equal opportunity in an age of abundance.
the civil rights movement along with strident criticism of the consumer culture revealed that beneath the bland surface of suburban affluence forces for change were at work.
little boxes the postwar boom how did the american economy evolve after world war ii.
a photograph for a levittown house.
the levittown builders applied the principles of mass production used in auto manufacturing to house construction.
one important difference was the fact that the product stood stationary while workers came to the site to perform their specialized tasks.
of the 1930s.
the obsession with material goods took on an almost desperate quality as if a profusion of houses cars and home appliances could guarantee that the nightmare of depression would never return.
critics were quick to disparage the quality of life in suburban society.
they condemned the conformity charging the newly affluent with forsaking traditional american individualism to live in identical houses drive look alike cars and accumulate the same material possessions.
folksinger malvina reynolds caught the essence of postwar suburbia in a 1962 song little boxes on the hillside little boxes made of ticky tacky little boxes on the hillside little boxes all the same.
theres a green one and a pink one and a blue one and a yellow one and theyre all made out of ticky tacky and they all look just the same 1 little boxes words and music by malvina reynolds.
copyright 1962 schroder music co ascap.
used by permission.
all rights reserved.
for fifteen years following world war ii the nation witnessed a period of unparalleled economic growth.
a pent up demand for consumer goods fueled a steady industrial expansion.
heavy government spending during the cold war added an extra stimulus to the economy offsetting brief recessions in 1949 and 1953 and moderating a steeper one in 1957 1958.
by the end of the 1950s the american people had achieved an affluence that finally erased the lingering fears of the great depression.
postwar prosperity the economy began its upward surge as the result of two longterm factors.
first american consumers after being held in check by depression and then by wartime scarcities finally had a chance to indulge their suppressed appetites for material goods.
at the wars end personal savings in the united states stood at more than 37 billion providing a powerful stimulus to consumption.
initially american factories could not turn out enough automobiles and appliances to satisfy the horde of buyers.
by 1950 however production lines had finally caught up with the demand.
in that year americans bought more than six million cars and the gross national product gnp reached 318 billion 50 percent higher than in 1940.
the cold war provided the additional stimulus the economy needed when postwar expansion slowed.
the marshall plan and other foreign aid programs financed a heavy export trade.
the korean war helped overturn a brief recession and ensured continued prosperity as the government spent massive amounts on guns planes and munitions.
in 1952 the nation spent 44 billion two thirds of the federal budget on national defense.
the postwar boom although eisenhower managed to bring about some modest reductions defense spending continued at a level of 40 billion throughout the decade.
the nation achieved an affluence in the 1950s that made the persisting fear of another great depression seem irrational.
the baby boom and the spectacular growth of suburbia served as great stimulants to the consumer goods industries.
manufacturers turned out an ever increasing number of refrigerators washing machines and dishwashers to equip the kitchens of levittown and its many imitators across the country.
the automobile industry thrived with suburban expansion as two car families became more and more common.
in 1955 in an era when oil was abundant and gasoline sold for less than 30 cents a gallon detroit sold a record eight million cars.
the electronics industry boomed.
consumers were eager to acquire the latest marvel of home entertainment the television set.
commercial enterprises snapped up office machines and the first generation of computers industry installed electronic sensors and processors as it underwent extensive automation and the military displayed an insatiable appetite for electronic devices for its planes and ships.
as a result american industry averaged more than 10 billion a year in capital investment and the number of persons employed rose above the long sought goal of sixty million nationwide.
yet the economic abundance of the 1950s was not without its problems.
while some sections of the nation notably the emerging sunbelt areas of the south and west benefited enormously from the growth of the aircraft and electronics industries older manufacturing regions such as new england did not fare as well.
the steel industry increased its capacity during the decade but it began to fall behind the rate of national growth.
agriculture continued to experience bumper crops and low prices so rural regions like the vast areas of the plains states failed to share in the general affluence.
unemployment persisted despite the boom rising to more than 7 percent in a sharp recession that hit the country in the fall of 1957 and lasted through the summer of 1958.
the rate of economic growth slowed in the second half of the decade causing concern about the continuing vitality of the american economy.
none of these flaws however could disguise the fact that the nation was prospering to an extent no one dreamed possible in the 1930s.
the gnp grew to 440 billion by 1960 more than double the 1940 level.
more important workers now labored fewer than forty hours a week they rarely worked on saturdays and nearly all enjoyed a two week paid vacation each year.
by the mid 1950s the average american family had twice as much real income to spend as its counterpart had possessed in the boom years of the 1920s.
from 1945 to 1960 per capita disposable income rose by 500 to 1 845 for every man woman and child in the country.
the american people in one generation had moved from poverty and depression to the highest standard of living the world had ever known.
life in the suburbs sociologists had difficulty describing the nature of suburban society in the 1950s.
some saw it as classless while others noted the absence of both the very rich and the very poor and consequently labeled it middle class rather than forming a homogeneous social group though the suburbs contained a surprising variety of people whether classified as upper lower lower middle and upper middle or simply as blue collar white collar and professional.
doctors and lawyers often lived in the same developments as salesclerks and master plumbers.
the traditional distinctions of ancestry education and size of residence no longer differentiated people as easily as they had in the past.
yet suburbs could vary widely from working class communities clustered near factories built in the countryside to old elitist areas such as scarsdale new york and shaker heights ohio.
most were almost exclusively white and christian but suburbs such as great neck on long island and richmond heights outside miami enabled jews and blacks to take part in the flight from the inner city.
life in all the suburban communities depended on the automobile.
highways and expressways allowed fathers to commute to jobs in the cities often an hour or more away.
children might ride buses to and from school but mothers had to drive them to piano lessons and little league ballgames.
two cars became a necessity for almost every suburban family thus helping spur the boom in automobile production.
in 1948 only 59 percent of american families owned a car just a few years later nearly every suburban family had at least one vehicle and many had several.
in the new drive in culture people shopped at the stores that grew up first in miracle miles along the highways and later at the shopping centers that spread across the countryside in the 1950s.
there were only eight shopping centers in the entire country in 1946 hundreds appeared over the next fifteen years including poplar plaza in memphis with one large department store thirty retail shops and parking for more than five hundred cars.
in 1956 the first enclosed air conditioned mall the southdale shopping center opened outside minneapolis.
despite the increased mobility provided by the car the home became the focus for activities and aspirations.
the postwar shortage of housing that often forced young couples to live with their parents or in laws created an intense demand for new homes in the suburbs.
when questioned prospective buyers expressed a desire for more space for comfort and roominess and for privacy and freedom of action in their new residences.
men and women who moved to the suburbs prized the new kitchens with their built in dishwashers electric ovens and gleaming counters the extra bedrooms that ensured privacy from and for the children the large garages that could be converted into recreation rooms and the small neat lawns that gave them an area for outdoor activities as well as a new way to compete with their neighbors.
togetherness became the code word of the 1950s.
families did things together whether gathering around the tv sets that dominated living rooms attending community activities or taking vacations in the huge station wagons of the era.
but there were some less attractive consequences of the new suburban lifestyle.
the extended family in which several generations had lived in close proximity was a casualty of the boom in small detached homes.
as historian kenneth jackson noted suburban life ordained that most children would grow up in intimate contact only with their parents and siblings for many families grandparents aunts and uncles cousins and more distant relatives would become remote figures seen only on special occasions.
the nuclear family typical of the suburb did little to encourage the development of feminism.
the end of the war saw many women who had entered the workforce return to the home where chapter 29 affluence and anxiety the role of wife and mother continued to be viewed as the ideal for women in the 1950s.
trends toward getting married earlier and having larger families reinforced the pattern of women devoting all their efforts to housework and child raising rather than acquiring professional skills and pursuing careers outside the home.
adlai stevenson extolling the humble role of housewife told smith college graduates that there was much they could do in the living room with a baby in your lap or in the kitchen with a can opener in your hand dr benjamin spocks 1946 best seller baby and child care became a fixture in millions of homes while the traditional womens magazines such as mccalls and good housekeeping thrived by featuring articles on natural childbirth and inspirational pieces such as homemaking is my vocation nonetheless the number of working wives doubled between 1940 and 1960.
by the end of the 1950s 40 percent of american women and nearly one third of all married women had jobs outside the home.
the heavy expenses involved in rearing and educating children led wives and mothers to seek ways to augment the family income inadvertently preparing the way for a new demand for equality in the 1960s.
the good life.
how did american culture change after the war.
consumerism became the dominant social theme of the 1950s.
yet even with an abundance of creature comforts and added hours of leisure time the quality of life left many americans anxious and dissatisfied.
areas of greatest growth organized religion flourished in the climate of the 1950s.
ministers priests and rabbis all commented on the rise in church and synagogue attendance in the new communities.
will herberg claimed that religious affiliation had become the primary identifying feature of modern american life dividing the nation into three separate segments protestant catholic and jewish.
some observers condemned the bland secular nature of suburban churches which seemed to be an integral part of the consumer society.
on weekdays one shops for food wrote one critic on saturdays one shops for recreation and on sundays one shops for the holy ghost but the popularity of religious writer norman vincent peale with his positive gospel that urged people to start thinking faith enthusiasm and joy suggested that the new churches filled a genuine if shallow human need.
at the same time the emergence of neo orthodoxy in protestant seminaries notably through the ideas of reinhold niebuhr and the rapid spread of radical forms of fundamentalism such as the assemblies of god indicated that millions of americans still were searching for a more personal religious faith.
schools provided an immediate problem for the growing new suburban communities.
the increase in the number of school age children from twenty to thirty million in the first eight grades overwhelmed the resources of many local districts leading to demands for federal aid.
congress granted limited help for areas affected by defense plants and military bases but eisenhowers reluctance to unbalance the budget along with traditional adherence to state control over public education blocked further federal assistance prior to 1957 when the government reacted to sputnik.
see the feature essay the reaction to sputnik pp.
equally important a controversy arose over the nature of education in the 1950s.
critics of progressive education called for sweeping educational reforms and a new emphasis on traditional academic subjects.
suburban communities often had bitter fights affluent parents demanded kindergarten enrichment programs and grade school foreign language instruction while workingclass people resisted such costly innovations.
the one thing all seemed to agree on was the desirability of a college education.
the number of young people attending colleges increased from 1 5 million in 1940 to 3 6 million in 1960.
the largest advances were made in the exciting new medium of television.
from a shaky start just after the war tv boomed in the 1950s pushing radio aside and undermining many of the nations magazines.
by 1957 three networks controlled the airwaves reaching forty million sets over nearly five hundred stations.
advertisers soon took charge of the new medium using techniques first pioneered in radio including taped commercials quiz shows and soap operas.
at first the insatiable demand for programs encouraged a burst of creativity.
playwrights such as reginald rose rod serling and paddy chayefsky wrote a series of notable dramas for playhouse 90 studio one and the goodyear television playhouse.
broadcast live from cramped studios these productions thrived on tight dramatic structures movable scenery and frequent close ups of the actors.
advertisers however quickly became disillusioned with the live anthology programs which usually dealt with controversial subjects or focused on ordinary people and events.
in contrast sponsors wanted shows that stressed excitement glamour and instant success.
aware that audiences were fascinated by contestants with unusual expertise a shoemaker answering tough questions on operas a grandmother stumping experts on baseball producers began giving away huge cash prizes on the 64 000 question and twenty one.
in 1959 the nation was shocked when charles van doren a columbia university professor confessed he had been given the answers in advance to win 129 000 on twenty one.
the three networks quickly dropped all the big prize quiz programs replacing them with comedy action and adventure shows such as the untouchables and bonanza.
despite its early promise of artistic innovation television had become a technologically sophisticated but safe conveyor of the consumer culture.
critics of the consumer society one striking feature of the 1950s was the abundance of self criticism.
a number of widely read books explored the flaws in the new suburbia.
john keatss the crack in the picture window described the endless rows of tract houses vomited up by developers as identical boxes spreading like gangrene their occupants whom he dubbed the drones the amiables and the fecunds lost any sense of individuality in their obsession with material goods.
richard gordon katherine gordon and max gunther were more concerned about the psychological toll of suburban life in the good life.
their 1960 book the split level trap.
they labeled the new lifestyle disturbia and bemoaned the haggard men the tense and anxious women and the gimme kids it produced.
the most sweeping indictment came in william h whytes the organization man 1956 based on a study of the chicago suburb of park forest.
whyte perceived a change from the old protestant ethic with its emphasis on hard work and personal responsibility to a new social ethic centered on the team with the ultimate goal of belongingness the result was a stifling conformity and the loss of personal identity.
the most influential social critic of the 1950s was harvard sociologist david riesman.
his book the lonely crowd appeared in 1950 and set the tone for intellectual commentary about suburbia for the rest of the decade.
riesman described the shift from the innerdirected americans of the past who had relied on such traditional values as self denial and frugality to the other directed americans of the consumer society who constantly adapted their behavior to conform to social pressures.
the consequences a decline in individualism and a tendency for people to become acutely sensitive to the expectations of others produced a bland and tolerant society of consumers lacking creativity and a sense of adventure.
view the closer look c wright mills was a far more caustic commentator on american society in the 1950s.
anticipating government statistics that revealed white collar workers salesclerks office workers bank tellers now outnumbered blue collar workers miners factory workers mill hands mills described the new middle class in ominous terms in his books white collar 1951 and power elite 1956.
the corporation was the villain for mills depriving office workers of their own identities and imposing an impersonal discipline through manipulation and propaganda.
the industrial assembly line had given way to an even more dehumanizing workplace the modern office.
at rows of blank looking counters sat rows of blank looking girls with blank white folders in their blank hands all blankly folding blank papers this disenchantment with the consumer culture reached its most eloquent expression with the beats literary groups that rebelled against the materialistic society of the 1950s.
jack kerouacs novel on the road published in 1957 set the tone for the new movement.
the name came from the quest for beatitude a state of inner grace sought in zen buddhism.
flouting the respectability of suburbia the beatniks as middle america termed them were i love lucy a 1950s family watching television i love lucy was one of the most popular television shows of the 1950s.
manufacturers designed television sets as living room furniture and marketed televisions as promoting family togetherness and facilitating domestic leisure time.
complete the assignment the reaction to sputnik on myhistorylab feature essay the reaction to sputnik sputnik was launched into an elliptical low orbit by the soviet union on october 4 1957.
the surprise success of the launching of the worlds first artificial satellite by the soviet union served as catalyst in the united states for major changes and initiatives in national security education and space exploration.
o n october 4 1957 the soviet union launched sputnik the worlds first artificial satellite.
every 92 minutes the 184 pound sphere orbited the globe emitting its distinctive radio signal beep.
beep americans were stunned.
the united states had been planning to send up its own satellite as part of the international geophysical year established as july 1 1957 to december 31 1958.
but the vanguard program kept separate from the militarys quest for an intercontinental ballistic missile icbm was far behind schedule.
all american scientists could do was offer their congratulations to the soviets while political leaders tried to downplay the feat with one official dismissing sputnik as a silly bauble critics of the eisenhower administration however reacted quite differently.
a sense of panic gripped the nation.
edward teller father of the h bomb spoke of a technological pearl harbor and raised the fear that the soviets with a rocket powerful enough to send sputnik into space were ahead of the united states in the race for the icbm.
even more important many soon began to worry that the soviets threatened the superiority of the united states in science and technology areas in which americans had long felt invincible.
thus senator henry jackson a cold war democrat called the launch of sputnik a devastating blow to the prestige of the united states as the leader in the scientific and technical world in responding to sputnik americans began to voice doubts about the vitality and quality of their own society.
critics warned of excessive devotion to material objects cars appliances luxury goods at the expense of traditional american values such as hard work dedication and national pride.
one senator proclaimed that it was time to be less concerned with the depth of pile on the new broadloom rug or the height of the tail fin on the car and to be more prepared to shed blood sweat and tears if this country and the free world are to survive others worried over the realization that the soviets were training more scientists and engineers than the united states and called for a complete overhaul of the american educational system.
sputnik gave new momentum to reformers who for years had been critical of the trend toward social adjustment in american schools and were crying out for more stress on the basics reading writing and arithmetic.
events in the first few months following the launch of sputnik did little to calm the nation.
in november 1957 the soviets orbited a second satellite one weighing over 1 000 pounds and carrying a dog into space.
a month later american scientists readied vanguard for its first launch at cape canaveral in florida.
the slim rocket carrying a tiny 4 pound sphere as its payload rose only a few inches off the ground and then toppled over in a cloud of smoke and fire.
reporters covering the event quickly derided vanguard referring to it as flopnik and kaputnik president eisenhower then approved plans to let an army team led by german scientist wernher von braun attempt to put a satellite into orbit using the reliable intermediate range jupiter rocket.
on january 31 1958 explorer the first american satellite successfully orbited the earth.
much smaller than the original sputnik explorer did carry a more sophisticated set of instruments to send back data from space.
informed of the successful launch president eisenhower expressed the sentiments of millions of americans when he exclaimed i surely feel a lot better now sputnik served as a catalyst for change that led to many positive developments.
the most significant came in the area of national security.
democrats led by senator lyndon johnson criticized eisenhower for cutting defense spending in an effort to balance the budget and warned of a future missile gap claiming that the powerful rocket that launched sputnik into orbit showed the soviets were ahead in developing the icbm.
the president responded by increasing the pentagon budget by several billion dollars and speeding up the american missile program.
his most important action however was the appointment of mit president james killian to the new post of presidential science adviser.
killian quickly created a presidents science advisory committee psac composed of 17 leading scientists who met regularly to advise eisenhower on technical issues.
science commented time magazine has never before been given that kind of attention at that level killian and the psac persuaded eisenhower to take a gamble on icbms that paid off handsomely.
instead of focusing on liquid fuel missiles which took hours to load and could not be placed in hardened sites the president gave priority to development of solidfuel missiles the minuteman and the polaris which could be fired almost immediately and could be protected against attack in underground silos or underwater onboard submarines.
by the 1960s fears of a missile gap evaporated as americas second generation of missiles made the original soviet icbms obsolete.
in 1958 the nation moved quickly to address the other issues raised by sputnik.
with strong bipartisan support congress acted on long overdue educational reform.
the national defense education act ndea helped schools improve and broaden their science and math offerings as academic leaders helped design new math and new physics courses.
the act also created a loan fund to assist needy students in meeting the costs of a college education as well as establishing graduate fellowships in science engineering and foreign area studies.
sputnik had allowed those calling for educational reform to break the logjam and upgrade and improve school curriculums as well as make higher education more affordable.
another important congressional action came with the creation of the national aeronautics and space administration nasa in 1958.
concerned by the interservice rivalry that hampered the missile program its sponsors insisted on a new civilian agency to oversee the nations space program.
while dependent on the military for the rocket boosters nasa was able to develop its own agenda for space exploration and started a program that would eventually place astronauts in orbit around the earth and land them on the moon by the end of the next decade.
the reaction to sputnik illustrates the curious way that democracy often works.
advocates of space exploration educational reform and intercontinental ballistic missiles had made little headway before october 4 1957.
the soviet feat in launching sputnik helped arouse the nation and despite the initial overreaction led to important advances in all three areas.
sputnik thus proved to be like a fire bell in the night filling the american people with alarm but triggering a positive response that served the nation well.
questions for discussion 1.
how did the cold war influence americas decision to invest heavily in space exploration.
why did nasa favor manned space flight over instrument probes.
chapter 29 affluence and anxiety read the document pearson profiles jack kerouac despite the disapproval they evoked from mainstream americans the beat generation had some compassion for their detractors.
we love everything kerouac proclaimed billy graham the big ten rock and roll zen apple pie eisenhower we dig it all yet as highly visible nonconformists in an era of stifling conformity the beats demonstrated a style of social protest that would flower into the counterculture of the 1960s.
farewell to reform what was the primary justification for the passage of the interstate highway act of 1956.
it is not surprising that the spirit of reform underlying the new deal failed to flourish in the postwar years.
growing affluence took away the sense of grievance and the cry for change that was so strong in the 1930s.
eager to enjoy the new prosperity after years of want and sacrifice the american people turned away from federal regulation and welfare programs.
truman and the fair deal novelist jack kerouac and his fellow beat writers bemoaned the moral bankruptcy of popular culture.
they sought not to improve conditions but to find release from the moral and social confines constricting their lives and the literary conventions circumscribing their writing.
this photograph of jack kerouac was taken by beat poet allen ginsberg.
easily identified by their long hair and bizarre clothing they also had a penchant for sexual promiscuity and drug experimentation.
they were conspicuous dropouts from a society they found senseless.
poet lawrence ferlinghetti who held forth in the city lights bookshop in san francisco a favorite resort of the beats summed it up this way i was a wind up toy someone had dropped wound up into a world already running down the social protest inherent in the books and poems of the beats found its artistic counterpart in the rise of abstract expressionism.
abstract expressionists worked in styles that emphasized individuality and freedom from the constraints of representational realistic art.
painters jackson pollock and mark rothko among others challenged mainstream americas notions about the form and function of art.
for pollock the act of creating a painting was as important as the painting itself.
rothko pioneered a style known as color field painting his works in this style are monumental pieces in which enormous areas of color lacking any distinct structure or central focus are used to create a mood.
harry truman was in a buoyant mood when he gave his state of the union address on january 5 1949.
heartened by his upset victory in 1948 and by the substantial democratic majorities in congress 54 to 42 in the senate and 263 to 171 in the house he looked forward to advancing a liberal legislative agenda.
as expected he emphasized traditional new deal goals expansion and reform of the farm price support program broadened social security an increase in the minimum wage and repeal of the antiunion taft hartley act.
but he went further advocating new areas of reform when he declared every segment of our population and every individual has a right to expect from our government a fair deal three reform measures stood out in trumans plan for a fair deal.
the first measure called for medical insurance for all americans designed to provide a comprehensive solution to the nations health problem.
equally controversial was the second measure that proposed establishing a compulsory fair employment practices commission fepc to open up employment opportunities for african americans.
during world war ii president roosevelt had created a voluntary fair employment practices committee but congress stopped funding and it expired in 1946.
the third measure called for federal aid to education in order to help the states and local school districts meet the demands created by the postwar baby boom.
taken together these legislative proposals went far beyond the new deal legacy in an effort to provide greater social justice for all citizens.
trumans ambitious fair deal met with defeat after defeat in congress.
doctors led by the american medical association branded the administrations health insurance plan as socialized medicine and lobbied effectively against it.
southern senators threatened a filibuster against the fepc proposal quickly ending any chance for action on civil rights.
and despite the need for more funding for schools those favoring local control especially southern defenders of segregation were able to defeat measures for federal farewell to reform aid.
thus congress failed to act on all three of the fair deal reforms it also refused to repeal the taft hartley act or revise the farm program.
trumans only successes came in expanding social security to cover 10 million more americans and in raising the minimum wage to 75 cents an hour.
the presidents failure to enact his fair deal program stemmed primarily from political reality.
despite the nominal democratic control of the house and senate a conservative coalition in the making since 1938 blocked all efforts at further reform.
southern democrats and northern republicans combined to defeat any effort to extend government regulation especially into sensitive areas such as health care and civil rights.
at the same time truman can be faulted for trying to do too much too soon.
had he selected one of his proposed reforms such as federal aid to education and given it priority he might have been successful.
but attempting to pass such a sweeping program in face of the bipartisan conservative coalition proved hopeless.
yet truman must be given credit for defending and consolidating the new deal legacy of the 1930s.
by going on the offensive he blocked any effort by conservatives to undo reforms such as social security.
moreover truman succeeded in expanding his partys reform agenda.
by calling for action on civil rights health care and federal aid to education he was opening up discussion of vital issues that laid the groundwork for legislative action in the future.
eisenhowers modern republicanism the american people found that moderation was the keynote of the eisenhower presidency.
his major goal from the outset was to restore calm and tranquility to a badly divided nation.
unlike fdr and truman eisenhower had no commitment to social change or economic reform.
ike was a fiscal conservative who was intent on balancing the budget.
yet unlike some republicans of the extreme right wing he had no plans to dismantle the social programs of the new deal.
he sought instead to keep military spending in check to encourage as much private initiative as possible and to reduce federal activities to the bare minimum.
defining his position as modern republicanism he claimed that he was conservative when it comes to money and liberal when it comes to human beings on domestic issues eisenhower preferred to delegate authority and to play a passive role.
he concentrated his own efforts on the cold war abroad.
the men he chose to run the nation reflected his preference for successful corporation executives.
thus george humphrey an ohio industrialist carried out a policy of fiscal stringency as secretary of the treasury while charles e wilson the former head of general motors sought to keep the pentagon budget under control as secretary of defense.
neither man was wholly successful and both were guilty of tactless public statements.
humphrey warned that unless congress showed budgetary restraint were gonna have a depression which will curl your hair and wilson gained notoriety by proclaiming that what was good for our country was good for general motors and vice versa eisenhower was equally reluctant to play an active role in dealing with congress.
a fervent believer in the separation of powers ike did not want to engage in intensive lobbying.
he left congressional relations to aides such as sherman adams a former new hampshire governor who served as white house chief of staff.
adamss skill at resolving problems at lower levels insulated eisenhower from many of the nations pressing domestic concerns.
republican losses in the midterm election of 1954 weakened eisenhowers relations with congress.
the democrats regained control of both houses and kept it throughout the 1950s.
the president had to rely on two texas democrats senate majority leader lyndon b johnson and speaker of the house sam rayburn for legislative action at best it was an awkward and uneasy relationship.
the result was a very modest legislative record.
eisenhower did continue the basic social measures of the new deal.
in 1954 he signed bills extending social security benefits to more than seven million americans raising the minimum wage to 1 an hour and adding four million workers to those eligible for unemployment benefits.
he consolidated the administration of welfare programs by creating the department of health education and welfare in 1953.
oveta culp hobby the first woman to hold a cabinet post in a republican administration headed the new department.
but ike steadfastly opposed democratic plans for compulsory health insurance which he condemned as the socialization of medicine and comprehensive federal aid to education preferring to leave everything except school construction in the hands of local and state authorities.
this lack of presidential support and the continuing grip of the conservative coalition in congress blocked any further reform in the 1950s.
the one significant legislative achievement of the eisenhower years came with the passage of the highway act of 1956.
after a twelve year delay congress appropriated funds for a 41 000 mile interstate highway system consisting of multilane divided expressways that would connect the nations major cities.
justified on grounds of national defense the 1956 act pleased a variety of highway users the trucking industry automobile clubs organized labor eager for construction jobs farmers needing to speed their crops to market and state highway officials anxious for the 90 percent funding contributed by the federal government.
eisenhowers insistence that general revenue funds not be used to provide the federal share estimated at 25 billion of the total cost led to the creation of a highway trust fund raised by taxes on fuel tires and new cars and trucks.
built over the next twenty years the interstate highway system had a profound influence on american life.
it stimulated the economy and shortened travel time dramatically while at the same time intensifying the nations dependence on the automobile and distorting metropolitan growth patterns into long strips paralleling the new expressways.
the election of 1956 candidate eisenhower stevenson party republican democratic popular vote 35 575 420 26 033 066 electoral vote overall the eisenhower years marked an era of political moderation.
the american people enjoying the abundance of the 1950s seemed quite content with legislative inaction.
the president was sensitive to the nations economic health when recessions chapter 29 affluence and anxiety seattle portland butte billings fargo boston minneapolis detroit new york sioux falls chicago pittsburgh columbus omaha cheyenne salt lake city kansas city denver san francisco washington d c cincinnati indianapolis st louis louisville nashville oklahoma city los angeles albuquerque birmingham san diego tucson el paso fort worth charlotte little rock atlanta dallas mobile san antonio alaska no interstate highways charleston savannah montgomery jacksonville new orleans houston tampa honolulu miami hawaii 500 miles 500 kilometers 100 miles 100 kilometers 500 miles major interstate highways 500 kilometers the interstate highway system the 1956 plan to create an interstate highway system drastically changed americas landscape and culture.
today the system covers about forty five thousand miles only a few thousand more miles than called for in the original plan.
developed in 1953 and again in 1957 after his landslide reelection victory over adlai stevenson he quickly abandoned his goal of a balanced budget in favor of a policy advocating government spending to restore prosperity.
these steps along with modest increases in new deal welfare programs led to a steady growth in the federal budget from 29 5 billion in 1950 to 76 5 billion in 1960.
eisenhower was able to balance the budget in only three of his eight years in office and the 12 billion deficit in 1959 was larger than any ever before recorded in peacetime.
in this manner eisenhower was able to maintain the new deal legacy of federal responsibility for social welfare and the state of the economy while at the same time successfully resisting demands for more extensive government involvement in american life.
the struggle over civil rights how did the civil rights movement develop in the 1940s and 1950s.
despite president eisenhowers reluctance to champion the cause of reform powerful pressures for change forced long overdue action in one area of american life the denial of basic rights to the nations black minority.
in the midst of the cold war the contradiction between the denunciation of the soviet union for its human rights violations and the second class status of african americans began to arouse the national conscience.
fighting for freedom against communist tyranny abroad americans had to face the reality of the continued denial of freedom to a submerged minority at home.
african americans had benefited economically from world war ii but they were still a seriously disadvantaged group.
those who had left the south for better opportunities in northern and western cities were concentrated in blighted and segregated neighborhoods working at low paying jobs suffering economic and social discrimination and failing to share fully in the postwar prosperity.
the rising expectations of african americans in the postwar years led them to challenge the older patterns of racial segregation and inequality.
in the south conditions were much worse.
state laws forced blacks to live almost totally segregated from white society.
not only did african americans attend separate and almost always inferior schools but they also were rigidly segregated in all public facilities.
they were forced to use separate waiting rooms in train stations separate seats on all forms of transportation separate drinking the struggle over civil rights watch the video justice for all civil protest and civil rights the firebombing of a greyhound bus carrying white and black civil rights activists challenging illegal segregation on interstate bus routes in the south during 1961 was undertaken by a mob outside of anniston alabama.
these civil rights activists barely escaped with their lives from this violent attack on their passive resistance efforts.
fountains and even separate telephone booths.
segregation was enforced at all places of public entertainment including libraries auditoriums and circuses chief justice earl warren noted.
there was segregation in the hospitals prisons mental institutions and nursing homes.
even ambulance service was segregated civil rights as a political issue truman was the first president to attempt to alter the historic pattern of racial discrimination in the united states.
in 1946 he appointed a presidential commission on civil rights.
a year later in a sweeping report titled to secure these rights the commission recommended the reinstatement of the wartime fair employment practices committee fepc the establishment of a permanent civil rights commission and the denial of federal aid to any state that condoned segregation in schools and public facilities.
the presidents ten point legislative program proposed in 1948 included some of these measures notably the establishment of a permanent fepc and a civil rights commission.
but southern resistance had blocked any action by congress and the inclusion of a strong civil rights plank in the 1948 democratic platform had led to the walkout of some southern delegations and a separate states rights dixiecrat ticket in several states of the south that fall.
african american voters in the north overwhelmingly backed truman over dewey in the 1948 election.
the african american vote in key cities los angeles cleveland and chicago ensured the democratic victory in california ohio and illinois.
truman responded by including civil rights legislation in his fair deal program in 1949.
once again however determined southern opposition blocked congressional action on both a permanent fepc and an antilynching measure.
even though president truman was unable to secure any significant legislation he did succeed in adding civil rights to the chapter 29 affluence and anxiety liberal agenda.
from this time forward it would be an integral part of the democratic reform program.
also truman used his executive power to assist african americans.
he strengthened the civil rights division of the justice department which aided black groups in their efforts to challenge school segregation and restrictive housing covenants in the courts.
most important in 1948 truman issued an order calling for the desegregation of the armed forces.
the navy and the air force quickly complied but the army resisted until the personnel needs of the korean war finally overcame the militarys objections.
by the end of the 1950s the armed forces had become far more integrated than american society at large.
by appealing to reason by prayer and by constantly working at it through our own efforts could change be enacted.
quietly and unobtrusively he worked to achieve desegregation in federal facilities particularly in veterans hospitals navy yards and the district of columbia school system.
yet he refrained from endorsing the brown decision which he told an aide he believed had set back progress in the south at least fifteen years southern leaders mistook ikes silence for tacit support of segregation.
in 1957 governor orval faubus of arkansas called out the national guard to prevent the integration of little rocks central high school on grounds of a threat to public order.
after 270 armed troops turned back nine young african american students a federal judge ordered the guardsmen removed but when desegregating the schools the nations schools soon became the primary target of civil rights advocates.
the naacp concentrated first on universities successfully waging an intensive legal battle to win admission for qualified african americans to graduate schools and professional programs.
led by thurgood marshall naacp lawyers then took on the broader issue of segregation in the countrys public schools.
challenging the 1896 supreme court decision that upheld the constitutionality of separate but equal public facilities see plessy v ferguson the shaping of jim crow pp.
460 463 marshall argued that even substantially equal but separate schools did profound psychological damage to african american children and thus violated the fourteenth amendment.
the supreme court was unanimous in its 1954 decision in the case of brown v board of education of topeka.
chief justice earl warren recently appointed by president eisenhower wrote the landmark opinion flatly declaring that separate educational facilities are inherently unequal to divide grade school children solely because of their race warren argued generates a feeling of inferiority as to their status in the community that may affect their hearts and minds in a way unlikely ever to be undone despite this sweeping language warren realized it would be difficult to change historic patterns of segregation quickly.
accordingly in 1955 the court ruled that desegregation of the schools should proceed with all deliberate speed and left the details to the lower federal courts.
all deliberate speed proved to be agonizingly slow.
officials in the border states quickly complied with the courts ruling but states deeper in the south responded with a policy of massive resistance.
local white citizens councils organized to fight for retention of racial separation 101 representatives and senators signed a southern manifesto in 1956 that denounced the brown decision as a clear abuse of judicial power school boards encouraged by this show of defiance found a variety of ways to evade the courts ruling.
the most successful was the passage of pupil placement laws.
these laws enabled local officials to assign individual students to schools on the basis of scholastic aptitude ability to adjust and morals conduct health and personal standards these stalling tactics led to long disputes in the federal courts by the end of the decade fewer than 1 percent of the black children in the deep south attended school with whites.
a conspicuous lack of presidential support further weakened the desegregation effort.
dwight eisenhower believed that peoples attitudes could not be altered by cold lawmaking only read the document brown v board of education of topeka kansas 1954 demonstrators bearing signs in support of the supreme courts 1954 brown v board of education ruling to desegregate the nations schools.
the ruling also sparked protests many of them violent and destructive from opponents of integration.
the struggle over civil rights watch the video how did the civil rights movement change american schools.
clinton high school located in a small town of 5 000 in eastern tennessee was the first public high school to desegregate.
clinton was also one of the first towns to witness the anger and hatred associated with school integration.
on september 1 1956 the national guard and state troopers were called in to help control the violent crowds of protestors.
the black students entered the school a mob of five hundred jeering whites surrounded the building.
eisenhower who had told faubus that the federal constitution will be upheld by me by every legal means at my command sent in one thousand paratroopers to ensure the rights of the little rock nine to attend central high.
the students finished the school year under armed guard.
then little rock authorities closed central high school for the next two years when it reopened there were only three african americans in attendance.
despite the snails pace of school desegregation the brown decision led to other advances.
in 1957 the eisenhower administration proposed the first general civil rights legislation since reconstruction.
senate majority leader lyndon b johnson overcame strong southern resistance to avoid a filibuster but at the expense of weakening the measure considerably.
the final act however did create a permanent commission for civil rights one of trumans original goals.
it also provided for federal efforts aimed at securing and protecting the right to vote a second civil rights act in 1960 slightly strengthened the voting rights section.
like the desegregation effort the attempt to ensure african american voting rights in the south was still largely symbolic.
southern registrars used a variety of devices ranging from intimidation to unfair tests to deny african americans suffrage.
yet the actions of congress and the supreme court marked a vital turning point in national policy toward racial justice.
the beginnings of black activism the most dynamic force for change came from african americans themselves.
the shift from legal struggles in the courts to protest in the streets began with an incident in montgomery alabama.
on december 1 1955 rosa parks a black seamstress who had been active in the local naacp chapter violated a city ordinance by refusing to give up her seat to a white person on a local chapter 29 affluence and anxiety bus.
her action often viewed as spontaneous grew out of a long tradition of black protest against the rigid segregation of the races in the south.
rosa parks herself had been ejected from a bus a decade earlier for refusing to obey the drivers command niggers move back in 1953 black church leaders in baton rouge louisiana had mounted a weeklong boycott of that citys bus system and succeeded in modifying the traditional segregated seating rules.
in montgomery the arrest of rosa parks sparked a massive protest movement.
black women played a particularly important role in the protest printing and handing out fifty thousand leaflets to rally the african american community behind parks.
the movement also led to the emergence of martin luther king jr as an eloquent new spokesman for african americans.
king agreed to lead the subsequent bus boycott.
the son of a famous atlanta preacher he had recently taken his first church in montgomery after years of studying theology while earning a ph d at boston university.
now he would be able to combine his wide learning with his charismatic appeal in behalf of a practical goal fair treatment for the african americans who made up the bulk of the riders on the citys buses.
the montgomery bus boycott started out with a modest goal.
instead of challenging the legality of segregated seating king simply asked that seats be taken on a first come first served basis with african americans being seated from the back and the whites from the front of each bus.
as the protest continued however and as they endured both legal harassment and sporadic acts of violence the protesters began to be more assertive.
an effective system of car pools enabled them to avoid using the city buses.
soon they were insisting on a complete end to segregated seating as they sang their new song of protest voice became familiar to the entire nation.
unlike many african american preachers he never shouted yet he captured his audience by presenting his ideas with both passion and a compelling cadence.
though still a boy to many of his older listeners branch noted he had the commanding air of a burning sage even more important he had a strategy and message that fitted perfectly with the plight of his followers.
drawing on sources as diverse as gandhi and henry david thoreau king came out of the bus boycott with the concept of passive resistance.
if cursed he had told protesters in montgomery do not curse back.
if struck do not strike back but evidence love and goodwill at all times the essence of his strategy was to use the apparent weakness of southern blacks their lack of power and turn it into a conquering weapon.
his message to southern whites was clear and unmistakable we will match your capacity to inflict suffering with our capacity to endure suffering.
we will meet your physical force with soul force.
we will not hate you but we will not obey your evil laws.
we will soon wear you down by pure capacity to suffer his ultimate goal was to unite the broken community through bonds of christian love.
he hoped to use nonviolence to appeal to middle class white america to the conscience of the great decent majority who through blindness fear pride or irrationality have allowed their consciences to sleep the result king prophesied would be to enable future historians to say of the effort there lived view the map civil rights movement aint gonna ride them buses no more aint gonna ride no more why in the hell dont the white folk know that i aint gonna ride no more.
the boycott ended in victory a year later when the supreme court ruled the alabama segregated seating law unconstitutional.
the protest movement had triumphed not only in denting the wall of southern segregation but in featuring the leadership of martin luther king jr.
he had emerged as the charismatic leader of a new civil rights movement a man who won acclaim not only at home but around the world.
a year after the successful bus boycott king founded the southern christian leadership conference sclc to direct the crusade against segregation.
he visited third world leaders in africa and asia and paid homage to indias mahatma gandhi who had influenced his reliance on civil disobedience.
he led a triumphant prayer pilgrimage to washington in 1957 on the third anniversary of the brown decision stirring the crowd of thirty thousand with his ringing demand for the right to vote.
his cry give us the ballot boomed in salvos that civil rights historian taylor branch likened to cannon bursts in a diplomatic salute his remarkable rosa parks refusal to surrender her seat to a white man on a montgomery alabama bus led to a citywide bus boycott that brought rev.
martin luther king jr to prominence as a leader of the civil rights movement.
parks remained active in the movement as well she is shown here being fingerprinted in february 1956 after her arrest for violating an antiboycott law.
conclusion restoring national confidence read the document student nonviolent coordinating committee statement from north carolina agricultural and technical college sat down at a dime store lunch counter in greensboro north carolina and refused to move after being denied service.
other students both whites and blacks joined in similar sit ins across the south as well as kneel ins at churches and wade ins at swimming pools.
by the end of the year some fifty thousand young people had succeeded in desegregating public facilities in more than a hundred southern cities.
several thousand of the demonstrators were arrested and put in jail but the movement gained strength leading to the formation of the student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc in april 1960.
from this time on the sclc and sncc with their tactic of direct though peaceful confrontation would replace the naacp and its reliance on court action in the forefront of the civil rights movement.
the change would eventually lead to dramatic success for the movement but it also ushered in a period of heightened tension and social turmoil in the 1960s.
conclusion restoring national confidence in february 1960 black students from north carolina a t college staged a sit in at a whites only woolworths lunch counter in greensboro north carolina.
their act of nonviolent protest spurred similar demonstrations in public spaces across the south in an effort to draw national attention to racial injustice to demand desegregation of public facilities and to prompt the federal government to take a more active role to end segregation.
a great people a black people who injected new meaning and dignity into the veins of civilization king was not alone in championing the cause of civil rights.
joann robinson helped pave the way in montgomery with the womans political caucus and leaders as diverse as bayard rustin and ella baker were advancing the cause at the grassroots level.
in february 1960 another spontaneous event sparked a further advance for passive resistance.
four african american students in 1959 disturbed by the criticism of american society sparked by sputnik president eisenhower appointed a commission on national goals to develop a broad outline of national objectives for the next decade and longer ten prominent citizens from all walks of life led by henry w wriston of brown university issued a report that called for increased military spending abroad greater economic growth at home broader educational opportunities and more government support for both scientific research and the advancement of the arts.
the consensus seemed to be that rather than a change of direction all the united states needed was a renewed commitment to the pursuit of excellence.
the 1950s ended with the national mood less troubled than when the decade began amid the turmoil of the second red scare and the korean war yet hardly as tranquil or confident as eisenhower had hoped it would be.
the american people felt reassured about the state of the economy no longer fearing a return to the grim years of the great depression.
at the same time however they were aware that abundance alone did not guarantee the quality of everyday life and realized that there was still a huge gap between american ideals and the reality of race relations in the north as well as the south.
chapter 29 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 29 affluence and anxiety on myhistorylab time line 1946 republicans win control of both houses of congress 1955 african americans begin boycott of montgomery in november elections william levitt announces first levittown truman orders end to segregation in armed forces minimum wage raised from 40 to 75 cents an hour mcdonalds chooses golden arches design for its hamburger shops supreme court orders schools desegregated in brown v board of education of topeka alabama bus company december eisenhower signs legislation creating the interstate highway system congress passes first civil rights act since reconstruction charles van doren confesses to cheating on television quiz show twenty one african american college students stage sit in in greensboro north carolina chapter review the postwar boom farewell to reform how did the american economy evolve after world war ii.
butte bi salt lake city what was the primary justification for the passage of the interstate highway act of 1956.
cheyen the american economy boomed after world war ii as the nation recovered from the great depression and the war.
the gnp doubled between 1940 and 1960.
individuals spent heavily on housing automobiles and consumer goods and the government on defense.
new communities emerged in the suburbs and the sunbelt states of the west and south.
p 690 the highway act appropriated funds to construct a 41 000 mile interstate highway system that would connect the nations major cities to each other.
although the highways would benefit a variety of users such as the trucking industry organized labor state transportation departments and farmers the primary justification for passing the law in congress was national defense.
p 696 the good life.
the struggle over civil rights how did american culture change after the war.
american culture reflected both the promise of material prosperity and the failure of material goods to yield true happiness.
more people went to church than ever more young people went to college.
television provided endless information and entertainment.
but suburban life exhibited a shallow sameness that prompted critics to question if it was worthwhile.
p 692 den a l how did the civil rights movement develop in the 1940s and 1950s.
civil rights became a major issue after world war ii.
truman desegregated the military and federal courts ordered the desegregation of schools.
black activists such as rosa parks and martin luther king jr led protests against segregation on buses and other public facilities.
students organized sit ins.
p 698 study resources key terms and definitions levittown in 1947 william levitt used mass production techniques to build inexpensive houses in suburban new york to help relieve the postwar housing shortage.
levittown became a symbol of the postwar move to the suburbs.
p 688 after seamstress rosa parks was arrested for refusing to move to the back of a bus.
the boycott which ended when the supreme court ruled in favor of the protesters marked the beginning of a new activist phase of the civil rights movement.
p 702 baby boom the rise in births following world war ii.
children born to this generation are referred to as baby boomers p 688 southern christian leadership conference sclc an organization founded by martin luther king jr to fight segregation through passive resistance nonviolence and peaceful confrontation.
p 702 brown v board of education of topeka in 1954 the supreme court reversed the plessy v ferguson decision 1896 which established the separate but equal doctrine.
the brown decision found segregation in schools inherently unequal and initiated a long and difficult effort to integrate the nations public schools.
p 700 montgomery bus boycott in late 1955 african americans led by martin luther king jr boycotted the buses in montgomery alabama student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc a group organized by students to work for equal rights for african americans.
it spearheaded peaceful sit its and marches in the early 1960s but later grew more radical and changed its name to the student national coordinating committee.
p 703 critical thinking questions 1.
what are some advantages of suburban life.
what are some 3.
were the civil rights marchers justified in breaking jim crow laws.
disadvantages.
did television bring americans together or drive them apart.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 29 on myhistorylab the postwar boom listen to the audio the struggle over civil rights little boxes p 690 the good life.
view the closer look television p 693 a 1950s family watching complete the assignment sputnik p 694 the reaction to read the document pearson profiles jack kerouac p 696 watch the video justice for all civil protest and civil rights p 699 read the document brown v board of education of topeka kansas 1954 p 700 watch the video how did the civil rights movement change american schools.
p 701 view the map civil rights movement p 702 read the document student nonviolent coordinating committee statement p 703 indicates study plan media assignment the turbulent sixties contents and learning objectives kennedy intensifies the cold war pg.
708 years of turmoil pg.
726 why were there protests during the 1960s.
how did the cold war intensify under kennedy.
the return of richard nixon pg.
731 how did the vietnam war influence american politics.
the new frontier at home pg.
713 what was the new frontier and what did it accomplish.
feature essay unintended consequences the second great migration us continue pg.
717 what were johnsons domestic priorities and what were his achievements.
johnson escalates the vietnam war pg.
721 how did johnsons vietnam policy evolve.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 reagan and americas shift to the right in october 1964 the republican national committee sponsored a televised address by hollywood actor ronald reagan on behalf of barry goldwaters presidential candidacy.
reagans speech had originally been aired on a los angeles station the resulting outpouring of praise and campaign contributions led to its national rebroadcast.
in contrast to goldwaters strident rhetoric reagan used relaxed confident and persuasive terms to put forth the case for a return to individual freedom.
instead of the usual choice between increased government activity and less government involvement often couched in terms of the left and the right reagan presented the options of either going up or down up to the maximum of human freedom consistent with law and order or down to the ant heap of totalitarianism then borrowing a phrase from fdr he told his audience you and i have a rendezvous with destiny.
we can preserve for our children this the last best hope of man on earth or we can sentence them to take the first step into a thousand years of darkness although the speech did not rescue goldwaters unpopular candidacy it marked the beginning of ronald reagans remarkable political career.
a popular actor whose movie career had begun to fade in the 1950s reagan had become an effective television performer as host of the general electric theater.
his political views once liberal moved steadily to the right as he became a spokesperson for a major american corporation.
in 1965 a group of wealthy friends persuaded him largely on the basis of the success of the speech to run for the california governorship.
reagan proved to be an attractive candidate.
his approachable manner and his mastery of television enabled him to present his strongly conservative message without appearing to be a rigid ideologue of the right.
he won handily by appealing effectively to rising middleclass suburban resentment over high taxes expanding welfare programs and bureaucratic regulation.
in his two terms as governor reagan displayed natural ability as a political leader.
instead of insisting on implementing all of his conservative beliefs he proved surprisingly flexible.
faced with a democratic legislature he yielded on raising taxes and increasing state spending while managing to trim the welfare rolls.
symbolic victories were his specialty in one example he managed to confront campus radicals and fire clark kerr chancellor of the university of california while at the same time generously funding higher education.
ronald reagan and his wife nancy wave to the crowd during the 1980 republican convention in detroit.
chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 by the time reagan left the governors office in 1974 many signs pointed to a growing conservative mood across the nation.
in a popular rebellion against escalating property taxes in 1978 californias voters passed proposition 13 which slashed property taxes in half and resulted in a gradual reduction in social services.
religious leaders were especially outraged over the 1962 supreme court ruling in engel v vitale outlawing school prayer on the grounds that it was no part of the business of government to compose official prayers in the south where daily prayers were the customary way of beginning the school day the reaction was intense.
one alabama congressman denounced the supreme court justices proclaiming they put the negroes in the schools and now theyre driving god out concern over school prayer along with rising abortion and divorce rates impelled religious groups to engage in political activity to defend what they viewed as traditional family values.
jerry falwell a successful virginia radio and television evangelist founded the moral majority a fundamentalist group dedicated to preserving the american way of life see the feature essay the christian right pp.
the population shift of the 1970s especially the rapid growth of the sunbelt region in the south and west see p 774 added momentum to the conservative upsurge.
those moving to the sunbelt tended to be white middleand upper class suburbanites mainly skilled workers young professionals and business executives who were attracted both by economic opportunity and by a political climate emphasizing low taxes less government regulation and more reliance on the marketplace.
the political impact of population shifts from east to west and north to south during the 1970s was reflected in the congressional gains seventeen seats by sunbelt and far western states after the 1980 census.
conservatives also succeeded for the first time since world war ii in making their cause intellectually respectable.
scholars and academics on the right flourished in new think tanks writer william buckley and economist milton friedman proved to be effective advocates of conservative causes in print and on television.
neoconservatism led by norman podhoretzs magazine commentary became fashionable among many intellectuals who were former liberal stalwarts.
they denounced liberals for being too soft on the communist threat abroad and too willing to compromise high standards at home in the face of demands for equality from african americans women and the disadvantaged.
neoconservatives called for a reaffirmation of capitalism and a new emphasis on what was right about america rather than an obsessive concern with social ills.
y the end of the 1970s a decade marked by military defeat in vietnam political scandal that destroyed the administration of richard nixon economic ills that vexed the country under gerald ford and jimmy carter and unprecedented social strains on families and traditional institutions millions of americans had come to believe that cold war liberalism had run its course.
ronald reagan as the acknowledged leader of the conservative resurgence was ideally placed to capitalize on this discontent.
his personal charm softened the hard edges of his right wing call to arms and his conviction that america could regain its traditional self confidence by reaffirming basic ideals had a broad appeal to a nation facing new challenges at home and abroad.
in 1976 reagan had barely lost to president ford at the republican convention four years later he overcame an early upset by george bush in iowa to win the gop presidential nomination handily.
in his acceptance speech at the republican convention in detroit reagan set forth the themes that endeared him to conservatives less government a balanced budget family values and peace through greater military spending.
unlike barry goldwater who frightened people with his rigid ideology reagan offered reassurance and hope for the future.
he spoke of restoring to the federal government the capacity to do the peoples work without dominating their lives as historian robert dallek pointed out reagan assured his listeners that he was no radical idealist courting defeat but a sensible thoroughly likable american with a surefire formula for success that would please everyone in ronald reagan the republicans had found the perfect figure to lead americans into a new conservative era.
b the tempting of richard nixon what were the major accomplishments and failures of the nixon presidency.
following the divisive campaign of 1968 richard nixons presidency proved to be one of the most controversial in american history.
nixons domestic policies had limited success and though his diplomacy broke new ground in relations with china and the soviet union and ended american fighting in vietnam he was forced to resign the presidency under the dark cloud of the watergate scandal.
pragmatic liberalism nixon began his first term on a hopeful note promising the nation peace and respite from the chaos of the 1960s.
rejecting the divisions that had driven americans apart he pledged in his inaugural address to bring the country together.
we cannot learn from one another he said until we stop shouting at one another until we speak quietly enough so that our words can be heard as well as our voices the tempting of richard nixon nixons moderate language appeared to herald a return to the politics of accommodation that had characterized the eisenhower era.
faced with a democratic congress nixon like ike reconciled himself to the broad outlines of the welfare state.
instead of trying to overthrow the great society he focused on making the federal bureaucracy function more efficiently.
in some areas he actually expanded federal programs and responsibilities.
on civil rights for example nixon was the first president to adopt affirmative action as an explicit policy.
his labor secretary george shultz applied the philadelphia plan which had evolved to ensure the hiring of minority contractors in pennsylvanias largest city to other cities and eventually to all federal contracts worth more than 50 000.
nixon also expanded affirmative action to include women vastly increasing the scope of the policy.
the goal a nixon executive order explained was for the federal government to achieve the prompt and full utilization of minorities and women at all levels in all segments of its work force nixon broke new ground in other areas associated with liberalism.
he approved the creation of the occupational safety and health administration which assumed responsibility for reducing workplace injuries.
he oversaw the establishment of the environmental protection agency epa the federal watchdog on environmental affairs.
he signed the clean air act which provided the basis for tackling smog and other air pollutants.
he supported automatic cost of living increases to social security ensuring that the elderly not lose ground to the inflation that increasingly vexed the american economy.
many liberals suspected nixons motives and not without reason.
nixons liberalism was pragmatic even opportunistic rather than principled.
in private conversations he could be demeaning of african americans jews and other minorities.
but planning big changes in american foreign policy he chose not to pick fights with congressional democrats or buck the liberal tide that was still flowing from the 1960s.
he did try to shape that tide.
under the label of the new federalism he shifted responsibility for many social programs from washington to state and local authorities.
he developed the concept of revenue sharing by which federal funds were dispersed to state county and city agencies to meet local needs.
in 1972 he signed a law that shared 30 billion with local governments over a five year period.
an accompanying ceiling of 2 5 billion a year on federal welfare payments meant that much of the revenue sharing payments had to be allocated by cities and states to programs previously paid for by the federal government.
nixons civil rights policy was similarly calculating.
action by congress and the johnson administration had ensured that massive desegregation of southern schools delayed for more than a decade by legal action would begin just as nixon took office.
nixon and his attorney general john mitchell decided to shift the responsibility for this process to the courts.
in the summer of 1969 the justice department asked a federal judge to delay the integration of thirty three school districts in mississippi.
the supreme court quickly ruled against the justice department declaring that the obligation of every school district is to terminate dual school systems at once thus in the minds of southern white voters it was the hated supreme court not richard nixon who had forced them to integrate their schools.
the upshot of nixons domestic policies was to extend the welfare state in some areas reshape it in others and leave liberals and conservatives alike wondering just where nixon stood.
dtente nixon didnt really care because foreign policy not domestic policy was his pride and joy.
nixon had thought long about the state of the world and he was determined to improve it.
to assist him in this endeavor he appointed henry kissinger to be national security adviser.
a refugee from nazi germany kissinger had become a professor of government at harvard the author of several influential books and an acknowledged authority on international affairs.
nixon and kissinger approached foreign policy from a practical realistic perspective.
instead of viewing the cold war as an ideological struggle for survival with communism they saw it as a traditional great power rivalry one to be managed and controlled rather than to be won.
nixon and kissinger had a grand design.
realizing that recent events especially the vietnam war and the rapid soviet arms buildup of the 1960s had eroded americas position of primacy in the world they planned a strategic retreat.
russia had great military strength but its economy was weak and it had a dangerous rival in china.
nixon planned to use american trade notably grain and high technology to induce soviet cooperation while at the same time improving u s relations with china.
nixon and kissinger shrewdly played the china card as their first step toward achieving dtente a relaxation of tension with the soviet union.
in february 1972 accompanied by a planeload of reporters and television camera crews nixon visited china meeting with the communist leaders and ending more than two decades of sino american hostility.
nixon agreed to establish an american liaison mission in beijing as a first step toward diplomatic recognition.
the soviets who viewed china as a dangerous adversary responded by agreeing to an arms control pact with the united states.
the strategic arms limitation talks salt had been under way since 1969.
during a visit to moscow in may 1972 nixon signed two vital documents with soviet leader leonid brezhnev.
the first limited the two superpowers to two hundred antiballistic missiles abms apiece the second froze the number of offensive ballistic missiles for a five year period.
the salt i agreements recognized the existing soviet lead in missiles but the american deployment of multiple independently targeted reentry vehicles mirvs ensured a continuing strategic advantage for the united states.
the salt i agreements were most important as a symbolic first step toward control of the nuclear arms race.
they signified that the united states and the soviet union were trying to achieve a settlement of their differences by peaceful means.
ending the vietnam war vietnam remained the one foreign policy challenge that nixon could not overcome.
he had a three part plan to end the conflict gradual withdrawal of american troops accompanied by training of south vietnamese forces to take over the chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 combat role renewed bombing and a hard line in negotiations with hanoi.
the number of american soldiers in vietnam fell from 540 000 in early 1969 to less than 30 000 by 1972 domestic opposition to the war declined sharply with the accompanying drop in casualties and reductions in the draft call.
renewed bombing proved the most controversial part of the plan.
as early as the spring of 1969 nixon secretly ordered raids on communist supply lines in neutral cambodia.
then in april 1970 he ordered both air and ground strikes into cambodia causing a massive outburst of antiwar protests at home.
students demonstrated against the invasion of cambodia on campuses across the nation.
tragedy struck at kent state university in ohio in early may.
after rioters had firebombed an rotc building the governor sent in national guard troops who were taunted and harassed by irate students.
the guardsmen then opened fire killing four students and wounding eleven more.
the victims were innocent bystanders two were young women caught in the fusillade on their way between classes.
a week later two african american student demonstrators were killed at jackson state college in mississippi soon riots and protests raged on more than four hundred campuses across the country.
nixon had little sympathy for the demonstrators calling the students bums who were intent on blowing up the campuses the silent majority to whom he appealed seemed to agree one poll showed that most americans blamed the students not the national guard for the deaths at kent state.
an honor america day program held in washington d c on july 4 attracted 250 000 people who heard billy graham and bob hope endorse the presidents policies.
nixons cambodian invasion did little to shorten the vietnam war but the public reaction reinforced the presidents resolve not to surrender.
the third tactic negotiation with hanoi finally proved successful.
beginning in the summer of 1969 kissinger held a series of secret meetings with north vietnams foreign minister le duc tho.
in the summer and fall of 1972 the two sides neared agreement but south vietnamese objections blocked a settlement before the 1972 election.
when the north vietnamese tried to make last minute changes nixon ordered a series of heavy the photograph depicts the horror of the kent state university shooting of thirteen unarmed college students by ohio national guardsmen on may 4 1970.
some of the students who were shot were protesting president nixons invasion of cambodia.
in response to the kent state tragedy hundreds of high schools colleges and universities across america closed due to a student strike.
the tempting of richard nixon b 52 raids on hanoi that finally led to the signing of a truce on january 27 1973.
in return for the release of all american prisoners of war the united states agreed to remove its troops from south vietnam within sixty days.
the political clauses allowed the north vietnamese to keep their troops in the south thus virtually guaranteeing future control of all vietnam by the communists.
for two years after the accords the communists waited weighing among other things the willingness of americans to continue to support south vietnam.
as nixon became enmeshed in the watergate scandal his grip on foreign policy weakened and by the time he was forced from office in august 1974 most americans simply wanted to forget vietnam.
the following spring the communists mounted a major offensive and in just weeks completed their takeover of vietnam.
ten years after the american escalation of the war and after the loss of sixty thousand american lives the american effort to preserve south vietnam from communism had proved a tragic failure.
election of 1972 electoral vote by state republican richard m nixon 46 740 323 democratic george s mcgovern 28 901 598 minor parties john hospers 1 983 231 77 625 152 hawaii wash d c 1 11 alaska the watergate scandal nixons vietnam problems and especially his formulation of dtente made him sensitive to the unauthorized release of information about american foreign policy.
he had good reason for fearing leaks since they might tip the administrations hand in sensitive negotiations with the communists.
when leaks did occur nixon grew outraged and demanded that they be stopped.
the white house established an informal office of covert surveillance the plumbers its operatives were called which began by investigating the national security breaches but during the presidential campaign of 1972 branched out into spying on nixons democratic opponents and engaging in political dirty tricks.
five of the plumbers were arrested in june 1972 during a break in at the headquarters of the democratic national committee at the watergate office complex in washington.
the nixon white house took pains to conceal its connection to what its spokesman dismissed as a third rate burglary attempt nixon personally ordered the cover up.
i want you to stonewall it let them plead the fifth amendment cover up or anything else nixon told john mitchell his former attorney general and then campaign director.
the cover up succeeded long enough to ensure nixons landslide reelection victory over democrat george s mcgovern of south dakota but in the months after the election the cover up began to unravel.
james mccord one of the watergate burglars was the first to break the silence.
sentenced to a long jail term by judge john sirica mccord asked for leniency informing sirica he had received money from the white house and had been promised a presidential pardon in return for his silence.
by april 1973 nixon was compelled to fire aide john dean who had directed the cover up but who now refused to become a scapegoat.
two other aides h r haldeman and john ehrlichman were forced to resign.
the senate then appointed a special committee to investigate the unfolding watergate scandal.
in a week of dramatic testimony dean revealed the presidents personal involvement in the cover up.
still it was basically a matter of whose word was to be believed the presidents or a discredited aides and nixon hoped to weather the storm.
popular vote the committees discovery of the existence of tape recordings of conversations in the oval office made regularly since 1970 proved the beginning of the end for nixon.
at first the president tried to invoke executive privilege to withhold the tapes.
when archibald cox appointed as watergate special prosecutor demanded the release of the tapes nixon fired him.
yet the new watergate prosecutor leon jaworski continued to press for the tapes.
nixon tried to release only a few of the less damaging ones but the supreme court ruled unanimously in june 1974 that the tapes had to be turned over to judge sirica.
by this time the house judiciary committee acting on evidence compiled by the staff of the senate committee had voted three articles of impeachment charging nixon with obstruction of justice abuse of power and contempt of congress.
faced with the release of tapes that directly implicated him in the cover up the president chose to resign on august 9 1974.
nixons resignation proved to be the culmination of the watergate scandal.
the entire episode revealed both the weaknesses and strengths of the american political system.
most regrettable was the abuse of presidential authority a reflection both of the growing power of the modern presidency and of fatal flaws in richard nixons character.
unlike previous executive branch scandals such as the whiskey ring and teapot dome watergate involved a lust for power rather than for money.
realizing he had reached the white house almost by accident nixon did everything possible to retain his hold on his office.
he used the plumbers to maintain executive secrecy and he directed the internal revenue service and the justice department to punish his enemies and reward his friends.
chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 but watergate also demonstrated the vitality of a democratic society.
the press showed how investigative reporting could unlock even the most closely guarded executive secrets.
judge sirica proved that an independent judiciary was still the best bulwark for individual freedom.
and congress rose to the occasion both by carrying out a successful investigation of executive misconduct and by following a scrupulous and nonpartisan impeachment process that left nixon with no chance to escape his fate.
the nation survived the shock of watergate with its institutions intact.
john mitchell and twenty five presidential aides were sentenced to jail terms.
congress in decline since lyndon johnsons exercise of executive dominance was rejuvenated with its members now intent on extending congressional authority into other areas of american life.
the economy of stagflation how were oil and inflation linked during the 1970s.
in the midst of watergate the outbreak of war in the middle east threatened a vital national interest the unimpeded and inexpensive flow of oil to the united states.
the resulting energy crisis helped spark a raging price inflation that had a profound impact on the national economy and on american society at large.
war and oil on october 6 1973 egypt and syria launched a surprise attack on israel.
the fighting followed decades of tension between israel and its arab neighbors which had grown only worse upon the stunning israeli victory in the six days war of 1967.
in that conflict the israelis routed the arabs view the closer look watergate shipwreck seizing the golan heights from syria the sinai peninsula from egypt and jerusalem and the west bank from jordan.
the arabs ached for revenge and in 1973 the egyptians and syrians attacked.
catching israel off guard they won early battles but eventually lost the initiative and were forced to give up the ground they had recovered.
the israelis would have delivered another devastating defeat to the arabs if not for the diplomatic intervention of nixon and kissinger who despite americas previous strong support for israel believed a decisive israeli victory would destabilize the middle east even more.
the american diplomatic triumph however was offset by an unforeseen consequence of the october war also called the yom kippur war as it started on the jewish holy day.
on october 17 the arab members of the organization of petroleum exporting countries opec announced a 5 percent cut in oil production and vowed additional cuts of 5 percent each month until israel surrendered the lands it had taken in 1967.
three days later following nixons announcement of an emergency aid package for israel saudi arabia cut off oil shipments to the united states.
the arab oil embargo had a disastrous impact on the american economy.
with arab producers cutting production by 25 percent from the september 1973 level world supplies fell by 10 percent.
for the united states which imported one third of its daily consumption this meant a loss of nearly 2 million barrels a day.
long lines formed at gas stations as motorists who feared running out of fuel kept filling their tanks.
the watergate cartoon by boston globe cartoonist paul michael szep ive decided not to tell a dramatic increase in oil prices proved to you about the alleged shipwreck was published on july 11 1973.
the title illustrates the irony of be a far more significant result of the embargo.
a shipwrecked attorney general john mitchell and president nixon floundering in political waters after the arab embargo began opec led as a result of mitchells and nixons participation in the planning and cover up of the break in of democratic national committee headquarters.
by the shah of iran raised crude oil prices the economy of stagflation the oil shocks price increases of crude oil and gasoline 1973 1985 price per gallon of regular average price per barrel 35 1 40 1 20 crude oil gasoline 1 00 80 60 40 20 fourfold.
in the united states gasoline prices at the pumps nearly doubled in a few weeks time while the cost of home heating fuel rose even more.
nixon responded with a series of temporary measures including pleas to americans to turn down their thermostats in homes and offices and avoid driving simply for pleasure.
when the arab oil embargo ended in march after kissinger negotiated an israeli pullback in the sinai the american public relaxed.
gasoline once again became plentiful thermostats were raised and people resumed their love affair with the automobile.
the energy crisis however did not end with the lifting of the embargo.
the arab action marked the beginning of a new era in american history.
the united states with only 6 percent of the worlds population had been responsible for nearly 40 percent of the worlds energy consumption.
in 1970 domestic oil production began to decline the embargo served only to highlight the fact that the nation was now dependent on other countries notably those in the persian gulf for its economic well being.
a nation that based its way of life on abundance and expansion suddenly was faced with the reality of limited resources and economic stagnation.
the great inflation the price spike from the october war was merely the first of the oil shocks of the 1970s.
cheap energy had been a primary contributor to the relentless growth of the american economy after world war ii.
the gnp had more than doubled between 1950 and 1973 the american people had come to base their standard of living on oil prices that yielded gas at about 35 cents a gallon.
large cars sprawling suburbs detached houses heated by fuel oil and natural gas and cooled by central air conditioning produced a dependence on inexpensive energy that americans took for granted.
the quadrupling of oil prices in 1973 1974 suddenly put all this at risk.
because oil or its equivalent in energy is required for the production and transportation of manufactured goods the rising oil prices caused the prices of nearly everything else to increase as well.
most services require energy they went up as well.
opec oil embargo other factors added to the trend of rising prices.
the vietnam war created federal budget deficits that grew from 63 billion for the entire decade of the 1960s to a total of 420 billion in the 1970s.
a worldwide shortage of food resulting from both rapid population increases and poor harvests around the globe in the mid 1970s triggered a 20 percent rise in american food prices in 1973 alone.
but above all else the primary source of the great inflation of the 1970s was the six fold increase in petroleum prices.
the impact on consumers was staggering.
the price of an automobile jumped 72 percent between 1973 and 1978.
during the decade the price of a hamburger doubled milk went from 28 to 59 cents a quart and a loaf of bread the proverbial staff of life rose from 24 to 89 cents.
corresponding wage increases failed to keep pace with inflation in 1980 the real income of the average american family fell by 5 5 percent.
often inflation signals economic exuberance and rising prices indicate a rapid rate of growth.
not so with the inflation of the 1970s which reflected economic weakness.
the great inflation contributed to the worst recession in the united states since world war ii.
american gnp dropped by 6 percent in 1974 and unemployment rose to more than 9 percent the highest level since the great depression of the 1930s.
president gerald r ford who followed richard nixon into the white house see p 749 responded belatedly to the economic crisis by proposing a tax cut to stimulate consumer spending.
congress passed a 23 billion reduction in taxes in early 1975 which led to a gradual recovery by 1976.
the resulting budget deficits however helped keep inflation above 5 percent and prevented a return to full economic health.
jimmy carter of georgia who succeeded ford see pp.
749 751 had little more success in reviving the economy.
continued federal deficits and relatively high interest rates kept the economy sluggish throughout 1977 and 1978.
then in 1979 the outbreak of the iranian revolution and the overthrow of the shah touched off another oil shock.
the members of the opec cartel took advantage of the situation to double prices over the next eighteen months.
a barrel of crude oil now cost more than 30.
gasoline prices climbed to more chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 than 1 a gallon at american service stations leading to an even greater wave of inflation than in 1973.
finally in late 1979 the federal reserve board led by carter appointee paul volcker began a sustained effort to halt inflation by mandating increased bank reserves to curtail the supply of money in circulation.
the new tight money policy served only to heighten inflation in the short run by driving interest rates up to record levels.
by the spring of 1980 the prime interest rate reached 20 percent.
the shifting american economy inflation and the oil shocks helped bring about significant changes in american business and industry in the 1970s.
the most obvious result was the slowing of the rate of economic growth with the gnp advancing only 3 2 percent for the decade compared to 3 7 percent in the 1960s.
more important american industry began to lose its position of primacy in world markets.
in 1959 u s firms had been the leaders in eleven of thirteen major industrial sectors ranging from manufacturing to banking.
by 1976 american companies led in only seven areas and in all but one category aerospace u s.
corporations had declined in relation to japanese and western european competitors.
the most serious losses came in the heavy industries in which the united states had once led the world.
new steel producers in western europe japan and the developing world using more advanced technology and aided by government subsidies were producing steel far more efficiently than their american counterparts.
as a result by the end of the 1970s american firms were closing down their obsolete mills in the east and midwest idling thousands of workers.
the foreign competition did even more damage in the automobile industry.
the oil shocks led to a consumer demand for small efficient cars.
german and japanese automakers seized the opportunity to expand their once low volume of sales in the united states.
by 1977 imported cars had captured nearly a fifth of the american market with japan leading the way.
in response detroit spent 70 billion retooling to produce a new fleet of smaller lighter front wheel drive cars but american manufacturers barely survived the foreign invasion.
only government backed loans helped the chrysler corporation stave off bankruptcy.
the decline in manufacturing led to significant shifts in the labor movement.
the industrial unions such as the united automobile workers uaw lost members steadily in the 1960s and 1970s.
at the same time public employee unions enjoyed rapid growth and acceptance.
the great society legislation the baby boom with the resulting need for many more teachers and the growth of social agencies on the state and local level opened up new jobs for social workers teachers and government employees.
by the end of the 1980s members of public employee unions made up over 20 percent of the afl cio ranks while the separate national education association nea became the nations largest single union with two million members 600 000 more than the teamsters.
the rise of public employee unions also opened the way for greater participation by african americans and women than in the older trade and industrial unions.
just as public employee unions prospered from the shifts in the american economy in the 1970s so did many american corporations.
the multinationals that had emerged in the boom years of the 1960s continued to thrive.
ibm sold computers all over the globe.
the growth of conglomerates huge corporations that combined many dissimilar industrial concerns accelerated as companies such as gulf western and the transamerica corporation diversified by buying up hollywood studios insurance companies and recreational equipment manufacturers.
the growth of high technology industries proved to be the most profitable new trend of the 1970s.
computer companies and electronics firms grew at a rapid rate especially after the development of the silicon chip a small waferthin microprocessor capable of performing complex calculations almost instantly.
the result was a geographic shift of american industry from the east and midwest to the sunbelt.
electronics manufacturers flourished in california texas and north carolina where they grew up around major universities.
the absence of entrenched labor unions the availability of skilled labor and the warm and attractive climate of the southern and western states lured many new concerns to the sunbelt.
at the same time the decline of the steel and auto industries was leading to massive unemployment and economic stagnation in the northern industrial heartland.
the overall pattern was one of an economy in transition.
the oil shocks had caused serious problems of inflation slower economic growth and rising unemployment rates.
but american business still displayed the enterprise and the ability to develop new technologies that gave promise of renewed economic vitality.
a new environmentalism the oil shocks had another effect they injected new life into the environmental movement.
the high price of gasoline made pocketbook conservationists of millions of americans who hadnt thought twice about their countrys heavy dependence on foreign oil it also spurred congress to press automakers to improve the fuel efficiency of the cars they built.
the 1975 energy policy and conservation act set corporate standards for gas mileage manufacturers who failed to achieve the mandated averages faced stiff fines and other sanctions.
between the high prices and the federal requirements american drivers began squeezing more miles out of each tank of gas.
environmentalists and consumers meanwhile began searching for alternative sources of energy.
solar power appealed to some as being clean and endlessly renewable.
but it was also expensive solar panels and related technologies remained underdeveloped and intermittent clouds cut off the power.
hydropower electricity generated by falling water was better proven and more reliable but most of the suitable dam sites had already been built upon.
wind power worked in some areas where the wind blew frequently and without obstruction but those were precisely the areas where few people lived.
coal power was reliable proven and cheap but it was also dirty the gases emitted by coal plants fouled the air and dangerous to the men and women who mined the coal.
nuclear power had its advocates.
it had been in use in america since the 1950s and its characteristics were well known.
its fuel uranium was essentially inexhaustible and nuclear reactors in normal operations produced no noxious gases.
nor did they private lives public issues produce any greenhouse gases carbon dioxide and other heattrapping gases that contribute to global warming a rise in average temperatures that was just beginning to worry some earth scientists and would worry them much more in coming decades.
but nuclear power made many environmentalists nervous.
the waste products of the reactors were radioactive and would remain so for thousands of years.
guaranteeing that the wastes would not contaminate water supplies for fifty generations into the future was a daunting challenge.
and occasionally nuclear reactors malfunctioned in terrifying ways.
in march 1979 a reactor at three mile island near harrisburg pennsylvania nearly melted down when cooling systems failed.
tens of thousands of people living in the vicinity fled and though the reactor didnt explode as authorities had feared it might the close call inspired grave second thoughts about nuclear power.
a more severe accident at chernobyl in the soviet ukraine in 1986 released large amounts of radiation into the atmosphere and caused many deaths reinforcing the fears.
the debate over alternative energy sources was part of a larger debate on the environment.
earth day first celebrated in april 1970 became an annual event at which participants considered the effect of human actions on their natural surroundings.
groups such as the sierra club and friends of the earth lobbied to reinforce antipollution laws to clean up toxic wastes and to increase gas mileage standards further.
business associations typically resisted the measures as too restrictive and expensive.
the results were mixed.
congress strengthened the clean air act and in 1980 it created the federal superfund for toxic cleanups.
but oil imports continued to rise by some 50 percent between 1973 and 1979 to nine million barrels a day or half what the country consumed.
private lives public issues how did private life change during this period.
sweeping changes in the private lives of the american people began in the 1970s and continued for the rest of the century.
the traditional american family with the husband as wage earner and the wife as homemaker gave way to much more diverse living arrangements.
the number of working women including wives and mothers increased sharply the wage gap between the sexes narrowed but women still lagged noticeably behind men in earnings.
then in the years following 1970 came the emergence of an active gay rights movement as more and more gay lesbian and bisexual americans began to disclose their sexual identities and demand an end to discrimination.
the changing american family family life underwent a number of significant shifts after 1970.
the most notable was a decline in the number of families with two parents and one or more children under 18.
by the end of the 1980s in only one two parent family out of five was the mother solely engaged in child rearing.
a few fathers stayed at home with the children but in the great majority of these families both parents worked outside the home.
the traditional nuclear family of the 1950s no longer prevailed in america by the end of the twentieth century.
the number of married couple households with children dropped from 30 percent in the 1970s to 23 percent by 2000.
the number of unmarried couples doubled in the 1990s while adults living alone surpassed the number of married couples with children for the first time in american history.
being married is great commented demographer william h frey but being married with kids is tougher in todays society with spouses in different jobs and expensive day care and schools the divorce rate which doubled between the mid 1960s and the late 1970s leveled off for the rest of the century.
nevertheless half of all first marriages still ended in divorce.
after a sharp fall in the 1970s the birthrate climbed again as the baby boom generation began to mature.
there was a marked increase in the number of births to women over age 30 as well as a very high proportion of children born to single mothers who composed 7 percent of all households by 2000 a 25 percent increase since 1990.
conservatives alarmed by the decline of the nuclear family called for change.
we need to discourage people from living together outside of marriage observed bridget maher of the family research council and encourage them to have children within marriage for better or worse the american family structure changed significantly in the last three decades of the twentieth century with a large number of people either never marrying or postponing marriage until late in the childbearing period.
the traditional family unit with the working father and the mother rearing the children at home rapidly declined.
most mothers worked outside the home and many were the sole support for their children.
the proportion of children living with only one parent doubled in twenty years.
women without partners headed more than one third of all impoverished families and children made up 40 percent of the nations poor.
although politicians especially republicans refer to family values during campaigns the fact remains that the american family underwent great stress due to social changes in the last third of the twentieth century and children suffered disproportionately.
gains and setbacks for women american women experienced significant changes in their way of life and their place in society in the last quarter of the twentieth century.
the prevailing theme concerned the increasing percentage of working women.
there was a rapid movement of women into the labor force in the 1970s six million more married women held jobs by the end of the decade as two incomes became increasingly necessary to keep up with inflation.
the trend continued through the 1980s.
fully 61 percent of the nearly nineteen million new jobs created during the decade were filled by women many of these new jobs however were entry level or low paying service positions.
women scored some impressive breakthroughs.
they began to enter corporation boardrooms became presidents of major universities and were admitted to the nations military academies.
women entered blue collar professional and small business fields traditionally dominated by men.
ronald reagans appointment of sandra day oconnor to the supreme court in 1981 marked a historic first bill clinton doubled the number of women on the court with his selection of ruth bader ginsburg.
chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 mass.
vt maine wash n dak.
minn n h oreg.
nev utah colo calif ariz okla texas pa ohio ill ind.
w va va mo.
ky n c tenn s c ark.
ala ga miss.
n y wis s dak.
r i conn n j del.
fla alaska states ratifying hawaii states not ratifying voting on the equal rights amendment by the end of 1974 thirty four states had ratified the era indiana finally approved the amendment in 1977 but the remaining fifteen states held out leaving ratification three states short of the required three fourths majority.
yet at the same time women encountered a great deal of resistance.
most women continued to work in female dominated fields as nurses secretaries teachers and waitresses.
those who entered such male areas as management and administration soon encountered the so called glass ceiling which kept them from advancing beyond midlevel executive status.
in 1990 only 4 3 percent of corporate officers were women.
most in business worked at the middle and lower rungs of management with staff jobs in personnel and public relations not key operational positions in sales and marketing that would lead to the boardroom women held fewer than 3 percent of the top jobs in fortune 500 companies.
the economic boom of the 1990s however led to a steady increase in the number of women executives in 1998 there was an increase of 514 000.
even with these gains however by 2004 womens wages still averaged only 76 5 percent of mens earnings.
a college education helped close the gap but a woman with a degree made only 600 a year more on the average than a man with a high school diploma.
younger women did best those between 16 and 24 earned almost 90 cents for every dollar paid to a male in the same age group.
older women who often had no other source of support fared poorly those over the age of 50 earned only 64 percent as much as men their age.
feminists had once hoped to close the gender gap by the year 2000 but experts predicted women would not reach pay equity with men until 2018.
the most encouraging development for women came in business ownership.
often blocked by the glass ceiling and seeking flexible schedules more and more women went into business for themselves.
the number of female business owners increased 40 percent between 1987 and 1992 twice the national rate of business growth.
a womens trade group estimated that in 1996 women owned almost eight million businesses employing more than eighteen million workers one out of four american workers.
a speaker at the first national womens economic summit in 1996 exaggerated only slightly in crediting her group with restoring prosperity claiming that the american economy has been revitalized in good measure because of the participation of and contributions of women business owners beyond economic opportunity the womens movement had two goals.
the first was ratification of the equal rights amendment era.
approved by congress in 1972 the era stated simply equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or any state on account of sex within a year twenty two states had approved the amendment but the efforts gradually faltered just three states short of ratification.
the opposition came in part from working class women who feared as one union leader explained that those employed as maids laundry workers hospital cleaners or dishwashers would lose the protection of state laws that regulated wages and hours of work for women.
right wing activist phyllis schlafly led an organized effort to defeat the era claiming the amendment would lead to unisex toilets homosexual marriages and the drafting of women.
the national organization of women now fought back persuading congress to extend the time for ratification by three years and waging intense campaigns for approval in florida and illinois.
but the deadline for ratification finally passed on june 30 1982 with the era forces still three states short.
now leader eleanor smeal vowed a continuing struggle the crusade is not over.
we know that we are the wave of the future the womens movement focused even more of its energies in protecting a major victory it had won in roe v wade in 1973.
see the law and society essay roe v wade the struggle over womens reproductive rights pp.
right to life groups consisting mainly of orthodox catholics fundamentalist protestants and conservatives fought back.
in 1978 with strong support from president carter congress passed the hyde amendment which denied the use of federal funds to pay for abortions for poor women.
nevertheless prochoice groups organized privately funded family planning agencies and abortion clinics to give more women a chance to exercise their constitutional right to abortion.
as presidents reagan and bush appointed more conservative judges to the court however prochoice groups began to fear the future overturn of roe v wade.
the court avoided a direct challenge contenting itself with lesser actions that upheld the rights of states to regulate abortion clinics impose a 24 hour waiting period and require the approval of one parent or a judge before a minor could have an abortion.
abortion became an issue in presidential contests with the republicans upholding a prolife position and the democrats taking a prochoice stand.
bill clintons election and appointment of ruth bader ginsburg to the court appeared to end the danger to roe v wade but in 2000 the court margin in rejecting a nebraska law forbidding certain late term abortions fell to a bare majority 5 4.
and even the exercise of the right to abortion proved difficult and sometimes dangerous in view of the often violent protests of prolife groups outside abortion clinics.
for many women abortion was a hard won right they still had to struggle to protect.
the gay liberation movement on the night of june 27 1969 a squad of new york policemen raided the stonewall inn a greenwich village bar frequented by drag queens and lesbians.
as the patrons were being herded into private lives public issues read the document roe v wade january 22 1973 roe v wade exerted a tremendous impact throughout the country as only four states had enacted laws guaranteeing a woman widespread access to an abortion at the time of the ruling.
the abortion issue continues to be a major source of controversy within u s politics and society.
vans a crowd of gay onlookers began to jeer and taunt the police.
a riot quickly broke out.
beer cans and bottles were heaved at the windows and a rain of coins descended on the cops reported the village voice.
almost by signal the crowd erupted into cobblestone and bottle heaving the next night more than four hundred police officers battled two thousand gay demonstrators through the streets of greenwich village.
the two day stonewall riots marked the beginning of the modern gay liberation movement.
refusing to play the role of victims any longer gays and lesbians decided to affirm their sexual orientation and demand an end to discrimination against homosexuals.
within a few days two new organizations were formed in new york the gay liberation front and the gay activist alliance with branches and offshoots quickly appearing in cities across the country.
the basic theme of gay liberation was to urge all homosexuals to come out of the closet and affirm with pride their sexual identity instead of shame they would find freedom and self respect in the very act of coming out.
come out for freedom.
come out now proclaimed the gay liberation fronts newspaper.
come out of the closet before the door is nailed shut in the course of the 1970s hundreds of thousands of gays and lesbians responded to this call.
they formed more than a thousand local clubs and organizations and won a series of notable victories.
in 1974 the american psychiatric association stopped classifying homosexuality as a mental disorder and by the end of the decade half the states had repealed their sodomy statutes.
gays fought hard in cities and states for laws forbidding discrimination against homosexuals in housing and employment and in 1980 they finally succeeded in getting a gay rights plank in the democratic national platform.
in the 1980s the onset of the aids epidemic see pp.
748 749 forced the gay liberation movement onto the defensive.
stung by the accusation that aids was a gay disease male homosexuals faced new public condemnation at a time when they were trying desperately to care for the growing number of victims of the disease within their ranks.
the gay organizations formed in the 1970s to win new rights now were channeling their energies into caring for the ill promoting safe sex practices and fighting for more public funding to help conquer aids.
in 1986 act up aids coalition to unleash power began a series of violent demonstrations in an effort to shock the nation into doing more about aids.
act up members disrupted public meetings chained themselves to a new york stock exchange balcony and spray painted outlines of corpses on the streets of san francisco to call attention to those who had died of aids.
chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 the movement also continued to stimulate gay consciousness in the 1980s.
in 1987 an estimated six hundred thousand gays and lesbians took part in a march on washington on behalf of gay rights.
every year afterward gay groups held a national coming out day in october to encourage homosexuals to proclaim proudly their sexual identity.
in a more controversial move some gay leaders encouraged outing releasing the names of prominent homosexuals primarily politicians and movie stars in an effort to make the nation aware of how many americans were gay or lesbian.
gay leaders claimed there were more than twenty million gays and lesbians in the nation basing this estimate on a kinsey report which had stated in the late 1940s that one in ten american males had engaged in homosexual behavior.
a sociological survey released in the spring of 1993 contradicted those numbers finding only 1 1 percent of american males exclusively homosexual.
whatever the actual number it was clear by the 1990s that gays and lesbians formed a significant minority that had succeeded in forcing the nation however grudgingly to respect its rights.
there was one battle however in which victory eluded the gay liberation movement.
in the 1992 election gays and lesbians strongly backed democratic candidate bill clinton who promised if elected to end the ban on homosexuals in the military.
in his first days in office however president clinton stirred up great resistance in the pentagon and congress when he tried to issue an executive order forbidding such discrimination.
the joint chiefs of staff and many democrats led by georgia senator sam nunn warned that acceptance of gays and lesbians would destroy morale and seriously weaken the armed forces.
clinton finally settled for the pentagons compromise dont ask dont tell policy that would permit homosexuals to continue serving in the military as they had in the past as long as they did not reveal their sexual preference and refrained from homosexual conduct.
however disappointed gays and lesbians were in clintons retreat their leaders understood that the real problem was the resistance of mainstream america to full acceptance of homosexuality.
public attitudes toward gays and lesbians seemed to be changing in the 1990s but the growing tolerance had definite limits.
in a 1996 poll 85 percent of those questioned believed that gays should be treated equally in the workplace up from 76 percent in 1992.
violence against gays however continued most notably in the 1998 fatal beating of matthew shepard a 21 year old gay college student in wyoming.
the brutal attack spurred calls for hate crime legislation and the judge in the case banning a so called gay panic defense sentenced shepards assailant to two consecutive terms of life imprisonment.
the issue of same sex marriage came to a head at the end of the century.
in 1996 president clinton signed the defense of marriage act which decreed that states did not have to recognize same sex marriages performed elsewhere.
but in 2000 following a state supreme court ruling the vermont legislature legalized civil unions between individuals of the same sex enabling gays and lesbians to receive all the legal benefits available to married couples.
whether sanctioned by law or not the number of gay and lesbian households steadily increased the 2000 census revealed that there were nearly six hundred thousand homes in america headed by same sex couples.
while nearly one quarter were in california and new york there was at least one gay or lesbian couple living in 99 percent of the nations counties.
the aids epidemic the outbreak of aids acquired immune deficiency syndrome in the early 1980s took most americans by surprise.
even health experts had difficulty grasping the nature and extent of the new public health threat.
doctors first noticed a few cases of a rare form of pneumonia and an unusual type of skin cancer in male patients in new york city and san francisco in 1981.
the centers for disease control noted the phenomenon in a june 1981 bulletin but it was several years before researchers finally identified it as a hitherto unknown human immunodeficiency virus hiv.
hiv apparently originated in central africa and spread to the united states where it found its first victims primarily among gay men.
initially aids was perceived as a threat only to gay men.
with a growing sense of urgency as the death toll mounted gay men began to practice safer sex using condoms and confining themselves to trusted partners.
it soon became clear however that aids could not be so easily contained.
it began to appear among intravenous iv drug users who shared the same needles and eventually among hemophiliacs and others receiving frequent blood transfusions.
the threat of a contaminated national blood supply terrified middle class america as did the possibility of the spread of aids to heterosexuals.
scientists tried to reassure the public by explaining that the virus could be spread only by the exchange of bodily fluids primarily blood and semen and not by casual contact.
the death of former movie star rock hudson from aids in the summer of 1985 however intensified the sense of national panic.
controversy soon developed over proposals for mandatory blood tests for suspected hiv carriers and for the quarantine of aids victims.
the integrity of hospital blood supplies caused the most realistic concern in 1985 a new test finally gave reassurance that transfusions could be performed safely.
the reagan administration proved slow and halting in its approach to the aids epidemic.
the lack of sympathy for gays and a need to reduce the deficit worked against any large increase in health spending what little money was devoted to aids went almost entirely for research rather than for educational measures to slow its spread.
the only real leadership came from surgeon general c everett koop who surprised his conservative backers in 1986 by coming out boldly with proposals for sex education the use of condoms to ensure safer sex and confidential blood testing to help contain the disease.
while the administration dallied the grim toll mounted.
because the average time between the initial hiv infection and the first symptoms of aids was five years and the delay could be as long as fourteen years efforts at prevention had little immediate impact.
in november 1983 there were 2 803 known cases and 1 416 deaths by the time hollywood film actor rock hudson died from complications of hiv aids in mid 1985 more than 12 000 cases and more than 6 000 deaths had been reported.
growing public concern finally led to action.
in 1987 reagan appointed a special presidential commission headed by admiral james watkins a former chief of naval operations to study the politics and diplomacy after watergate aids epidemic.
the watkins report in 1988 criticized the administrations aids efforts as inconsistent and recommended a new effort that included antidiscrimination legislation and explicit prevention education.
koop responded by sending out a pamphlet titled understanding aids to 107 million households while in the fall congress voted to spend 1 3 billion to fight aids with much of the money going for confidential testing and counseling and home care for victims.
despite the new efforts the epidemic continued to grow.
in 1987 there were 50 000 cases by mid 1989 the count had reached 100 000.
the u s centers for disease control and prevention in atlanta georgia reported more than 200 000 cases at the end of 1991 the total had increased to more than 500 000 by mid 1996.
by then 345 000 aids victims had died making it the leading cause of death for americans aged 25 to 44.
the number of those infected with hiv appeared to be stabilizing by the mid 1990s at between 650 000 and 900 000.
yet what was once known as the gay disease had spread far beyond that one group in society by the end of the century.
minorities and the young were at greatest risk.
african american youths made up two thirds of the new hiv cases among people under 25.
the disease is disappearing from the mainstream claimed a washington d c clinic director and becoming a disease of kids who are disenfranchised anyway the most encouraging development was a fall off in the death rate from aids that began in the mid 1990s.
health officials attributed the decline to heavier spending on treatment and prevention and above all to powerful new drug combinations.
by 2001 however the drop in new cases and deaths from aids began to level off.
the latest data commented one expert in august 2001 suggest that the era of dramatic declines is now over there was a particularly alarming increase in the number of new cases among young gay men who apparently believed that the new treatment had made the disease manageable.
but unfortunately the so called aids cocktail was very expensive running as high as 15 000 a year and did not work for everyone.
and even more disturbing was the growing realization that aids was threatening to decimate the population of developing countries especially in sub saharan africa.
politics and diplomacy after watergate why did the presidencies of ford and carter largely fail.
the economic and social disruptions of the era contributed to problems of governance left over from watergate.
even as many americans worried about shrinking paychecks and disintegrating families congress increasingly challenged the prerogatives of the presidency.
this made life in the white house difficult for richard nixons immediate successors and it made solving americas pressing problems nearly impossible.
who had been forced to resign in order to avoid prosecution for accepting bribes while he was governor of maryland.
ford an amiable and unpretentious michigan congressman who had risen to the post of house minority leader seemed ready to restore public confidence in the presidency when he replaced nixon in august 1974.
fords honeymoon lasted only a month.
on september 8 1974 he shocked the nation by announcing he had granted richard nixon a full and unconditional pardon for all federal crimes he may have committed.
some critics charged darkly that nixon and ford had made a secret bargain others pointed out how unfair it was for nixons aides to serve their prison terms while the chief criminal went free.
ford apparently acted in an effort to end the bitterness over watergate but his attempt backfired eroding public confidence in his leadership and linking him indelibly with the scandal.
ford soon found himself fighting an equally difficult battle on behalf of the beleaguered cia.
the watergate scandal and the vietnam fiasco had eroded public confidence in the government and lent credibility to a startling series of disclosures about past covert actions.
the president allowed the cia to confirm some of the charges and then he made things worse by blurting out to the press the juiciest item of all the cia had been involved in plots to assassinate foreign leaders.
senate and house select committees appointed to investigate the cia now focused on the assassination issue eventually charging that the agency had been involved in no less than eight separate attempts to kill fidel castro.
the chairman of the senate committee frank church of idaho worried that the revelations would damage the reputations of democratic presidents kennedy and johnson he tried to put all the blame on the cia likening it to a rogue elephant on the rampage in late 1975 president ford finally moved to limit the damage to the cia.
he appointed george h w bush then a respected former republican congressman as the agencys new director and gave him the authority both to reform the cia and to strengthen its role in shaping national security policy.
most notably ford issued an executive order outlawing assassination as an instrument of american foreign policy.
to prevent future abuses congress created permanent house and senate intelligence committees to exercise general oversight for covert cia operations.
ford proved less successful in his dealings with congress on other issues.
although he prided himself on his good relations with members of both houses he opposed democratic measures such as federal aid to education and control over strip mining.
in a little more than a year he vetoed thirty nine separate bills.
in fact ford who as a congressman had opposed virtually every great society measure proved far more conservative than nixon in the white house.
carter and american malaise the ford administration gerald r ford had the distinction of being the first president who had not been elected to national office.
richard nixon had appointed him to the vice presidency to succeed spiro agnew fords lackluster record and the legacy of watergate made the democratic nomination a prize worth fighting for in 1976.
a large field of candidates entered the contest but a virtual unknown former georgia governor james earl carter quickly became the chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 on television the basic carter commercial showed him at his georgia peanut farm dressed in blue jeans looking directly into speech 1979 the camera and saying ill never tell a lie voters took carter at his word and elected him over ford in a close contest.
unfortunately carters outsider status while attractive in a campaign made governing as president difficult.
he had no discernible political philosophy no clear sense of direction.
he called himself a populist but that label meant little more than an appeal to the common man a somewhat ironic appeal given carters personal wealth.
the idea of a millionaire populist has always amused me commented his attorney general fellow georgian griffin bell.
lacking both a clear set of priorities and a coherent political philosophy the carter administration had little chance to succeed.
the president strove hard for a balanced budget but was forced to accept mounting deficits.
federal agencies fought to save the environment and help consumers but served only to anger industry.
in the crucial area of social services joseph califano secretary of health education and welfare hew failed repeatedly in efforts to carry out longoverdue reforms.
his attempts to overhaul the nations welfare program which had become a 30 billion annual operation serving some thirty million americans won little support from the white house.
carters unwillingness to take the political risks involved in revamping the overburdened social security system by reducing benefits and raising the retirement age blocked califanos efforts.
and the hew secretary finally gave up his attempt to draw up a workable national health insurance plan.
informed by his pollsters in 1979 that he was losing the nations confidence carter sought desperately to redeem himself.
after a series of meetings at camp david with a wide variety of advisers he gave a speech in which he seemed to blame his failure on the american people accusing them of creating a crisis of confidence.
that strikes at the very as national polls in the summer of 1979 reflected a profound loss of americans confidence in the heart and soul and spirit of our national will leadership of president jimmy carter the president attempted to rally the nation and redeem his then a week after what his critics termed presidency with his nationally televised crisis of confidence speech.
the national malaise speech he requested the resignation of califano and the secretary of the treasury.
but front runner.
aware of the voters disgust with politicians of both neither the attempt to pin responsibility on the american people parties jimmy carter ran as an outsider portraying himself as nor the firing of cabinet members could hide the fact that carter a southerner who had no experience in washington and one despite his good intentions and hard work had failed to provide the who could thus give the nation fresh and untainted leadership.
bold leadership the nation needed.
watch the video jimmy carter the crisis of confidence politics and diplomacy after watergate the election of 1976 candidate jimmy carter gerald ford party democratic republican troubles abroad popular vote 40 828 587 39 147 613 electoral vote with the shah despite growing signs of domestic discontent with his leadership.
by 1978 iran was in chaos as the exiled ayatollah ruholla khomeini led a fundamentalist muslim revolt against the shah who was forced to flee the country.
in october 1979 carter permitted the shah to enter the united states for medical treatment.
irate mobs in iran denounced the united states and on november 4 militants seized the u s embassy in tehran and took fifty three americans prisoner.
the prolonged iranian hostage crisis revealed the extent to which american power had declined in the 1970s.
carter relied first on diplomacy and economic reprisals in a vain attempt to free the hostages.
in april 1980 the president authorized a desperate rescue mission that ended in failure when several helicopters broke down in the iranian desert and an accident cost the lives of eight crewmen.
the hostage crisis dragged on through the summer and fall of 1980 a symbol of american weakness that proved to be a powerful political handicap to carter in the upcoming presidential election.
in the aftermath of the vietnam war most americans wanted to have little to do with the world.
military intervention had failed in southeast asia and with the american economy in trouble the countrys economic leverage appeared minimal.
moreover the point of dtente was to diminish the need for american intervention abroad by directing the superpower contest with the soviet union into political channels.
yet various groups in the developing world didnt get the message of dtente.
central america for example witnessed numerous uprisings against entrenched authoritarian regimes.
in mid 1979 the collapse of dtente dictator anastasio somoza capitulated to the sandinista forces in the policy of dtente was already in trouble when carter took nicaragua.
despite american attempts to moderate the sandinista office in 1977.
congressional refusal to relax trade restrictions on revolution the new regime moved steadily to the left developing the soviet union had doomed kissingers attempts to win politiclose ties with castros cuba.
in neighboring el salvador a growcal concessions from the soviets through economic incentives.
ing leftist insurgency against a repressive regime put the united the kremlins repression of the growing dissident movement states in an awkward position.
unable to find a workable alternaand its harsh policy restricting the emigration of soviet jews had tive between the extremes of reactionary dictatorship and radical caused many americans to doubt the wisdom of seeking accomrevolution in central america carter tried to use american ecomodation with the soviet union.
nomic aid to encourage the military junta in el salvador to carry president carters emphasis on human rights appeared to the out democratic reforms.
but after the guerrillas launched a major russians to be a direct repudiation of dtente.
in his inaugural offensive in january 1981 he authorized large scale military assisaddress carter reaffirmed his concern over the mistreatment of tance to the government for its war against the insurgents setting a precedent for the future.
carter initially had better luck in the middle east.
in 1978 he invited egyptian president anwar sadat and israeli prime minister menachem begin to negotiate a peace treaty under his guidance at camp david.
for thirteen days carter met with sadat and begin finally emerging with the camp david accords.
a framework for negotiations rather than an actual peace settlement the camp david accords nonetheless paved the way for a 1979 treaty between these principal antagonists in the arab israeli conflict.
the treaty provided for the gradual return of the sinai to egypt but left the fate of the palestinians the arab inhabitants of the west bank and the gaza strip unsettled.
any sense of progress in the middle east was quickly offset in 1979 with the outbreak of the iranian revolution.
under nixon and kissinger the united states blindfolded american hostages stand among their iranian captors after iranian militants captured the had come to depend heavily on the shah american embassy in tehran on november 4 1979.
the iranians capture of fifty three americans as for defense of the vital persian gulf.
hostages and their violent attacks on the embassy shocked u s citizens.
the hostage crisis dragged carter continued the close relationship on for the rest of carters administration the hostages were not released until january 1981.
chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 human beings anywhere in the world declaring that our commitment to human rights must be absolute it was easier said than done.
carter withheld aid from authoritarian governments in chile and argentina but equally repressive regimes in south korea and the philippines continued to receive generous american support.
the soviets however found even an inconsistent human rights policy to be threatening particularly after carter received soviet exiles in the white house.
secretary of state cyrus vance concentrated on continuing the main pillar of dtente the strategic arms limitation talks salt.
in 1974 president ford had met with brezhnev in vladivostok and reached tentative agreement on the outline of salt ii.
the chief provision was for a ceiling of twenty four hundred nuclear launchers by each side a level that would not require either the soviet union or the united states to give up any existing delivery vehicles.
in march 1977 vance went to moscow to propose a drastic reduction in this level the soviets already angry over human rights rejected the american proposal as an attempt to overcome the soviet lead in land based icbms.
zbigniew brzezinski carters national security adviser worked from the outset to reverse the policy of dtente.
commenting that he was the first pole in three hundred years in a position to really stick it to the russians he favored confrontation with the kremlin.
although carter signed a salt ii treaty with russia in 1979 lowering the ceiling on nuclear delivery systems to 2 250 growing opposition in the senate played directly into brzezinskis hands.
he prevailed on the president to advocate adoption of a new mx missile to replace the existing minuteman icbms which some experts thought were now vulnerable to a soviet first strike.
this new weapons system together with the planned trident submarine ensured that regardless of salt the nuclear arms race would be speeded up in the 1980s.
brzezinski also was successful in persuading the president to use china to outmaneuver the soviets.
on january 1 1979 the united states and china exchanged ambassadors thereby completing the reconciliation that nixon had begun in 1971.
the new relationship between beijing and washington presented the soviet union with the problem of a link between its two most powerful enemies.
the cold war in abeyance for nearly a decade resumed with full fury in december 1979 when the soviet union invaded afghanistan.
although this move was designed to ensure a regime friendly to the soviet union it appeared to many the beginning of a soviet thrust toward the indian ocean and the persian gulf.
carter responded to this aggression by declaring a carter doctrine that threatened armed opposition to any further soviet advance toward the gulf.
the president banned the sale of high technology to russia embargoed the export of grain resumed draft registration and even boycotted the 1980 moscow olympics.
the soviet action and the american reaction doomed dtente.
aware that he could not get a two thirds vote in the senate carter withdrew the salt ii treaty.
the hopeful phrases of dtente gave way to belligerent rhetoric as groups such as the committee on the present danger called for an all out effort against the soviet union.
jimmy carter who had come into office hoping to advance human rights and control the nuclear arms race now found himself a victim of a renewed cold war.
the reagan revolution what was the reagan revolution.
after the turmoil of the 1960s the economic and political troubles of the 1970s made americans turn to conservatism almost inevitable.
the watergate scandal won the democrats a brief reprieve but when the republicans discovered an attractive candidate in ronald reagan a decisive republican victory was essentially assured.
the election of 1980 in 1980 jimmy carter who had used the watergate trauma to win the presidency found himself in serious trouble.
inflation touched off by the second oil shock of the 1970s reached doubledigit figures.
the federal reserve boards effort to tighten the money supply had led to a recession with unemployment climbing to nearly 8 percent by july 1980.
what ronald reagan dubbed the misery index the combined rate of inflation and unemployment hit 28 percent early in 1980 and stayed above 20 percent throughout the year.
foreign policy proved almost as damaging to carter.
the soviet invasion of afghanistan had exploded hopes for continued dtente read the document ronald reagan first inaugural address 1981 election of 1980 electoral vote by state popular vote republican ronald reagan 43 901 812 democratic jimmy carter 35 483 820 independent john b anderson 5 719 437 minor parties 921 188 86 026 257 alaska hawaii wash d c.
the reagan revolution and made carter appear naive.
the continuing hostage crisis in iran blamed what he termed the worst economic mess since the underlined the administrations helplessness.
great depression on high federal spending and excessive taxaronald reagan and his running mate george h w bush tion.
government is not the solution to our problems reagan hammered away at the state of the economy and the world.
reagan announced in his inaugural address.
government is the problem scored heavily among traditionally democratic blue collar groups the president embraced the concept of supply side economics as the remedy for the nations economic ills.
supplyby blaming carter for inflation which robbed workers of any gain in real wages.
reagan also accused carter of allowing the soviets side economists believed that the private sector if encouraged by to outstrip the united states militarily and promised a massive tax cuts would shift its resources from tax shelters to productive buildup of american forces if he was elected.
carters position was investment leading to an economic boom that would provide further hurt by the independent candidacy of liberal republican enough new income to offset the lost revenue.
although many john anderson of illinois who appealed to voters disenchanted economists worried that the 30 percent cut in income taxes that with carter but not yet ready to embrace reagan.
reagan favored would lead to large deficits the president was conthe president fought back by claiming that reagan was too fident that his program would both stimulate the economy and reckless to conduct american foreign policy in the nuclear age.
reduce the role of government.
charging that the election would decide whether we have peace the president made federal spending his first target.
quickly or war carter tried to portray his republican challenger as a wardeciding not to attack such popular middle class entitlement promonger.
reagan deflected the charge and summarized the case grams as social security and medicare and sparing critical social against the administration by putting a simple question to voters services for the truly deserving needy the so called safety net the are you better off now than you were four years ago republicans concentrated on slashing 41 billion from the budget voters answered with a resounding no reagan carried by cutting heavily into other social services such as food stamps forty four states and gained 51 percent of the popular vote.
carter and by reducing public service jobs student loans and support won only six states and 41 percent of the popular vote while john for urban mass transit.
reagan used his charm and powers of peranderson received the remaining 8 percent but failed to carry a suasion to woo conservative democrats from the west and south.
single state.
reagan clearly benefited from the growing political appearing before a joint session of congress only weeks after an power of the sunbelt he carried every state west of the mississippi attempt on his life reagan won a commanding 253 to 176 margin except minnesota the home state of carters running mate walter of victory for his budget in the house and an even more lopsided mondale.
in the south reagan lost only georgia carters home vote of 78 to 20 in the senate in may.
a jubilant reagan told a state.
even more impressive were reagans inroads into the old los angeles audience that he had achieved the greatest reduction new deal coalition.
he received 50 5 percent of the blue collar vote in government spending that has ever been attempted and 46 percent of the jewish vote the best showing by a republican since 1928.
only one group remained loyal to carter african american votwatch the video ronald reagan on the wisdom of the tax cut ers gave him 85 percent of their ballots.
republican gains in congress were even more surprising.
for the first time since 1954 the gop gained control of the senate 53 to 46 and the party picked up 33 seats in the house to narrow the democratic margin from 114 to 50.
though the full implications of the 1980 election remained to be seen the outcome suggested that the democratic coalition that had dominated american politics since the days of franklin roosevelt was falling apart.
in the eight presidential elections from 1952 to 1980 republican candidates received 52 3 percent of the popular vote compared with 47 7 percent for the democrats.
reagans victory in 1980 thus marked the culmination of a republican presidential realignment that ended a half century of democratic dominance.
cutting taxes and spending when ronald reagan took office in january 1981 the ravages of inflation had devastated the economy.
interest rates hovered near 20 percent while the value of the dollar compared to 1960 had dropped to just 36 cents.
the new president president ronald reagans televised speech to the nation in the 1981 advocating deep personal income taxes to spur economic growth and limit the ability of congress to spend funds on domestic social programs.
president reagan persuaded congress to adopt a 25 percent cut in personal income taxes over three years.
chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 the president proved equally successful in trimming taxes.
he initially advocated annual cuts of 10 percent in personal income taxes for three consecutive years.
when the democrats countered with a two year plan that would reduce taxes by only 15 percent reagan compromised with a proposal to cut taxes by 5 percent the first year but insisted on the full 10 percent reduction for the second and third years.
in july both houses passed the tax cut by impressive margins.
in securing reductions in spending and lowering taxes reagan demonstrated beyond doubt his ability to wield presidential power effectively.
as time magazine commented no president since fdr had done so much of such magnitude so quickly to change the economic direction of the country unleashing the private sector reagan met with only mixed success in his other efforts to restrict government activity and reduce federal regulation of the economy.
cutting back on the scope of federal agencies and limiting their impact on american business was a central tenet of the presidents political philosophy.
to achieve his goal of deregulation he appointed men and women who shared his belief in relying on the marketplace rather than the bureaucracy to direct the nations economy.
to the outrage of environmentalists secretary of the interior james watt opened up federal land to coal and timber production halted the growth of national parkland and made more than a billion acres available for offshore oil drilling.
though watt was eventually forced to resign the reagan administration continued its policy of reducing government intervention in business long after watts departure.
transportation secretary drew lewis proved to be the most effective cabinet member in the administrations first two years.
he helped relieve the troubled american automobile industry of many of the regulations adopted in the 1970s to reduce air pollution and increase passenger safety.
at the same time he played a key role in the behind the scenes negotiations that led japan to agree in the spring of 1981 to restrict its automobile exports to the united states for the next three years.
this unilateral japanese action enabled the reagan administration to help detroits carmakers without openly violating its free market position by endorsing protectionist measures.
lewis gained notoriety in opposing a strike by the air traffic controllers union patco in the summer of 1981.
the president denouncing patco for threatening to interrupt the protective services which are governments reason for being fired the striking workers decertified the union and ordered lewis to hire and train thousands of new air traffic controllers at a cost of 1 3 billion.
for the reagan administration the price was worth paying to prove that no group of government employees had the right to defy the public interest.
the reagan administration was less successful in trying to cut back on the entitlement programs that it viewed as the primary cause of the growing budget deficits.
social security was the greatest offender.
a 500 percent increase in social security benefits in the 1970s threatened to bankrupt the systems trust fund by the end of the century.
reagan overconfident from his budget victory met a sharp rebuff when he tried to make substantial cuts in future benefits.
the president then appointed a bipartisan commission to recommend ways to protect the systems endangered trust fund.
in march 1983 congress approved a series of changes that guaranteed the solvency of social security by gradually raising the retirement age delaying cost of living increases for six months and taxing pensions paid to the well to do elderly.
the administrations record in dealing with womens concerns and civil rights proved clumsy and divisive.
although feminist groups were disappointed by the administrations strong rhetorical attacks on legalized abortion the appointment of sandra day oconnor to the supreme court pleased them.
by this one shrewd move reagan was able both to fulfill a campaign pledge and to make a symbolic gesture to women.
his appointments to the lower federal courts were a better indication of his administrations relatively low regard for women.
of the first seventy two reagan nominees to the federal judiciary only three were women just one of the sixty nine men was african american.
read the document ronald reagan the air traffic controllers strike the professional air traffic controllers organization patco was one of the few unions to support reagan in the 1980 campaign.
but when patco struck in august 1981 reagan unhesitatingly fired the striking air traffic controllers and refused to rehire them when the strike collapsed.
reagan and the world the administrations civil rights record proved especially revealing.
aware of how few african americans had supported the gop in 1980 reagan made no effort to reward this group with government jobs or favors.
instead the justice department actively opposed busing to achieve school integration and affirmative action measures that resulted in minority hiring quotas.
reagan and the world how did reagan reshape american foreign relations.
reagan was determined to reverse the course of american policy abroad no less than at home.
he believed that under carter american prestige and standing in the world had dropped to an all time low.
intent on restoring traditional american pride and influence reagan devoted himself to strengthening americas defenses and recapturing world supremacy from the soviet union.
challenging the evil empire the president scored his first foreign policy victory on the day he took office thanks to diplomatic efforts begun under carter.
on january 20 1981 iran released the fifty three americans held hostage and thus enabled reagan to begin his presidency on a positive note.
he built upon this accomplishment by embarking on a major military expansion.
here again he continued efforts begun by carter who after the soviet invasion of afghanistan had persuaded congress to fund a 5 percent increase in defense spending.
the reagan expansion went far beyond carters.
secretary of defense caspar weinberger proposed a plan that would more than double defense spending.
the emphasis was on new weapons ranging from the b 1 bomber and the controversial mx nuclear missile to the expansion of the navy from 456 to 600 ships.
despite some opposition in congress reagan and weinberger got most of what they wanted and by 1985 the defense budget grew to more than 300 billion.
the justification for all the new weapons was reagans belief that the soviet union was a deadly enemy that threatened the wellbeing and security of the united states.
reagan saw the russians as bent on world revolution ready to commit any crime to lie to cheat to advance their cause.
citing what he called a record of tyranny reagan denounced the russians before the un in 1982 claiming soviet sponsored guerrillas and terrorists are at work in central and south america in africa the middle east in the caribbean and in europe violating human rights and unnerving the world with violence given this view of russia as the focus of evil in the modern world it is not surprising that the new president continued the hard line that carter had adopted after the invasion of afghanistan.
abandoning dtente reagan proceeded to implement a 1979 decision to place 572 pershing ii and cruise missiles in western europe within range of moscow and other russian population centers to match soviet deployment of mediumrange missiles aimed at nato countries.
despite strong protests from the soviet union as well as growing uneasiness in europe and an increasingly vocal nuclear freeze movement at home the united states began putting the weapons in bases in great britain and germany in november 1983.
the soviets claiming the move gave them only ten minutes of warning time in case of an american attack responded by breaking off disarmament negotiations in geneva.
the nuclear arms race had now reached a more dangerous level than ever before.
the united states stepped up research and development of the strategic defense initiative sdi an antimissile system based on the use of lasers and particle beams to destroy incoming missiles in outer space.
sdi was quickly dubbed star wars by the media.
critics doubted that the sdi could be perfected but they warned that even if it were the result would be to escalate the arms race by forcing the russians to build more offensive missiles in order to overcome the american defense system.
the reagan administration however defended sdi as a legitimate attempt to free the united states from the deadly trap of deterrence with its reliance on the threat of nuclear retaliation to keep the peace.
meanwhile the soviet union kept deploying larger and more accurate land based icbms.
although both sides continued to observe the unratified salt ii agreements the fact remained that between them the two superpowers had nearly fifty thousand warheads in their nuclear arsenals.
confrontation in central america reagan perceived the soviet challenge as extending across the globe.
in central america an area marked by great extremes of wealth with a small landowning elite and masses of peasants mired in poverty the united states had traditionally looked for moderate middle class regimes to support.
but these were hard to find and washington often ended up backing repressive rightwing dictatorships rather than the leftist groups that raised the radical issues of land reform and redistribution of wealth.
yet it was often oppression by u s supported regimes that drove those seeking political change to embrace revolutionary tactics.
this was precisely what happened in nicaragua where the leftist sandinista coalition finally succeeded in overthrowing the authoritarian somoza regime in 1979.
in an effort to strengthen the many middle class elements in the original sandinista government and to avoid forcing nicaragua into the cuban and soviet orbit carter extended american economic aid.
the reagan administration quickly reversed this policy.
secretary of state alexander haig cut off aid to nicaragua in the spring of 1981 accusing the sandinistas of driving out the moderates welcoming cuban advisers and soviet military assistance and serving as a supply base for leftist guerrillas in nearby el salvador.
the criticism became a self fulfilling prophecy as nicaragua became even more dependent on cuba and the soviet union.
the united states and nicaragua were soon on a collision course.
in april 1983 declaring that the national security of all the americas is at stake in central america reagan asked congress for the money and authority to oust the sandinistas.
when congress fearful of repeating the vietnam fiasco refused reagan opted for covert action.
the cia began supplying the contras exiles fighting against the sandinistas from bases in honduras and costa rica.
the u s backed rebels tried to disrupt the nicaraguan economy raiding villages blowing up oil tanks and even mining harbors.
then in 1984 congress passed the boland amendment complete the assignment the christian right on myhistorylab feature essay the christian right i n early 1979 rev.
jerry falwell was flying to lynchburg virginia when he suddenly felt god calling him to enlist the good people of america in a crusade to battle permissiveness and moral decay.
falwell who had built a small church in lynchburg into a huge religious enterprise with eighteen thousand members sixty associate pastors and a television and radio audience of a million and a half plus fifteen hundred students at liberty baptist college launched his new enterprise on capitol hill in april 1979.
announcing that it was time to fight the pornography obscenity vulgarity profanity that under the guise of sex education and values clarification pervaded public school education falwell founded an overtly political organization to purify american society.
he invited roman catholics jews protestants mormons and even nonreligious conservatives to join his moral majority falwells moral majority highlighted the emergence in the 1970s of what journalists called the christian right.
throughout american history many church members have been swept up in religious awakenings leaders of the revivals have called americans back to personal piety and a concern for their society and its changing values.
at those times christians have been urged to work actively to change their communities.
the supreme courts 1962 and 1963 decisions to ban school sponsored prayer and bible reading sparked increased political activity among conservative christians.
many joined organizations working at the local level to gain greater control over public education and the content of textbooks ronald reagan appears with rev.
jerry falwell at a moral majority rally in dallas texas in 1980.
falwells moral majority and other similar evangelical groups endorsed conservative positions on a variety of issues including abortion and school prayer.
in his two presidential election campaigns reagan vigorously sought the support of falwells followers.
and science lectures.
church leaders often encouraged their congregations to become more active in local politics they endorsed candidates and causes and passed out literature at church services.
conservative christians also supported candidates who promised measures that would reverse the perceived decline in traditional family values as evidenced by feminism abortion and overt homosexuality.
concern for the changing values of americana resulted in a new series of revivals.
the open air camp meetings of past awakenings developed into gatherings that packed thousands into large arenas for events broadcast by television to extended audiences.
a number of christian preachers used television to broaden their ministries.
several like falwell produced their own weekly or daily television broadcasts.
the new television evangelists dubbed televangelists combined commentary on social economic and foreign policy issues with their more traditional sermons and advice on living the christian life.
the televangelists produced publications and solicited contributions for their ministries.
their mailing lists formed the first membership roles of the new christian right.
jimmy carter was one of their earliest national beneficiaries and suffered the consequences.
carter was a devoted baptist who taught sunday school readily professed his christianity and emphasized family values in his speeches.
he received the endorsement of some of the televangelists for his campaign to become president of the united states and the national press began to pay closer attention to his personal religious beliefs.
but support from the budding christian right was not necessarily an asset such christians hold themselves their preachers and other christians to very high standards of moral behavior and ideological purity.
when carter discussed his christian commitment in an interview in playboy magazine it cost him some votes in a close election playboy was the cultural antithesis of the family values advocated by the christian right.
other voters feared that carter was crossing the traditional barrier placed between religion and politics in america.
as president carters actions continually reminded conservatives that he was after all a democrat and a liberal one.
carter was unwilling to reform welfare to work for the return of prayer in public schools or to ban abortion.
the developing christian right wanted more than just christians in office they wanted to see their program enacted.
they found a new darling ronald reagan.
reagan was not a practicing christian he was divorced and his children were not the model products of a family values home.
but he was a bona fide conservative.
he knew the right words to answer questions about his faith and he peppered his speeches with the program of the christian right.
with his words reagan brought the growing power of the christian right solidly into the republican party.
their numbers and the enthusiasm of their individual political workers were sufficient to swing close elections candidates at all levels sought their endorsement.
the moral majority and conservative christians in general were energized by the recognition they received while working hard for ronald reagan.
however president reagan paid them for their support with little more than the words in his speeches.
so the christian right began to carefully consider the choice of a successor.
pat robertson stepped forward.
he was the son of a congressman and a phi beta kappa graduate of washington and lee university yale law school and the new york theological seminary.
he had first joined the baptist church but later became a charismatic christian and one of the most prominent preachers and healers on television with his 700 club.
like falwell robertson formed a coalition of religious conservatives from many faiths with the intent of teaching the members how to be effective in politics.
that organization provided the grassroots workers for his effort to win the republican nomination for president in 1988.
robertson however became the innocent victim of the televangelist scandals the fallen angels that filled newspapers and television throughout 1987 and 1988.
oral roberts demanded that his supporters send him 8 million or god would call him home jim and tammy bakker of the ptl club were accused of sexual drug and financial misconduct jim bakker was sentenced to prison.
jimmy swaggart famous for his exhortations calling christians to morally upright lives was caught with a prostitute.
the scandals cut into the income of every religious broadcast including the ministries of falwell and robertson.
the moral majority folded.
pat robertson received good seats for his supporters and some attention at the republican convention george bush got the nomination.
by the end of the twentieth century the christian right had grown into a powerful political force but its national program remained unrealized.
conservative christians had become experts at mobilizing support for national elections and local causes and candidates but they did not form a mature political entity willing to negotiate compromise or trade one goal in order to achieve another.
many religious activists quickly became disillusioned with politics when their candidates could not fulfill all their promises once elected.
likewise candidates who campaigned on the programs of the christian right often lost the support of the general electorate because they were seen as too extreme.
clearly the ideological purity demanded by the christian right was at odds with the pragmatism needed to achieve their goals through the actions of government.
questions for discussion 1.
what events contributed to the emergence of the christian right in the 1970s and 1980s.
what challenges did the new movement pose to the liberalism of the 1960s.
to what extent do you think overtly religious values should influence political debate and the framing of laws.
chapter 31 view the map the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 conflict in central america 1970 1998 600 miles 600 kilometers united states atlantic ocean ba ha gulf of mexico m guatemala.
military coup against president cerezo fails may 1989 free elections held 1993.
duvalier forced out of office feb 1986 military coup against elected government 1991.
cuba ter antilles grenada.
u s and regional forces land after military coup oct 1983 elections held dec 1984.
antilles caribbean sea nicaragua.
sandinista rebels come to power 1979 sandinista government defeated by opposition candidate violetta barrios de chamorro feb 1990.
grenada nicaragua el salvador.
civil war 1980 1990 opposing sides hold peace talks 1990 peace treaty signed 1992 er honduras puerto rico u s ss belize pacific ocean haiti ea jamaica guatemala el salvador gr dominican republic le jamaica.
former socialist michael manley elected prime minister feb 1989.
mexico as panama canal costa rica panama canal.
canal zone comes under panamanian control 1979 canal comes under panamanian control in 2000.
canal zone venezuela panama panama.
u s forces invade and capture drug trafficker general manuel noriega dec 1989 noriega is flown to federal prison in united states jan 1990.
colombia guyana trouble spots in central america and the caribbean u s involvement in central american trouble spots intensified in the 1980s and early 1990s.
prohibiting any u s agency from spending money in central america.
the withdrawal of u s financial backing left the contras in a precarious position.
more trouble in the middle east reagan tried to continue carters basic policy in the turbulent middle east.
in april 1982 the israelis honored a camp david pledge by making their final withdrawal from the sinai.
reagan hoped to achieve the other camp david objective of providing a homeland for the palestinian arabs on the west bank but israel instead continued to extend jewish settlements into the disputed area.
the threat of the palestine liberation organization plo based in southern lebanon and frequently raiding across the border into israel seemed to be the major obstacle to further progress.
on june 6 1982 with tacit american encouragement israel invaded southern lebanon in order to secure its northern border and destroy the plo.
the reagan administration made no effort to halt the offensive but did join with france and italy in sending a multinational force to permit the plo to evacuate to tunisia.
unfortunately the united states soon became enmeshed in the lebanese civil war which had been raging since 1975.
american marines sent to lebanon as part of the multinational force to restore order were caught up in the renewed hostilities between muslim and christian militia.
the muslims perceived the marines as aiding the christian dominated government of lebanon instead of acting as neutral peacekeepers and they began firing on the vulnerable american troops.
in the face of growing congressional demands for the withdrawal of the marines reagan declared they were there to protect lebanon from the designs of soviet backed syria.
but finally after terrorists drove a truck loaded with explosives into the american barracks killing 239 marines the president saw no choice but to pull out.
the last american unit left beirut in late february 1984.
despite his good intentions reagan had experienced a humiliation similar to carters in iran one that left lebanon in shambles and the arab israeli situation worse than ever.
trading arms for hostages reagans middle eastern troubles didnt prevent his easy reelection in 1984.
voters gave him credit for curbing inflation reviving the economy and challenging communism compared to these major reagan and the world view the map the middle east in the 1980s and 1990s black italy turkmenistan armenia turkey greece caspian sea lebanon.
terrorist bomb kills 239 marines oct 23 1983 shiite extremists hold american hostages 1984 1990.
sicily malta crete tripoli benghazi lebanon israel gaza strip suez canal l i b ya afghanistan iraq iran iraq war.
jordan kuwait kuwait.
invaded and occupied by iraq aug 2 1990.
daharan pe rsi an pa k ista n persian gulf.
u s escorts reflagged kuwaiti tankers 1987 1988.
oman gulf bahrain egypt qatar iraq.
operation desert storm persian gulf war jan feb.
400 miles 400 kilometers sudan a se israeli occupied territories iran iran.
american hostages held in tehran since nov 4 1979 released jan 20 1981 noon est.
golan heights d re tehran west bank libya.
u s bombs military targets apr.
afghanistan.
soviet invasion dec 1979 soviet withdrawal 1989 azerbaijan syria cyprus mediterranean sea gulf of sidra georgia sea macedonia albania tunisia s au d i a r a b i a oman united arab emirates trouble spots in the middle east armed conflict and territorial attacks in this region intensified in the 1980s and early 1990s.
achievements the miscue in lebanon appeared minor.
democratic candidate walter mondale formerly jimmy carters vice president provided a jolt to the campaign by choosing representative geraldine ferraro of new york as his running mate.
but even the presence of the first woman on the national ticket of a major american party couldnt dent reagans enormous popularity.
he swept to victory with 59 percent of the popular vote and carried every state but mondales home minnesota.
yet the troubles abroad persisted.
not long after reagans second inauguration his administrations policies in the middle east and central america converged in the iran contra affair.
in mid 1985 robert mcfarlane who had become national security adviser a year earlier began a new initiative designed to restore american influence in the troubled middle east.
concerned over the fate of six americans held hostage in lebanon by groups thought to be loyal to irans ayatollah khomeini mcfarlane proposed trading american antitank missiles to iran in return for the hostages release.
the iranians desperate for weapons in the war they had been waging against iraq since 1980 seemed willing to comply.
the election of 1984 candidate reagan mondale party republican democratic popular vote 54 455 075 37 577 185 electoral vote mcfarlane soon found himself in over his head.
he relied heavily on a young marine lieutenant colonel assigned to the national security council nsc oliver north and north in turn sought the assistance of cia director william casey who interpreted the iran initiative as an opportunity to use the nsc to mount the kind of covert operation denied the cia under the post 1975 congressional oversight policy.
by early 1986 when john poindexter a naval officer with little political experience replaced a burned out mcfarlane as national security adviser casey was able to persuade the president to go ahead with shipments of tow antitank missiles and hawk antiaircraft missiles to iran.
the arms deal with iran was bad policy but what came next was criminal.
ever since the boland amendment in late 1984 had cut off congressional funding the reagan administration had been searching for ways to supply the contras in nicaragua.
oliver north was put in charge of soliciting donations from wealthy rightwing americans.
in early 1986 north had what he later described as a neat idea apparently shared by casey as well he could use profits from the sale of weapons to iran charging as much as 10 000 for a tow that cost the united states only 3 500 to finance the contras.
norths ploy was clearly not only illegal but unconstitutional since it meant usurping the congressional power of the purse.
ultimately the secret got out.
administration officials tried to shield reagan from blame and even after a congressional investigation it was unclear whether the president had approved the contra diversion.
reagans reputation survived the scandal complete the assignment roe v wade the struggle over womens reproductive rights on myhistorylab law and society i n colonial america abortion was generally legal as a method of terminating early pregnancies although the practice was usually kept secret since the most common cause of unwanted pregnancy sex between unmarried men and women was illegal.
throughout the nineteenth century states began restricting or outlawing abortion and by 1900 every state except kentucky had enacted some form of antiabortion law.
despite laws criminalizing abortion the number of illegal abortions each year whether performed privately by physicians or by unlicensed practitioners numbered anywhere from 200 000 to 1 2 million.
and each year about two hundred of the women who obtained illegal abortions died as a result of the procedure.
abortion rights advocates mobilized in the 1960s helped by the growing womens rights movement the declining health risk involved in the procedure and the wave of fetal deformities and birth defects that swept the nation in the early 1960s largely attributable to an outbreak of german measles.
their argument centered on the belief that a woman had the right to control her own body.
just as vocal as abortion rights advocates were those who opposed abortion believing that human life began at conception and that a fetuss right to life outweighed a womans right to end a pregnancy.
in 1973 in the case of roe v wade the u s supreme court handed down a momentous decision on the abortion debate a decision that continues to generate controversy more than thirty years later.
roe v wade the struggle over womens reproductive rights on january 22 1998 norma mccorvey joined thousands of americans who braved the freezing weather of washington d c to protest the supreme court decision in the case of jane roe et.
v henry wade.
exactly twenty five years earlier the court had sided with jane roe the pseudonym for an anonymous texas woman seeking an abortion and overturned a state law that made abortion illegal in all cases except when the life of the mother was at risk.
the ruling had voided forty six state laws that denied or restricted a womans access to the controversial procedure.
now norma mccorvey and other abortion opponents were observing the anniversary of the decision by taking to the streets to demonstrate their opposition.
in many ways mccorveys presence was unsurprising she was a born again christian an active abortion opponent and the founder of an antiabortion ministry.
in 1997 she had publicly denounced abortion in america as a terrible terrible holocaust yet one thing made norma different from the other protestors twenty five years earlier she had been jane roe.
the intensity of the debate over abortion reached unprecedented heights in the 1970s and state legislatures began to pay attention to the cries for reform of laws governing abortion.
between 1967 and 1970 twelve states liberalized their laws usually to permit abortion in cases of rape incest or fetal deformity or to protect the life and health of the pregnant woman.
most states however retained their restrictive laws and by 1973 only four states guaranteed their residents virtually unhindered access to an abortion.
texas the home of norma mccorvey was not one of them.
mccorvey was largely unaware of these legal struggles.
a poor texas woman from a broken home she had dropped out of school in tenth grade and married at sixteen.
the marriage quickly collapsed and norma spent the next five years working odd jobs.
her first child born while she was sixteen was eventually adopted by her mother and her second the product of a short affair with a co worker a few years later was given up for adoption.
in late 1969 norma again became pregnant.
twenty two years old depressed and poor she sought a way to avoid having another child.
her attempt to induce an abortion by drinking castor oil only made her sick.
texass abortion law which had stood virtually unchanged since 1857 prescribed a punishment of up to five years in prison for anyone convicted of performing an abortion for reasons other than saving the mothers life.
adoption it seemed was her only option.
surprisingly her path toward adoption led mccorvey into the struggle for abortion rights.
an adoption lawyer referred her to sarah weddington and linda coffee two young lawyers who were preparing to challenge texass abortion law but needed a pregnant woman willing to serve as the name plaintiff.
in december 1969 the three women met for dinner in dallas.
mccorvey agreed to join the lawsuit without much prodding but had one request the use of a pseudonym to hide her identity.
three months later weddington and coffee filed a class action lawsuit on behalf of all texas women against henry wade the district attorney of dallas county demanding that he stop enforcing the states abortion laws mccorvey the name plaintiff was identified only as jane roe.
coffee and weddington asked the three judge court of the federal fifth circuit to overturn the texas law on two grounds.
first they claimed it was written too vaguely to be applied fairly.
more significantly they argued that the texas law violated a womans right to privacy.
they cited recent supreme court decisions articulating a zone of personal privacy this zone the justices had admitted was not explicitly written into the constitution but could be inferred from a number of amendments.
in 1965 the supreme court had made their most specific statement on this concept writing in griswold v connecticut of a zone of privacy created by several fundamental constitutional guarantees in griswold the justices struck down a one hundredyear old connecticut law forbidding the sale of birth control devices now weddington and coffee argued that this personal privacy zone included reproductive rights as well.
texass lawyers rejected the claims.
jay floyd of the attorney generals office contended that jane roe whoever she was had no standing to sue since the law punished only doctors who performed abortions not the women who received them.
besides floyd claimed roe had to be so far along in her pregnancy by now that either she had already given birth or would do so fairly soon thus regardless of the courts decision the whole case was moot.
assistant district attorney john tolle took a different approach arguing that the state had the right to protect life in all forms and hence the fetus was entitled to the full protection of the state.
i personally think and i think the states position he concluded is that the right of the child to life is superior to that womans right to privacy it took almost a month for the judges to announce their decision.
the texas laws they ruled were unconstitutional because they deprive single women and married couples of their norma mccorvey the jane roe of roe v wade with one of her lawyers gloria allred.
right to privacy secured by the ninth amendment they also found the statute too vague to be allowed to continue under the fourteenth amendment.
the law would have to be eliminated.
however the judges refused to issue an injunction ordering the district attorneys office to stop enforcing it immediately such an action they announced would be too intrusive considering that the state had not yet been given the opportunity to revise its laws.
quickly the texas attorney general announced his intention to appeal the case and to continue prosecuting doctors who violated the statute.
weddington and coffee also appealed citing the courts refusal to issue an injunction.
for weddington and coffee the decision would mean an eventual appeal to the supreme court for norma mccorvey it meant only crushing disappointment.
mccorvey had never seen herself as a crusader for womens rights and despite being the named plaintiff she had played virtually no role in the case.
she had joined the lawsuit only in the hope of obtaining an abortion and for six months had drifted across texas clinging to the lawsuit as her last chance.
now she discovered she had won her case but without an immediate injunction she would have to deliver the baby after all.
the lawsuit she realized for the first time was not really for me.
it was about me and maybe all the women whove come before me but it was really for all the women who were coming after me a few months later she had her third baby whom she gave up for adoption.
in march 1971 the united states supreme court agreed to hear the case.
supreme court involvement prior to a case being argued before an appeals court was an unusual step but since a constitutional right was at issue the justices agreed to intervene immediately.
undoubtedly the growing intensity of the abortion debate also influenced the court by the time the roe appeal was filed eleven state courts had abortion cases pending twenty cases were before three judge federal panels and four others were on the supreme court docket for consideration.
in the end the supreme court would hear roe v wade not once but twice.
at oral arguments on december 13 1971 both sides reiterated their positions to the nations highest court.
the justices pondered the arguments and handed down their verdict.
five of the justices favored striking down the texas law while only two sided with the state.
due to recent retirements however the court was operating with only seven members two short of its full complement.
this fact combined with general unhappiness with the majority opinion written by justice harry blackmun led the court to the unusual decision of putting the case over for reargument the following year.
on october 10 1972 the two sides rehashed their arguments for a final time.
again mccorvey remained in texas while weddington emphasized her constitutional right to privacy.
we are not here to advocate abortion she told the court.
we do not ask this court to rule that abortion is good or desirable in any particular situation.
we are here to advocate that the decision as to whether or not a particular woman will continue to carry or will terminate a pregnancy is a decision that should be made by that individual a majority of the justices agreed.
on january 22 1973 the supreme court struck down the texas law by a 7 to 2 vote.
justice blackmuns eighty page majority opinion echoed weddington and coffees argument about an implied zone of privacy.
the right of privacy he wrote whether it be founded in the fourteenth amendments concept of personal liberty and restrictions upon state action as we feel it is or as the district court determined in the ninth amendments reservation of rights to the people is broad enough to encompass a womans decision whether or not to terminate her pregnancy the fetus the majority also agreed had never been given legal recognition as a person and as such could not expect to receive equal protections.
once again the verdict was not an unqualified victory for coffee and weddington.
blackmuns decision forbade states from restricting abortion in the first trimester of pregnancy and allowed them to regulate it only in the interests of preserving maternal health in the second.
however he recognized a legitimate state interest in protecting potential life which he defined as occurring when the fetus had the capacity for meaningful life outside of the mothers womb accordingly he permitted states to regulate abortion under almost all circumstances during the last trimester.
only justices byron white and william rehnquist sided with texas.
in a scathing dissent white attacked his brethren for making a decision that should have been left to the individual states calling the verdict an improvident and extravagant exercise of the power of judicial review the court he concluded apparently values the convenience of the pregnant mother more than the continued existence and development of the life or potential life which she carries the ruling set off both celebration and protest.
in texas norma mccorvey read about the decision in the newspaper and immediately broke into tears.
when weddington finally reached her a few days later norma was thrilled.
it makes me feel like im on top of mt.
everest she told her lawyer.
many others felt quite differently.
john cardinal krol president of the national catholic conference predicted that the court was ushering in the greatest slaughter of innocent life in the history of mankind the debate over roe v wade was just beginning.
shocked by the decision antiabortion forces redoubled their efforts.
although a few chose violence most opponents of the roe decision turned to lobbying and legislation to undo the verdict.
congressmen introduced hundreds of constitutional amendments limiting abortion but none were approved.
in 1976 congress did prohibit the use of medicaid funds for abortions except when the life of the mother was at risk and twelve years later the department of health and human services banned government employed doctors from counseling women about abortions.
even the supreme court showed a willingness to chip away at its earlier decision.
in bellotti v baird 1979 the court allowed states to require unmarried minors to get parental consent for abortions as long as the state offered an alternative procedure such as allowing her to obtain a judges permission instead.
the court in planned parenthood of southeastern pennsylvania v casey 1992 later upheld a pennsylvania law that placed various restrictions on abortion rights including a mandatory twenty four hour waiting period and a requirement that doctors present alternative options before performing the surgery.
during the next decade abortion continued to be the most controversial issue in american politics and law.
as of early 2006 the roe decision still held and abortion remained legal in most cases.
but conservatives remained as determined as ever to overturn it.
throughout the intense debate no figure remained more central to the struggle than norma mccorvey.
for two decades many who supported abortion rights admired her as a courageous individual who led american women in their fight to recapture control of their own bodies.
yet more than twenty years later mccorvey who revealed her identity in 1984 stunned her supporters by renouncing her past position and embracing the antiabortion movement.
she then became an inspirational symbol to those on the other side of the debate who applauded her wisdom and courage in renouncing the errors of her past.
by 1997 she had joined the controversial antiabortion group operation rescue and the following year opened her own ministry roe no more yet despite her role as a symbol of this intense struggle mccorvey remained just a typical american struggling to come to grips with a difficult and complex topic.
deep inside she recalled twenty years after jane roe had become famous im still nobody but norma mccorvey questions for discussion 1.
what is the constitutional basis for the assertion of a womans right to privacy.
why was justice blackmuns opinion so controversial.
why did he limit the right to abortion to the first two trimesters of a pregnancy.
to what extent have subsequent court decisions limited a womans right to abortion.
how likely do you think it is that the court will overturn roe v wade in the future.
chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 watch the video oliver north hearing hardliner reagan softened during his second term to become an advocate of cooperation with moscow.
a momentous change in leadership in the soviet union had much to do with the change in reagans approach.
the illness and death of leonid brezhnev in 1982 followed in rapid succession by the deaths of his aged successors yuri andropov and konstantin chernenko led finally to the selection of mikhail gorbachev a younger and more dynamic soviet leader.
gorbachev was intent on improving relations with the united states as part of his new policy of perestroika restructuring the soviet economy and glasnost political openness.
soviet economic performance had been deteriorating steadily and the war in afghanistan had become a major liability.
gorbachev needed a breathing spell in the arms race and a reduction in cold war tensions in order to carry out his sweeping changes at home.
a series of summit meetings between reagan and gorbachev broke the chill in superpower relations and led in december 1987 to an intermediate nuclear forces treaty by which reagan and gorbachev agreed to remove and destroy all intermediaterange missiles in europe.
the most important arms control agreement since salt i of 1972 the inf treaty raised hopes that an end to the cold war was finally in sight.
during the presidents last year in office the soviets cooperated with the united states in pressuring iran and iraq to end their long war.
most significant of all gorbachev moved to end the war in afghanistan.
the first soviet units pulled out in april 1988 with the final evacuation due to be completed early the next year.
by the time reagan left office in january 1989 he had scored a series of foreign policy triumphs that offset the iran contra fiasco and thus helped redeem his presidency.
conclusion challenging the new deal despite oliver norths questionable conduct the public elevated him to near hero status during the televised iran contra hearings.
the bemedaled marine testified that he believed his deeds were justified as a defense of democracy.
albeit tarnished.
several of his subordinates including north and poindexter were prosecuted.
william casey might have joined them in the dock but died suddenly of a brain tumor.
reagan the peacemaker americans tolerance of reagans mistakes in the iran contra affair resulted in part from the progress he was making on the larger issue of u s soviet relations.
elected as an anticommunist though trouble dogged the final years of his presidency the overall effect of reagans two terms was to reshape the landscape of american politics.
the democratic coalition forged by franklin roosevelt during the new deal finally broke down as the republicans captured the south and made deep inroads into organized labor.
more significantly reagan challenged the liberal premises of the new deal by asserting that the private sector rather than the federal government ought to be the source of remedies to most of americas ills.
reagan prudently left intact the centerpieces of the welfare state social security and medicare but he trimmed other programs and made any comparable expansion of federal authority nearly impossible.
by the time he left office smallgovernment conservatism seemed the undeniable wave of the american future.
study resources study resources take the study plan for chapter 31 the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 on myhistorylab time line 1969 stonewall riots in new yorks greenwich village spark gay rights movement june american astronauts land on the moon july u s forces invade cambodia april ohio national guardsmen kill four students at kent state university may states ratify twenty sixth amendment to the constitution giving 18 year olds the right to vote july president nixon freezes wages and prices for ninety days august richard nixon visits china february u s and ussr sign salt i accords in moscow may white house plumbers unit breaks into democratic headquarters in watergate complex june nixon wins reelection in landslide victory over george mcgovern november united states and north vietnam sign truce january arab oil embargo creates energy crisis in the united states october supreme court orders nixon to surrender white house tapes june nixon resigns presidency august last evacuation helicopter leaves roof of u s embassy in saigon south vietnam april nation celebrates bicentennial with fireworks patriotic music and parade of sailing ships july jimmy carter defeats gerald ford in presidential election november 1977 carter signs panama canal treaties restoring sovereignty to panama september carter orchestrates camp david accords between israel and egypt september 1979 iranian militants seize american hostages tehran november soviet invasion of afghanistan leads to u s withdrawal from 1980 moscow olympics december 1980 ronald reagan wins presidency over carter 1981 american hostages in iran released after 444 days in captivity january sandra day oconnor becomes first woman u s supreme court justice september 1982 equal rights amendment fails state ratification june unemployment reaches postwar record high of 10 4 percent october 1984 russia boycotts summer olympics in los angeles july reagan reelected president november 1985 mikhail gorbachev becomes leader of the soviet union march 1986 iran contra affair made public november 1987 reagan and gorbachev sign inf treaty at washington summit 1988 george h w bush defeats michael dukakis decisively in presidential election chapter review the tempting of richard nixon what were the major accomplishments and failures of the nixon presidency.
nixon opened diplomatic relations with china and initiated dtente with the soviet union.
he withdrew american troops from vietnam terminating a quarter century of american involvement.
but his role in the watergate scandal led to a constitutional crisis that forced him from office in disgrace.
p 738 private lives public issues how did private life change during this period.
the divorce rate rose significantly and the number of married couples with children declined.
more women entered the professions and roe v wade guaranteed their right to an abortion.
gay men and lesbians achieved greater freedom than before though they still lacked rights accorded to heterosexuals.
p 745 politics and diplomacy after watergate the economy of stagflation crude oil how were oil and inflation linked during the 1970s.
oil prices jumped dramatically in the 1970s as a result of growing demand for oil and turmoil in the middle east.
rising oil prices contributed to the worst inflation in modern american history.
p 742 why did the presidencies of ford and carter largely fail.
ford and carter had to deal with the aftermath of vietnam and watergate and the economic disruptions that followed the oil price rises of the 1970s.
ford alienated many americans by pardoning nixon and carter fumbled the hostage crisis in iran.
p 749 chapter 31 chapter review the reagan revolution reagan and the world what was the reagan revolution.
the reagan revolution was the return to conservatism in american politics and diplomacy upon reagans 1980 election as president.
reagan pledged to reduce the role of government in american life and restore american honor and confidence abroad.
p 752 how did reagan reshape american foreign relations.
reagan rejected dtente and challenged the soviet union more directly than any american president in decades.
he called for the creation of the sdi missile system and he waged covert war against leftists in central america.
the iran contra affair in which reagan traded arms for hostages tarnished his reputation but he also negotiated the inf treaty with the soviet union.
p 755 key terms and definitions moral majority in 1979 the reverend jerry falwell founded the moral majority to combat amoral liberals drug abuse coddling of criminals homosexuality communism and abortion.
the moral majority represented the rise of political activism among organized religions radical right wing.
p 738 neoconservatism former liberals who advocated a strong stand against communism abroad and free market capitalism at home.
these intellectuals stressed the positive values of american society in contrast to those liberals who emphasized social problems.
p 738 dtente president richard nixon and henry kissinger pursued a policy of dtente a french word meaning a relaxation of tension with the soviet union to lessen the possibility of nuclear war in the 1970s.
p 739 strategic arms limitation talks salt in 1972 the united states and the soviet union culminated four years of salt by signing a treaty limiting the deployment of antiballistic missiles abm and an agreement to freeze the number of offensive missiles for five years.
p 739 watergate scandal a break in at the democratic national committee offices in the watergate complex in washington was carried out under the direction of white house employees.
disclosure of the white house involvement in the break in and subsequent cover up forced president richard nixon to resign in 1974 p 741 organization of petroleum exporting countries opec a cartel of oil exporting nations.
p 742 equal rights amendment era a proposed constitutional amendment passed by congress in 1972 to guarantee women equal treatment under the law.
the amendment failed to be ratified in 1982 p 746 roe v wade the 1973 supreme court decision that women have a constitutional right to abortion during the early stages of pregnancy.
p 746 camp david accords in 1978 president jimmy carter mediated a peace agreement between the leaders of egypt and israel at camp david.
in 1979 israel and egypt signed a peace treaty based on the accords.
p 751 iranian hostage crisis in 1979 iranian fundamentalists seized the american embassy in tehran and held fifty three americans hostage for over a year.
the hostages were released on january 20 1981 the day ronald reagan became president.
p 751 supply side economics the theory that tax cuts would stimulate the economy by giving individuals more incentive to earn more money which would lead to greater investment and eventually larger tax revenues at a lower rate.
p 753 strategic defense initiative sdi popularly known as star wars president ronald reagans sdi proposed to construct an elaborate computer controlled antimissile defense system capable of destroying enemy missiles in outer space.
p 755 iran contra affair the iran contra affair involved officials in the reagan administration secretly and illegally selling arms to iran and using the proceeds to finance the contra rebels in nicaragua.
p 759 intermediate nuclear forces treaty inf signed by president ronald reagan and soviet president mikhail gorbachev in late 1987 this agreement provided for the destruction of all intermediate range nuclear missiles and permitted on site inspection for the first time during the cold war.
p 764 critical thinking questions 1.
if nixon hadnt resigned would he have been impeached.
would that have been a good thing or a bad thing.
what did feminism and gay liberation have to do with each other.
should ford have pardoned nixon.
why or why not.
which was more scandalous iran contra or watergate.
study resources myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 31 on myhistorylab the tempting of richard nixon read the document ronald reagan the air traffic controllers strike p 754 view the closer look watergate shipwreck p 742 reagan and the world private lives public issues read the document p 747 view the map conflict in central america 1970 1998 p 758 roe v wade january 22 1973 politics and diplomacy after watergate watch the video jimmy carter the crisis of confidence speech 1979 p 750 the reagan revolution read the document ronald reagan first inaugural address 1981 p 752 ronald reagan on the watch the video wisdom of the tax cut p 753 complete the assignment the christian right p 756 view the map the middle east in the 1980s and 1990s p 759 roe v wade the complete the assignment struggle over womens reproductive rights p 760 watch the video oliver north hearing p 764 indicates study plan media assignment into the twenty first century 1989 2012 contents and learning objectives the first president bush pg.
770 republicans triumphant pg.
783 what were the important issues in george h w bushs presidency and how were they handled.
how did george w bush become president and what did he do in the white house.
the changing faces of america pg.
774 barack obamas triumph and trials pg.
791 how did the american population shift and grow between 1990 and 2010.
the new democrats pg.
778 what were the accomplishments and failures of the clinton administration.
what challenges faced barack obama and the american people during the first decade of the twenty first century.
feature essay an inconvenient truth.
the controversy surrounding global warming clinton and the world pg.
781 how did clinton respond to the balkan wars.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
chapter 30 the turbulent sixties kennedy versus nixon the first televised presidential candidate debate on monday evening september 26 1960 john f kennedy and richard m nixon faced each other in the nations first televised debate between two presidential candidates.
kennedy the relatively unknown democratic challenger had proposed the debates nixon confident of his mastery of television had accepted even though as eisenhowers vice president and the early front runner in the election he had more to lose and less to gain.
richard nixon arrived an hour early at the cbs studio in chicago looking tired and ill at ease.
he was still recovering from a knee injury that had slowed his campaign and left him pale and weak as he pursued a hectic catch up schedule.
makeup experts offered to hide nixons heavy beard and soften his prominent jowls but the gop candidate declined preferring to let an aide apply a light coat of max factors lazy shave a pancake cosmetic.
john kennedy tanned from openair campaigning in california and rested by a day spent nearly free of distracting activity wore very light makeup.
he also changed from a gray to a dark blue suit better adapted to the intense television lighting.
central time moderator howard k smith welcomed a viewing audience estimated at seventy seven million.
kennedy led off echoing abraham lincoln by saying that the nation faced the question of whether the world will exist half slave and half free although the ground rules limited the first debate to domestic issues kennedy argued that foreign and domestic policy were inseparable.
he accused the republicans of letting the country drift at home and abroad.
i think its time america started moving again he concluded.
nixon caught off guard seemed to agree with kennedys assessment of the nations problems but he contended that he had better solutions.
our disagreement the vice president pointed out is not about the goals for america but only about the means to reach those goals for the rest of the hour the two candidates answered questions from a panel of journalists.
radiating confidence watch the video kennedy nixon debate kennedy nixon debate and self assurance kennedy used a flow of statistics and details to create the image of a man deeply knowledgeable about all aspects of government.
nixon fought back with a defense of the eisenhower record but he seemed nervous and unsure of himself.
the reaction shots of each candidate listening to the others remarks showed kennedy calm and serene nixon tense and uncomfortable.
chapter 30 the turbulent sixties polls taken during the following few weeks revealed a sharp swing to kennedy.
many democrats and independents who had thought him too young or too inexperienced were impressed by his performance.
nixon suffered more from his unattractive image than from what he said those who heard the debate on radio thought the republican candidate more than held his own.
in the three additional debates held during the campaign nixon improved his performance notably wearing makeup to soften his appearance and taking the offensive from kennedy on the issues.
but the damage had been done.
a postelection poll revealed that of four million voters who were influenced by the debates three million voted for kennedy.
the televised debates were only one of many factors influencing the outcome of the 1960 election.
in essence kennedy won because he took full advantage of all his opportunities.
lightly regarded by democratic leaders he won the nomination by appealing to the rank and file in the primaries but then he astutely chose lyndon johnson of texas as his running mate to blunt nixons southern strategy.
uring the fall campaign kennedy exploited the national mood of frustration that had followed sputnik.
see the feature essay in chapter 29 the reaction to sputnik pp.
at home he promised to stimulate the lagging economy and carry forward long overdue reforms in education health care and civil rights under the banner of the new frontier.
abroad he pledged a renewed commitment to the cold war vowing he would lead the nation to victory over the soviet union.
he met the issue of his catholicism head on telling a group of protestant ministers in houston that as president he would always place country above religion.
in the shrewdest move of all he won over african american voters by helping to secure the release of martin luther king jr from a georgia jail where the civil rights leader was being held on a trumped up charge.
the democratic victory in 1960 was paper thin.
kennedys edge in the popular vote was only two tenths of 1 percent and his wide margin in the electoral college 303 to 219 was tainted by voting irregularities in several states notably illinois and texas which went democratic by very slender majorities.
yet even though he had no mandate kennedys triumph did mark a sharp political shift.
in contrast to the aging eisenhower kennedy symbolized youth energy and ambition.
his mastery of the new medium of television reflected his sensitivity to the changes taking place in american life in the 1960s.
he came to office promising reform at home and advances abroad.
over the next eight years he and lyndon johnson achieved many of their goals.
yet the nation also became engulfed in angry protests violent demonstrations and sweeping social change in one of the stormiest decades in american history.
d election of 1960 electoral vote by state democratic john f kennedy harry f byrd republican richard m nixon popular vote 34 227 096 34 108 546 502 363 minor parties 68 838 005 alaska hawaii kennedy intensifies the cold war how did the cold war intensify under kennedy.
john f kennedy was determined to succeed where he believed eisenhower had failed.
critical of his predecessor for holding down defense spending and apparently allowing the soviet union to open up a dangerous lead in icbms kennedy sought to warn the nation of its peril and lead it to victory in the cold war.
in his inaugural address the young president sounded the alarm.
ignoring the domestic issues aired during the campaign he dealt exclusively with the world.
let every nation know whether it wishes us well or ill that we shall pay any price bear any burden meet any hardship support any friend oppose any foe kennedy declared to assure the survival and success of liberty.
we will do all this and more from the day he took office john f kennedy gave foreign policy top priority.
in part the decision reflected the perilous world situation the immediate dangers ranging from the unresolved berlin crisis to the emergence of fidel castro as a soviet ally in cuba.
but it also corresponded to kennedys personal priorities.
as a congressman and senator he had been an intense cold warrior.
bored by committee work and legislative details he had focused on foreign policy in the senate gaining a seat on the foreign relations committee and publishing a book of speeches the strategy of peace in early 1960.
his appointments reflected his determination to win the cold war.
his choice of dean rusk an experienced but unassertive diplomat to head the state department indicated that kennedy kennedy intensifies the cold war planned to be his own secretary of state.
he surrounded himself with young pragmatic advisers who prided themselves on toughness mcgeorge bundy dean of harvard college became national security adviser walt w rostow an mit economist was bundys deputy and robert mcnamara the youthful president of the ford motor company took over as secretary of defense.
these new frontiersmen later dubbed the best and the brightest by journalist david halberstam all shared a hard line view of the soviet union and the belief that american security depended on superior force and the willingness to use it.
walt rostow summed up their view of the contest with russia best when he wrote the cold war comes down to this test of whether we and the democratic world are fundamentally tougher and more purposeful in the defense of our vital interests than they are in the pursuit of their global ambitions flexible response the first goal of the kennedy administration was to build up the nations armed forces.
during the 1960 campaign kennedy had warned that the soviets were opening a missile gap.
in fact due largely to eisenhowers foresight the united states had a significant lead in nuclear striking power by early 1961 with a fleet of more than 600 b 52 bombers 2 polaris submarines and 16 atlas icbms capable of delivering more than 2 000 warheads against russian targets.
nevertheless the new administration intent on putting the soviets on the defensive authorized the construction of an awesome nuclear arsenal that included 1 000 minuteman solid fuel icbms five times the number eisenhower had believed necessary and 32 polaris submarines carrying 656 missiles.
the united states thus opened a missile gap in reverse creating the possibility of a successful american first strike.
at the same time the kennedy administration augmented conventional military strength.
secretary of defense mcnamara developed plans to add five combat ready army divisions three tactical air wings and a ten division strategic reserve.
these vast increases led to a 6 billion jump in the defense budget in 1961 alone.
the president took a personal interest in counterinsurgency.
he expanded the special forces unit at fort bragg north carolina and insisted over army objections that it adopt a distinctive green beret as a symbol of its elite status.
the purpose of this buildup was to create an alternative to eisenhowers policy of massive retaliation.
instead of responding to communist moves with nuclear threats the united states could now call on a wide spectrum of force ranging from icbms to green berets.
thus as robert mcnamara explained the new strategy of flexible response meant the united states could choose among several operational plans.
we shall be committed only to a system that gives us the ability to use our forces in a controlled and deliberate way the danger was that such a powerful arsenal might tempt the new administration to test its strength against the soviet union.
crisis over berlin the first confrontation came in germany.
since 1958 soviet premier khrushchev had been threatening to sign a peace treaty that would put access to the isolated western zones of berlin under the control of east germany.
the steady flight of skilled workers to the west through the berlin escape route weakened the east german regime dangerously and the soviets believed they had to resolve this issue quickly.
at a summit meeting in vienna in june 1961 kennedy and khrushchev focused on berlin as the key issue.
the russian leader called the current situation intolerable and announced the soviet union would proceed with an east german peace treaty.
kennedy was equally adamant defending the american presence in berlin and refusing to give up occupation rights that he considered crucial to the defense of western europe.
in their last session the failure to reach agreement took on an ominous tone.
i want peace khrushchev declared but if you want war that is your problem it is you not i the young president replied who wants to force a change when the soviet leader said he would sign a german peace treaty by december kennedy added it will be a cold winter the climax came sooner than either man expected.
on july 25 kennedy delivered an impassioned televised address to the american people in which he called the defense of berlin essential to the entire free world announcing a series of arms increases including 3 billion more in defense spending the president took the unprecedented step of calling more than 150 000 reservists and national guardsmen to active duty.
aware of superior american nuclear striking power khrushchev settled for a stalemate.
on august 13 the soviets sealed off their zone of the city.
they began the construction of the berlin wall to stop the flow of brains and talent to the west.
for a brief time russian and american tanks maneuvered within sight of each other at checkpoint charlie where the american and soviet zones met but by fall the tension gradually eased.
the soviets signed a separate peace treaty that did not affect u s occupation rights berlin like germany and indeed all of europe remained divided between the east and the west.
neither side could claim a victory but kennedy believed that at least he had proved to the world americas willingness to honor its commitments.
containment in southeast asia two weeks before kennedys inauguration khrushchev gave a speech in moscow in which he declared soviet support for wars of national liberation the russian leaders words were actually aimed more at china than the united states the two powerful communist nations were now rivals for influence in the developing world.
but the new american president ignoring the growing sino soviet split concluded the united states and russia were locked in a struggle for the hearts and minds of the uncommitted in asia africa and latin america.
calling for a new policy of nation building kennedy advocated financial and technical assistance designed to help developing world nations achieve economic modernization and stable pro western governments.
measures ranging from the formation of the idealistic peace corps to the ambitious alliance for progress a massive economic aid program for latin america were part of this effort.
unfortunately kennedy relied even more on counterinsurgency and the green berets to beat back the communist challenge in the developing world.
southeast asia offered the gravest test.
the american decision to back ngo dinh diem see p 710 had prevented the holding of chapter 30 the turbulent sixties their war.
they are the ones who have to win it or lose it but at the same time kennedy was not prepared to accept the possible loss of all southeast asia.
saying it would be a great mistake to withdraw from south vietnam he told reporters strongly on our mind is what happened in the case of china at the end of world war ii where china was lost.
we dont want that although aides later claimed he planned to pull out after the 1964 election kennedy raised the stakes by tacitly approving a coup that led to diems overthrow and death on november 1 1963.
the resulting power vacuum in saigon made further american involvement in vietnam almost certain.
containing castro the bay of pigs fiasco kennedys determination to check global communist expansion reached a peak of intensity in cuba.
in the 1960 campaign pointing to the growing ties between the soviet union and fidel castros regime he had accused the republicans of permitting flames engulf buddhist monk the reverend quang duc who set himself afire at an intersection in a communist satellite to arise on our very saigon vietnam to protest persecution of buddhists by vietnam president ngo dinh diem and his doorstep kennedy had even issued a stategovernment.
other monks placed themselves in front of the wheels of nearby fire trucks to prevent ment backing anti castro forces in exile them from reaching duc.
calling them fighters for freedom who held out hope for overthrowing castro elections throughout vietnam in 1956 as called for in the geneva in reality the eisenhower administration had been training accords.
instead diem sought to establish a separate government in a group of cuban exiles in guatemala since march 1960 as part the south with large scale american economic and military assisof a cia plan to topple the castro regime.
many of the new presitance.
by the time kennedy entered the white house however the dents advisers had doubts about the proposed invasion.
some saw communist government in north vietnam led by ho chi minh was little chance for success because the operation depended heavily directing the efforts of vietcong rebels in the south.
as the guerrilla on a broad uprising of the cuban people.
others notably senator war intensified in the fall of 1961 the president sent two trusted adviswilliam fulbright of arkansas chairman of the foreign relations ers walt rostow and general maxwell taylor to south vietnam.
committee viewed it as an immoral act that would discredit the they returned favoring the dispatch of eight thousand american united states.
the castro regime is a thorn in the flesh fulbright combat troops.
as an area for the operation of u s troops reported argued but it is not a dagger in the heart the president however general taylor svn south vietnam is not an excessively difficult committed by his own campaign rhetoric and assured of success or unpleasant place to operate.
the risks of backing into a major by the military decided to proceed.
asian war by way of svn are present but are not impressive on april 17 1961 fourteen hundred cuban exiles moved the president decided against sending in combat troops in 1961 ashore at the bay of pigs on the southern coast of cuba.
even but he authorized substantial increases in economic aid to diem and though the united states had masterminded the entire operation in the size of the military mission in saigon.
the number of american kennedy insisted on covert action even canceling at the last minute advisers in vietnam grew from fewer than one thousand in 1961 to a planned american air strike on the beachhead.
with air superimore than sixteen thousand by late 1963.
the flow of supplies and the ority castros well trained forces had no difficulty in quashing the creation of strategic hamlets fortified villages designed to protect invasion.
they killed nearly five hundred exiles and forced the rest the peasantry from the vietcong slowed the communist momentum.
to surrender within forty eight hours.
american helicopters gave government forces mobility against the aghast at the swiftness of the defeat president kennedy took vietcong but by 1963 the situation had again become critical.
diem personal responsibility for the bay of pigs.
in his address to the had failed to win the support of his own people buddhist monks set american people however he showed no remorse for arranging themselves aflame in public protests against him and even diems the violation of a neighboring countrys sovereignty only regret own generals plotted his overthrow.
at the outcome.
above all he expressed renewed defiance warning president kennedy was in a quandary.
he realized that the fate the soviets that our restraint is not inexhaustible he went on to of south vietnam would be determined not by america but by the assert that the united states would resist communist penetration vietnamese.
in the final analysis he said in september 1963 it is in the western hemisphere terming it part of the primary kennedy intensifies the cold war obligations.
to the security of our nation for the remainder of his presidency kennedy continued to harass the castro regime imposing an economic blockade on cuba supporting a continuing series of raids by exile groups operating out of florida and failing to stop the cia from experimenting with bizarre plots to assassinate fidel castro.
containing castro the cuban missile crisis the climax of kennedys crusade came in october 1962 with the cuban missile crisis.
throughout the summer and early fall the soviets engaged in a massive arms buildup in cuba ostensibly to protect castro from an american invasion.
in the united states republican candidates in the 1962 congressional elections called for a firm american response kennedy contented himself with a stern warning against the introduction of any offensive weapons believing their presence would directly threaten american security.
khrushchev publicly denied any such intent but secretly he took a daring gamble building sites for twenty four medium range 1 000 mile and eighteen intermediate range 2 000 mile missiles in cuba.
later he claimed his purpose was purely defensive but most likely he was responding to the pressures from his own military to close the enormous strategic gap in nuclear striking power that kennedy had opened.
unfortunately the kennedy administration had stopped direct u 2 overflights of cuba in august.
fearful that recently installed soviet surface to air missiles could bring down the american spy plane and create an international incident similar to the 1960 u 2 episode see p 712 the white house over the objections of cia director john mccone limited u 2 flights to the air space bordering the island.
mccone finally prevailed on the president to resume direct overflights and on october 14 the first such mission brought back indisputable photographic evidence of the missile sites which were nearing completion.
as soon as president kennedy was informed of this development he decided to keep it secret while he consulted with a hand picked group of advisers to consider how to respond.
in the excomm as this group became known the initial preference for an immediate air strike gradually gave way to discussion of either a full scale invasion of cuba or a naval blockade of the island.
the president and his advisers ruled out diplomacy rejecting a proposal to offer the withdrawal of obsolete american jupiter missiles from turkey in return for a similar russian pullout in cuba.
kennedy finally agreed to a two step procedure.
he would proclaim a quarantine of cuba to prevent the arrival of new missiles and threaten a nuclear confrontation to force the removal of those already there.
if the russians did not cooperate then the united states would invade cuba and dismantle the missiles by force.
on the evening of october 22 the president informed the nation of the existence of the soviet missiles and his plans to remove them.
he blamed khrushchev for this clandestine reckless and provocative threat to world peace and he made it clear that any missile attack from cuba would lead to a full retaliatory response upon the soviet union for the next six days the world hovered on the brink of nuclear catastrophe.
khrushchev replied defiantly accusing kennedy of pushing mankind to the abyss of a world nuclear missile war in the atlantic some sixteen soviet ships continued on course toward cuba while the american navy was deployed to intercept them five hundred miles from the island.
in florida nearly a quarter million men were being concentrated in the largest invasion force ever assembled in the continental united states.
the first break came at midweek when the soviet ships suddenly halted to avert a confrontation at sea.
were eyeball to eyeball commented secretary of state dean rusk and i think the other fellow just blinked on friday khrushchev sent kennedy a long rambling letter offering a face saving way out russia would remove the missiles in return for an american promise never to invade cuba.
the president was ready to accept when a second russian message raised the stakes by insisting that american jupiter missiles be withdrawn from turkey.
heeding the advice of his brother attorney general robert kennedy the president refused to bargain khrushchev had endangered world peace by putting the missiles in cuba secretly and he must take them out immediately.
nevertheless while the military went ahead with plans for the invasion of cuba the president heeding his brothers advice decided to make one last appeal for peace.
ignoring the second russian message he sent a cable to khrushchev accepting his original offer.
on saturday night october 27 robert kennedy met with soviet ambassador anatoly dobrynin to make clear it was the last chance to avert nuclear confrontation.
we had to have a commitment by tomorrow that those bases would be removed robert kennedy recalled telling him.
he should understand that if they did not remove those bases we would remove them then the presidents brother calmly remarked that if khrushchev did not back down there would be not only dead americans but dead russians as well in reality john f kennedy was not quite so ready to risk nuclear war.
he instructed his brother to assure dobrynin that the jupiter missiles would soon be removed from turkey.
the president preferred that the missile swap be done privately but twenty five years later secretary of state dean rusk revealed that jfk had instructed him to arrange a deal through the united nations involving the removal of both the jupiters and the missiles in cuba in recently released transcripts of his meetings with his advisers the president reaffirmed his intention of making a missile trade with khrushchev publicly as a last resort to avoid nuclear war.
we cant very well invade cuba with all its toil he commented when we could have gotten them out by making a deal on the same missiles in turkey president kennedy never had to make this final concession.
at nine the next morning khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in return only for kennedys promise not to invade cuba.
the crisis was over.
the world however had come perilously close to a nuclear conflict.
we now know the soviets had nuclear warheads in cuba not only for twenty of the medium range missiles but also for short range tactical launchers designed to be used against an american invading force.
if kennedy had approved the militarys recommendations for an invasion of cuba the consequences might have been disastrous.
the peaceful resolution of the cuban missile crisis became a personal and political triumph for john f kennedy.
his party successfully overcame the republican challenge in the november elections and his own popularity reached new heights.
chapter 30 the turbulent sixties watch the video president john f kennedy and the cuban missile crisis the cuban missile crisis occurred in 1962 when u s spy planes detected soviets supplying nuclear warheads being delivered to cuba.
the american people on the defensive since sputnik suddenly felt that they had proved their superiority over the russians.
arthur schlesinger jr kennedys confidant and later his biographer claimed that the cuban crisis showed the whole world.
the ripening of an american leadership unsurpassed in the responsible management of power.
it was this combination of toughness and restraint of will nerve and wisdom so brilliantly controlled so matchlessly calibrated that dazzled the world the cuban missile crisis had more substantial results as well.
shaken by their close call kennedy and khrushchev agreed to install a hot line to speed direct communication between washington and moscow in an emergency.
long stalled negotiations over the reduction of nuclear testing suddenly resumed leading to the limited test ban treaty of 1963 which outlawed tests in the atmosphere while still permitting them underground.
above all kennedy displayed a new maturity as a result of the crisis.
in a speech at american university in june 1963 he shifted from the rhetoric of confrontation to that of conciliation.
speaking of the russians he said our most basic common link is the fact that we all inhabit this planet.
we all breathe the same air.
we all cherish our childrens future.
and we are all mortal despite these hopeful words the missile crisis also had an unfortunate consequence.
those who believed that the russians understood only the language of force were confirmed in their penchant for a hard line.
hawks who had backed kennedys military buildup believed events had justified a policy of nuclear superiority.
the russian leaders drew similar conclusions.
aware the united states had a four to one advantage in nuclear striking the new frontier at home power during the cuban crisis one soviet official told his american counterpart never will we be caught like this again after 1962 the soviets embarked on a crash program to build up their navy and to overtake the american lead in nuclear missiles.
within five years they had the nucleus of a modern fleet and had surpassed the united states in icbms.
kennedys fleeting moment of triumph thus ensured the escalation of the arms race.
his legacy was a bittersweet one of short term success and long term anxiety.
the new frontier at home what was the new frontier and what did it accomplish.
kennedy hoped to change the course of history at home as well as abroad.
his election marked the arrival of a new generation of leadership.
for the first time people born in the twentieth century who had entered political life after world war ii were in charge of national affairs.
kennedys inaugural call to get the nation moving again was particularly attractive to young people who had shunned political involvement during the eisenhower years.
the new administration reflected kennedys aura of youth and energy.
major cabinet appointments went to activists notably connecticut governor abraham ribicoff as secretary of health education and welfare labor lawyer arthur j goldberg as secretary of labor and arizona congressman stuart udall as secretary of the interior.
the most controversial choice was robert f kennedy the presidents brother as attorney general.
critics scoffed at his lack of legal experience leading jfk to note jokingly he wanted to give bobby a little experience before he goes out to practice law in fact the president prized his brothers loyalty and shrewd political advice.
equally important were the members of the white house staff who handled domestic affairs.
like their counterparts in foreign policy these new frontiersmen kenneth odonnell theodore sorensen richard goodwin and walter heller prided themselves on being tough minded and pragmatic.
in contrast to eisenhower kennedy relied heavily on academics and intellectuals to help him infuse the nation with energy and a new sense of direction.
kennedys greatest asset was his own personality.
a cool attractive and intelligent man he possessed a sense of style that endeared him to the american public.
encouraged by his wife jacqueline the president invited artists and musicians as well as corporate executives to white house functions and he sprinkled his speeches with references to emerson and shakespeare.
he seemed to be a new lancelot bent on calling forth the best in national life admirers likened his inner circle to king arthurs court at camelot.
reporters loved him both for his fact filled and candid press conferences and for his witty comments.
after an embarrassing foreign policy failure when his standing in the polls actually went up he remarked its just like eisenhower.
the worse i do the more popular i get the congressional obstacle neither kennedys wit nor his charm proved strong enough to break the logjam in congress.
since the late 1940s a series of reform bills ranging from health care to federal aid to education had been stalled on capitol hill.
despite jfks victory the election of 1960 clouded the outlook for his new frontier program.
the democrats had lost twenty seats in the house and two in the senate even though they retained majorities in both branches a conservative coalition of northern republicans and southern democrats opposed all efforts at reform.
the situation was especially critical in the house where 101 southern representatives held the balance of power between 160 northern democrats and 174 republicans.
aided by speaker sam rayburn kennedy was able to enlarge the rules committee and overcome a traditional conservative roadblock but the narrowness of the vote 217 to 212 revealed how difficult it would be to enact reform measures.
the president gave up the fight for health care in the senate and settled instead for a modest increase in the minimum wage and the passage of manpower training and arearedevelopment legislation.
kennedy had no more success in enacting his program in 1962 and 1963.
the conservative coalition stood firmly against education and health care proposals.
shifting ground the president did win approval for a trade expansion act in 1962 designed to lower tariff barriers but no significant reform legislation was passed.
although the composition of congress was his main obstacle kennedys greater interest in foreign policy and his distaste for legislative infighting contributed to the outcome.
jfk did not enjoy blarneying with pompous congressmen and simply would not take the time to do it one observer noted.
as a result the new frontier languished in congress.
economic advance kennedy gave a higher priority to the sluggish american economy.
during the last years of eisenhowers administration the rate of economic growth had slowed to just over 2 percent annually while unemployment rose to new heights with each recession.
jfk was determined to stimulate the economy to achieve a much higher rate of long term growth.
in part he wanted to redeem his campaign pledge to get the nation moving again he also believed the united states had to surpass the soviet union in economic vitality.
kennedy received conflicting advice from the experts.
those who claimed the problem was essentially a technological one urged manpower training and area redevelopment programs to modernize american industry.
others called for federal spending to rebuild the nations public facilities from parks and playgrounds to decaying bridges and urban courthouses.
kennedy sided with the first group largely because congress was opposed to massive spending on public works.
the actual stimulation of the economy however came not from social programs but from greatly increased appropriations for defense and space.
a 6 billion increase in the arms budget in 1961 gave the economy a great lift and kennedys decision to send an astronaut to the moon eventually cost 25 billion.
by 1962 more than half the federal budget was devoted to space and defense aircraft and computer companies in the south and west benefited but unemployment remained uncomfortably high in the older industrial areas of the northeast and midwest.
the administrations desire to keep the inflation rate low led to a serious confrontation with the business community.
kennedy chapter 30 the turbulent sixties relied on informal wage and price guidelines to hold down the cost of living.
but in april 1962 just after the president had persuaded the steelworkers union to accept a new contract with no wage increases and only a few additional benefits u s steel head roger blough informed kennedy that his company was raising steel prices by 6 a ton.
outraged the president publicly called the increase a wholly unjustifiable and irresponsible defiance of the public interest and accused blough of displaying contempt for the interests of 185 million americans privately kennedy was even blunter.
he confided to aides my father always told me that all businessmen were sons of bitches but i never believed it till now roger blough soon gave way.
the presidents tongue lashing along with a cutoff in pentagon steel orders and the threat of an antitrust suit forced him to reconsider.
when several smaller steel companies refused to raise their prices in hopes of expanding their share of the market u s steel rolled back its prices.
the business community deeply resented the presidents action and when the stock market which had been rising steadily since 1960 suddenly fell sharply in late may 1962 analysts were quick to label the decline the kennedy market troubled by his strained relations with business and by the continued lag in economic growth the president decided to adopt a more unorthodox approach in 1963.
walter heller chairman of the council of economic advisers had been arguing since 1961 for a major cut in taxes in the belief it would stimulate consumer spending and give the economy the jolt it needed.
the idea of a tax cut and resulting deficits during a period of prosperity went against economic orthodoxy but kennedy finally gave his approval.
in january 1963 the president proposed a tax reduction of 13 5 billion asserting that the unrealistically heavy drag of federal income taxes on private purchasing power was the largest single barrier to full employment when finally enacted by congress in 1964 the massive tax cut led to sustained economic advance for the rest of the decade.
kennedys economic policy was far more successful than his legislative efforts.
although the rate of economic growth doubled to 4 5 percent by the end of 1963 and unemployment was reduced substantially the cost of living rose only 1 3 percent a year.
personal income went up 13 percent in the early 1960s but the greatest gains came in corporate profits up 67 percent in the period.
critics pointed to the kennedy administrations failure to close the glaring loopholes in the tax laws that benefited the rich and its lack of effort to help those at the bottom by forcing redistribution of national wealth.
despite the overall economic growth the public sector continued to be neglected.
i am not sure what the advantage is complained economist john kenneth galbraith in having a few more dollars to spend if the air is too dirty to breathe the water too polluted to drink the commuters are losing out in the struggle to get in and out of the cities the streets are filthy and the schools so bad that the young perhaps wisely stay away moving slowly on civil rights kennedy faced a genuine dilemma over the issue of civil rights.
despite his own lack of a strong record while in the senate he had portrayed himself during the 1960 campaign as a crusader for african american rights.
he had promised to launch an attack on segregation in the deep south but his fear of alienating the large bloc of southern democrats forced him to downplay civil rights legislation.
the presidents solution was to defer congressional action in favor of executive leadership in this area.
he directed his brother attorney general robert kennedy to continue and expand the eisenhower administrations efforts to achieve voting rights for southern blacks.
to register previously disfranchised citizens the justice department worked with the civil rights movement notably the student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc in the deep south.
in two years the kennedy administration increased the number of voting rights suits fivefold.
yet the attorney general could not force the fbi to provide protection for the civil rights volunteers who risked their lives by encouraging african americans to register.
snccs only contact with federal authority noted one observer consisted of the fbi agents who stood by taking notes while local policemen beat up sncc members other efforts had equally mixed results.
vice president lyndon johnson headed a presidential commission on equal employment opportunities that worked with defense industries and other government contractors to increase the number of jobs for african americans.
but a limited budget and a reliance on voluntary cooperation prevented any dramatic gains african american employment improved only in direct proportion to economic growth in the early 1960s.
kennedy did succeed in appointing a number of african americans to high government positions robert weaver became chief of the federal housing agency and thurgood marshall who pleaded the brown v topeka school desegregation case before the supreme court was named to the u s.
circuit court.
on the other hand among his judicial appointments kennedy included one mississippi jurist who referred to african americans in court as niggers and once compared them to a bunch of chimpanzees the civil rights movement refused to accept kennedys indirect approach.
in may 1961 the congress of racial equality core sponsored a freedom ride in which a biracial group attempted to test a 1960 supreme court decision outlawing segregation in all bus and train stations used in interstate commerce.
when they arrived in birmingham alabama the freedom riders were attacked by a mob of angry whites.
the attorney general quickly dispatched several hundred federal marshals to protect the freedom riders but the president deeply involved in the berlin crisis was more upset at the distraction the protesters created.
kennedy directed one of his aides to get in touch with the leaders of core.
tell them to call it off he demanded.
stop them in september after the attorney general finally convinced the interstate commerce commission to issue an order banning segregation in interstate terminals and buses the freedom rides ended.
the kennedy administration then sought to prevent further confrontations by involving civil rights activists in its voting drive.
a pattern of belated reaction to southern racism marked the basic approach of the kennedys.
when james meredith courageously sought admission to the all white university of mississippi in 1962 the president and the attorney general worked closely with mississippi governor ross barnett to avoid violence.
a transcript of robert kennedys conversation with governor barnett on the new frontier at home watch the video photographing the civil rights movement african american civil rights demonstrators in birmingham alabama encounter high velocity fire hoses in response to their nonviolent demonstrations during the spring of 1963.
this and other similar photographs of young african americans being assaulted by the authorities in birmingham rallied support for the civil rights protestors and their political and economic demands.
september 25 indicates that the attorney general focused on the legal rather than the moral issues involved rfk i think the problem is that the federal courts have acted and when there is a conflict between your state and the federal courts under arrangements made some years ago barnett the institution is supported by the taxpayers of this state and controlled by the trustees.
rfk governor you are a part of the united states.
i am going to treat you with every courtesy but i wont agree to let that boy get to ole miss.
i will never agree to that.
i would rather spend my whole life in a penitentiary than do that.
rfk i have a responsibility to enforce the laws of the united states.
barnett i appreciate that.
you have a responsibility.
why dont you let the naacp run their own affairs and quit cooperating with that crowd.
chapter 30 the turbulent sixties watch the video civil rights march on washington the march on washington organized by civil rights leaders to maintain political pressure on the kennedy administration was held on august 28 1936.
the rally in front of the lincoln memorial was highlighted by martin luther king jr s famous i have a dream speech.
despite barnetts later promise of cooperation the night before meredith enrolled at the university of mississippi a mob attacked the federal marshals and national guard troops sent to protect him.
the violence left 2 dead and 375 injured including 166 marshals and 12 guardsmen but meredith attended the university and eventually graduated.
in 1963 kennedy sent the deputy attorney general to face down governor george c wallace an avowed segregationist who had promised to stand in the schoolhouse door to prevent the integration of the university of alabama.
after a brief confrontation wallace yielded to federal authority and two african american students peacefully desegregated the state university.
i have a dream martin luther king jr finally forced kennedy to abandon his cautious tactics and come out openly in behalf of racial justice.
in the spring of 1963 king began a massive protest in birmingham one of the souths most segregated cities.
public marches and demonstrations aimed at integrating public facilities and opening up jobs for african americans quickly led to police harassment and let us continue many arrests including that of king himself.
police commissioner eugene bull connor was determined to crush the civil rights movement king was equally determined to prevail.
writing from his cell in birmingham he vowed an active campaign to bring the issue of racial injustice to national attention.
bull connor played directly into kings hands.
on may 3 as six thousand children marched in place of the jailed protesters authorities broke up a demonstration with clubs snarling police dogs and high pressure water hoses strong enough to take the bark off a tree.
with a horrified nation watching scene after scene of this brutality on television the kennedy administration quickly intervened to arrange a settlement with the birmingham civic leaders that ended the violence and granted the protesters most of their demands.
more important kennedy finally ended his long hesitation and sounded the call for action.
we are confronted primarily with a moral issue he told the nation on june 11.
it is as old as the scriptures and is as clear as the american constitution eight days later the administration sponsored civil rights legislation providing equal access to all public accommodations as well as an extension of voting rights for african americans.
despite pleas from the government for an end to demonstrations and protests civil rights leaders kept pressure on the administration.
they scheduled a massive march on washington for august 1963.
on august 28 more than 200 000 marchers gathered for a daylong rally in front of the lincoln memorial where they listened to hymns speeches and prayers for racial justice.
the climax of the event was martin luther king jr s eloquent i have a dream speech.
by the time of kennedys death in november 1963 his civil rights legislation was well on its way to passage in congress.
yet even this achievement did not fully satisfy his critics.
for two years they had waited for him to deliver on his campaign promise to wipe out housing discrimination with a stroke of the pen the executive order on housing finally issued in november 1962 proved disappointing it ignored all past discrimination and applied only to houses and apartments financed by the federal government.
for many kennedy had raised hopes for racial equality that he never fulfilled.
but unlike eisenhower he had provided presidential leadership for the civil rights movement.
his emphasis on executive action gradually paid off especially in extending voting rights.
by early 1964 40 percent of southern blacks had the franchise compared to only 28 percent in 1960.
moreover kennedys sense of caution and restraint painful and frustrating as it was to african american activists had proved to be well founded.
avoiding an early and possibly fatal defeat in congress he had waited until a national consensus emerged and then had carefully channeled it behind effective legislation.
behaving very much the way franklin roosevelt did in guiding the nation into world war ii kennedy chose to be a fox rather than a lion on civil rights.
the supreme court and reform the most active impulse for social change in the early 1960s came from a surprising source the usually staid and conservative supreme court.
under the leadership of earl warren a pragmatic jurist more noted for his political astuteness than his legal scholarship the court ventured into new areas.
a group of liberal judges especially william o douglas hugo black and william j brennan jr argued for social reform while advocates of judicial restraint such as john marshall harlan and felix frankfurter fought stubbornly against the new activism.
the resignation of felix frankfurter in 1962 enabled president kennedy to appoint secretary of labor arthur goldberg a committed liberal to the supreme court.
with a clear majority now favoring judicial intervention the warren court issued a series of landmark decisions designed to extend to state and local jurisdictions the traditional rights afforded the accused in federal courts.
thus in gideon v wainwright 1963 escobedo v illinois 1964 and miranda v arizona 1966 the majority decreed that defendants had to be provided lawyers had to be informed of their constitutional rights and could not be interrogated or induced to confess to a crime without defense counsel being present.
in effect the court extended to the poor and the ignorant those constitutional guarantees that had always been available to the rich and to the legally informed notably hardened criminals.
the most far reaching warren court decisions came in the area of legislative reapportionment.
in 1962 the court ruled in baker v carr that tennessee had to redistribute its legislative seats to give citizens in memphis equal representation.
subsequent decisions reinforced the ban on rural overrepresentation as the court proclaimed that places in all legislative bodies including the house of representatives had to be allocated on the basis of people not land or trees or pastures the principle of one man one vote greatly increased the political power of cities at the expense of rural areas it also involved the court directly in the reapportionment process frequently forcing judges to draw up new legislative and congressional districts.
the activism of the supreme court stirred up a storm of criticism.
the rulings that extended protection to criminals and those accused of subversive activity led some americans to charge that the court was encouraging crime and weakening national security.
the john birch society an extreme anticommunist group demanded the impeachment of chief justice warren.
the 1962 engel v vitale decision banning school prayer incensed many conservative americans who saw the court as undermining moral values.
legal scholars worried more about the weakening of the courts prestige as it became more directly involved in the political process.
on balance however the warren court helped achieve greater social justice by protecting the rights of the underprivileged and by permitting dissent and free expression to flourish.
let us continue what were johnsons domestic priorities and what were his achievements.
the new frontier came to a sudden and violent end on november 22 1963 when lee harvey oswald assassinated john f kennedy as the president rode in a motorcade in downtown dallas.
the shock of losing the young president who had become a symbol of hope and promise for a whole generation stunned the entire world.
the american people were bewildered by the rapid sequence of events the brutal killing of their young president the televised slaying of oswald by jack ruby in the basement of chapter 30 the turbulent sixties the dallas police station the composure and dignity of kennedys widow jacqueline at the ensuing state funeral and the hurried warren commission report which identified oswald as the lone assassin.
afterward critics would charge that oswald had been part of a vast conspiracy but at the time the prevailing national reaction was a numbing sense of loss.
vice president lyndon b johnson moved quickly to fill the vacuum left by kennedys death.
sworn in on board air force one as he returned to washington johnson soon met with a stream of world leaders to reassure them of american political stability.
five days after the tragedy in dallas johnson spoke eloquently to a special joint session of congress.
recalling jfks inaugural summons let us begin the new president declared today in the moment of new resolve i would say to all my fellow americans let us continue asking congress to enact kennedys tax and civil rights bills as a tribute to the fallen leader lbj concluded let us here highly resolve that john fitzgerald kennedy did not live or die in vain johnson in action lyndon johnson suffered from the inevitable comparison with his young and stylish predecessor.
lbj was acutely aware of his own lack of polish he sought to surround himself with kennedy advisers and insiders hoping their sophistication would rub off on him.
johnsons assets were very real he possessed an intimate knowledge of congress an incredible energy and determination to succeed and a fierce ego.
when a young marine officer tried to direct him to the proper helicopter saying this one is yours johnson replied son they are all my helicopters lbjs height and intensity gave him a powerful presence he dominated any room he entered and he delighted in using his physical power of persuasion.
one texas politician explained why he had given in to johnson lyndon got me by the lapels and put his face on top of mine and he talked and talked and talked.
i figured it was either getting drowned or joining yet lbj found it impossible to project his intelligence and vitality to large audiences.
unlike kennedy he wilted before the camera turning his televised speeches into stilted and awkward performances.
trying to belie his reputation as a riverboat gambler he came across like a foxy grandpa clever calculating and not to be trusted.
he lacked kennedys wit and charm and reporters delighted in describing the way he berated his aides or shocked the nation by baring his belly to show the scar from a recent operation.
whatever his shortcomings in style however johnson possessed far greater ability than kennedy in dealing with congress.
he entered the white house with more than thirty years of experience in washington as a legislative aide congressman and senator.
his encyclopedic knowledge of the legislative process and his shrewd manipulation of individual senators had enabled him to become the most influential senate majority leader in history.
famed for the johnson treatment a legendary ability to use personal persuasion to reach his goals johnson in fact relied more on his close ties with the senates power brokers or whales as he called them than on his exploitation of the minnows above all johnson sought consensus.
indifferent to ideology he had moved easily from new deal liberalism to oil and gas conservatism as his career advanced.
he had carefully cultivated richard russell of georgia leader of the dixie bloc but he also had taken hubert humphrey a minnesota liberal under his wing.
he had performed a balancing act on civil rights working with the eisenhower administration on behalf of the 1957 voting rights act yet carefully weakening it to avoid alienating southern democrats.
when kennedy dashed johnsons own intense presidential ambitions in 1960 lbj had gracefully agreed to be his running mate and had endured the humiliation of the vice presidency loyally and silently.
suddenly thrust into power johnson used his gifts wisely.
citing his favorite scriptural passage from isaiah come now and let us reason together saith the lord he concentrated on securing passage of kennedys tax and civil rights bills in 1964.
the tax cut came first.
aware of the power wielded by senate finance committee chairman harry byrd a virginia conservative johnson astutely lowered kennedys projected 101 5 billion budget for 1965 to 97 9 billion.
although byrd voted against the tax cut he let the measure out of his committee telling johnson ill be working for you behind the scenes in february congress reduced personal income taxes by more than 10 billion touching off a sustained economic boom.
consumer spending increased by an impressive 43 billion during the next eighteen months and new jobs opened up at the rate of one million a year.
johnson was even more influential in passing the kennedy civil rights measure.
staying in the background he encouraged liberal amendments that strengthened the bill in the house.
with hubert humphrey leading the floor fight in the senate johnson refused all efforts at compromise counting on growing public pressure to force northern republicans to abandon their traditional alliance with southern democrats.
everett m dirksen of illinois the gop leader in the senate met repeatedly with johnson at the white house.
when lbj refused to yield dirksen finally led a republican vote to end a 57 day filibuster.
the 1964 civil rights act signed on july 2 made illegal the segregation of african americans in public facilities established an equal employment opportunity commission to lessen racial discrimination in employment and protected the voting rights of african americans.
an amendment sponsored by segregationists in an effort to weaken the bill added gender to the prohibition of discrimination in title vii of the act in the future womens groups would use the clause to secure government support for greater equality in employment and education.
the election of 1964 passage of two key kennedy measures within six months did not satisfy johnson who wanted now to win the presidency in his own right.
eager to surpass kennedys narrow victory in 1960 he hoped to win by a great landslide.
searching for a cause of his own lbj found one in the issue of poverty.
beginning in the late 1950s economists had warned that the prevailing affluence disguised a persistent and deep seated problem of poverty.
in 1962 michael harringtons book the other america attracted national attention.
writing with passion and let us continue read the document the civil rights act of 1964 president johnson applies the johnson treatment to senator theodore francis green of rhode island.
a shrewd politician and master of the legislative process johnson always knew which votes he could count on those he couldnt and where and how to apply pressure to swing votes his way.
eloquence harrington claimed that nearly one fifth of the nation some thirty five million americans lived in poverty.
three groups predominated among the poor african americans the aged and households headed by women.
the problem harrington contended was that the poor were invisible living in slums or depressed areas such as appalachia.
they were cut off from the educational facilities medical care and employment opportunities afforded more affluent americans.
moreover poverty was a vicious cycle.
the children of the poor were trapped in the same culture of poverty as their parents living without hope or knowledge of how to enter the mainstream of american life.
johnson quickly took over proposals that kennedy had been developing and made them his own.
in his january 1964 state of the union address lbj announced this administration today here and now declares unconditional war on poverty in america during the next eight months johnson fashioned a comprehensive poverty program under the direction of r sargent shriver kennedys brother in law.
the president added 500 million to existing programs to come up with a 1 billion effort that congress passed in august 1964.
the new office of economic opportunity oeo set up a wide variety of programs ranging from head start for preschoolers to the job corps for high school dropouts in need of vocational training.
the emphasis was on self help with the government providing money and know how so the poor could reap the benefits of neighborhood day care centers consumer education classes legal aid services and adult remedial reading programs.
the level of funding was never high enough to meet the oeos ambitious goals and a controversial attempt to include representatives of the poor in the community action program led to bitter political feuding with city and state officials.
nonetheless the war on poverty along with the economic growth provided by the tax cut helped reduce the ranks of the poor by nearly ten million between 1964 and 1967.
the new program established johnsons reputation as a reformer in an election year but he still faced two challenges to his authority.
the first was robert f kennedy the late presidents brother who continued as attorney general but who wanted to become vice president and johnsons eventual successor in the white house.
desperate to prove his ability to succeed without chapter 30 the turbulent sixties kennedy help lbj commented i dont need that little runt to win and chose hubert humphrey as his running mate.
the second challenge was the republican candidate senator barry goldwater an outspoken conservative from arizona.
an attractive and articulate man goldwater advocated a rejection of the welfare state and a return to unregulated free enterprise.
to johnsons delight goldwater chose to place ideology ahead of political expediency.
the senator spoke out boldly against the tennessee valley authority denounced social security and advocated a hawkish foreign policy.
in your heart you know hes right read the republican slogan leading the democrats to reply yes far right and in reference to a careless goldwater comment about using nuclear weapons johnson backers punned in your heart you know he might johnson stuck carefully to the middle of the road embracing the liberal reform program which he now called the great society while emphasizing his concern for balanced budgets and fiscal orthodoxy.
the more goldwater sagged in the polls the harder johnson campaigned determined to achieve his treasured landslide.
on election day lbj received 61 1 percent of the popular vote and an overwhelming majority in the electoral college goldwater carried only arizona and five states of the deep south.
equally important the democrats achieved huge gains in congress controlling the house by a margin of 295 to 140 and the senate by 68 to 32.
kennedys legacy and goldwaters candor had enabled johnson to break the conservative grip on congress for the first time in a quarter century.
the election of 1964 candidate party popular vote electoral vote johnson democratic 43 126 506 goldwater republican 27 176 799 the triumph of reform lbj moved quickly to secure his legislative goals.
despite solid majorities in both houses including seventy first term democrats who had ridden into office on his coattails johnson knew he would have to enact the great society as swiftly as possible.
youve got to give it all you can that first year he told an aide.
doesnt matter what kind of majority you come in with.
youve got just one year when they treat you right and before they start worrying about themselves johnson gave two traditional democratic reforms health care and education top priority.
aware of strong opposition to a comprehensive medical program lbj settled for medicare which mandated health insurance under the social security program for americans over age 65 and a supplementary medicaid program for the indigent.
to symbolize the end of a long struggle johnson flew to independence missouri so truman could witness the ceremonial signing of the medicare law which had its origins in trumans 1949 health insurance proposal.
lbj overcame the religious hurdle on education by supporting a child benefit approach allocating federal money to advance the education of students in parochial as well as public schools.
the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 provided more than 1 billion in federal aid the largest share going to school districts with the highest percentage of impoverished pupils.
civil rights proved to be the most difficult test of johnsons leadership.
martin luther king jr concerned that three million southern blacks were still denied the right to vote in early 1965 chose selma alabama as the site for a test case.
the white authorities in selma led by sheriff james clark used cattle prods and bullwhips to break up the demonstrations.
more than two thousand african americans were jailed.
johnson intervened in march after tv cameras showed sheriff clarks deputies brutally halting a march from selma to montgomery.
the president ordered the alabama national guard to federal duty to protect the demonstrators had the justice department draw up a new voting rights bill and personally addressed the congress on civil rights.
i speak tonight for the dignity of man and the destiny of democracy he began.
calling the denial of the right to vote deadly wrong lbj issued a compelling call to action.
their cause must be our cause too.
because it is not just negroes but really it is all of us who must overcome the crippling legacy of bigotry and injustice five months later congress passed the voting rights act of 1965.
once again johnson had worked with senate republican leader dirksen to break a southern filibuster and assure passage of a measure.
the act banned literacy tests in states and counties in which less than half the population had voted in 1964 and provided for federal registrars in these areas to assure african americans the franchise.
the results were dramatic.
in less than a year 166 000 african americans were added to the voting rolls in alabama african american registration went up 400 percent in mississippi.
by the end of the decade the percentage of eligible african american voters who had registered had risen from 40 to 65 percent.
for the first time since reconstruction african americans had become active participants in southern politics.
before the 89th congress ended its first session in the fall of 1965 it had passed eighty nine bills.
these included measures to create two new cabinet departments transportation and housing and urban affairs acts to provide for highway safety and to ensure clean air and water large appropriations for higher education public housing and the continuing war on poverty and sweeping immigration reform legislation.
see the feature essay unintended consequences the second great migration pp.
in nine months johnson had enacted the entire democratic reform agenda.
the man responsible for this great leap forward however had failed to win the public adulation he so deeply desired.
his legislative skills had made the most of the opportunities offered by the 1964 democratic landslide but the people did not respond to johnsons leadership with the warmth and praise they had showered on kennedy.
reporters continued to portray him as a crude wheeler dealer as a maniac who drove around texas back roads at 90 miles an hour one hand on the wheel and the other holding a can of beer or as a bully who picked up his dog by the ears.
no one was more aware of this lack of affection than lbj himself.
his public support he told an aide is like a western river broad but not deep johnsons realization of the fleeting nature of his popularity was all too accurate.
the dilemmas of the cold war began to divert his attention from domestic concerns and eventually in the johnson escalates the vietnam war view the map impact of the voting rights act of 1965 number of registered voters 400 000 south dakota new york minn wis.
registered african american voters in 1960 300 000 mich pa iowa n j nebraska 200 000 ohio ind.
illinois registered african american voters in 1966 100 000 md.
w va kansas 50 000 25 000 missouri 105 0 va ky n c tenn oklahoma ark.
21 6 s c new mexico ala 57 5 229 3 miss.
34 3 ga 695 4 la.
texas 278 8 66 7 atlantic ocean florida gulf of mexico 52 8 mexico 76 2 400 miles 65 6 400 kilometers african american voter registration before and after passage of the voting rights act of 1965 the percentages shown on the map indicate the increase in african american voter registration between 1960 and 1966 case of vietnam would overwhelm him.
yet his legislative achievements were still remarkable.
in one brief outburst of reform he had accomplished more than any president since fdr.
difficulties abroad would dim the luster of the johnson presidency but they could not diminish the lasting impact of the great society on american life.
federal aid to education the enactment of medicare and medicaid and above all the civil rights acts of 1964 and 1965 changed the nation irrevocably.
the aged and the poor now were guaranteed access to medical care communities saw an infusion of federal funds to improve local education and african americans could now begin to attend integrated schools enjoy public facilities and gain political power by exercising the right to vote.
but even at this moment of triumph for liberal reform new currents of dissent and rebellion were brewing.
johnson escalates the vietnam war how did johnsons vietnam policy evolve.
lyndon johnson emphasized continuity in foreign policy just as he had in enacting kennedys domestic reforms.
he not only inherited the policy of containment from his fallen predecessor but he shared the same cold war assumptions and convictions.
and feeling less confident about dealing with international issues he tended to rely heavily on kennedys advisers notably secretary of state rusk secretary of defense mcnamara and mcgeorge bundy the national security adviser until he was replaced in 1966 by the even more hawkish walt rostow.
johnson had broad exposure to national security affairs.
he had served on the naval affairs committee in the house before and during world war ii and as senate majority leader he had been briefed and consulted regularly on the crises of the 1950s.
a confirmed cold warrior he had also seen in the 1940s the devastating political impact on the democratic party of the communist triumph in china.
i am not going to lose vietnam he told the american ambassador to saigon just after taking office in 1963.
i am not going to be the president who saw southeast asia go the way china went aware of the problem castro had caused john kennedy lbj moved firmly to contain communism in the western hemisphere.
when a military junta overthrew a leftist regime in brazil johnson offered covert aid and open encouragement.
he was equally forceful in compelling panama to restrain rioting aimed at the continued american presence in the canal zone.
in 1965 to block the possible emergence of a castro type government lbj sent twenty thousand american troops to the complete the assignment unintended consequences the second great migration on myhistorylab feature essay t his is not a revolutionary bill president lyndon johnson declared when he signed the immigration act of 1965 into law.
rarely has a president been so wrong.
the changes congress made in american immigration policy led to a second great migration larger and even more diverse than the first great migration that took place in the thirty years before world war i.
by the end of the century the second great wave of immigration had profoundly altered the ethnic composition of the united states.
the political leaders responsible for changing immigration policy in the 1960s had very different intentions.
focused on removing long standing inequities in the law they sought to replace the national origins system adopted in the 1920s which favored people from western europe with a new set of criteria designed to bring in newcomers with economic skills the united states needed and to reunite broken families.
above all the architects of change wanted to end the unfair race based quotas for people of asian extraction and the evident discrimination against applicants from eastern and southern europe.
attorney general robert kennedy called the national origins quotas a standing affront to many americans and to many countries at the height of the cold war realism seemed to join with idealism in the effort to end a discriminatory immigration policy that smacked of racism.
the legislative process however often works in mysterious ways.
the bill passed by congress did end the national origins system as its framers desired but reversed the new unintended consequences the second great migration the second great migration a theoretical example student nonimmigrant comes for postgraduate studies.
after two years completes education and gets job with labor certification thus becoming an immigrant.
becomes citizen after six years and sponsors one brother and one sister after one year brother brings wife and one child after two years sister brings husband immigrant now brings wife and two children as citizen brings both parents as citizen wife brings one parent after seven years wife becomes citizen and brings two brothers brother brings wife and two children after two years brother brings wife and one child note total is nineteen after original student arrived for postgraduate education ten years earlier.
source adapted from david m reimer still the golden door 2nd ed.
new york columbia university press 1992 p 95 priorities giving highest preference to family reunification and less emphasis to job skills and asylum for refugees.
as enacted and later amended the 1965 immigration act set an annual limit of 170 000 for immigrants from europe asia and africa and 120 000 for those from western hemisphere countries with a ceiling of 20 000 for any one country.
the total 290 000 would be only slightly larger than the number admitted under the old system.
by the end of the 1970s it was clear that the family preferences which made up nearly 70 percent of the allotted visas were allowing recent immigrants to bring in large numbers of relatives instead of reuniting immigrants who had been in the united states for years with their families.
the figure the second great migration a theoretical example shows how one postgraduate student with a nonimmigrant visa by adroit use of the available family preferences could easily gain the admission of eighteen relatives in just a decade.
moreover once resident aliens became citizens they could bring in relatives spouses children under 21 and parents without regard to visa limits.
two significant developments flowed directly from the great societys immigration policy.
first annual immigration increased steadily from an average of 250 000 in the 1950s to at least one million by the end of the century.
in 1990 in an effort to place immediate relatives under an effective limit congress approved an overall ceiling of just less than 700 000 immigrants a year except for refugees.
but other legislation allowing undocumented workers to gain legal status as well as an estimated 300 000 illegal immigrants a year swelled the actual total to more than one million.
in effect the 1965 legislation had led to a quadrupling of newcomers entering the united states every year.
the other unintended consequence of the 1965 immigration act was a rapid shift in the source of the new immigrants.
europe the traditional place of origin for immigrants fell from providing 70 percent of newcomers in the 1950s to just 16 percent by the mid1990s.
latin american immigrants rose from 25 to 49 percent of the total while asia supplied 32 percent by the end of the century up from just 6 percent in the 1950s.
this change in the countries of origin was as striking as the similar shift from western to eastern europe in the first great migration.
where once germany great britain and ireland had furnished the majority of newcomers by 1989 it was mexico the philippines and vietnam that led the list with no european country among the top ten.
the result was a growing diversity that promised to make the united states a truly multiethnic society in the twenty first century.
by the 1990s the number of foreign born americans had more than doubled to 10 percent of the population.
hispanic americans were the most rapidly growing segment replacing african americans as the nations largest minority in 2001.
asian americans although much smaller in number grew at a fast pace and had greater success economically than any other ethnic group.
by the end of the century it was clear that the immigration act of 1965 had led to a major shift in the racial and ethnic composition of the united states.
the effort to erase past discriminatory and race based quotas resulted in an unexpected flow of people from asia and latin america that ensured the end of traditional european dominance.
by 2050 according to census bureau projections the country will be almost evenly divided between non hispanic whites and minorities.
social harmony in the twenty first century will depend on whether the melting pot continues to melt blending ethnic groups into mainstream america or whether these groups as their numbers grow will shape the society into one that political leaders of the 1960s such as lyndon johnson and robert kennedy could never have foreseen.
questions for discussion 1.
how did the 1965 immigration act change immigration policy.
why did the act lead to a major change in the nations ethnic and racial make up.
chapter 30 the turbulent sixties dominican republic.
johnsons flimsy justifications ranging from the need to protect american tourists to a dubious list of suspected communists among the rebel leaders served only to alienate liberal critics in the united states particularly senate foreign relations committee chairman j william fulbright a former johnson favorite.
the intervention ended in 1966 with the election of a conservative government.
senator fulbright however continued his criticism of johnsons foreign policy by publishing the arrogance of power a biting analysis of the fallacies of containment.
fulbrights defection symbolized a growing gap between the president and liberal intellectuals the more lbj struggled to uphold the cold war policies he had inherited from kennedy the more he found himself under attack from congress the media and the universities.
view the map vietnam war china burma major battles or actions laos north vietnam thailand taiwan south china sea south vietnam u s and south vietnamese troop movements philippines cambodia major north vietnamese supply routes into south vietnam m alay s ia equator indonesia the vietnam dilemma c h i n a hanoi u s air raids 1966 1968 1972 haiphong harbor mined 1972 gulf of tonkin laos mekong r gulf of tonkin incident aug 4 1964 north vietnam vientiane demilitarized zone dmz 17th parallel demarcation line july 1954 invasion of laos feb 6 mar.
1971 ail minh tr chi ho it was vietnam rather than latin america that became lyndon johnsons obsession and led ultimately to his political downfall.
inheriting an american commitment that dated back to eisenhower to support an independent south vietnam the new president believed he had little choice but to continue kennedys policy in vietnam.
the crisis created by diems overthrow only three weeks before kennedys assassination led to a vacuum of power in saigon that prevented johnson from conducting a thorough review and reassessment of the strategic alternatives in southeast asia.
in 1964 seven different governments ruled south vietnam power changed hands three times within one month.
according to an american officer the atmosphere in saigon fairly smelled of discontent with workers on strike students demonstrating and the local press pursuing a persistent campaign of criticism of the new government resisting pressure from the joint chiefs of staff for direct american military involvement lbj continued kennedys policy of economic and technical assistance.
he sent in seven thousand more military advisers and an additional 50 million in aid.
while he insisted it was still up to the vietnamese themselves to win the war he expanded american support for covert operations including amphibious raids on the north.
these undercover activities led directly to the gulf of tonkin affair.
on august 2 1964 north vietnamese torpedo boats attacked the maddox an american destroyer engaged in electronic intelligence gathering in the gulf of tonkin.
the attack was prompted by the belief the american ship had been involved in a south vietnamese raid nearby.
the maddox escaped unscathed but to show american resolve the navy sent in another destroyer the c turner joy.
on the evening of august 4 the two destroyers responding to sonar and radar contacts opened fire on north vietnamese gunboats in the area.
johnson ordered retaliatory air strikes on north vietnamese naval bases.
later investigation indicated that the north vietnamese gunboats had not launched a second attack on the american ships.
the next day the president asked congress to pass a resolution authorizing him to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the united states and to prevent further aggression he did not in fact need this authority he had already ordered the retaliatory air strike thailand cambodia invasion of cambodia apr.
29 june 29 1970 phnom penh hue tet offensive jan 30 feb.
1968 my lai massacre mar.
16 1968 south vietnam south china sea saigon tet offensive jan 30 feb.
1968 surrender apr.
30 1975 gulf of thailand mekong delta 100 miles 100 kilometers southeast asia and the vietnam war american combat forces in south vietnam rose from sixteen thousand in 1963 to a half million in 1968 but a successful conclusion to the conflict was no closer.
without it.
later critics charged that lbj wanted a blank check from congress to carry out the future escalation of the vietnam war but such a motive is unlikely.
he had already rejected johnson escalates the vietnam war immediate military intervention.
in part he wanted the gulf of tonkin resolution to demonstrate to north vietnam the american determination to defend south vietnam at any cost.
the challenge we face in southeast asia today he told congress is the same challenge that we have faced with courage and that we have met with strength in greece and turkey in berlin and korea he also wanted to preempt the vietnam issue from his republican opponent barry goldwater who had been advocating a tougher policy.
by taking a firm stand on the gulf of tonkin incident johnson could both impress the north vietnamese and outmaneuver a political rival at home.
congress responded with alacrity.
the house acted unanimously while only two senators voted against the gulf of tonkin resolution.
johnson appeared to have won a spectacular victory.
his standing in the gallup poll shot up from 42 to 72 percent and he had effectively blocked goldwater from exploiting vietnam as a campaign issue.
in the long run however this easy victory proved costly.
having used force once against north vietnam lbj was more likely to do so in the future.
and although he apparently had no intention of widening the conflict in august 1964 the congressional resolution was phrased broadly enough to enable him to use whatever level of force he wanted including unlimited military intervention.
above all when he did wage war in vietnam he left himself open to the charge of deliberately misleading congress.
presidential credibility proved ultimately to be johnsons achilles heel his political downfall began with the gulf of tonkin resolution.
be needed in 1966 and that american battle deaths could rise as high as five hundred a month by early 1968 they hit a peak of more than five hundred a week.
at the same time other advisers most notably undersecretary of state george ball spoke out against military escalation in favor of a political settlement.
warning that the united states was likely to suffer national humiliation ball told the president that he had serious doubt that an army of westerners can successfully fight orientals in an asian jungle lyndon johnson was genuinely torn asking his advisers at one point are we starting something that in two to three years we simply cant finish but he finally decided he had no choice but to persevere in vietnam.
although he insisted on paring down mcnamaras troop request lbj settled on a steady u s troop levels in vietnam as of dec 31 of each year 536 100 500 000 485 600 475 200 400 000 escalation full scale american involvement in vietnam began in 1965 in a series of steps designed primarily to prevent a north vietnamese victory.
with the political situation in saigon growing more hopeless every day the presidents advisers urged the bombing of the north.
american air attacks would serve several purposes they would block north vietnamese infiltration routes make hanoi pay a heavy price for its role and lift the sagging morale of the south vietnamese.
but most important as mcgeorge bundy reported after a visit to pleiku site of a vietcong attack on an american base that took nine lives without new u s action defeat appears inevitable probably not in a matter of weeks or perhaps even months but within the next year or so in february 1965 johnson cited the pleiku attack in ordering a long planned aerial bombardment of selected north vietnamese targets.
the air strikes aimed at impeding the communist supply line and damaging hanois economy proved ineffective.
in april johnson authorized the use of american combat troops in south vietnam restricting them to defensive operations intended to protect american air bases.
the joint chiefs then pressed the president for both unlimited bombing of the north and the aggressive use of american ground forces in the south.
in mid july secretary of defense mcnamara recommended sending a hundred thousand combat troops to vietnam more than doubling the american forces there.
he believed this escalation would lead to a favorable outcome but he also told the president that an additional hundred thousand soldiers might 385 300 334 600 300 000 200 000 184 300 156 800 100 000 3 200 23 300 16 300 11 300 24 200 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 source u s department of defense chapter 30 the turbulent sixties military escalation designed to compel hanoi to accept a diplomatic solution.
in late july the president permitted a gradual increase in the bombing of north vietnam and allowed american ground commanders to conduct offensive operations in the south.
most ominously he approved the immediate dispatch of fifty thousand troops to vietnam and the future commitment of fifty thousand more.
these july decisions formed an open ended commitment to employ american military forces as the situation demanded wrote historian george herring and they were the closest thing to a formal decision for war in vietnam convinced that withdrawal would destroy american credibility before the world and that an invasion of the north would lead to world war iii johnson opted for large scale but limited military intervention.
moreover lbj feared the domestic consequences of either extreme.
a pullout could cause a massive political backlash at home as conservatives condemned him for betraying south vietnam to communism.
all out war however would mean the end of his social programs.
once congress focused on the conflict he explained to biographer doris kearns that bitch of a war would destroy the woman i really loved the great society so he settled for a limited war committing a half million american troops to battle in southeast asia all the while pretending it was a minor engagement and refusing to ask the american people for the support and sacrifice required for victory.
lyndon johnson was not solely responsible for the vietnam war.
he inherited both a policy that assumed vietnam was a vital national interest and a deteriorating situation in saigon that demanded a more active american role.
truman eisenhower and kennedy had taken the united states deep into the vietnam maze it was johnsons fate to have to find a way out.
but lbj bears full responsibility for the way he tried to resolve his dilemma.
the failure to confront the people with the stark choices the nation faced in vietnam the insistence on secrecy and deceit and the refusal to acknowledge that he had committed the united states to a dangerous military involvement were johnsons sins in vietnam.
his lack of self confidence in foreign policy and fear of domestic reaction led directly to his undoing.
stalemate for the next three years americans waged an intensive war in vietnam and succeeded only in preventing a communist victory.
american bombing of the north proved ineffective.
the rural undeveloped nature of the north vietnamese economy meant there were few industrial targets a political refusal to bomb the main port of haiphong allowed soviet and chinese arms to flow freely into the country.
nor were the efforts to destroy supply lines any more successful.
american planes pounded the ho chi minh trail that ran down through laos and cambodia but the north vietnamese used the jungle canopy effectively to hide their shipments and their massive efforts to repair damaged roads and bridges.
in fact the american air attacks with their inadvertent civilian casualties gave north vietnam a powerful propaganda weapon which it used to sway world opinion against the united states.
the war in the south went no better.
despite the steady increase in american ground forces from 184 000 in late 1965 to more than 500 000 by early 1968 the vietcong still controlled much of the countryside.
the search and destroy tactics employed by the american commander general william westmoreland proved ill suited to the situation.
the vietcong aided by north vietnamese regulars were waging a war of insurgency avoiding fixed positions and striking from ambush.
in a vain effort to destroy the enemy westmoreland used superior american firepower wantonly devastating the countryside causing many civilian casualties and driving the peasantry into the arms of the guerrillas.
inevitably these tactics led to the slaughter of innocent civilians most notably at the hamlet of my lai.
in march 1968 an american company led by lieutenant william calley jr killed more than two hundred unarmed villagers.
the main premise of westmorelands strategy was to wage a war of attrition that would finally reach a crossover point when communist losses each month would be greater than the number of new troops they could recruit.
he hoped to lure the vietcong and the north vietnamese regulars into pitched battles in which american firepower would inflict heavy casualties.
but soon it was the communists who were deciding where and when the fighting would take place provoking american attacks in remote areas of south vietnam that favored the defenders and made westmoreland pay heavily in american lives for the communist losses.
by the end of 1967 the nearly half million american troops johnson had sent to vietnam had failed to defeat the enemy.
at best lbj had only achieved a bloody stalemate that gradually turned the american people against a war they had once eagerly embraced.
years of turmoil why were there protests during the 1960s.
the vietnam war became the focal point for a growing movement of youthful protest that made the 1960s the most turbulent decade of the twentieth century.
disenchantment with conventional middle class values a rapid increase in college enrollments as a result of the post world war ii baby boom a reaction against the crass materialism of the affluent society with its endless suburbs and shopping malls all led american youth to embrace an alternative lifestyle based on the belief that people are sensitive searching poetic and capable of love they were ready to create a counterculture.
the agitation of the 1960s was at its height between 1965 and 1968 the years that marked the escalation of the vietnam war.
disturbances on college campuses reflected growing discontent in other parts of society from the urban ghettos to the lettuce fields of the southwest.
all who felt disadvantaged and dissatisfied students african americans hispanics native americans women hippies took to the streets to give vent to their feelings.
the student revolt the first sign of student rebellion came in the fall of 1964 at the prestigious university of california at berkeley.
a small group of radical students resisted university efforts to deny them a place to solicit volunteers and funds for off campus causes.
forming the free speech movement they struck back by occupying years of turmoil administration buildings and blocking the arrest of a nonstudent class.
but like the flappers of the 1920s the protesters set the tone for protester.
for the next two months the campus was in turmoil.
an entire era and left a lasting impression on american society.
in the end the protesters won the rights of free speech and association that they championed.
their hero was mario savio a protesting the vietnam war student who had eloquently summed up the cause by likening the university to a great machine and telling others youve got to put the most dramatic aspect of the youthful rebellion came in your bodies upon the gears and upon the wheels upon the levers opposing the vietnam war.
the first student teach ins began upon all the apparatus and youve got to make it stop at the university of michigan in march 1965 soon they spread the free speech movement at berkeley offered many insights into the causes of campus unrest.
it was fueled in part by student suspicion of an watch the video protests against the vietnam war older depression born generation that viewed affluence as the answer to all problems.
unable to exert much influence on the power structure that directed the consumer society the students turned on the university.
they viewed higher education as the faithful servant of a corporate culture the university trained hordes of technicians harbored research laboratories that perfected dreadful weapons and used ibm punch cards to regiment students.
the feeling of powerlessness that underlay the berkeley riots was best revealed by a protester carrying a sign that read i am a uc student.
please dont bend fold spindle or mutilate me student protest found its full expression in the explosive growth of the students for a democratic society sds.
founded in port huron michigan in 1962 this radical organization wanted to rid american society of poverty racism and violence.
although the sds embraced many traditional liberal reforms such as expanded public housing and comprehensive health insurance its founders advocated a new approach called participatory democracy.
in contrast to both liberalism and oldstyle socialism the sds sought salvation through the individual rather than the group.
personal control of ones life and destiny not the creation of new bureaucracies was the hallmark of the new left.
in the next few years the sds grew phenomenally.
spurred on by the vietnam war and massive campus unrest the sds could count more than a hundred thousand followers and was responsible for disruptions at nearly a thousand colleges in 1968.
yet its very emphasis on the individual and its fear of bureaucracy left it leaderless and subject to division and disunity.
by 1970 a split between factions some of which were given to violence led to its complete demise.
the meteoric career of the sds symbolized the turbulence of the 1960s.
for a brief time it seemed as though the nations youth had gone berserk indulging in a wave of experimentation with drugs sex and rock music.
older americans believed that all the nations traditional values from the puritan work ethic to the antiwar demonstrators protest in central park new york city on april 15 1967 family were under attack.
not all american youth four hundred thousand peace demonstrators with martin luther king jr leading the joined in the cultural insurgency the rebellion was procession marched from central park to the united nations to demand a halt to the american bombing of north vietnam.
generally limited to children of the upper middle chapter 30 the turbulent sixties to campuses across the nation.
more than twenty thousand protesters under sds auspices gathered in washington in april to listen to entertainers joan baez and judy collins sing antiwar songs.
end the war in vietnam now stop the killing read the signs.
one of the great ironies of the vietnam war was the system of student draft deferments which enabled most of those enrolled in college to avoid military service.
as a result the children of the well to do who were more likely to attend college were able to escape the draft.
one survey revealed that men from disadvantaged families including a disproportionately large number of african and hispanic americans were twice as likely to be drafted and engage in combat in vietnam as those from more privileged backgrounds.
consequently a sense of guilt led many college activists who were safe from vietnam because of their student status to take the lead in denouncing an unjust war.
as the fighting in southeast asia intensified in 1966 and 1967 the protests grew larger and the slogans more extreme.
hey hey lbj how many kids did you kill today chanted students as they proclaimed hell no we wont go at the pentagon in october 1967 more than a hundred thousand demonstrators mainly male students but housewives teachers and young professionals as well confronted a cordon of military policemen guarding the heart of the nations war machine.
the climax came in the spring of 1968.
driven by both opposition to the war and concern for social justice the sds and african american radicals at columbia university joined forces in april.
they seized five buildings effectively paralyzing one of the countrys leading colleges.
after eight days of tension the new york city police regained control.
the brutal repression quickened the pace of protest elsewhere.
students held sit ins and marches at more than one hundred colleges from cheyney state in pennsylvania to northwestern in illinois.
the students failed to stop the war but they did succeed in gaining a voice in their education.
university administrations allowed undergraduates to sit on faculty curriculum planning committees and gave up their once rigid control of dormitory and social life.
but the students greatest impact lay outside politics and the campus.
they spawned a cultural uprising that transformed the manners and morals of america.
the cultural revolution in contrast to the elitist political revolt of the sds the cultural rebellion by youth in the 1960s was pervasive.
led by college students young people challenged the prevailing adult values in clothing hairstyles sexual conduct work habits and music.
blue jeans and love beads took the place of business suits and wristwatches long hair and unkempt beards for men bare feet and bralessness for women became a new uniform of protest.
families gave way to communes for the hippies and flower children of the 1960s.
a summer of love in san franciscos haight ashbury district in 1967 drew hundreds of thousands of young men and women from all across the country to sample free sex free drugs and free medical care the last required to deal with the former two.
underground newspapers proliferated rejecting the values and opinions of the media establishment.
experimental art and film smashed the models of highbrow art and hollywood.
music became the touchstone of the counterculture.
folksingers such as joan baez and bob dylan popular for their songs of social protest in the mid 1960s gave way first to rock groups such as the beatles whose lyrics were often suggestive of drug use and then to acid rock as symbolized by the grateful dead.
the climactic event of the counterculture during the decade came at the woodstock concert at bethel in upstate new york when 400 000 young people indulged in a three day festival of rock music drug experimentation and public sexual activity.
former harvard psychology professor timothy leary encouraged youth to join him in trying out the drug scene.
millions accepted his invitation to tune in turn on drop out literally as they experimented with marijuana and with lsd a new and dangerous chemical hallucinogen.
the ultimate expression of insurgency was the yippie movement led by jerry rubin and abbie hoffman.
shrewd buffoons who mocked the consumer culture they delighted in capitalizing on the mood of social protest to win attention.
once when testifying before a congressional committee investigating internal subversion rubin dressed as a revolutionary war soldier hoffman appeared in the gallery of the new york stock exchange in 1967 raining money down on the cheering brokers below.
black power the civil rights movement which had spawned the mood of protest in the 1960s fell on hard times later in the decade.
the legislative triumphs of 1964 and 1965 were relatively easy victories over southern bigotry now the movement faced the far more complex problem of achieving economic equality in the cities of the north where more than half of the nations african americans lived in poverty.
the civil rights movement had raised the expectations of urban african americans for improvement frustration mounted as they failed to experience any significant economic gain.
the first sign of trouble came in the summer of 1964 when african american teenagers in harlem and rochester new york rioted.
the next summer a massive outburst of rage and destruction swept over the watts area of los angeles as the inhabitants burned buildings and looted stores.
riots in the summer of 1966 were less destructive but in 1967 the worst ones yet took place in newark and in detroit where forty three were killed and thousands were injured.
the mobs attacked the shops and stores expressing a burning grievance against a consumer society from which they were excluded by their poverty.
th e civil rights coalition fell apart a victim of both its legislative success and economic failure.
black militants took over the leadership of the student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc they disdained white help and even reversed martin luther kings insistence on nonviolence.
the snccs new leader stokely carmichael told blacks they should seize power in those parts of the south where they outnumbered whites.
i am not going to beg the white man for years of turmoil anything i deserve he said im going to take it soon his calls for black power became a rallying cry for more militant blacks who advocated the need for african americans to form our own institutions credit unions co ops political parties and even write our own history others went further than calls for ethnic separation.
h rap brown who replaced carmichael as the leader of the sncc in 1967 told an african american crowd in cambridge maryland to get your guns and burn this town down huey newton one of the founders of the militant black panther party proclaimed we make the statement quoting from chairman mao that political power comes through the barrel of a gun king suffered the most from this extremism.
his denunciation of the vietnam war cost him the support of the johnson administration and alienated him from the more conservative civil rights groups such as the naacp and the urban league.
he finally seized on poverty as the proper enemy for attack but before he could lead his poor peoples march on washington in 1968 he was assassinated in memphis in early april.
both blacks and whites realized the nation had lost its most eloquent voice for racial harmony.
his tragic death elevated king to the status of a martyr but it also led to one last outbreak of urban violence.
african americans exploded in angry riots in 125 cities across the nation the worst rioting took place in washington d c where buildings were set on fire within a few blocks of the white house.
it was as if the city were being abandoned to an invading army wrote a british journalist.
clouds of smoke hung over the potomac evoking memories of the london blitz yet there was a positive side to the emotions engendered by black nationalism.
leaders urged african americans to take pride in their ethnic heritage to embrace their blackness as a positive value.
african americans began to wear afro hairstyles and dress in dashikis emphasizing their african roots.
students began to demand new black studies programs in the colleges the word negro identified with white supremacy of the past virtually disappeared from usage overnight replaced by the favored afro american or black.
singer james brown best expressed the sense of racial identity say it loud im black and im proud grape pickers and lettuce workers in california into the national farm workers association nfwa.
chvez appealed to ethnic nationalism in mobilizing mexican american field hands to strike against grape growers in the san joaquin valley in 1965.
a national boycott of grapes by mexican americans and their sympathizers among the young people of the counterculture led to a series of hard fought victories over the growers.
the five year struggle resulted in a union victory in 1970 but at an enormous cost 95 percent of the farmworkers involved had lost their homes and their cars.
nevertheless chvez succeeded in raising the hourly wage of farmworkers in california to 3 53 by 1977 it had been 1 20 in 1965.
chvezs efforts helped spark an outburst of ethnic consciousness among mexican americans that swept through the urban barrios of the southwest.
mexican american leaders campaigned for bilingual programs and improved educational opportunities.
young activists began to call themselves chicanos which had previously been a derogatory term and to take pride in their cultural heritage in 1968 they succeeded in establishing the first mexican american studies program at california state college at los angeles.
campus leaders called for reform urging high school students to insist on improvements.
heeding such appeals nearly ten thousand students at east los angeles high schools walked out of class in march 1968.
these walkouts sparked similar movements in san antonio texas and phoenix arizona and led to the introduction of ethnic nationalism other groups quickly emulated the african american phenomenon.
native americans decried the callous use of their identity as football mascots in response universities such as stanford changed their symbols.
puerto ricans demanded their history be included in school and college texts.
polish italian and czech groups insisted on respect for their nationalities.
congress acknowledged these demands with passage of the ethnic heritage studies act of 1972.
instead of trying to melt all groups down into a standard american type congress now gave what one sponsor of the measure called official recognition to ethnicity as a positive constructive force in our society today mexican americans were in the forefront of the ethnic groups that became active in the 1970s.
the primary impulse came from the efforts of csar chvez to organize the poorly paid in march 1966 csar chvez shown here talking with workers led striking grape pickers on a 250 mile march from delano california to the state capital at sacramento to dramatize the plight of the migrant farmworkers.
with the slogan god is beside you on the picket line the march took on the character of a religious pilgrimage.
chapter 30 the turbulent sixties women to fix the food and type the communiqus while the men made the decisions.
read the document national organization for women statement of understandably women soon realized that purpose 1966 they could only achieve respect and equality by mounting their own protest.
in some ways the position of women in american society was worse in the 1960s than it had been in the 1920s.
after forty years a lower percentage of women were enrolled in the nations colleges and professional schools.
women were still relegated to stereotyped occupations such as nursing and teaching there were few female lawyers and even fewer women doctors.
and gender roles as portrayed on television commercials continued to call for the husband to be the breadwinner and the wife to be the homemaker.
betty friedan was one of the first to seize on the sense of grievance and discrimination that developed among white middle class women in the 1960s.
the beginning of the effort to raise womens consciousness was her 1963 book the feminine mystique.
calling the american home a comfortable concentration camp she attacked the prevailing view that women were completely contented with their housekeeping and child rearing tasks claiming that housewives had no selfesteem and no sense of identity.
im a server of food and putter on of pants and a bedmaker a mother of four told friedan somebody who can be called on when you want something.
but who am i the 1964 civil rights act helped women attack economic inequality head on by making it illegal to discriminate in employment on the basis of gender.
women filed suit for equal wages demanded that companies provide day care for their infants and preschool children and entered politics to lobby against laws that in the guise of protection of a weaker gender were unfair to women.
as the womens liberation movement grew its advocates began to attack laws banning abortion and waged a campaign to toughen the enforcement of rape laws.
the womens movement met with many betty friedan was a writer and a major american feminist during the 1960s and 1970s.
she was of the same obstacles as other protest groups the founder of the national organization for women now and her book the feminist mystique in the 1960s.
the moderate leadership of helped ignite the second wave of american feminism in the 20th century.
the national organization for women bilingual programs in grade schools and the hiring of more now founded by betty friedan in 1966 soon was chalchicano teachers at all levels.
lenged by those with more extreme views.
ti grace atkinson and susan brownmiller attacked revered institutions the family and the home and denounced sexual intercourse with men womens liberation calling it a method of male domination.
many women were active as they were in the civil rights and antiwar movements repelled by the harsh rhetoric of the extremists and expressed women soon learned that the male leaders of these causes satisfaction with their lives.
but despite these disagreements were little different from corporate executives they expected most women supported the effort to achieve equal status with the return of richard nixon men and in 1972 congress responded by voting to send the equal rights amendment to the state legislatures for ratification.
the return of richard nixon how did the vietnam war influence american politics.
the turmoil of the 1960s reached a crescendo in 1968 as the american people responded to the two dominant events of the decade the war in vietnam and the cultural insurgency at home.
in an election marked by a series of bizarre events including riots and an assassination richard nixon staged a remarkable comeback to win the post denied him in 1960.
vietnam undermines lyndon johnson a controversial vietcong offensive in early 1968 proved to be the decisive event in breaking the stalemate in vietnam and driving lyndon johnson from office.
using deceptive tactics the north vietnamese began a prolonged siege of an american marine base at khe sanh deep in the northern interior.
fearing another dien bien phu westmoreland rushed in reinforcements sending more than 40 percent of all american infantry and armor battalions into the two northernmost provinces of south vietnam.
the vietcong then used the traditional lull in the fighting at tet the lunar new year to launch a surprise attack in the heavily populated cities.
beginning on january 30 1968 the vietcong struck at thirty six of the forty four provincial capitals.
the most daring raid came at the american embassy compound in saigon.
although the guerrillas were unable to penetrate the embassy proper for six hours television cameras caught the dramatic battle that ensued in the courtyard before military police finally overcame the attackers.
although caught off guard american and south vietnamese forces succeeded in repulsing the tet offensive quickly everywhere except in hue the old imperial capital which was retaken only after three weeks of heavy fighting that left this beautiful city in the words of one observer a shattered stinking hulk its streets choked with rubble and rotting bodies tet proved to be the turning point of the vietnam war.
although the communists failed to win control of the cities and suffered heavy losses they still held on to most of the rural areas and had scored an impressive political victory.
for months president johnson had been telling the american people the war was almost over and victory was in sight suddenly it appeared to be nearly lost.
cbs tv newscaster walter cronkite took a quick trip to saigon to find out what had happened.
horrified at what he saw he exclaimed to his guides what the hell is going on.
i thought we were winning the war he returned home to tell the american people it seems now more certain than ever that the bloody experience of vietnam is to end in a stalemate president johnson reluctantly came to the same conclusion after the joint chiefs of staff requested an additional 205 000 troops to achieve victory in vietnam following the tet offensive.
he began to listen to his new secretary of defense clark clifford who had replaced robert mcnamara in january 1968.
in midmarch after receiving advice from the wise men a group of experienced cold warriors that included such illustrious figures as dean acheson and omar bradley the president decided to limit the bombing of north vietnam in an effort to open up peace negotiations with hanoi.
in a speech to the nation on sunday evening march 31 1968 johnson outlined his plans for a new effort at ending the war peacefully and then concluded by saying as proof of his sincerity i shall not seek and i will not accept the nomination of my party for another term as your president in the fourteen years since the siege of dien bien phu american policy had gone full cycle in vietnam.
even though eisenhower had decided against using force to rescue the french his commitment to the diem regime in saigon had led eventually to american military involvement on a massive scale.
three years of inconclusive fighting and a steadily mounting loss of american lives had disillusioned the american people and finally cost lyndon johnson the presidency.
and the full price the nation would have to pay for its folly in southeast asia was still unknown the vietnam experience would continue to cast a shadow over american life for years to come.
the democrats divide lyndon johnsons withdrawal from the presidential race after the tet offensive set the tone for the 1968 election.
lbjs decision had come in response to political as well as military realities.
by 1966 the antiwar movement had spread from the college campuses to capitol hill.
chairman j william fulbright gave the protests a new respectability when his senate foreign relations committee held probing hearings on the war broadcast on television to the entire country.
johnson began to feel like a prisoner in the white house since in his infrequent public appearances he was hounded by larger and larger groups of antiwar demonstrators whose taunts and jeers wounded him.
the essentially leaderless protest against the war had taken on a new quality on january 3 1968 when senator eugene mccarthy a democrat from minnesota announced he would challenge lbj for the partys presidential nomination.
intellectual cool and aloof mccarthy raised the banner of idealism telling audiences whatever is morally necessary must be made politically possible college students flocked to his campaign shaving their beards and cutting their hair to be clean for gene in the new hampshire primary in early march the nations earliest political test mccarthy shocked the political experts by coming within a few thousand votes of defeating president johnson.
mccarthys strong showing in new hampshire led robert kennedy who had been weighing the risks in challenging johnson to enter the presidential race.
elected senator from new york in 1964 bobby kennedy had become an effective voice for the disadvantaged as well as an increasingly severe critic of the vietnam war.
unlike mccarthy whose appeal was largely limited to uppermiddle class whites and college students kennedy attracted strong support among blue collar workers african americans chicanos and other minorities who formed the nucleus of the continuing new deal coalition.
lyndon johnsons dramatic withdrawal caused an uproar in the democratic party.
with johnsons tacit backing and strong support from party regulars and organized labor vice president hubert h humphrey immediately declared his candidacy.
chapter 30 the turbulent sixties humphrey a classic cold war liberal who had worked equally hard for social reform at home and american expansion abroad was totally unacceptable to the antiwar movement.
accordingly he decided to avoid the primaries and work for the nomination within the framework of the party.
kennedy and mccarthy the two antiwar candidates were thus left to compete in the spring primaries requiring agonizing choices among those who desired change.
kennedy won everywhere except in oregon but his narrow victory in california ended in tragedy when a palestinian immigrant sirhan sirhan assassinated him in a los angeles hotel.
with his strongest opponent struck down hubert humphrey had little difficulty at the chicago convention.
backed by that citys political boss mayor richard daley the vice president relied on party leaders to defeat an antiwar resolution and win the nomination on the first ballot by a margin of more than two to one.
humphreys triumph was marred by violence outside the heavily guarded convention hall.
radical groups had urged their members to come to chicago to agitate the turnout was relatively small but included many who were ready to provoke the authorities in their despair over the conventions outcome.
epithets and cries of pigs brought on a savage response from daleys police.
the cops had one thing on their mind commented journalist jimmy breslin.
club and then gas club and then gas club and then gas the bitter fumes of tear gas hung in the streets for days afterward the battered heads and bodies of demonstrators and innocent bystanders alike flooded the citys hospital emergency rooms.
what an official investigation later termed a police riot marred humphreys nomination and made a sad mockery out of his call for the politics of joy the democratic party itself had become the next victim of the vietnam war.
the republican resurgence the primary beneficiary of the democratic debacle was richard nixon.
written off as politically dead after his unsuccessful race for governor of california in 1962 nixon had slowly rebuilt his place within the party by working loyally for barry goldwater in 1964 and for gop congressional candidates two years later.
positioning himself squarely in the middle he quickly became the front runner for the republican nomination.
at the gop convention in miami beach nixon won an easy first ballot nomination and chose maryland governor spiro agnew as his running mate.
agnew little known on the national scene had won the support of conservatives by taking a strong stand against african american rioters.
in the fall campaign nixon opened up a wide lead by avoiding controversy and reaping the benefit of discontent with the vietnam war.
he played the peace issue shrewdly appearing to advocate an end to the conflict without ever taking a definite stand.
the united states should end the war and win the peace he declared hinting he had a secret formula for peace but never revealing what it was.
above all he chose the role of reconciler for a nation torn by emotion a leader who promised to bring a divided country together again.
election of 1968 electoral vote by state popular vote republican richard m nixon 31 770 237 democratic hubert h humphrey 31 270 533 american independent george c wallace 9 906 141 239 908 minor parties 73 186 819 hawaii wash d c alaska humphrey in contrast found himself hounded by antiwar demonstrators who heckled him constantly.
he walked a tightwire desperate for the continued support of president johnson but handicapped by lbjs stubborn refusal to end all bombing of north vietnam.
only when he broke with johnson in late september by announcing that if elected he would stop the bombing of north vietnam as an acceptable risk for peace did his campaign begin to gain momentum.
unfortunately for humphrey a third party candidate cut deeply into the normal democratic majority.
george c wallace had first gained national attention as the racist governor of alabama whose motto was segregation now.
segregation tomorrow segregation forever in 1964 he had shown surprising strength in democratic primaries in northern states.
by attacking both black leaders and their liberal white allies wallace appealed to the sense of powerlessness among the urban working classes.
liberals intellectuals and longhairs have run the country for too long wallace told his followers.
when i get to washington he promised ill throw all these phonies and their briefcases into the potomac running on the ticket of the american independent party wallace was a close third in the september polls gaining support from more than 20 percent of the electorate.
but as the election neared his following declined.
humphrey continued to gain especially after johnson agreed in late october to end all bombing of north vietnam.
by the first week in november the outcome was too close for the experts to call.
conclusion the end of an era nixon won the election with the smallest share of the popular vote of any winning candidate since 1916.
but he swept a broad band of states from virginia and the carolinas through the midwest to the pacific for a clear cut victory in the electoral college.
humphrey held on to the urban northeast wallace took just five states in the deep south but his heavy inroads into blue collar districts in the north shattered the new deal coalition.
conclusion the end of an era the election of 1968 was a repudiation of the politics of protest and the cultural insurgency of the mid 1960s.
the combined popular vote for nixon and wallace 56 5 percent of the electorate signified there was a silent majority that was fed up with violence and confrontation.
a growing concern over psychedelic drugs rock music long hair and sexual permissiveness had offset the usual democratic advantage on economic issues and led to the election of a republican president.
richard nixons victory marked the end of an era with the passing of two concepts that had guided american life since the 1930s.
first the liberal reform impulse which reached its zenith with the great society legislation in 1965 had clearly run its course.
civil rights medicare and federal aid to education would continue in place but nixons election signaled a strong reaction against the growth of federal power.
at the same time the vietnam fiasco spelled the end of an activist foreign policy that had begun with american entry into world war ii.
containment so successful in protecting western europe against the soviet threat had proved a disastrous failure when applied on a global scale.
the last three decades of the twentieth century would witness a struggle to replace outmoded liberal internationalism with new policies at home and abroad.
chapter 30 chapter review study y resources take the study plan for chapter 30 the turbulent sixties on myhistorylab time line 1961 jfk establishes peace corps march u s backed 1965 lbj commits fifty thousand american troops to com bay of pigs invasion crushed by cubans april president kennedy forces u s steel to roll back price hike april cuban missile crisis takes world to brink of nuclear war october united states great britain and ussr sign limited nuclear test ban treaty august jfk assassinated lyndon b johnson sworn in as president november bat in vietnam july congress enacts medicare and medicaid july national organization for women now formed israel wins six day war in middle east june riots in detroit kill forty three injure two thousand leave five thousand homeless july vietcong launch the tet offensive january johnson announces he will not seek reelection march martin luther king jr assassinated in memphis april robert kennedy assassinated in los angeles june 1964 president johnson declares war on poverty january congress overwhelmingly passes gulf of tonkin resolution august johnson wins presidency in landslide november chapter review kennedy intensifies the cold war johnson escalates the vietnam war c h i n a how did the cold war intensify under kennedy.
how did johnsons vietnam policy evolve.
haiphong harbor mined 1972 johnson seized upon an ambiguous incident in the gulf of tonkin to persuade congress to grant him authority to escalate american involvement in vietnam.
he initiated a major troop buildup and air attacks against north vietnam.
the escalation produced only a bloody stalemate.
p 721 gulf of tonkin laos mekong r gulf of tonkin incident aug 4 1964 north vietnam vientiane demilitarized zone dmz 17th demarc july invasion of laos feb 6 mar.
1971 hue tet offensive jan 30 feb.
1968 c ho kennedy increased american support to south vietnam and pressured the cuban government of fidel castro.
kennedy raised troop levels in vietnam and authorized the overthrow of diem.
he ordered a covert operation against castro at the bay of pigs which failed and delivered an ultimatum to the soviets to pull their missiles out of cuba which succeeded.
p 708 hanoi u s air raids 1966 1968 1972 ha il a nd years of turmoil the new frontier at home why were there protests in the 1960s.
what was the new frontier and what did it accomplish.
the new frontier was kennedys domestic program and on its most important issue civil rights it achieved mixed results.
kennedy supported civil rights but hesitantly.
black activists especially martin luther king jr pushed the cause of racial equality farther than kennedy was prepared to take it.
p 713 during the 1960s students protested the war in vietnam.
many young people also rebelled against the values of their parents experimenting with new kinds of music clothing styles and drugs.
black militants demanded faster progress toward racial equality and sometimes employed violence to achieve it.
csar chvez improved the lot of mexican american farmworkers.
feminists sought greater equality for women.
p 726 let us continue the return of richard nixon what were johnsons domestic priorities and what were his achievements.
239 90 minor parties 73 186 81 johnsons great society included the 1964 civil rights act and the 1965 voting rights act medicare which provided health insurance for the elderly and federal aid to education.
p 717 how did the vietnam war influence american politics.
johnsons failure in vietnam discredited his administration and produced desire for change.
he abandoned plans to run for reelection in 1968 opening the door to richard nixon.
p 731 aska waii study resources key terms and definitions new frontier president john f kennedys program to revitalize the stagnant economy and enact reform legislation in education health care and civil rights.
p 708 bay of pigs in april 1961 a group of cuban exiles organized and supported by the cia landed on the southern coast of cuba in an effort to overthrow fidel castro.
when the invasion ended in disaster president kennedy took full responsibility for it.
p 710 cuban missile crisis in october 1962 the united states and the soviet union came close to nuclear war when president john f kennedy insisted that nikita khrushchev remove the 42 missiles he had secretly deployed in cuba.
the soviets eventually did so and the crisis ended.
p 711 freedom ride sponsored by the congress of racial equality core freedom rides on buses by civil rights advocates in 1961 in the south were designed to test the enforcement of federal regulations that prohibited segregation in interstate public transportation.
p 714 march on washington in august 1963 civil rights leaders organized a massive rally in washington to urge passage of president john f kennedys civil rights bill.
the high point was martin luther king jr s i have a dream speech.
p 717 war on poverty president lyndon johnson declared war on poverty in his 1964 state of the union address.
a new office of economic opportunity oeo oversaw programs to help the poor.
p 719 great society president lyndon johnsons name for his version of the democratic reform program.
in 1965 congress passed many great society measures including medicare civil rights legislation and federal aid to education.
p 720 medicare the 1965 medicare act provided social security funding for hospitalization insurance for people over age 65 and the disabled and a voluntary plan to cover doctor bills paid in part by the federal government.
p 720 voting rights act of 1965 the 1965 voting rights act banned literacy tests for voting rights and provided for federal registrars to assure the franchise to minority voters.
p 720 gulf of tonkin resolution after a north vietnamese attack on an american destroyer in the gulf of tonkin in 1964 congress gave president lyndon authority in this resolution to use force in vietnam.
p 725 students for a democratic society sds founded in 1962 the sds was a popular college student organization that protested shortcomings in american life notably racial injustice and the vietnam war.
it led thousands of protests before it split apart in the late 1960s.
p 727 national organization for women now founded in 1966 now called for equal employment opportunity and equal pay for women.
it also championed the legalization of abortion and an equal rights amendment to the constitution.
p 730 tet offensive in february 1968 the viet cong launched a major offensive in the cities of south vietnam.
although caught by surprise american and south vietnam forces quashed this attack.
but the tet offensive was a blow to american public opinion and led president lyndon johnson to seek a negotiated peace.
p 731 critical thinking questions 1.
how did american foreign policy in the 1960s reflect the personalities of kennedy and johnson.
how did the war on poverty influence johnsons handling of the vietnam war.
why did mlk jr command such respect.
why did americans turn to nixon in 1968.
myhistorylab media assignments find these resources in the media assignments folder for chapter 30 on myhistorylab kennedy intensifies the cold war watch the video kennedy nixon debate p 707 watch the video president john f kennedy and the cuban missile crisis p 712 the new frontier at home watch the video photographing the civil rights movement p 715 view the map johnson escalates the vietnam war read the document the civil rights act of 1964 p 719 complete the assignment unintended consequences the second great migration p 722 view the map vietnam war p 724 years of turmoil watch the video protests against the vietnam war p 727 watch the video civil rights march on washington p 716 let us continue impact of the voting rights act of 1965 p 721 read the document national organization for women statement of purpose 1966 p 730 indicates study plan media assignment the rise of a new conservatism 1969 1988 contents and learning objectives the tempting of richard nixon pg.
738 the reagan revolution pg.
752 what were the major accomplishments and failures of the nixon presidency.
what was the reagan revolution.
the economy of stagflation pg.
742 how did reagan reshape american foreign relations.
reagan and the world pg.
755 how were oil and inflation linked during the 1970s.
feature essay the christian right private lives public issues pg.
745 law and society roe v wade the struggle over womens reproductive rights how did private life change during this period.
politics and diplomacy after watergate pg.
749 why did the presidencies of ford and carter largely fail.
listen to the audio file on myhistorylab.
