chapter 29 a new world on while gorbachev and bush got to know each other gorbachev s own hold on power weakened.
hardliners within the kremlin blamed gorbachev for weak leadership as soviet control of eastern europe ended.
in august 1991 old line communists staged a military coup and arrested gorbachev.
boris yeltsin the president of the russian republic the largest and most powerful of the 15 soviet republics that made up the soviet union or union of soviet socialist republics the u s s r helped defeat the coup leaders and gorbachev was freed and restored to power within days.
however the restoration was short lived.
in december 1991 gorbachev announced that the union of soviet socialist republics the soviet union which had governed russia and its neighbors since 1917 was no more.
russia the ukraine and belarus created an informal confederation of independent states.
other former soviet republics savored their independence.
gorbachevs position simply disappeared.
at the kremlin the red hammer and sickle flag was replaced with the blue flag of the russian republic.
the prime enemy of the united states through 45 years of cold war was gone.
while relations with russia and the other former soviet republics would be difficult at times they took place in a vastly different world see map 29 1.
map 29 1 europe after communism.
the map of europe was radically rearranged after the soviet union broke apart into independent republics and the nations of eastern europe claimed their independence from russian domination.
840 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present while eastern europe went through its dramatic changes the other communist giant china was also changing.
as a former ambassador to china bush thought he knew the country well and wanted to build closer ties.
but he was taken by complete surprise in the spring of 1989 when chinese students gathered in tiananmen square in the heart of china s capital beijing to protest the communist partys tight hold and to demand more democratic governance and greater individual freedom.
such protests were unheard of in communist china.
by may as protests had spread to 200 other chinese cities the government declared martial law and then in june sent tanks and army units into tiananmen square killing perhaps 3 000 students and injuring three times as many.
the communist government of china was not about to follow russias peaceful transition to a different social system.
the world including president bush was horrified.
for the rest of his term bush was torn about whether to join other nations in protest seek to maintain and expand commercial ties with china and respond to protests by members of congress and the 43 000 chinese students who were in the united states.
the result was an unclear and inconsistent china policy.
in august 1990 the bush foreign policy team was confronted by another surprising crisis in yet another part of the world.
on august 1 iraqi dictator saddam hussein ordered an attack on iraqs smaller neighbor kuwait and quickly took control of the country.
kuwait had been part of iraq until 1961 and hussein insisted he was simply reuniting what should never have been divided.
u s ambassador to iraq april glaspie had told hussein that the united states had no opinion on iraqs border dispute with kuwait but she never meant that statement to mean the united states would allow iraq to swallow its neighbor.
both iraq and kuwait were among the worlds largest oil producers and iraqi control of kuwait meant that an iraqi dictator whom the united states did not trust was in control of 20 percent of the worlds oil.
tiananmen square prodemocracy demonstrations involving thousands of young chinese students.
w elcome to kuwait xxzearly 991 u s troops landed in kuwait and quickly secured its independence from iraq.
chapter 29 a new world ordj 29 1 operation desert storm code name for the successful offensive against iraq by the united states and its allies in the 1991 persian gulf war.
north american free trade agreement nafta agreement reached in 1993 by canada mexico and the united states to substantially reduce barriers to trade.
bush announced this will not stand the united states negotiated with hussein but quickly began military planning if negotiations failed.
bush gained the support of syria egypt and saudi arabia in insisting that iraq must leave kuwait.
in november the un security council authorized the use of force if negotiations did not succeed.
while there was significant opposition in the united states to any intervention congress authorized the use of force though in the senate the vote was a close 52 47.
on january 17 1991 the u s led operation desert storm began.
an air war showered missiles and bombs on the iraqi forces in kuwait and destroyed communications and electrical systems in iraq.
on february 24 u s marines from bases in saudi arabia landed in kuwait and in 100 hours of battle drove the iraqi forces out of the country.
kuwait was reestablished as an independent country and a close u s ally.
fearing unnecessary carnage and not wanting a u s occupation of iraq proper bush then halted all military operations.
the war was over.
it seemed an easy military victory but it was not without costs.
within iraq rebellions broke out against husseins rule.
while bush hoped they would succeed he was not willing to intervene or to try to topple hussein fearing that the united states would be caught in a long term land war in iraq.
he did however take action to protect the kurdish minority in a new autonomous region within northern iraq announcing a no fly zone in which the united states would shoot down any iraqi planes over that area but opposition forces in the rest of the country expecting u s aid that never came were slaughtered by husseins troops.
a u s boycott of iraq led to widespread suffering within the country.
finally the staging of u s troops in saudi arabia site of the holiest places in the muslim world stirred anger among devout muslims who hated the idea of non muslims in that region.
among those who were angry was osama bin laden a saudi who founded al qaeda a terrorist organization to retaliate against both saudi arabia and the united states.
meanwhile closer to home bush decided in december 1989 that panamas dictator manuel noriega had to be removed.
noriega had received cia support to oppose communists in the region but he had also become rich through drug trafficking and had become a brutal dictator.
when his party lost a presidential election in may 1989 noriega annulled the election.
knowing that the carter era treaty meant that the panama canal was going to be returned to panama bush took no chances.
on december 20 a u s assault team landed in panama and took control of the country.
they restored the democratically elected president of panama guillermo endara and eventually arrested noriega as a drug dealer and imprisoned him in florida.
the bush team also made other international efforts that had mixed results.
the administration negotiated a north american free trade agreement nafta that would eliminate tariffs between the united states and canada and mexico but senate confirmation of the treaty was slow in coming.
into somalia a nation in northeast africa threatened by famine and chaos the united states sent 28 000 peacekeeping troops but could not effect large scale changes.
to the surprise of many of its own citizens yugoslavia which had been relatively stable since the end of world war ii disintegrated into ethnic hostility between its eastern orthodox serbian roman catholic croatian and bosnian muslim communities.
in response to the new crisis in yugoslavia the united states supported a un peacekeeping mission which was ineffective and an arms embargo.
even with the cold war over the world remained a confusing and dangerous place.
education legislation and the supreme court in his inaugural address george bush angered the outgoing ronald reagan by saying that it was time to make kinder the face of the nation and gentler the face of the world.
he also continued the reagan assault on big government insisting 842 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present that the new kindness must come from a thousand points of light emerging from local nongovernmental groups around the country rather than from federal government programs.
bush called himself an education president where reagan sought to abolish the department of education and reduce the federal governments role in education bush convened the nation s governors at an education summit in charlottesville virginia in the fall of 1989 to address the challenges in american public schools.
the plan that emerged from bushs partnership with the governors who were led by arkansas governor bill clinton was called america 2000.
it sought to improve the nation s schools by setting new national standards for all students.
bush also focused efforts on two other pieces of legislation that would have far reaching results.
he supported the clean air act that toughened air quality standards and pollution controls.
it would effect huge changes in industry and begin to shift more attention to environmental issues.
he also led the fight for the americans with disabilities act ada that passed congress in 1990.
the ada outlawed discrimination in employment public services and public accommodations for people with disabilities.
it not only transformed the face of american buildings that now had to provide wheelchair ramps elevators and appropriate lavatories for those with physical disabilities but also put in motion pervasive changes in hiring practices and services that would benefit all those with disabilities including those who were deaf and blind.
bushs first appointment to the supreme court david souter drew little controversy.
souter turned out to be a more liberal judge than many expected probably including bush especially when he voted to affirm the courts roe v wade decision in 1992.
when thurgood marshall retired bush stirred considerable controversy by nominating clarence thomas.
thomas like marshall was an african american but while marshall had been known as mr.
civil rights and was probably the most liberal member of the court in many years thomas was known as an unusually conservative republican.
in his confirmation hearings thomas was accused of sexual harassment by anita hill a black law professor and former member of thomass staff.
hill offered explicit testimony as to what thomas had said and done which was highly embarrassing to thomas and his supporters.
hill was attacked in turn by conservatives and thomas called the assault a high tech lynching for uppity blacks but when he was confirmed by the narrowest of senate votes 52 to 48 many women concluded that the male senators did not take sexual harassment seriously.
while thomas took his seat on the court more women ran for and won elective office the following year than in any previous time increasing their numbers in the senate the house and state legislatures.
race from rodney king to o j.
simpson in march 1991 rodney king an african american failed to stop for police on the foothill freeway near san fernando california.
los angeles police department lapd officers gave chase for 8 miles and finally arrested king.
when king resisted arrest four police officers beat him as he lay on the ground.
a nearby resident used a home video camera to record the arrest and beating and the video was quickly distributed around the nation.
people were outraged.
although king had resisted arrest the officers had clearly continued to beat him long after he was subdued.
the four officers on the video were arrested.
their attorneys argued that they could not get a fair trial in los angeles and the trial was moved to mostly rural simi county california.
the result of the move was that the officers faced an all white jury unlikely in los angeles county.
in april 1992 the jury found three of the officers clean air act passed by congress in 1990 as amendments to an earlier act required substantial restrictions on air pollution.
americans with disabilities act ada legislation that significantly improved options for people with disabilities.
the supreme court s 1973 roe v wade decision stating that the right to privacy guaranteed in the constitution protects a woman s right to choose an abortion remained controversial and impacted american politics for decades to come most of all in terms of the appointment every new supreme court justice.
not guilty and deadlocked on the fourth.
the acquittal released pent up anger in the black community in los angeles.
riots lasting 4 days resulted in 53 deaths 2 300 injuries and 1 billion in property damage.
black and latino rioters targeted whites and asians in their neighborhoods perhaps especially korean storeowners.
a video from the riot showed a white truck driver being pulled out of his cab and beaten.
only the intervention of other blacks who got the driver to a hospital saved his life.
for many the arrest of king the trial and the riot that followed illustrated just how deeply lines were still drawn between races in the united states in the 1990s.
while the events around king got the headlines scholars and activists debated the state of race relations.
some observed that despite what happened much had changed since the 1950s when blacks were legally barred from white schools white bus seats and all white polling places in many places.
orlando patterson a harvard sociologist wrote relations between ordinary afro americans and euro americans are in fact the best they have ever been although still far from ideal other scholars were less sure noting that events like the beating of rodney king and data about the educational experience of many black and latino students confirmed that much had not changed.
andrew hacker wrote that a huge racial chasm remains and there are few signs that the coming century will see it closed in 1994 another crisis illustrated the depth of the racial divide in the united states.
simpson a celebrated african american hall of fame former football star was arrested in june after his divorced wife nicole brown who was white and her white friend ron goldman were found stabbed to death just outside her condominium in an exclusive neighborhood of los angeles.
when the police issued a warrant for simpsons arrest he and a friend fled in simpsons white bronco down the artesia freeway while perhaps 100 000 americans watched on tv.
simpson eventually surrendered and his trial continued for most of the next year.
the evidence against simpson seemed strong but black and white americans saw it differently.
in one poll 63 percent of whites thought he would get a fair trial while 69 percent of blacks thought he would not.
the trial was a media circus.
simpsons lead attorney johnnie cochran a tough african american trial lawyer proved that the investigation of simpson by the los angeles police was filled with racist assumptions although he did not prove simpsons innocence.
when in october 1995 a jury acquitted simpson of the murder charge a majority of blacks agreed with the verdict and celebrations broke out in black communities while most whites were stunned.
regardless of whoever killed brown and goldman the simpson trial showed that americans of different races were deeply divided in how they viewed the criminal justice system in the 1990s.
economic troubles and the election of 1992 bushs greatest political failure was his inability to manage the u s economy.
after 1990 the economy went into a serious recession.
during 1991 and 1992 at t fired 100 000 workers gm fired 74 000 and two major airlines pan am and eastern went bankrupt throwing more out of work.
people blamed the president.
with his preoccupation with foreign policy bush seemed out of touch a perception that did not help his political standing.
bushs economic problems became an even worse political liability when he decided in the face of the rapidly increasing government debt that he needed to raise taxes in spite of his promise not to do so.
when the top tax bracket was increased from 28 to 31 5 percent the new york post headline said read my lips i lied conservative republicans never forgave bush.
with the republican party in not quite open revolt and the nations economy in trouble democrats smelled victory in the 1992 election.
arkansas governor bill clinton soon emerged as a democratic front runner.
when clinton lost the new hampshire primary he called himself the comeback kid and campaigned harder than ever.
clinton demonstrated a combination of strengths and of weaknesses.
844 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present 29 1 president bush future president clinton and independent candidate ross perot debated in the lively 1992 presidential campaign.
he was brilliant.
even though he grew up in poverty he excelled in school and won scholarships to georgetown university was awarded a rhodes scholarship to oxford and then went on to yale law school.
at yale he also met and married fellow student hillary rodham.
he was as charismatic on the campaign trail as john f kennedy had been.
as one of the founders of the democratic leadership council he was a moderate who distanced himself from his partys more liberal members.
clinton also had his weaknesses.
the explanations he gave for his rumored womanizing draft dodging and one time marijuana smoking were never convincing and he earned the name slick willie but he was a tough campaigner who would not quit.
he won the democratic nomination asked tennessee senator al gore a fellow baby boomer to be his running mate and in spite of a personally chaotic style kept his campaign focused.
a sign in the clinton campaign headquarters reading its the economy stupid said it all.
an independent candidate also entered the race eccentric billionaire h ross perot.
perot described the deficit as being like a crazy aunt we keep down in the basement.
all the neighbors know shes there but nobody wants to talk about her he said that bushs nafta treaty would produce a giant sucking sound of american jobs leaving the country.
although given virtually no chance of winning perot was the most popular third party candidate in many years.
bush was challenged for the republican nomination by conservative commentator pat buchanan known as the pit bull of the right bush easily defeated buchanan for the nomination but the attack weakened the president.
the conservative dominance of the 1992 republican convention especially the vocal role of religious conservatives like buchanan alienated many more moderate voters.
throughout the fall campaign the president seemed disengaged.
it was not a close contest.
clinton won almost 45 million votes to bushs 39 million.
surprisingly perot won almost 20 million votes hurting bush more than clinton.
democrats retained control of the senate 57 to 43 and the house 258 to 176.
29j quick review how did george h w.
bush s foreign policy concerns evolve over the course of his presidency.
chapter 29 a new world on the clinton presidency 2m 29 2 analyze the impact of the clinton presidency and the clinton gingrich conflict on the country.
clinton came to office with high hopes.
he idolized john f kennedy and wanted to be remembered as another kennedy.
clinton the first baby boomer president replaced bush the last of eight presidents who had served in world war ii.
he saw his coming to office as a generational change and told the country today a generation raised in the shadows of the cold war assumes new responsibilities he set an activist agenda saying we must invest more in our own people in their jobs in their future and at the same time cut our massive debt clinton did cut the federal deficit dramatically.
success on other fronts however was more elusive.
29 2 first lady hilary rodham clinton took an unusually active policy role leading the task force to create health care legislation in 1994.
the early clinton agenda it s still mostly the economy clinton knew he owed his election to the poor state of the nations economy.
clinton also knew that he would be reelected in 1996 only if the economic picture brightened.
having campaigned as a moderate democrat he surprised many when he made health care reform his first major policy initiative.
clinton however was convinced that reforming the nations chaotic health insurance system would provide a significant jolt to the economy and that providing insurance for the 35 million americans who had no insurance would help close the growing gap between rich and poor.
in spite of personal tensions in their marriage bill and hillary clinton were an especially close political team sometimes compared to franklin and eleanor roosevelt.
the president appointed his wife along with trusted associate ira magaziner to lead a task force to redesign the nations health care system.
unfortunately the clinton magaziner team made two significant errors.
first their final 1 342 page report was too long and far too complicated.
second while they consulted hundreds of experts in developing the report they failed to consult with congress.
in 1993 clinton said if i dont get health care ill wish i didnt run for president in the end he did not get it.
conservatives in the republican minority led by congressman newt gingrich from georgia attacked the plan from the day it was announced.
representatives of physicians and the insurance industry attacked the plan with tv ads and heavily financed congressional lobbying.
without strong support from a large segment of the population or the democratic majority in congress the plan was doomed.
in august 1994 the president announced that he was dropping the plan.
it had not yet reached a single vote in congress but the probable outcome had become clear.
other issues also got in the way of what clinton wanted to accomplish.
when clinton tried to fire long time staff members of the white house travel office for alleged improprieties he was blocked and accused of trying to give those jobs to friends.
when he tried to fulfill a campaign promise to end the ban on gay men and lesbians serving in the armed forces he was blocked again.
the resulting compromise of dont ask dont tell in which officers would not ask about sexual orientation and soldiers and sailors would keep their sexual orientation hidden or face discharge satisfied no one.
only weeks into the new presidency clintons administration had to handle the fallout from an unexpected confrontation in texas.
in waco texas cult members led by david koresh had blockaded themselves in their groups compound.
a gun battle with agents of the fbi and bureau of alcohol tobacco and firearms on february 28 led to a 7 week stand off.
when the fbi became convinced that children in the compound were being abused they attacked.
koresh ordered the compound burned and he and more than 80 of his followers including 21 children were killed.
it was a horrible outcome that brought significant criticism of the administration and especially of janet reno the new attorney general who had approved the raid though few knew what could have been a good outcome.
f46 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present clinton had more success on other fronts.
within 2 weeks of taking office he signed the family and medical leave act which bush had vetoed twice.
the law guaranteed up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for family medical emergencies and pregnancy.
in his campaign he had promised to develop a national service plan and congress quickly approved clinton s americorps which encouraged volunteerism and promised financial support for college costs to those who gave a year of national service.
in september 1994 the first 20 000 americorps volunteers were sworn in.
congress also authorized 2 billion for goals 2000 the clinton version of president bushs america 2000 education plan to set national educational standards in core academic subjects.
in addition congress approved a modest ban on semiautomatic assault weapons and a freedom of access to clinic entrances act that required antiabortion protesters to keep some distance from medical clinics or places of worship.
during his first 2 years the senate confirmed two of clintons supreme court nominees ruth bader ginsburg and stephen breyer.
with their confirmation the courts conservative drift seemed to stop.
in addition clinton was convinced that the huge deficit which had grown substantially under reagan and bush was creating a drag on the american economy.
he was also anxious to establish his political credentials as a moderate.
in august 1993 less than 7 months into office and with the health care bill still pending congress passed clintons first budget.
the budget infuriated conservatives because it included a tax increase and it infuriated liberals because it did little for federal programs.
the administrations goal was simple balance the federal budget and lower the federal debt.
clinton succeeded and during his term in office the total federal spending as a share of the u s gross domestic product dropped from 21 5 percent to 19 1 percent.
starting in 1998 real surpluses allowed a major reduction in the federal debt.
immediately after clintons budget passed congress he turned his attention to getting congressional approval of the north american free trade agreement nafta which had been negotiated by george bush.
few gave nafta much chance for approval.
labor unions hated the treaty because it proposed to reduce all trade barriers between the united states canada and mexico and the unions feared it would cost jobs.
ross perot had based his third party campaign on opposition to nafta and had succeeded in winning 19 percent of the vote.
nevertheless clinton believed that free trade and the development of an unfettered global economy was the key to long term prosperity.
he allied with republicans in congress and against some of his closest democratic allies to get the treaty passed and he signed it in december 1993.
although clinton saw himself as a moderate to conservative democrat conservative republicans especially those in the house of representatives did not think he was nearly conservative enough.
clinton also sought to undercut republican efforts to differentiate themselves from him which republicans found utterly frustrating.
under the leadership of a georgia congressman newt gingrich working with congressmen dick armey and tom delay of texas house republicans planned for the 1994 midterm elections.
the house of representatives had enjoyed a democratic majority and a democratic speaker for 60 of the 64 years between 1930 and 1994.
while the senate and the white house changed hands the house seemed permanently democratic.
but a new generation of representatives coming mostly from suburban districts especially in the south where there had been few republicans elected until the 1970s were determined to create a republican majority in the congress and enact their agenda.
they were very successful.
in november 1994 34 democrats were defeated in their bids for reelection a new republican majority took control and gingrich became the speaker of the house.
the era of big government is over with the new republican majority and newt gingrich as the new speaker coming to power at the end of clintons second year in office the chance for significant legislative victories for clinton virtually disappeared.
clinton would spend much of the next 6 years either trying to hold on to past democratic victories or doing what he and goals 2000 legislation that set tough new goals over the coming decades to improve the quality of american schooling.
not all americans supported the nafta trade agreement.
many feared it would cost a significant number of jobs in the united states.
chapter 29 a new world order american voices republican contract with america 1994 contests for seats in the u s house of representatives are traditionally local.
in the 1994 campaign however 337 republican candidates endorsed a common platform in a dramatic ceremony on the capitol steps.
their contract with america represented the voice of conservative americans.
as republican members of the house of representatives and as citizens seeking to join that body we propose not just to change its policies but even more important to restore the bonds of trust between the people and their elected representatives.
thereafter within the first 100 days of the 104th congress we shall bring to the house floor the following bills each to be given full and open debate each to be given a clear and fair vote and each to be immediately available this day for public inspection and scrutiny.
the fiscal responsibility act a balanced budget tax limitation amendment and a legislative line item veto to restore fiscal responsibility to an out of control congress requiring them to live under the same budget constraints as families and businesses.
the taking back our streets act an anticrime package including stronger truth in sentencing good faith exclusionary rule exemptions effective death penalty provisions and cuts in social spending from this summer s crime bill to fund prison construction and additional law enforcement to keep people secure in their neighborhoods and kids safe in their schools.
the personal responsibility act discourage illegitimacy and teen pregnancy by prohibiting welfare to minor mothers and denying increased afdc for additional children while on welfare cut spending for welfare programs and enact a tough 2 years and out provision with work requirements to promote individual responsibility.
the family reinforcement act child support enforcement tax incentives for adoption strengthening rights of parents in their children s education stronger child pornography laws and an elderly dependent care tax credit to reinforce the central role of families in american society.
the american dream restoration act a 500 per child tax credit begin repeal of the marriage tax penalty and creation of american dream savings accounts to provide middle class tax relief.
the national security restoration act no u s troops under u n command and restoration of the essential parts of our national security funding to strengthen our national defense and maintain our credibility around the world.
the senior citizens fairness act raise the social security earnings limit which currently forces seniors out of the workforce repeal the 1993 tax hikes on social security benefits and provide tax incentives for private long term care insurance to let older americans keep more of what they have earned over the years.
the job creation and wage enhancement act small business incentives capital gains cut and indexation neutral cost recovery risk assessment cost benefit analysis strengthening the regulatory flexibility act and unfunded mandate reform to create jobs and raise worker wages.
the common sense legal reform act loser pays laws reasonable limits on punitive damages and reform of product liability laws to stem the endless tide of litigation.
the citizen legislature act a first ever vote on term limits to replace career politicians with citizen legislators.
source downloaded from august 2 2011.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what fundamental principles and assumptions link the 10 initiatives included in the contract.
historical interpretation what does the contract tell you about the political landscape of the 1990s.
to which groups was the contract meant to appeal.
which groups were most likely to find it objectionable.
his closest political advisor dick morris called triangulating finding a third point between increasingly conservative republicans and increasingly liberal democrats to stake out their own position one that sometimes undercut both.
the biggest battle between the clinton administration and the gingrich republicans came in late 1995 only months into the tenure of the new congress.
after several months of budget battles congress passed a budget that included cuts in social programs.
clinton vetoed the budget with the result that the government was briefly without a budget forcing a partial government shut down for 6 days in 848 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present november.
after temporary legislation reopened government offices later that month the republican house passed a budget with even further cuts reducing funds for food stamps medicare and other domestic program.
republican leaders proudly announced this is a fundamental change in the direction of government clinton again vetoed the budget and on december 16 the government shut down for 21 days.
federal employees went without their paychecks national parks and nonessential government offices closed.
only in january was a compromise reached that restored most of the cuts.
most political observers thought clinton had won the battle painting gingrich as an extremist and clinton as a cautious moderate.
in the context of this tense budget debate clinton went to congress in january 1996 to give his annual state of the union message.
he announced the era of big government is over many democrats wondered who had really won the budget showdown.
clinton had already promised that one of his major policy goals for 1996 was to put an end to welfare as we know it after vetoing more conservative legislation in august 1996 clinton signed the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act that replaced the federal governments long standing aid to families with dependent children afdc program with temporary assistance that prevented most people except the disabled from receiving more than 2 years of assistance with a 5 year lifetime maximum.
new york senator daniel moynihan called the result which dropped 2 million black and latino students from eligibility the most brutal act of social policy since reconstruction fortunately the economy was experiencing a boom time when the law was passed the minimum wage was raised and there were jobs to be found at least in the short run.
the long time cost to some of the nations poorest people was a different matter.
clinton took other positions that disappointed liberals and heartened conservatives.
he signed the defense of marriage act which said no state was required to recognize a same sex marriage from another state.
since no state yet allowed same sex marriage when the law passed it was a symbolic move but for gay and lesbian voters who had supported clinton it was a frustrating limitation that would have a greater impact in future years.
in spite of the republican gains in the 1994 elections the 1996 presidential election was seldom in doubt.
the republicans nominated conservative senator robert dole a decorated world war ii hero and a long time washington insider who preferred compromise to gingrich style conflict.
dole had a good sense of humor but was not a strong campaigner.
clinton adopted many republican issues and campaigned energetically.
clintons fundraising ability meant that the two parties were closely matched in available funds where previously republicans had traditionally outspent democrats by a two to one margin.
perot again ran as an outsider.
clinton won 49 percent of the vote to doles 40 percent.
perots vote dropped to less than 9 percent.
clinton coasted to a second term but with republican majorities in both houses of congress.
in the post cold war era other trends were reshaping the american political scene.
by the 1990s the majority of americans lived in suburbs up from only a quarter of the population in the 1950s.
the combination of suburbanization and the voting rights act typically led to the nations urban centers electing liberal democrats often african americans or latinos who reflected their districts majority and the surrounding suburbs electing white conservatives who reflected these districts.
especially in the south and west republican victories often came at the cost of moderates of either party rather than liberal democrats with the result that as the republican party got more conservative the democratic party got more liberal.
since 1900 if not earlier the republican party represented the elite whether major corporate executives wall street investors or small town business leaders.
the democrats were the party of the working class especially union members.
the new deal coalition which had kept congress solidly democratic for so long included union members urban immigrants especially the irish and the white south.
during the 29 1 29 2 293 defense of marriage act legislation that required the federal government to ignore provisions of any state act recognizing same sex marriages was declared unconstitutional by the u s supreme court in 2013.
chapter 29 a new world order 849 l ml m2 oslo accords a 1993 agreement between israel and the palestine liberation organization plo in which israel agreed that the plo could govern the west bank and gaza strip in exchange for plo recognition of israel s right to exist.
new deal most african american voters who had traditionally been republicans after the civil war shifted to the democratic party.
however by the time clinton came to office much had changed.
many white southerners had turned against the civil rights movement which they associated with the democrats and had become republicans.
many white workers in the north especially those in ethnic enclaves were making the same transition for the same reason.
in addition union membership had fallen to below 10 percent of nongovernment workers reducing the union vote.
at the same time more and more middle and upper middle class professionals including teachers journalists lawyers and many in high tech industries supported the more liberal policies of the democrats.
in contrast to either 1930 or 1960 when if one knew a persons income one could make a good guess as to their political party preference no such guess was possible in 1990.
as the political divisions between the two parties grew sharper the political discourse of the country grew more caustic.
angry talk radio shows drew huge audiences.
rush limbaugh who called women activists feminazis and environmentalists environmental wackos drew an audience of 20 million.
the national rifle association stridently attacked any politician of either party who voted for any gun control.
common cause sought to speak for a liberal perspective.
few spoke for moderation or even good manners.
respectful differences did not sell radio advertising.
likewise respecting differences did not win political debates in washington in the 1990s.
small wars and dangerous terrorists clinton s foreign policy clinton once said foreign policy is not what i came here to do nevertheless as president he could not ignore the rest of the world.
his proudest foreign policy accomplishment came early with the passage of nafta but it was far from his last foreign engagement.
early in his first term in september 1993 israeli prime minister yitzhak rabin and palestine liberation organization plo leader yasser arafat shook hands in the white house after signing the oslo accords which norway had helped to broker.
the oslo agreement led to a suspension of the intifada the palestinian uprising that had been going on since 1987.
the plo recognized israels right to exist and renounced terrorism while israel agreed that the plo would assume governing authority in parts of the west bank and gaza strip.
it was an optimistic moment for peace in the middle east that ended all too soon when an outraged israeli assassinated rabin.
in 1993 events in somalia and haiti demanded attention.
bush had initially sent troops to somalia to help secure peace in that war torn region of africa and clinton authorized 440 elite troops.
when american troops sought to capture a warlord who had ordered the killing of pakistani un troops two u s black hawk helicopters were shot down in mogadishu and 18 americans were killed the body of one was dragged through the streets of the city.
clinton immediately withdrew all americans.
in haiti when demonstrators blocked the landing of u s peacekeepers in haiti clinton did not try to persist in spite of his desire to support the democratically elected president jean bertrand aristide.
in light of experiences in somalia and haiti clinton took an even more cautious stand in rwanda when civil war broke out in april 1994.
for 100 days hutus butchered perhaps 800 000 tutsi and moderate hutus who had tried to stop the genocide.
the united states and the world did virtually nothing although perhaps 70 percent of the tutsi population was killed.
after he left office clinton said that his failure to act in rwanda was his greatest regret but there was little support for intervention in 1994.
at the same time the former yugoslavia was continuing to come apart.
slobodan milosevic the nationalist leader of serbia wanted to create a new pure serbian nation.
he led a slaughter in which perhaps 200 000 bosnian muslims were killed by bosnian and serbian nationalists.
some 6 000 un peacekeepers were held as virtual prisoners while the slaughter went on see map 29 2.
b85 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present map 29 2 yugoslavia comes apart.
in 1991 92 the nation of yugoslavia which had been created in the aftermath of world war i came apart as ethnic rivalries burst into warfare.
29 1 292 293 while the united states and most of europe did nothing the battle continued.
finally in the summer of 1995 clinton ordered the bombing of serbian positions.
when in july 1995 serbia forced 40 000 muslim refugees out of a un safe area around srebrenica and then murdered some 7 000 muslim men and boys clinton determined that further action was needed.
in august after further serb attacks the united states joined with other nato forces in massive air strikes on bosnian serb positions.
the bombing and nato support for croatian and bosnian muslim ground forces led milosevic to agree to join negotiations at the wright patterson air force base in dayton ohio.
the dayton peace accords led to a significant reduction of the conflict the placement of 60 000 nato soldiers in bosnia including 20 000 americans and the eventual war crimes trial of milosevic.
in june 1999 the american commander in europe general wesley clark convinced clinton that the united states needed to intervene again to stop serbian aggression in the province of kosovo where muslims made up 90 percent of the population.
a bombing raid on the serbian capital of belgrade resulted in a bomb falling on the chinese embassy which killed several staff members and deeply hurt u s chinese relations.
iraq also remained an issue even though the war with iraq over kuwait was over before clinton came to office.
after the cia concluded that saddam hussein had tried to arrange the assassination of former president bush clinton ordered a missile strike on baghdad that destroyed the countrys intelligence headquarters.
the government also continued to monitor potential terrorist activity emanating from iran or north korea both of which were seeking to develop nuclear weapons.
in his efforts at foreign relations clinton also tried to broker peace agreements.
in 1995 he sought to recognize the government of vietnam and supported a mission by three veterans of the vietnam war then serving in the u s senate democrats john kerry of massachusetts robert kerrey of nebraska and republican john mccain dayton peace accords a november 1995 agreement that began the process to bring peace to the former yugoslavia.
chapter 29 a new world order 851 29 1 29 2 good friday accords a 1998 peace agreement to bring a peaceful settlement to the long standing battles between catholic and protestant factions over the government of northern ireland.
0 5 of arizona all of whom testified that there were no remaining prisoners of war in vietnam and urged reconciliation.
in addition he worked for peace in northern ireland and in 1994 appointed former u s senator george mitchell as special envoy.
mitchell helped broker the good friday accords of 1998 a promising breakthrough in war torn ireland.
terrorism at home and abroad terrorism both domestic and foreign posed unique challenges because terrorists were difficult to find to predict and to deal with.
while international terrorist acts deeply frightened the united states a new form of domestic terrorism though perhaps less organized stunned the nation during clintons term in office.
the actions of the fbi in the waco texas standoff with david koresh had infuriated timothy mcveigh and terry nichols who believed that the fbi attack needed to be avenged.
they managed to build a powerful truck bomb and on april 19 1995 mcveigh drove the bomb to the parking lot of the alfred p murrah federal building in oklahoma city and detonated it.
the resulting blast killed 168 people including a number of children in a day care center.
the bombing was the largest terrorist attack in u s history up to that time.
mcveigh and nichols were eventually captured and mcveigh was executed but government officials and the public knew that they were not the only americans so disaffected that they might turn to violence.
four years later two deeply disaffected teenagers eric harris and dylan klebold whose journals reflected their fascination with the oklahoma city bombing went on a rampage at their high school in littleton colorado a day after the anniversary of the earlier bombing.
their deadly rampage was the first of what would be many similar school shootings often in suburban or rural areas and often initiated by disturbed and angry males who sought revenge against teachers and more popular students and the fleeting fame that came with such actions.
in february 1993 only a month after clinton took office muslim terrorists bombed the world trade center in new york city killing six.
over 1 000 people were injured in the blast and 5 000 were evacuated from the buildings.
the bombing the october 2000 bombing of the american destroyer uss cole in yemen was one of several terrorist attacks against the united states during clinton s years in office.
852 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present thinking historically the causes of the columbine shootings on april 20 1999 two high school students went on a shooting rampage at columbine high school in littleton colorado killing 12 students and a teacher before committing suicide.
the two had planned the day carefully and came to school well armed with rifles and firebombs.
ever since that tragic day and through the other school shootings that have followed in subsequent years people have tried to make sense of what happened and why.
one journalist neal gabler writing for the los angeles times immediately after the event asked readers to locate the tragedy in cultural and historical context of all the bizarre sidelights to the horrifying massacre at columbine high school in littleton colo tuesday the most bizarre may have been the story of the students trapped inside the school who called local tv stations on their cell phones and provided brief commentaries on the action.
according to one report they signed off only because they feared the intruders might be watching television themselves and thus discover the whereabouts of the cell phone users.
all of which suggests that even for the perpetrators and their victims television was the great mediator.
by now this is hardly surprising.
like so many real life dramas in america the littleton tragedy became a media event even before the smoke had cleared and anyone knew what was really happening.
copters buzzed overhead reporters swarmed the scene and commentators were soon delivering sententious analyses of what it all meant giving us a sense of deja vu.
but tragedies like this are media events not only because the media immediately latch onto them.
often they are media events in two far more important senses first because the perpetrators usually seem to have modeled their behavior after certain figures in the popular culture and second because the rampages seem ultimately to have been staged for the media on the assumption that if you kill it they will come.
or put another way what we witnessed at littleton was not just inchoate rage.
it was a premeditated performance in which the two gunmen roamed the school dispatching victims whooping with delight after each murder.
without pop culture the slaughter would have been unimaginable.
begin with the killers.
in the inevitable postmortems that follow these horrors it was reported that the outcasts dylan klebold and eric harris were part of a high school clique whose members wore long black trench coats and which dubbed itself the trench coat mafia a cinematic image if ever there was one.
they were also devotees of the computer games doom and quake in which players prowl virtual hallways shooting virtual victims with virtual guns.
they worshipped adolf hitler loved goth music and had a special fondness for marilyn manson the mordant rockstar whose satanic persona is designed to scandalize parents of his fans.
in short harris and klebold were creatures of pop culture.
given how much these two seemed to have been shaped by movies music and computer games it is tempting to blame the media once again for providing guidance to young would be sociopaths what helped give these fantasies body is yet another new instrument of the entertainment age the internet.
movies provided a personal reverie for those disaffected teenagers of the past with the internet to connect them teenagers are no longer silent sufferers when you live within a virtual reality you have to expect some addled individuals won t accept the difference between the movie or video screen and the screen of life.
source neal gabler becoming your fantasy in virtual munch beer hall los angeles times april 25 1999 reprinted in stuart a kallen editor the 1990s san diego ca greenhaven press 2000 pp.
thinking critically 1.
comparison what do you think about gabler s description of teenagers in the age of cell phones the internet and other new media in comparison to teenagers of other times.
does it seem accurate.
contextualization in the context of the 1990s what other factors should gabler include in seeking to understand the columbine shootings.
29 3 llll had been fueled by anger at the united states over its support for israel and over the fact that u s troops had been stationed in saudi arabia near muslim holy places.
some of the terrorists involved had gotten training from a relatively new terrorist group known as al qaeda.
the leader of al qaeda was a rich saudi osama bin laden who had been expelled from his home country for his terrorist leanings and then expelled from africa where he had been living.
he landed in afghanistan and supported the countrys taliban government.
in february 1998 when bin laden called for a holy war against the chapter 29 a new world order 853 west the cia estimated that he had some 15 000 followers though little was known about the hard to find organization.
in august 1998 al qaeda operatives managed to bomb the u s embassies in both kenya and tanzania.
most of the 223 killed and 4 500 wounded were african civilians working in or around the embassies though 12 americans were also killed.
in october 2000 another al qaeda bomb ripped a hole in the hull of the navys uss cole while it was anchored in a port in yemen.
seventeen sailors were killed.
in all some 90 americans were killed by foreign terrorists mostly bin ladens al qaeda during the clinton years.
far worse was to come in 2001 but the warning signs were there.
scandal and impeachment on january 21 1998 the washington post carried a story that surprised but probably did not shock the nation.
the president of the united states had been involved in an affair with a young white house intern and had lied about it to his wife to his administration to the press and under oath.
it made for a sensational news story and in the months that followed the young intern monica lewinsky and the sexual escapades of bill clinton remained front page news.
kenneth starr a zealous lawyer and former republican solicitor general was appointed as an independent prosecutor in 1994 to look into accusations that the president and hillary clintons land dealings in a development at the whitewater river in arkansas had been improper.
he spent the next 4 years and a significant amount of taxpayer money investigating but never discovered evidence of a crime.
however before being appointed starr was an advisor to the legal team assembled for a sexual harassment suit brought against bill clinton by paula corbin jones an arkansas state employee who claimed that while clinton was governor he had ordered a state trooper to bring her to his hotel room and sought sexual favors.
because of the troopers role the affair came to be known a troopergate in the media.
by late 1997 both the paula jones lawsuit and the whitewater investigation were crawling through the legal process with no end in sight and only limited political damage to the president.
then the situation changed rapidly.
a disgruntled former white house staffer linda tripp befriended monica lewinsky and secretly recorded their conversations as lewinsky shared intimate details of her relationship with the president.
as lewinsky described it she began her affair with clinton during the government shutdown of november 1995.
tripp then shared the tapes with legal counsel for paula jones who used the evidence to bolster her case that clinton regularly engaged in extramarital affairs.
she also shared the tapes with starr.
for starr the tapes proved that the president had lied under oath and perhaps also urged lewinsky to lie both federal crimes that could lead to impeachment.
clinton denied the whole story.
at a press conference a few days after the washington post story broke he said i want to say one thing to the american people.
i want you to listen to me.
im going to say this again.
i did not have sexual relations with that woman ms lewinsky.
i never told anybody to lie not a single time never.
these allegations are false.
and i need to go back to work for the american people hillary clinton denounced starr as being part of a vast right wing conspiracy and said accurately that he has literally spent four years looking at every telephone call weve made every check weve ever written scratching for dirt in the summer of 1998 lewinsky told a federal grand jury about her affair with the president and produced a semen stained dress that she had saved.
backed into a corner on august 17 clinton told a federal grand jury that he had engaged in an inappropriate relationship with lewinsky.
that evening he gave a tv speech in which he said i did have a relationship with ms lewinsky that was not appropriate it constituted a critical lapse in judgment and a personal failure and he admitted he had misled people including even my wife but he also insisted that the starr investigation had gone on too long cost too much and hurt too many innocent people part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present 854 many even among clinton s closest supporters were furious if not at the affair then at the lying.
at a time when the country needed to deal with its economy and the terrorist attacks in kenya and tanzania the president was distracted and untrustworthy.
starr and the republican majority in congress were eager to punish the president.
starr sent his report to the house of representatives.
in december the house with its republican majority voted to impeach president clinton on the grounds that he had committed perjury in his original testimony to a federal grand jury and had sought to obstruct justice in the paula jones case.
it was only the second time in u s history that a president had been impeached.
nixon resigned before an impeachment vote.
according to the constitution removing the president is a two part process.
the house must vote on impeachment essentially the same as a grand jury indict menf then the house acts a prosecutor while the senate acts as the jury with the chief justice of the supreme court presiding.
in clintons case the senate was convinced that although his behavior was inappropriate it hardly met the level of high crimes and misdemeanors specified in the constitution.
on february 12 1999 the senate rejected the charges against clinton by a vote of 55 to 45 for the perjury charge and 50 to 50 for the obstruction of justice charge a very safe margin since a two thirds vote was required to convict.
five to 10 republicans joined all of the democrats in voting not guilty on the two charges.
clinton could focus again on being president.
the starr investigation cost 60 million.
speaker gingrich had been among the presidents harshest critics but the impeachment did not turn out well for gingrich.
just before the impeachment vote republicans lost five seats in the november midterm congressional elections.
it was the first time since 1934 that the party holding the white house showed gains in midterm elections.
but the speaker who had been an avid prosecutor of the president was further hurt by the revelation that he too had been having an extramarital affair with a young staff aide.
he resigned as speaker and announced that he would leave the house.
the newly elected republican speaker robert livingston of louisiana turned out to also be having an affair and he too resigned.
while many in the media were fascinated by the whole case the american public was surprisingly indifferent.
even if many did not approve of an extramarital affair it did not seem as big an issue as it might once have been.
clinton was hardly the first president to stray from his marriage vows.
perhaps more important the nation was prosperous and at peace in 1999.
clinton seemed to be doing his job whatever his personal life.
as the case wound down starrs approval rating was 19 percent.
clintons seldom dropped below 55 percent in his second term.
the prosperous 1990s although an economic downturn brought clinton to office an economic upsurge kept him there.
after clintons second year in office the u s economy started to grow and it did not stop growing for the next 6 years.
nearly all americans were better off at the end of clintons term than they had been at the beginning.
the signs of the new prosperity were everywhere.
of the nations 107 million households 106 million had a color tv by 2000 96 million had a vcr or dvd player 92 million a microwave and 81 million had air conditioning.
houses were larger than ever before.
americans were eating better as fresh local and seasonal foods became more widely available and more popular.
the prosperity of the 1990s was the result of many factors.
clintons budget which brought down the federal deficit and produced the first federal budget surpluses in decades made more money available for investment and spending and kept interest rates low all factors in the prosperity.
experts argued about whether clinton free trade policies like nafta were helping or hurting the economy but certainly more goods were in circulation as a result.
changes in agriculture made farms and farmers more productive so fewer people working less land could produce more food and more variety of foods than ever before enough to feed the 29 1 29 2 293 chapter 29 a new world order 855 united states and much of the rest of the world.
the boom in technology was producing many new products and cutting the costs of items such as tvs and computers that were already on the market.
in addition easily available personal credit at low interest rates fed the consumer spending and consumer confidence even though it allowed people to pile up worrisome levels of debt.
in his last state of the union message in january 2000 clinton was able to say never before has our nation enjoyed at once so much prosperity and social progress with so little internal crisis and so few external threats no wonder the president remained popular and the people of the united states relatively happy.
bush v gore the election and the court case of 2000 the constitution prevented clinton from running for a third term in 2000.
even so he still had a remarkably high approval rating despite the affair with monica lewinsky that had tarnished his reputation.
the logical candidate for the democratic nomination was vice president al gore.
during the 8 years that gore served as vice president he established a solid reputation with special expertise in government operations the use of the internet and the environment.
gores 1992 book earth in the balance described humankinds assault on the earth although gore had worked with clinton for 8 years he and the president were never especially close and gore had been deeply offended by the monica lewinsky affair.
he selected connecticut senator joseph lieberman as his running mate the first jew to be on a major partys national ticket.
lieberman had also been offended by the presidents behavior and said so on the senate floor.
the two leading candidates for the republican nomination were george w bush the governor of texas and the son of the former president and arizona senator john mccain.
mccain was considered more liberal compared with bush who called himself a compassionate conservative by march bush had wrapped up the nomination.
bush asked former secretary of defense dick cheney to handle the vice presidential selection and in the end cheney himself became the nominee.
gore made a fateful decision to distance himself from clinton and did not call on the president to do much campaigning.
he campaigned in favor of tough gun control legislation and for womens right to choose on abortion decisions and he promised to keep the social security trust fund in a lock box separate from the rest of the federal budget.
many even among his supporters found him to be stiff and wooden hardly the relaxed and at ease campaigner that bill clinton had been.
bush promised a major tax cut giving the current budget surplus back to the people.
he favored allowing people to invest some of their social security contributions in their own stock market accounts.
he promised to reform public education.
he told the country that he was a uniter not a divider and would work with democrats and end the divisive partisanship in washington.
in a not so subtle reference to the lewinsky affair he promised to restore honor and dignity to the presidency.
he talked openly about how he had overcome his own alcoholism and about his born again christian faith.
he was a surprisingly strong campaigner in spite of his tendency to mangle the english language with statements like families is where our nation finds hope where wings take dreams two other candidates also entered the race ralph nader running on the green party ticket and critiquing the power that multinational corporations had over both republicans and democrats and patrick buchanan running a conservative and antiimmigrant campaign on ross perots reform party ticket.
although nader and buchanan might take crucial votes away from either candidate no one gave them a chance of winning.
in addition several other candidates representing fringe parties entered the contest however they posed little threat even to siphon away votes from the major contenders.
as the polls closed on november 7 2000 results for several states were still up in the air but later that night the deciding vote seemed to come down to florida.
gore had clearly won a small majority in the overall vote a final count of 50 992 335 for part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present 856 gore versus 50 455 156 for bush see map 29 3.
however american presidential contests are decided by electoral votes and at this point in the contest whoever won floridas electoral vote would win the presidency.
at one point the major tv networks using exit polls announced that gore had carried florida.
later in the evening they backed off.
at around 2 00 a m they announced that bush had won.
gore called bush to congratulate him and was about to make a public concession speech.
then as new data came in he called bush a second time to say that any announcement was premature.
by midmorning on wednesday november 8 everyone agreed that the election was too close to call.
it would stay that way for the next 36 days.
both campaigns assembled teams of attorneys to challenge votes and demand a florida recount.
problems with floridas election procedures became apparent.
some african american voters had been intimidated or turned away from the polls.
in other places where votes were counted by punch cards fed into voting machines cards with hanging chads that is cards that were not punched all the way through were not counted and in these places the gore team demanded a hand count.
when gore asked 29 1 29 2 293 electoral vote popular vote george w bush 271 50 456 169 republican 50 5 48 0 s0 996 h6 democrat map 29 3 the election of 2000.
the presidential election of 2000 reflected how deeply divided the united states had become the northeast and west leaned democratic and the whole of the nation s midsection plus the south leaned republican.
for a recount in four counties where the errors seemed especially glaring the bush lawyers challenged him in court.
after the florida supreme court sided with gore the bush team took the ase to the u s supreme court.
on december 12 the supreme court ruled in a 5 to 4 decision that a recount in only four counties violated the equal protection of the law and that given the time that had elapsed all recounts in florida must cease.
the next day gore conceded the election though he said he disagreed with the courts decision with every fiber of my being all five of the justices who voted to end the recount had been appointed by reagan and herbert walker bush often referred to as bush sr to distinguish him from george w bush.
the other four justices were scathing in their dissent.
ihe courts senior justice john paul stevens who had been appointed by gerald ford said although we may never know with complete certainty the identity of the winner of this years presidential election the identity of the loser is perfectly clear.
it is the nations confidence in the judge as an impartial guardian of the rule of law 29 2 quick review were clinton s high approval ratings justified based on his domestic and foreign policy accomplishments.
why or why not.
technology dominates an era 29 3 analyze the changes in technology and their impact on u s culture.
while americans battled over elections and a host of social issues a small group of americans were transforming the world in a very different way.
in the 1990s computer use and technological innovation from connections to the internet to the use of cell phones became widespread in the united states.
the birth of new technologies during world war ii the military sought ways to speed the mathematical calculations to send a shell in exactly the right direction to hit an enemy target.
these first computers were exactly what the name implied machines that computed distance velocity and air pressure to get a shot where it was intended to go.
after the war the u s armys 1946 eniac computer known as the giant brain performed ballistic calculations in chapter 29 a new world order 857 a the eniac computer created in 1946 and huge by later standards allowed the army more computational possibilities than ever before imagined.
30 minutes that had taken 12 hours for humans to perform.
with its 17 468 vacuum tubes it was also the largest electronic apparatus on the planet.
throughout the 1950s and 1960s similar large mainframe computers became common throughout american military bases universities and industry.
a whole series of postwar inventions made possible the move from large mainframe computers to personal computers.
in 1947 the bell labs invented transistors that could replace bulky and unreliable vacuum tubes.
in 1958 jack kilby at texas instruments found a way to construct a transistor and the circuitry needed to launch the pocket calculator.
in 1968 robert noyce and gordon moore founded intel to market a microprocessor that was key to personal computers.
the computer giants of the day burroughs univac ncr corporation control data corporation and honeywell dismissed intel.
within a decade intel would outpace all of them.
in january 1975 the first personal computer the mits altair 8800 went on the market.
the mits company promised investors it would sell at least two hundred altair computers.
it quickly sold several thousand.
the altair had its problems.
mits shipped the computer as a kit and the buyer needed to assemble it.
one early purchaser steve dompier of berkeley california reported enthusiastically that his altair had arrived in the mail at 10 a m and 30 hours later it was up and running with only one bug in the memory not everyone however had 30 hours to dedicate to making the new computer work.
those who did manage to successfully assemble their computers quickly realized the altairs second problem it didnt actually do much on its own.
with no keyboard no screen and no disk drive the altair consisted of a case a series of switches and lights.
it could do some things solve mathematical problems as well as keep and sort lists.
dompier even found a way to link it to a radio and turn data into music.
this early computer was a machine for dedicated enthusiasts not the general public but dedicated enthusiasts liked it.
one especially enthusiastic group in the san francisco bay area called themselves the homebrew club.
the homebrew club self described geeks loved the new altair.
most were hobbyists who just wanted to have fun with the machines.
but they also had a political agenda.
they were rebels against the large government universities and corporations that dominated society and used technology especially the giant mainframe computers to do so.
homebrew wanted something different a modern world in which the individual with a personal computer was more powerful than the corporation or the military or the university with its giant computers.
ted nelson another bay area geek wrote in his 1974 self published computer lib dream machines i would 858 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present the apple ii designed by steve jobs and steve wozniak had expanded computing capabalities for both personal and business use.
like to alert the reader in no uncertain terms that the time has come to be openly attentive and critical in observing and dealing with computer systems and to transform criticism into action the public does not have to take whats being dished out a decade earlier students had demonstrated in berkeley with signs that said mocking the instructions on cards then used in mainframe computers human being do not bend spindle or mutilate according to nelson it was time to liberate the computer and put its power into everyones hands.
steve wozniak and steve jobs were part of homebrew.
they decided that they should market their own kit that could outperform the altair.
they sold their first apple i computer in 1976.
however to accomplish all they wanted to make the computer truly a popular device that everyone could use they needed something simpler and easier than the altair or the apple i.
jobs studied the styling of popular european toasters and mixers in the kitchen department at macys in san francisco and designed the plastic case for what became the apple ii.
the two also designed new uses for the apple.
the apple ii could be connected to a tv or a stand alone screen and used to play computer games.
it could be used for spreadsheets and word processing.
small businesses could do their own financial analysis.
jobs and wozniak also courted investors including two silicon valley engineers mike markkula and michael scott who formed the core of the new apple company that launched the apple ii computer in 1977.
apple was a huge success.
apple computers revenue went from 800 000 in 1977 to 48 000 000 in 1979.
that unbelievable start was only the beginning.
ibm the largest of the computer companies realized the money to be made in personal computers and was determined that big blue as ibm was known not be left behind.
in the 1970s ibms money and power came from its manufacture of office machines the name international business machines actually meant something including popular typewriters and from leasing the large mainframe computers used by corporations and government agencies.
in the summer of 1980 ibm created a special task force independent of all the normal routines of the company to create a personal computer pc complete with operating system that could compete head to head with apple and do so quickly.
the task force did its work in 12 months and the first ibm pc went on the market in august 1981.
it was a huge hit.
ibm made 43 million from its pc division in the first year and the profits were soon in the billions.
the core of the ibm pc was intels microprocessor a power supply from zenith and printers from epson.
even though ibm was one of the largest software companies in the world the team also decided to find a different source for the software for the pc.
they turned to a seattle based upstart known as micro soft later simply microsoft led by computer enthusiasts bill gates and paul allen.
gates and allen had written a class scheduling program for their own high school while students there.
in 1975 gates like the people at homebrew became fasci nated with the altair.
he dropped out of harvard and moved to albuquerque new mexico where the altair was manufactured.
he and allen began writing software for the altair and founded their company micro soft in april 1975.
while homebrew wanted to share all information freely making personal computers part of a peoples revolution gates saw the potential for profit.
he wrote a 1976 open letter condemning information sharing as theft software gates insisted should be as closely held as any computer hardware.
when the ibm team approached him gates assured them he could produce what they needed.
he bought another operating system the quick and dirty operating system qdos adapted it to the needs of the ibm pc and renamed it the ms dos or microsoft disk operating system.
rather than sell the chapter 29 a new world order 859 system to ibm gates licensed the ms dos system and received royalties on every ibm pc sold.
the foundation was laid by 1980 to make bill gates the richest person on the planet within a decade.
by 1979 even before ibm set its team to work steve jobs was looking for ways to improve the apple ii.
he visited the research offices of the xerox corporation xerox parc which was something of a mecca to computer developers.
the staff was intrigued but wary of the upstart jobs.
at xerox jobs saw an engineer larry tesler working with a small box that he used to move a cursor around on a computer screen.
tesler called it a mouse and with it he could click on icons open and close windows on the screen and give the machine commands.
the mouse was slow and bulky.
the engineers at xerox were not quite sure what to do with it.
soon xerox withdrew from the personal computer business though it made a fortune selling printers that linked to pcs made by others.
but jobs felt like he had seen the future.
he set a team to work designing a very different and more user friendly mouse and the macintosh computer that went on sale in 1981 transformed the industry with its easy to operate system guided by a handheld mouse that replaced the need to key in commands.
the y2k scare of january 1 2000 as the nation prepared for the calendar change from 1999 to january 1 2000 people were strangely preoccupied with their computers.
reporting on the abc news forrest sawyer said surf through the internet these days and you keep coming across a strange word teotwawki.
it stands for the end of the world as we know it and it refers to the effect of a tiny seemingly innocuous computer glitch a tiny glitch a lot of people say could literally blow the lights out on civilization.
the fear of what was sometimes called the y2k problem or the millennium bug was very real and illustrated how completely the united states had become dependent on computers by 2000.
the y2k problem was relatively simple.
beginning in the 1970s computer programmers began using a two digit code for the date.
rather than take up additional memory for 1978 they shortened the space for the year to two digits.
everyone and every machine knew that 78 meant 1978.
but as 2000 got closer some computer researchers began to get very nervous.
if on new years day 2000 the computers suddenly thought it was 1900 who knew what might happen in term of systems malfunctioning or shutting down.
the threat was very real.
the u s department of defense worried about crucial information systems shutting down.
banks worried that all information on their accounts could be lost.
electric companies worried that the electric grid now completely computer controlled and monitored could shut down.
hospitals worried that everything from heart monitors and breathing machines to the electricity and air conditioning in the operating rooms could stop.
internet based businesses might not be able to operate.
ultimately very little went wrong.
monitoring equipment in nuclear power plants in japan failed but was repaired within a few hours.
bus ticket validation machines in australia failed.
in several countries some cell phones stopped taking messages.
in the united states slot machines in delaware stopped and the naval observatory clock briefly said that it was january 1 19100.
the problems however hardly resulted in the end of the world.
some insisted that the whole y2k crisis had been a distraction.
others knew how much work it had taken to avoid a crisis.
paul saffo director of the institute for the future in menlo park california said this was not hype.
this was not software consultants trying to create a full employment act for themselves.
this really could have screwed up our lives and you know a whole bunch of little geeks saved us david eddy a computer programmer in boston who first coined the term y2k crisis said ihe reason nothing bad happened was that so many people put so much work into it part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present 860 american voices peter de jager and richard bergeon countdown y2k business survival planning for the year 2000 1999 s more people realized the seriousness of what could happen on january 7 2000 if the nation s increasingly networked computers all responded as if the date were january 7 1900 many people began to worry.
many publications raised the alarm and in the end the problem was addressed though what some in retrospect saw as a hype others believed was a true crisis averted by the hard work of many experts.
in any case books like this one were very popular in the late 7 990s and spoke to the increasing public dependence on computers in many aspects of people s lives something that had not been true even a few years earlier.
introduction houston we have a problem it s new year s day 2000 and you re headed to your best friend s house to watch football.
you re in a hurry because you don t want to miss kickoff and you have to stop at the nearest cash machine first because you promised to bring the beer.
but instead of cash the atm commandeers your card rudely informing you that it has expired.
furious but knowing you won t get much help on a holiday you head to the nearest 7 11 intending to pay for your refreshments with a credit card.
pulling up to the store you think a lot of people have the same idea because there s a long line at the checkout counter.
but the problem is not a run on beer instead you find out the cash register is not working.
the word as it reaches you at the end of the line is that the cash register is computer based and requires a valid date to start up.
and for some reason it won t.
some reason is the year 2000 problem y2k for short.
the preceding hypothetical but probable scenario is just the tip of the iceberg and if collective public denial continues it is an iceberg that will sink titanic computer systems worldwide.
like the unheeded warnings of disaster on the oceanliner titanic the alert to the year 2000 problem has been sounded on television in newspapers magazines and newsletters and via the internet.
often however it has been defined simply as the inability of computers to calculate properly with 00 two zeros signifying the new century.
further media coverage frequently couches the issue in computer jargon making it seem irrelevant to anyone other than programmers and information systems managers.
the truth is the year 2000 problem will affect each of us personally and professionally.
source peter de jager and richard bergeon countdown y2k business survival planning for the year 2000 boston john wiley sons 1999.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how do de jager and bergeon describe the y2k problem.
historical interpretation in retrospect we know that the problems described in the article did not happen.
reading the chapter in 1999 how might different readers have responded.
what might have led different people to respond differently.
a lot of money was spent on y2k preparation perhaps 100 billion in the united states and 300 billion worldwide.
old computers and operating systems were replaced.
whatever the other results the preparation for y2k illustrated that beyond a doubt by 1999 the united states and the world had become deeply dependent on computers the internet the world wide web and related technology most of which had not even existed 29 or 30 years earlier.
a connected nation by the 1990s the personal computers that were being produced by apple and ibm as well as the systems such as those made by microsoft that made them useful were providing people with the ability to read write calculate and do much more at speeds never before thought possible.
nevertheless for the most part these amazing machines each still stood alone.
as early as the 1940s dreamers like vannevar bush founder of the national science foundation were imagining a day when through connected systems the patent attorney has on call the millions of issued patents the physician puzzled by a patients reactions runs rapidly through analogous case histories but bushs dream remained just a dream for almost 50 years.
only in the 1990s did it become possible for most people to make meaningful connections between individual chapter 29 a new world order 861 internet the system of interconnected computers and servers that allows the exchange of e mail posting of websites and other means of instant communication.
world wide web since 1991 a protocol for information use on the internet.
862 part ix certainty uncertainty and new computers to share information seek information and combine information in heretofore unimaginable ways.
those connections were made possible by the development of the internet a massive network of smaller networks joined together.
actually many separate developments created the internet.
president kennedy and his secretary of defense robert mcnamara were preoccupied with the question of how the president could maintain communication with the nations far flung military installations if a nuclear war actually happened.
without communication the threat of massive retaliation in the case of a nuclear attack was a fiction.
in the 1960s however government planners knew that a nuclear blast would cripple existing radio communications and knock out the nations highly centralized telephone network.
to solve the problem the pentagon turned to researchers at the rand corporation and a rand employee paul baran led the team that would solve the problem.
a decade later on august 27 1976 in the parking lot of zotts beer garden near stanford university a team of stanford researchers sent a message from a computer in a van to another computer they had placed inside the bar.
the message was received and the first data transmission had taken place over a network.
further developments led to a much more sophisticated system.
a next crucial step in connecting computers was the development of the world wide web which was achieved by tim berners lee.
berners lee was an english physicist working at the international physics lab in switzerland known as cern where he noted that the various scientists from different countries could not share information from computer to computer.
he wanted to solve that problem.
his goal was to find a way to connect computers and share information lots of information.
in 1990 berners lee found a way to create a common system so the information within files could easily be shared from computer to computer.
he created a language for formatting files in hypertext so they could be read in the same way by the sending and receiving computers and he called the language hypertext markup language or html.
in addition he developed a method of moving files of information which he called the world wide web although in the beginning it connected only the computers within the laboratories at cern.
by the end of 1990 the world wide web was up and running within the small research community at cern.
by august 1991 it was being made available at select internet sites around the world and by 1992 it was being used by more and more people who were creating their own websites to send and receive hypertext information through the internet.
in the early 1990s the was still primitive but many also saw it as revolutionary.
berners lee made another crucial decision.
although he could have gotten rich off of his invention he insisted that the world wide web would be free.
on april 30 1993 cern announced that anyone anywhere in the world could use the web without payment of royalties or legal constraints.
the information superhighway as tennessee senator al gore would call it was launched.
gore did not invent the internet but he did coin the term information superhighway in 1990 and sponsored legislation to support it in congress.
people needed the right software on their own computers to connect to the world wide web.
one of the earliest softwares and the first to be available at no cost was produced by marc andreesen a 21 year old computer science major at the university of illinois.
in january 1993 he posted an announcement that said by the power vested in me by nobody in particular alpha beta version of 0 5 of ncsas motif based information system and world wide web browser x mosaic is hereby released cheers marc andreesen then moved to california and was recruited by venture capitalist jim clark to develop a more sophisticated connection system and in october 1994 netscape was launched as a browser.
soon thousands of people in the united states and around the world were connecting to the internet for the first time using netscape navigator to get to the netscape home page and from there to the world.
other systems america online aol and yahoo soon followed.
before long bill gates was leading beginnings 1980 to the present microsoft in the development and distribution of its own web browser.
by 1998 over 45 million people quite a jump from 15 000 in 1990 were connected to the world wide web.
people could shop do research listen to music or tour the world without leaving the comfort of their own homes.
e mail messages began replacing telephone calls and office memos in the late 1990s.
ray tomlinson a researcher working at the defense department inaugurated the use of as the core of an e mail address.
in the 1990s people embraced the opportunity to send and receive messages at times of their own convenience rather than to have to answer the telephone.
with the growth of television in the 1950s some had worried that the printed word was in decline.
after 2000 the reliance on text certainly saw a resurgence even if in abbreviated form as e mail messages replaced telephone calls as the prime source of communication among americans.
the bubble and its eventual burst if y2k illustrated the degree to which almost every aspect of society had become dependent on computer technology by 2000 the bursting of the bubble illustrated how easy it was to inflate the value of every computer related enterprise.
just as the world of electronic communications was being born in the 1990s many people decided that the key to making a fortune was investing in the enterprise.
as had happened many times before see chapter 22 on the stock market crash of 1929 overea ger investors created a bubble that eventually burst.
in march 2000 an article in barrons the respected business magazine asked when will the internet bubble burst a week later business week ran a story on internet stocks called wall streets hype machine investors some of whom were already beginning to have their own worries paid attention.
at the end of march and all through april 2000 stocks in high technology companies fell dramatically.
between march 10 and april 14 yahoo.
fell from 178 to 116.
by the end of december 2000 nearly every technology company was down significantly.
some like amazon com recovered.
others did not.
the value of specific parts of the new electronic world had shrunk but the new electronic order was just beginning.
google becomes a verb in september 1998 two stanford university graduate students larry page and sergey brin launched a new company in a garage in menlo park california.
they called their company google.
page and brin first met at stanford in 1995 and by 1996 they had decided to search for and find information through the still new world wide web.
other search engines predated google and others rose to challenge its dominance but it quickly became the leader.
as early as december 1998 a computer magazine was reporting googles uncanny knack for producing good information very quickly and by 2001 one could search for information on google in 26 languages.
by december 2001 page and brins company had scanned or indexed 3 billion webpages almost 80 percent of the total then in existence.
and as the number of webpages grew google kept scanning and indexing.
when someone in any corner of the globe typed a question or a name or a topic into the search page a series of interconnected computers at google headquarters in mountain view california scanned the data and presented a list of websites to the searcher.
with the advent of google virtually all of the knowledge available anywhere on the internet was available at the click of a few key strokes to everyone not just computer geeks with unlimited time and patience.
google never charged for its services which along with its speed was a key to its popularity.
the companys main source of revenue came from advertisements.
hotels in london may pay to get top billing when someone does a search of london while sporting goods companies may pay for top billing when a search is done for sneakers in the years after its founding google kept up the rapid pace of growth and change.
in 2004 google launched google books.
the company signed agreements 29j 292 29 3 google revolutionized the ability to search for information on the internet through its powerful search engine.
chapter 29 a new world order 863 with a number of prominent libraries including harvard stanford the university of michigan oxford university the library of congress and the new york public library to digitize all of their holdings.
the books whose copyrights had expired would be made available online.
books still under copyright which included most books would have only small selections available considered fair use and readers would be referred to the publisher for more.
however publishers were nervous about the fact that the whole book would be stored in googles electronic archives and in 2005 the association of american publishers sued the company for violation of copyright laws.
in response john l hennessy the president of stanford university and a member of googles board of directors said we need to rethink our copyright framework that is still a remnant of the past the nature of copyrights and indeed the printed page would be in for dramatic changes.
the latest technology winners losers and change agents soon after 2000 the fast paced technological changes were producing some clear winners companies like google and microsoft and the thousands of engineers and inventors who worked in places like silicon valley in california or seattle washington.
in addition there were also clear losers.
when the sony walkman cassette tape player appeared in 1979 it seemed part of a never ending expansion of the music industry.
people could buy music and listen as they walked or worked.
by 2001 however the music industry was in deep trouble.
new technologies gave consumers the power to simply download the music they wanted at no cost.
in the 1990s the bestselling album sold 15 million copies.
in 1999 alone the music industry reported profits of 14 6 billion but in retrospect that point was the peak year for the industrys profits.
that number would fall to 6 3 billion in 2009.
it was just too easy to download music share it and give it away.
in 2001 representatives of the music industry were successful in a lawsuit closing napster one of the first vehicles for downloading music that had been launched in 1999 but the move was a public relations disaster because other technology for downloading made it easier and easier even without the help of napster.
if the industry was going to survive after 2001 then it would need to find a new way to create market and profit from music products.
newspapers went through similar losses.
after 2000 newspaper advertising which generates most of newspaper revenue fell dramatically as did the actual sales of newspapers.
circulation kept dropping for most newspapers and some like the los angeles times and the boston globe lost perhaps a third of all subscribers between 2000 and 2010.
many of these papers began small online versions but readers had already become accustomed to accessing other news sites that had been designed specifically for online readers.
newspapers have yet to recover if they ever will.
many people also began to worry about the loss of privacy that can accompany growing information technology.
certainly google held a lot of information not just on products but on people who search for information.
e mail was much easier to hack into and read than traditional letters or telephone calls and the federal protection of privacy especially in letters sent through the u s mail did not apply to much of the new technology.
mobile phones made it easy to call from anywhere but they also made it easy for people to track anyones location.
privacy as civil libertarians had traditionally defined it was a fast changing matter.
in the decades after 2001 technology kept changing the way people lived their lives and interacted with others.
a world without e mail or without the ability to search the world wide web or listen to music or follow ones friends on facebook became virtually unimaginable.
yet before the 1990s such a world did not exist.
in that decade the foundation for the technological future was set.
quick review is the expansion of technology beneficial to people businesses and or governments.
why or why not.
293 864 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present conclusion in 1989 the cold war came to an end and a new world order began to take shape.
after reagans second term when george h w.
bush a foreign policy expert took office in 1989 he was well positioned to see the united states through the dissolution of the soviet union and the end of the cold war.
but as soon as the cold war had ended other international crises immediately began to preoccupy the bush administration.
during his term in office bush sent u s troops to iraq to protect the independence of kuwait ordered the overthrow of panamanian dictator manuel noriega and sent peacekeeping troops to both somalia and yugoslavia.
amid this international turmoil the bush administration also had to confront the increasing threat of al qaeda and other nonstate terrorist organizations.
while bush focused on international issues the u s economy fell into a recession and when he raised taxes despite an earlier promise not to do so the conservative wing of the republican party abandoned him.
division within the republican party and the troubled economy allowed democratic candidate bill clinton whose campaign team motto was it s the economy stupid to defeat bush in his bid for reelection.
clinton focused on two primary issues early in his administration the economy and the nations health care system.
he managed with the help of a democratic controlled congress to balance the federal budget lower the national debt and secure approval for the north american free trade agreement nafta but his health care plan faltered before it reached the u s congress for a vote.
two years into clintons first term republicans took control of the house of representatives forcing him to further moderate his positions.
in his remaining 6 years in office clinton worked with republicans to limit some budget cuts end the nations traditional welfare system and pass the defense of marriage act.
although clinton faced impeachment stemming from charges that he had lied under oath about a sexual affair he kept his office.
the 1990s concluded with one of the strangest presidential elections in american history.
it took over one month and a decision of the u s supreme court to determine that george w bush not al gore would succeed clinton as president.
with the rise of new international issues as well as economic and social issues at home dramatic developments in technology launched a new information era.
personal computers which first became available in the 1980s became commonplace in the 1990s.
new companies like apple microsoft and google emerged and existing companies like ibm and xerox adapted to changing technologies.
in the 1990s developments such as the internet and the world wide web allowed people to connect and communicate at speeds never before thought possible.
these advances also ushered in an era of speculation among overeager investors.
technology stocks grew steadily throughout the 1990s but in march 2000 the tech bubble burst and many people lost jobs and savings.
by the end of the decade technology had become so pervasive in american life that many feared a catastrophic y2k problem if computers malfunctioned on january 1 2000.
in addition concern grew about the computers impact on a range of existing institutions from the music industry to books and newspapers as well as the impact of computers on personal privacy.
nevertheless by 2001 it was clear that the transformation of life as a result of technology was here to stay.
chapter e how did changes in the 1990s connect the united states to the rest of the world to an extent unimagined at the beginning or in the middle of the 1900s.
chapter 29 a new world order 865 chapter 29 chapter review 29 1 the bush administration 1989 1993 explain the new world order that george bush described.
review questions 1.
comparison compare and contrast the global situation faced by the united states in 1980 and 1990.
what challenges and opportunities did the changed world present to the bush administration.
contextualization how did the power of conservatives within the republican party shape the bush presidency.
historical interpretation what do the thomas nomination hearings the rodney king incident and the o j.
simpson trial indicate about the state of race relations in the united states at the end of the 1900s.
the clinton presidency analyze the impact of the clinton presidency and the clinton gingrich conflict on the country.
review questions 4.
contextualization why did clinton feel that it was important to emphasize his departure from traditional democratic ideas.
29 2 29 3 5.
comparison compare and contrast the american political landscape in 1976 and 1996.
what explains the differences you note.
construct an argument how would you explain clintons high public opinion ratings throughout his impeachment proceedings.
what does his high ratings tell you about how the public viewed clinton and his congressional opponents.
technology dominates an era analyze the changes in technology and their impact on u s culture.
review questions 7.
synthesis what role did new technology play in producing the prosperity of the 1990s.
what other factors were important in this regard.
construct an argument defend or refute the following statement the advent of the internet was the most important advance in communications technology since the invention of the printing press 9.
historical interpretation who were the economic winners and losers of the communications technology revolution.
866 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present the september 11 2001 terror attack on the world trade center in new york and the pentagon in washington dc was a tragedy that shaped american politics for a decade chapter objective the present tuesday morning on september 11 2001 dawned clear and beautiful on the east coast of the united states.
president bush was in florida reading to a class of second graders as part of his effort to get the no child left behind legislation through congress.
most americans were going about their business at the beginning of another workweek as memories of summer vacations faded.
at 7 59 a m american airlines flight 11 took off from bostons logan international airport bound for los angeles.
in the minutes that followed united airlines flight 93 left newark for san francisco american flight 77 left washington dc for los angeles and united flight 175 left boston for los angeles.
none of those four flights made it to their intended destination.
on each of the four planes just minutes after takeoff hijackers took control of the flight using box cutters then legal to carry onto a plane as weapons.
following existing procedures designed for hijackers of an earlier era who often sought ransom or political concessions airline crews yielded to the hijackers and then quickly realized the new destinations.
as terrified crew and passengers used cell phones to call relatives and authorities the planes turned back toward the east coast.
at 8 46 a m american flight 11 crashed into the north tower of the world trade center.
seventeen minutes later united flight 175 crashed into the south tower of the trade center.
demonstrate an understanding of the most recent history of the united states from september 11 2001 to the present.
the impact of september 11 2001 analyze the impact of 9 11 on the nation and on the presidency of george bush and the impact of bush administration policies around the world.
hurricane katrina and its aftermath explain the impact of hurricane katrina on the gulf coast.
the financial crisis of 2008 explain the costs and consequences of the 2008 financial crisis.
new liberals new conservatives analyze the most recent political developments in the united states.
30 1 30 2 30 3 30 4.
chapter 28 the reagan revolution 1980 1989 a rapidly changing u s government the changing nature of the american economy changes in the rest of the country chapter 29 a new world order 1989 2001 the bush administration 1989 1993 the clinton presidency technology dominates an era chapter 30 entering a new time 2001 to the present the impact of september 11 2001 hurricane katrina and its aftermath the financial crisis of 2008 new liberals new conservatives 1980 1989 no american president since franklin roosevelt has so dominated the nation s politics and indeed culture as ronald reagan shown here at his inauguration in 1981.
the voters who gave ronald reagan his margin of victory over jimmy carter in 1980 were a diverse lot.
working class whites north and south sometimes called reagan democrats were alienated by the civil rights and protest movements of the 1960s and 1970s.
many feared crime which they tended to see as a black issue and wanted a champion of law and order the coalition also included middle class and upper middle class suburbanites in revolt over taxes especially rising property taxes and government regulations that they thought were intrusive.
the antitax movement led to the passage of proposition 13 in california in 1978 a law sponsored by a private citizen howard jarvis which significantly cut californias property taxes and ultimately the states vaunted government services.
other states copied proposition 13 reducing taxes and public services.
a third group of reagan supporters were social conservatives catholics and protestants associated with the religious right for whom the key issues were their opposition to abortion sexual and reproductive freedoms gay rights and the teaching of evolution as well as their desire for prayer in the public schools.
in seeking to limit abortion or gay rights the social conservatives wanted a more activist government even if they otherwise favored a smaller government and lower taxes.
these diverse groups also shared a staunch hostility to communism and believed that presidents from franklin roosevelt to richard nixon had been too soft.
they were united in their anger at those they considered elitist celebrities in hollywood the media universities and the federal government.
in ronald reagan the former actor and two term governor of california they chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the changes in government and in the larger society in the times known as the reagan revolution.
a rapidly changing u s government explain reagan s impact on the united states and the world.
the changing nature of the american economy explain international economic developments that shaped the united states.
changes in the rest of the country explain cultural changes in the united states during the 1980s.
chapter 28 the reagan revolution significant dates ronald reagan defeats carter in election for u s president u s center for disease control recognizes a new disease hiv aids congress passes reagan tax and budget bills reagan fires patco strikers boland amendment prohibits funding for overthrowing the government of nicaragua national security decision directive 75 ends peaceful coexistence with u s s r reagan calls soviet union the evil empire strategic defense initiative announced bombing of marine barracks in beirut lebanon u s invasion of grenada national security council launches what becomes iran contra scandal ronald reagan reelected democratic leadership council created to move democratic party to the center beginning of savings and loan collapse of the late 1980s movie actor rock hudson dies of aids first of five summit meetings between reagan and gorbachev held in geneva soviet nuclear reactor at chernobyl explodes worst nuclear accident in history reagan gorbachev summit at reykjavik iceland congress passes tax reform act tower commission report on iran contra arms for hostages deal released george h w.
bush defeats michael dukakis for president found a hero who they believed would not disappoint them as had richard nixon.
this chapter is a look at the reagan revolution the wide ranging changes in the federal government in u s international relations and in american culture that took place while ronald reagan was president some with his support and some in spite of his best efforts.
a rapidly changing u s government explain reagan s impact on the united states and the world.
1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 reagan revolution major changes in american politics under the leadership of ronald reagan including cuts in taxes and domestic spending and increased military spending.
many federal government programs that dated from the new deal changed drastically during what came to be known as the reagan revolution.
by the end of the 8 years that ronald reagan was president taxes took less of peoples incomes the federal debt ballooned and a 50 year period in which labor unions could rely on a friendly government came to an end.
the cold war which had been the dominant element in u s foreign policy since the end of world war ii also ended.
both the republican and democratic parties emerged from the reagan revolution more conservative than they had been.
supporters and detractors all agreed that the presidency of ronald reagan was a significant turning point in the united states.
ronald reagan and the reagan coalition when ronald reagan became president he was only 1 month short of his 70th birthday the oldest man ever elected to the office.
reagan was born in the small town of tampico illinois in 1911.
his father was a shoe salesman and an alcoholic who was unsuccessful in his search for better jobs until he was hired by the new deals wpa.
his mother who worked as a seamstress was a religious woman who made sure that the young ronald and his brother were brought up in church.
he said of his childhood we didnt live on the wrong side of the tracks but we lived so close we could hear the whistle real loud handsome and popular reagan was elected high school class president and then student body president at eureka college in illinois.
soon after college and after a brief stint as a sports announcer in iowa reagan left the midwest for hollywood where he appeared in 53 films between 1937 and 1953.
it was steady work and it paid well.
reagan later said that he generally made two pictures per year earning 300 000 to 400 000 per film and would have worked harder to make more pictures if not for the high tax bite.
the film work took reagan a long way from the marginal economic status of his childhood.
he married and later divorced jane wyman whose hollywood career was more successful than his he would be the first divorced person elected president.
he was popular in hollywood and was elected president of the screen actors guild from 1947 to 1952 a position he used to identify suspected communists in the film industry.
when he became u s president he was the first former union president to do so.
during his hollywood years reagan remained a democrat voting for harry truman in 1948 and against richard nixon for the senate in 1950.
in 1952 he married nancy davis and left a declining hollywood career to become a spokesperson for the general electric company serving as the tv host of the general electric theater program from 1954 to 1962.
working for ge he also gave pep talks to workers at ge plants touted ge products and spoke about the corporations views on taxes and government regulation to business groups.
in his ge career as in hollywood reagan mastered the art of connecting with audiences especially maintaining a relaxed and genial presence in the face of lights crowds and distractions as well as delivering content from a script.
while at ge he also changed his party registration from democrat to republican.
by the time reagan left ge in 1962 he was as well known for his political views as his acting.
he supported barry goldwater in 1964.
in a standard stump speech that came to be known simply as the speech reagan said that the choice facing americans was whether we believe in our capacity for self government or whether we abandon the american revolution and confess that a little intellectual elite in a far distant beginnings 1980 to the present 810 part ix certainty uncertainty and new capital can plan our lives for us better than we can plan them ourselves ihe speech did not elect goldwater but it did bring reagan to the attention of a crucial audience rich republican conservatives who agreed to back him if he would run for governor of california in 1966.
the incumbent governor democrat edmund g pat brown a tough campaigner who had defeated richard nixon in 1962 was seeking a third term in 1966.
reagan defeated him in the fall election and won reelection as governor in 1970.
reagan talked a more conservative line all through his presidency than he practiced while he was governor of california.
while he was tough on student protests raised tuition at california s public colleges and universities and ousted clark kerr as the president of the university of california he was willing to compromise with a democratic legislature on other matters.
he raised taxes to cover a budget shortfall as well as signed bills supporting liberalized abortion rights and bilingual education.
some of his conservative supporters were nervous about his positions but valued his skill as a campaigner.
as a conservative governor of the nations largest state reagan quickly became a presidential contender.
he almost defeated gerald ford for the 1976 republican nomination and easily defeated george h w.
bush to win the 1980 nomination and then the presidential election against jimmy carter.
as president he did not disappoint most of his supporters.
28 1 282 283 reaganomics supply side tax cuts military growth and electoral politics reagan came to office with three priorities increasing military spending to ensure that the united states was significantly stronger than the soviet union cutting domestic spending and government sponsored social programs and cutting the federal income tax.
he was willing to compromise on almost everything else.
the antitax crusade had helped elect reagan and he surrounded himself with advisors who developed new economic theories to defend a tax cut even as he sought increased military spending.
reagan justified the tax cut with an economic theory known as supply side economics.
as defined by republican congressman jack kemp and democratic senator lloyd bentsen supply side referred to stimulating the economy not by means of federal spending the traditional approach since the new deal but rather by means of supporting the supply side cutting taxes to foster private investment that might then lead to the creation of new jobs.
tax cut proponents also cited what is called the laffer curve developed in the 1970s by jude wanniski a correspondent for the wall street journal and economist arthur laffer the curve meant to show that higher taxes reduced government income by reducing the incentive to work and earn taxable wages.
at the extreme ends the curve made complete sense.
zero tax would not impact work and earning in any way and a 100 percent tax would certainly stifle most work.
but the point in between where taxes really cut into the will to work and where decreased tax rates might actually increase government income was hard to pinpoint.
when reagan first called for a 30 percent tax cut and used laffer and the supply side arguments to justify his position his main rival for the 1980 republican nomination george bush called it voodoo economics and jimmy carter called reagan s tax plans rebates for the rich deprivation for the poor and fierce inflation for all of us but after he became president reagan dismissed criticism saying of the economists who challenged his ideas theyre the sort of people who see something works in practice and wonder if it works in theory in spite of a lack of evidence in either practice or theory the president made a tax cut his first priority and in august 48 congressional democrats their democratic colleagues called them boll weevils joined the republican minority to pass a cut in federal income taxes that reduced the top rate on individual income from 70 to 50 percent.
the president won the first of his three goals for his reagan revolution the implementation of reaganomics as his economic policy came to be called in less than 100 days in office.
supply side economics an economic theory that to stimulate the economy the best intervention is a tax cut that would stimulate the supply side.
chapter 28 the reagan revolution 811 28 1 the reagan cuts in domestic programs including health insurance benefits for the elderly through medicare were not done without protest as shown here.
but few protests had a major impact on the cuts themselves.
in addition to the tax cut congress passed a modified version of reagans budget.
he did not get all the cuts he wanted but the new federal budget reduced domestic spending significantly.
reagan also used his administrative authority to cut a number of additional federal programs including food stamps and other programs for the poor as well as social security benefits for people with disabilities.
some 500 000 people were removed from the social security disability list.
another 300 000 who had been employed through the carter administrations comprehensive employment and training act ceta lost their government sponsored jobs.
the cuts were not the wholesale abolition of welfare that reagan advocated but they represented a substantial cut in the federal safety net that had been growing since the 1930s.
at the same time some programs such as aid to families with dependent children afdc and federal tax credits for the poor actually expanded during the reagan years.
while campaigning for the presidency reagan also promised to expand the military so the united states would without question be the most powerful nation on earth.
as a candidate he said you spend what you need as president he got congressional approval to develop a new b 2 bomber as well as cruise and mx missiles and to expand the navy.
during his first term in office from 1981 to 1985 the total defense spending of the united states rose by 34 percent from 171 billion to 229 billion.
within months of the new administration coming to office americans understood that the change in washington was significant indeed that some federal policies that had been in place since the 1930s were no longer going to continue.
in addition to the tax cuts and expanded military spending the new administration showed its attitude when the members of the professional air traffic controllers organization patco the people who guide airplanes on take off and landing went on strike.
the president told the members of the union who were federal employees that they had 48 hours to go back to work or they would be fired.
when almost two thirds of patcos members stayed out on strike reagan fired all 11 000 of them.
they permanently lost their jobs and the union was destroyed.
people worried about the safety of air travel with so many veteran controllers gone but the signal that this administration was going to have a different view of unions was clear.
organized labor used to having a friend in the white house was demoralized.
other strikes were also defeated 812 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present including an especially bitter one by the meatpackers at the hormel plant in minnesota in 1985 86.
union membership dropped from one fourth of the u s workforce to one sixth during reagan s two terms.
organized labor long a major force in american society was on a long slow decline something that delighted the president and his conservative backers.
in the short term the reagan initiatives did not improve the nations economy.
the president strongly supported federal reserve chair paul volcker whom carter had appointed.
both presidents told volcker to curb inflation no matter what the cost.
volcker did with tough policies that sent unemployment above 10 percent in 1982 the highest since the great depression of the 1930s.
many people lost jobs and new jobs were often in low paying service sectors of the economy.
homelessness doubled while reagan was in office from an estimated 200 000 to 400 000.
the recession of the early reagan years hurt the presidents popularity and the republicans lost seats in congress in the 1982 elections.
reagan with his optimism and self confidence asked the nation to stay the course by 1983 the national economy started to improve and continued to do so through the last 5 years of reagans tenure.
economists argued whether the improvement was due to the tax cuts or expanded military spending but in either case a strong economy made reagan more popular.
one result of the reagan economic agenda was rapid growth in the federal deficit.
the tax cut did not bring in as much new revenue as estimated while the expansion of military spending more than offset cuts in domestic programs.
the total federal deficit nearly tripled during the reagan years from 914 billion to 2 7 trillion.
more than one supporter saw the deficit as reagans greatest failure.
the united states which had been a major creditor nation since world war i became the worlds largest debtor nation.
the government kept borrowing money to cover the federal deficit while individuals borrowed money often by running up credit card debt.
if some complained that americans were maintaining a living standard beyond their means they quickly noted that the worst offender was the u s government.
daniel patrick moynihan once an advisor to richard nixon and who was a democratic senator from new york throughout the reagan years warned that the huge deficits virtually guaranteed that new federal initiatives to improve the lives of average or poor citizens were now off the table.
reagan faced the prospect of reelection in 1984 with some significant strengths and some formidable weaknesses.
to challenge him the democrats had after an intense primary battle with colorado senator gary hart selected former vice president walter mondale as the democratic candidate for president.
in an historic move mondale asked new york representative geraldine ferraro to be his running mate the first time a woman was on the ticket of a major political party.
at 73 reagan seemed old especially when in one debate with mondale he seemed to lose track of a story he was telling.
reagan dismissed the issue saying i will not make age an issue in this campaign.
i am not going to exploit for political purposes my opponent s youth and inexperience reagan could not so easily dismiss other issues however.
labor unions almost unanimously supported mondale although because of reagan s policies they had far less clout.
most african americans supported mondale continuing a move by black voters to the democratic party that was speeded by reagan s inattention to their needs.
moreover reagans silence on the rising epidemic of aids a new and deadly disease created some of his toughest enemies.
even social and religious conservatives who had flocked to reagan in 1980 were disappointed.
he had done little more than talk about many of their issues such as school prayer during his first term.
as president he never gave a speech to an antiabortion audience.
however conservatives did not have another candidate.
other developments helped reagan in 1984.
by 1983 the economy started to turn around.
more americans had jobs and people were buying more goods often on credit including personal computers video cassette recorders vcrs and telephone answering machines that had not been available in the 1970s.
chapter 28 the reagan revolution 813 morning again in america the campaign slogan of ronald reagan s reelection effort in 1984.
president ronald reagan looks to his left as a secret service agent places a hand on his shoulder and pushes the president into his limousine after he was shot leaving a washington hotel march 30 1981.
reagan also benefited from an upsurge of popular patriotism that he had helped to foster.
the space shuttle program had been years in the making since the days when americans worried about sputnik and soviet leadership in space but reagan benefit ted from the good will when the first space shuttle was successfully launched in april 1981.
reagans tough line with the soviet union pleased anti communists and the fact that at the end of his first term he was the first president since herbert hoover never to have met with a soviet leader did not worry them.
in june 1984 reagan traveled to france for the 40th anniversary of the d day landing that ended world war ii.
in a series of events carefully scripted by his communications director michael deaver he led a series of jubilant and patriotism filled celebrations honoring veterans and american power.
later that summer the olympics were held in los angeles and reagan led the celebrations emphasizing how far the country had come since the boycott of the games in moscow only 4 years before.
reagans wealthy supporters also gave him a huge financial edge over mondale.
perhaps most of all reagans own sunny disposition made people like him.
his tv ads reinforced reagans message that it was morning again in america.
his optimism was on full display when on march 30 1981 reagan was shot while leaving a speaking event.
his press secretary james brady was severely wounded and permanently disabled.
few knew at the time how seriously the president had been wounded when a bullet lodged in his left lung and he bled heavily.
but just before entering surgery reagan looked at his wife nancy and said honey i forgot to duck and then asked the surgeons please tell me youre all republicans that sort of pluck made him popular even with people who disagreed with his policies.
in addition his speaking style was extraordinary.
his many years as an actor paid off.
his friends called him the great communicator and even his toughest opponents admired him.
the democratic speaker of the house tip oneill who tangled with reagan on many occasions said of him he may not be much of a debater but with a prepared text hes the best public speaker ive ever seen im beginning to think that in this regard he dwarfs both roosevelt and kennedy in the november 1984 vote reagan carried every state except mondales home state of minnesota and the district of columbia and won almost 60 percent of the popular vote.
while republicans continued to control the senate 53 to 46 the democrats controlled the house 252 to 182.
a year after the election a group of democrats including representative richard gephardt of missouri and governor bill clinton of arkansas organized the democratic leadership council.
these new democrats argued that there was more to the election than reagans personal popularity and that the democratic party was not going to win elections until it moved closer to the conservative mainstream.
the creation of the democratic leadership council was high tribute to the conservative shift in american opinion that constituted the heart of the reagan revolution and signaled a move away from traditional new deal democratic values that included significant government services especially for those in need and support for labor unions.
as reagan entered his second term people expected a repeat of the first.
reagans top priority remained reducing taxes and in the mid 1980s many democrats agreed.
a bipartisan coalition passed the tax reform act of 1986 that cut the number of tax brackets from 14 to two with tax rates of 15 and 28 percent respectively while closing many tax loopholes.
led by the president who had begun his term cutting the tax rate for the wealthiest americans from 70 to 50 percent the government had now cut it to 28 percent.
after the 1986 tax bill passed reagan devoted more and more of his time to foreign policy.
he continued to appoint conservative judges and to support deregulation and the shrinking of the federal government but he did not present major domestic policy initiatives in his last 2 years in office.
reagan had come to office a devout cold warrior.
but before he left office he presided over the greatest change in u s soviet relationships since franklin roosevelt had granted official u s recognition to the soviet union in the 1930s.
814 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 tothe present expanding the cold war from star wars to iran contra when ronald reagan became president in january 1981 he had virtually no foreign policy experience.
he was more sophisticated as a politician than many of his detractors and some of his supporters admitted.
nevertheless he had not spent much time outside of the united states and did not know much about foreign policy.
he was served by a series of weak national security advisors as well as two secretaries of state two secretaries of defense and a strong director of central intelligence william casey all of whom disliked each other intensely kept major developments secret from each other and at times implemented contradictory policies.
first lady nancy reagan also took an active role in policy discussions especially when she feared that conservative ideologues were taking her husband in an unnecessarily hard line direction.
it was not an administrative structure leading to crisp and clear decision making.
however in the midst of apparent chaos reagan himself appeared to have been a far stronger leader than perceived one who determined the main aspects of his foreign policy even as he left the details of implementation to others.
28 1 m2 efforts to undermine communism reagan had several deeply held beliefs that would drive his foreign policy.
his fierce anticommunism which first developed when he battled with perceived communists in the film industry in the 1940s was reinforced by his religious faith which was offended by communist atheism.
his ability to articulate that passionate stance against communism had been honed through his speaking career for ge and as governor.
he saw communism as he once said as the focus of evil in the modern world and the united states as the exceptional carrier of goodness the shining city on a hill he disliked the longstanding policy of containment that had been at the core of american foreign policy from truman to carter.
he did not want merely to contain communism where it was.
he wanted to undermine existing communist governments.
despite that fierce anticommunism however reagan had a far greater horror of nuclear war than some of his fellow conservatives.
his firm belief was that a nuclear war could never be won and must never be fought during his first term he never trusted the soviets enough to engage in serious negotiations but he was determined to avoid nuclear war.
during his first term reagan was harshly critical of the soviet union.
in a 1983 speech to christian evangelicals reagan referred to the soviet union as the evil empire a year later in august 1984 thinking that the microphone was turned off reagan said my fellow americans i am pleased to tell you today that ive signed legislation that will outlaw russia forever.
we begin bombing in five minutes it was a joke but the soviets found it frightening.
reagan also ordered a massive arms buildup.
worried about u s vulnerability and believing that any negotiations needed to be from a position of strength reagan supported annual increases in the military budget between 1981 and 1986.
he arranged the deployment of new intermediate range missiles in europe in 1983 and resisted serious talks with soviet leaders.
reagans goal of undermining communism where it already existed led also to other steps.
in 1981 as protest movements spread in poland and the polish communist government instituted martial law reagan imposed sanctions on poland and on the soviet union an end to landing rights in the united states for the russian airline aeroflot a ban on the sale of equipment for a soviet natural gas pipeline and at the petty level termination of the special parking privileges of soviet ambassador anatoly dobrynin in the state department garage.
the administration secretly fun neled some 20 million to solidarity the polish protest movement through the vatican bank with the approval of polish pope john paul ii.
in march 1983 reagan against the almost unanimous advice of his foreign policy team who seldom agreed on anything announced that the united states was going to develop a strategic defense initiative sdi.
as the president described it sdi would use u s technological know how to create a series of space stations armed with lasers the evil empire a phrase that reagan used for the soviet union in particular and all communist countries in general.
strategic defense initiative president reagan s program to defend the united states with sophisticated technologies also known as star wars.
chapter 28 the reagan re 815 that would destroy any enemy missiles fired at the united states.
he thought that the long standing u s policy dating to the eisenhower administration of mutually assured destruction in which each superpower had the ability to retaliate after a nuclear attack was essentially a commitment to mutual suicide.
in 1979 e war e er the lead scientist in the development of the hydrogen bomb told reagan that for all its ability to build and launch missiles the united states had virtually no defense against incoming missiles.
as president reagan was determined to create one to make soviet missiles impotent and obsolete reagan was convinced that the united states could do it.
senior advisors worried that sdi would be expensive impractical and a needless escalation of the cold war.
critics called the whole system star wars and worried that it would militarize space drain the treasury and ultimately turn out to be ineffective.
military contractors however loved sdi.
the president was committed and throughout his two terms research and development of the system continued.
only long after reagan left office did it become clear how deeply fearful soviet leaders were of the reagan rhetoric and arms buildup especially sdi.
the soviets feared that sdi would make them vulnerable to a u s attack one they could not resist if they could not retaliate.
in september 1983 a soviet satellite mistook blips for incoming u s missiles and the country went on full military alert.
only the courage of a young soviet officer who believed that there was a computer error and who overrode the system appears to have avoided a world war iii with millions of deaths in both countries.
the cold war had never been so dangerous.
managing relations in the middle east as the united states focused on the soviet union the reagan foreign policy advisors also viewed the rest of the world through the prism of the cold war sometimes with disastrous results.
regarding the middle east reagan came to office with a generally pro israel point of view a perspective that was supported by many christian evangelicals in his political base.
his team believed that jimmy carter s camp david accords had tilted u s policy too closely toward egypt and wanted to correct the balance.
at the same time they saw israel egyph jordan and saudi arabia as u s allies and were prepared to sell military aircraft to the saudis and to supply israel with jet bombers and military hardware.
their goal was to create a strong buffer in the middle east against syria and iraq both of which were viewed as soviet client states see map 28 1.
0 200 400 kilometers ri israeli occupied 1 j territories map 28 1 the united states and the middle c africa involved the united states in a series of crisps hi vents ln the midd e east afghanistan and nort e n 816 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present nn9t e 1980s that would only expand in the 1 s in afghanistan reagan expanded the carter era efforts to resist the soviet occupation.
in 1983 and 1984 the united states provided significant aid to the mujahedeen opposition whom reagan called freedom fighters in 1985 when the soviets escalated their involvement reagan ordered his military to do whats necessary to win and the united states began supplying the afghan resistance with antiaircraft missiles and satellite based intelligence on soviet troop movements.
eventually the soviets withdrew from afghanistan leaving the cia backed taliban in control of the country.
it was a short term victory but one that came with significant long term consequences not only for the people of afghanistan but also for the united states.
in addition the leader of libya was cause for concern.
libyas longtime leader muammar gaddafi had come to power in 1969 long before reagans time.
most of his north african neighbors found him to be a troublemaker but he especially liked to create trouble for the united states.
reagan was determined to respond.
in 1981 the u s navy conducted exercises off the libyan coast and when libyan jets attacked the navy shot them down.
as terrorism expanded across the middle east reagan was sure gaddafi was behind much of it.
when a twa flight was hijacked in june 1985 and a west german discotheque was bombed in december of that year killing one u s soldier reagan retaliated.
in april 1986 the united states bombed gaddafis headquarters in tripoli destroying much of the libyan air force and killing some 30 civilians including gadaffis 15 month old adopted daughter.
for a time libya was quiet but in december 1988 a pan am flight was blown up over lockerbie scotland and the plot was again traced to libya.
nevertheless gadaffi maintained his hold on power until 2011.
although the hostage crisis with iran ended the day reagan came to office in january 1981 the united states remained hostile to iran because of the crisis.
when iran and iraq went to war against each other in september 1980 the united states tended to wish both sides ill.
however as the war continued members of reagans national security council nsc became convinced that it might be possible to support moderates within the iranian government and build a new u s relationship by supplying iran with weapons.
the united states also had good reason to believe that iran had influence with forces in lebanon that were holding seven u s citizens hostage.
nsc staff led by national security advisor robert mcfarlane argued iran might help free the hostages which was a high priority for the president.
carrying forged irish passports and traveling under assumed names mcfarlane and his deputy lieutenant colonel oliver north secretly visited tehran.
in spite of u s policy never to negotiate for the release of hostages and despite its official arms embargo of iran the united states sold over 2 000 missiles to iran in 1985 and 1986.
it was the beginning of the greatest foreign policy misadventure of the reagan administration.
reagan and his advisers were further pulled into middle east conflicts when israel invaded lebanon in june 1982.
israels goal was to attack the palestine liberation organization plo presence in lebanon and create a buffer against syria.
reagan did not object though he tried to get israel to limit its engagement.
later that year the united states sent a detachment of marines to join an international peace effort in lebanon.
in october 1983 a truck loaded with tnt drove into the u s barracks killing 241 marines.
americans including the president were horrified at the loss of life.
the purpose the marines were supposed to serve was always vague and after the tragedy the administration announced that the marines were to be redeployed to ships off the coast where they moved in 1984.
in response to the experience in lebanon defense secretary caspar weinberger and his top military advisor and future chair of the joint chiefs of staff colin powell crafted what became known as the powell doctrine.
henceforth they said u s soldiers would be sent overseas only as a last resort and only if the mission was clearly defined attainable supported by the public and included an exit strategy none of which had been true in the case of the deployment in lebanon.
the new restrictions would be honored more clearly in some cases than others.
toward the end of the reagan administration when palestinians in the gaza strip and west bank territories under the control of israel rose up in what they called the intifada or shaking off the united states did little beyond urge both sides to negotiate.
28 1 28 2 283 chapter 28 the reagan rew 81 dealing with perceived threats in latin america u s policy in central america especially in el salvador honduras and nicaragua was also shaped by the cold war.
since the 1920s democratic and republican administrations depended on a series of latin american dictators to create a safe climate for u s business and ensure that there was no communist influence in the government of their countries.
what they did to their own citizens was of less concern to american authorities.
by the time reagan had come to office the longtime dictator in nicaragua anastasio somoza had been overthrown by a popular uprising and the totalitarian regime in el salvador was seriously threatened by similar opposition.
fearing communist influence in such popular uprisings the reagan administration supported the besieged government of el salvador and sought to overthrow the new government of nicaragua see map 28 2.
jean kirkpatrick reagans united nations ambassador said that central america was the most important place in the world for us kirkpatrick also outlined a key reagan policy of differentiating between authoritarian governments such as that of el salvador which kirkpatrick said could in time be reformed into democracies and totalitarian governments particularly the government of the soviet union and its client states which she claimed would never change.
under the policy the united states would provide support for the former and opposition to the latter.
the same month as the attack on the marine barracks in lebanon october 1983 reagan ordered u s troops into the small caribbean island nation of grenada where a military coup had overthrown the previous government.
fearing growing communist influence and worried about u s medical students in grenada u s troops quickly defeated the coup leaders.
leaders in other countries and in the united nations condemned the invasion as a violation of international law but some in and out of grenada were grateful for the u s role.
even though a majority of the congress wanted nothing to do with supporting central american dictators or overthrowing governments the administration was determined to see its will done.
while rejecting a proposal to invade cuba made by 300 300 600 kilometers gulf of mexico guatemala.
military coup against president cerezo fails may 1989 free elections held 1993.
el salvador el salvador.
civil war 1980 1990 opposing sides hold peace talks 1990 peace treaty signed 1992.
pacific ocean a hss.
600 miles atlantic ocean haiti.
duvalier forced out of office feb 1986 military coup against elected government 1991.
former socialist michael manley elected prime minister feb 1989.
jamaica antilles nicaragua.
sandinista rebels come to power 1979 sandinista government defeated by opposition candidate violetta barrios de chamorro feb 1990.
puerto rico u s caribbean sea panama.
u s forces invade and capture drug trafficker general manuel noriega dec 1989 noriega is flown to federal prison in united states jan 1990.
panama canal.
canal zone comes under panamanian control 1979 canal comes under panamanian control in 2000.
colombia grenada.
u s and regional forces land after military coup oct 1983 elections held dec 1984.
map 28 2 the united states and the americas.
during the reagan and bush administrations the united states intervened several times in central america especially in nicaragua and el salvador and in the caribbean.
818 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present v alexander haig during his short tenure as secretary of state reagan greatly expanded military aid and sent military advisers to el salvador.
that support was authorized even while government sanctioned death squads assassinated critics including the archbishop of san salvador oscar romero murdered while he was saying mass in 1980.
the united states also determined to intervene in nicaragua where the new socialist sandinista government was committed to land reform.
in december 1981 reagan at the urging of cia director casey authorized 20 million for covert operations to support the nicaraguan contras or counterrevolutionaries who sought to overthrow the new government.
the core of the contra movement was a group of some 500 followers of somoza but it grew to an army of perhaps 10 000 who were trained in u s sponsored camps in honduras and sent back to nicaragua with u s supplied weapons to disrupt the workings of the sandinista government.
by 1984 reagan was calling the contras our brothers and he remained steadfast in their support.
by 1984 however congress was unhappy with the administrations central american policy.
as early as 1982 congress passed the boland amendment prohibiting the united states from seeking to overthrow the sandinista government.
since reagan insisted he was simply trying to get them to negotiate he ignored that stipulation.
but in 1984 when it came to light that the cia had mined nicaraguan ports members of congress not only liberals but also conservatives including barry goldwater were furious.
in october 1984 congress passed stricter legislation that cut off all aid to the contras.
with what seemed like an iron clad prohibition of aid to the contras u s adventures in central america seemed to be at an end.
but reagan did not give up easily.
the president encouraged efforts of a young national security staffer oliver north to find new sources of aid though it was never clear how much reagan knew of the details of norths enterprise.
since congress had banned government aid to the contras north sought donations from friendly governments in taiwan brunei and saudi arabia and from wealthy private u s citizens like beer magnate joseph coors.
at least 50 million in such aid was delivered to the contras.
seeking to expand the aid north and his mentor casey had what they termed a neat idea the united states was secretly selling arms to iran.
what if they thought the united states could make a profit on the clandestine arms shipments to iran and then use the funds to support the contras.
congress would not have to appropriate any money and no one needed to know.
the complex arrangement did not remain secret for long.
in october 1986 an american cargo plane loaded with military supplies for the contras was shot down in nicaragua.
the sandinista government let the world know that in spite of the two boland amendments the united states was still providing significant aid to the contras.
a month later a beirut lebanon newspaper published an account based on iranian sources of u s arms sales to iran and the link to hoped for hostage releases.
people soon connected the two and the scandal quickly became known as the arms for hostages deal or simply as iran contra the matter was serious.
in selling arms to iran and in funding the contras u s laws had been broken laws that the white house clearly knew existed.
some in congress talked of impeachment.
as with nixon at watergate the question was what did the president know and when did he know it.
as the details of u s activity began to emerge the president insisted that the government did not repeat did not trade arms or anything else for hostages he also asked attorney general ed meese to investigate.
oliver north immediately began to shred documents in his office.
meese reported to the president that north had in fact not only sold arms to iran presumably to free hostages but also used the profits to aid the contras.
national security advisor john poindexter met with reagan confirmed that meese was right and resigned.
reagan asked former texas senator john tower to lead an investiga tion.
a special prosecutor lawrence walsh was appointed and congress held hearings.
reagan eventually had to admit i told the american people i did not trade arms for hostages.
my heart and best intentions still tell me that it is true but the facts and evidence tell me it is not many were shocked that an administration that talked so boland amendment two amendments passed by congress prohibiting the u s government from attempting to overthrow the leftist government of nicaragua.
iran contra a plan to secretly sell arms to iran in exchange for the release of hostages held in lebanon and to use the profits to provide aid to the contra forces of nicaragua.
chapter 28 the reagan r ion 81 in his testimony before congress regarding the iran contra investigation oliver north looked and sounded like a hero in spite of the fact that he had obviously broken the law.
much about law and order was doing so many illegal things.
reagan clearly knew about the illegal sale of arms to iran and the arms for hostages deals.
many also suspected that he knew about the transfer of funds to the contras although that was never proved.
poindexter and north insisted that the decision rested with them alone.
not everyone was convinced but no smoking gun was found.
north managed to testify brilliantly before congress portraying himself as a well meaning patriot and though reagans approval rating plummeted talk of impeachment ended.
walsh continued his investigation after reagan left office and eventually secured the indictment of several officials but reagans successor george h w.
bush pardoned them.
in 1994 walsh concluded that reagan probably should have been impeached but by then he was retired and ill iran contra seriously damaged reagans reputation.
as reagan entered his last 2 years in office many considered his foreign policy efforts to be a failure.
between 1987 and 1989 however the president accomplished his great foreign policy triumph.
ending the cold war during his first term as reagan talked tough and launched the arms buildup he also refused to meet with soviet leaders in part because he saw no point in such conversations and didnt trust the soviets and in part because of changes in soviet leadership.
leonid brezhnev who had led the soviet union since nikita khrushchev was deposed in 1964 died in 1982.
his successor yuri andropov died 2 years later and the next leader konstantin cherenko died a year after that.
reagan said how am i supposed to get anyplace with the russians if they keep dying on me then in 1985 a new and very different leader mikhail gorbachev came to power in the soviet union.
after a succession of hard line communists who were aging and ill gorbachev represented a new younger generation of reform minded soviet leaders who saw how desperately their country needed change.
top down soviet style planning was strangling the economy.
matching the united states in military matters took a huge percentage of their nations limited wealth.
the disastrous meltdown of the nuclear reactor at chernobyl just after gorbachev came to office further convinced him of the need for change.
gorbachev could be as charming and optimistic as reagan 820 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present but he was also a devoted communist and a very tough leader.
he called for major changes perestroika reform of the soviet economic system while maintaining communism and glasnost more openness and freedom for soviet citizens.
he quickly concluded that matching the u s arms buildup was going to bankrupt the soviet union and he sought a way to avoid the arms race.
after his reelection in 1984 reagan was also ready to talk.
by 1985 he had achieved the military buildup that he wanted and could negotiate from a position of strength.
u s allies especially those in europe who lived on the front line of any conflict were tired of cold war tensions and increased pressure on the united states for a different policy.
nancy reagan nudged her husband away from the hard liners in his administration.
reagan also knew that his cold war credentials gave him room to maneuver that another leader might not have.
by 1985 reagan and gorbachev were ready to work together.
british prime minister margaret thatcher known as the iron lady because of her ability to stand up to pressure was a close ally and friend of reagan.
she assured him that gorbachev was someone with whom we can do business reagan and gorbachev began a private correspondence and then met for the first time in november 1985 at geneva where they agreed in general to a reduction in nuclear arms.
the following october they met again at reykjavik iceland.
there in a small house on the ocean they got to know each other.
they talked about their lives gorbachev had once wanted to be an actor their grandchildren and their hopes for the future.
at one point they frightened their respective staff when they reached a tentative agreement to abolish all nuclear weapons by 2000 and then moved the date back to 1995.
that agreement floundered over gorbachevs insistence that they include sdi and reagans refusal.
the reykjavik summit ended in anger over star wars and without any agreement but the two men had established a personal bond.
in june 1987 reagan traveled to berlin the flashpoint of the cold war.
facing the berlin wall at the brandenburg gate he demanded mr.
gorbachev tear down this wall the speech which sounded much more like reagans old line anticommunism than the new thaw in u s soviet relations seemed to have been as much an effort to reassure the presidents conservative critics as an actual demand.
but in fact the steps that reagan and gorbachev were taking would lead to the end of the wall within 2 years just after reagan left office.
soon after reykjavik the soviet physicist andrei sakharov convinced gorbachev that sdi would not work and could safely be ignored.
the two leaders then authorized further negotiations on offensive weapons that led to a treaty dramatically reducing intermediate range nuclear forces inf and to onsite inspections so rigorous that they frightened the american cia.
critics in both countries thought the leaders were moving too fast.
in the senate north carolinas jesse helms tried to stop any new treaty and howard phillips of the conservative caucus called the president a useful idiot for soviet propaganda.
gorbachev for his part had to deal with military and civilian attacks for his capitulationist line toward the united states.
even so the momentum was not going to be stopped.
at their next summit in washington dc in december 1987 reagan signed the inf treaty in a well publicized ceremony and gorbachev met and mingled with american crowds like a u s politician.
the two seemed at ease with each perestroika russian for restructuring efforts to make the soviet economic and political systems more modern flexible and innovative.
glasnost russian for openness encouragement of new ideas and easing of political repression in the soviet union.
28 1 28 2 28 3 other.
when reagan included one of his favorite sayings trust but verify in his remarks gorbachev interjected you repeat that at every meeting people celebrated gorby fever the senate ratified the inf treaty by a large vote in may 1988.
the two countries also made significant progress in resolving the conflicts in nicaragua and afghanistan plans for joint space missions cultural and student exchanges and emigration and human rights.
they jointly sponsored a un resolution calling for an end to the iran iraq war.
the same month that the senate ratified the inf treaty the two leaders met for a fourth time in moscow.
they walked through red square called each other old friends and talked with russian citizens.
when asked about his earlier cold war speeches reagan said they were from another time another place chapter 28 the reagan rj 28 1 283 283 before reagan left moscow the united states and soviet union had essentially normalized their relationship.
for all intents and purposes the cold war was over.
the strained election of 1988 as a candidate in the republican primaries in 1980 george bush had called ronald reagans economic plans voodoo economics.
while democrats had a field day with the term once he became reagans vice president bush was a loyal member of the reagan team so loyal that some thought he had disappeared but those who thought that way underestimated him considerably.
george herbert walker bush was a child of privilege.
his father was a successful banker and republican senator from connecticut.
bush attended private schools and expected to attend yale when world war ii intervened.
while ronald reagan made war movies in hollywood for the government bush flew more than 50 combat missions in the south pacific and was shot down twice.
after the war he married barbara pierce attended yale and then moved to texas to make his fortune in the oil business.
he served two terms in the house of representatives from houston.
he was defeated when he ran for the senate in 1970 but was subsequently appointed head of the republican party nominal u s.
ambassador to china after the nixon trip and head of the cia for gerald ford.
the conservative wing of the republican party never trusted bush especially after his voodoo economic remarks but also because of his lack of enthusiasm for their social issues.
disappointed that reagan had not done more to support the social issues that were near and dear to them some conservatives thought that the 1988 election was their chance.
and democrats convinced that reagan was more personally popular than his programs believed that the end of his second term would be their chance to retake the white house.
neither challenge succeeded.
in the republican party the conservative but genial kansas senator robert dole challenged the vice president.
and pat robertson the extremely conservative religious broadcaster and head of the christian broadcasting network who had strongly supported ronald reagan now resigned his ordination as a baptist minister and campaigned for the nomination.
robertson felt that it was time to take the religious rights social and cultural issues into a presidential campaign.
while bush won the nomination on the first ballot he embraced many of doles and robertsons issues invited a conservative indiana senator j danforth quayle whom many considered to be a lightweight to be his running mate and made a speech he would later regret telling the republican convention read my lips.
no new taxes sensing possible victory many democrats sought the nomination.
colorado senator gary hart an initial front runner was forced out of the race after he was photographed on the yacht monkey business with the model donna rice not his wife sitting on his lap.
the nomination battle came down to a contest between the reverend jesse jackson a longtime civil rights leader and massachusetts governor michael dukakis.
jackson was extremely popular in some circles and reviled in others.
he was the first african american candidate to win presidential primaries in southern states winning five.
but in the end dukakis won the democratic nomination.
he summed up his campaign when he told the democratic convention this election is not about ideology its about competence dukakis entered the fall campaign with a 17 point lead in the polls a sign that people were ready for a change but the lead quickly evaporated in what turned into a very nasty battle.
dukakis s focus on competence did not make for an inspiring campaign.
822 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present explore the reagan revolution on myhistorylab how did the reagan revolution of the shape american politics.
in the presidential election of 1980 republican ronald reagan won a landslide victory over jimmy carter.
economic stagnation and foreign policy difficulties had marked the previous years while reagan promised smaller government at home and stronger government abroad.
in 1984 reagan won an even more impressive victory over democratic candidate walter mondale.
one reason for these landslide victories was that a group of traditionally democratic voters white socially conservative blue collar workers changed party affiliation during the reagan years and voted republican.
reagan s supply side economic policy which included limited government deregulation and tax breaks for middle class and wealthy americans brought economic prosperity but did not change the duress many suffered as other market forces saw the country move from an back.
taking advantage of a troubled economy and national mood former california governor and actor ronald reagan won the elections of 1980 and 1984 for the republican party based on the bringing america back message.
industrial to a service economy.
abroad the cold war began to end during reagan s second administration with the weakening of the soviet union and the erosion of communist control in its warsaw pact allies.
presidential election electoral results 1980 election reagan republican carter democrat 1984 election reagan republican mondale democrat.
489 electoral votes 49 electoral votes 525 electoral votes 13 electoral votes key questions use myhistorylab explorer to answer these questions cause how did support for republican and democratic presidential candidates change in the elections from 1976 1988.
chart these trends to consider their causation.
analysis where did the incidence of poverty stay high.
map the regions where economic difficulties remained prevalent.
response how did the soviet union s collapse redraw the map of europe and central asia.
explore the unfolding of the end of the cold war.
chapter 28 the reagan revolj american voices jesse jackson and pat robertson presidential candidates 1988 pat robertson was the most conservative candidate to seek the republican nomination in 1988 and jesse jackson the most liberal to seek the democratic.
both were baptist ministers.
both lost to more moderate candidates and endorsed them but each also had a significant impact on their respective party platform.
in speeches to their conventions they outlined their own views.
jesse jackson 1988 democratic national convention address pat robertson 1988 republican national convention address when 1 look out at this convention 1 see the face of america red yellow brown black and white.
we re all precious in god s sight the real rainbow coalition when 1 was a child growing up in greenville south carolina and grandmamma could not afford a blanket she didn t complain she took pieces of old doth sewed them together into a quilt a thing of beauty and power and culture.
now democrats we must build such a quilt.
farmers you seek fair prices and you are right but you cannot stand alone.
your patch is not big enough.
workers you fight for fair wages you are right but your patch labor is not big enough.
women you seek comparable worth and pay equity head start and day care and prenatal care on the front side of life relevant jail care and welfare on the back side of life you are right but your patch is not big enough.
students you seek scholarships you are right but your patch is not big enough.
blacks and hispanics when we fight for civil rights we are right but our patch is not big enough.
gays and lesbians when you fight against discrimination and a cure for aids you are right but your patch is not big enough.
but don t despair.
be as wise as my grandmamma.
pull the patches and the pieces together bound by a common thread.
when we form a great quilt of unity and common ground we ll have the power to bring about health care and housing and jobs and education and hope to our nation.
we the people can win.
four years ago the keynote speaker at the democratic national convention told us that america was a tale of two cities the haves and the have nots.
the rich and the poor.
the upper class and the lower class the democrats have given us a clear picture of their city.
they offer unlimited government massive transfers of wealth from the productive sector of society to the nonproductive and ever increasing regulation of the daily lives of the people and their children.
in the city of the democratic party the liberal mindset reigns supreme.
criminals are turned loose and the innocent are made victims.
disease carriers are protected and the healthy are placed at great risk.
in the democrat s city welfare dependency flourishes and no one is held accountable for his or her behavior.
society is always to blame.
in the democrat s city the rights of the majority must always take a back seat to the clamorous demands of the special interest minorities.
and yet in their city it is always the majority that must pay the bills through higher and higher taxes ladies and gentlemen the republican party wants to write a tale of another city.
we are the children of those who tamed the wilderness spanned a continent and brought forth the greatest nation on the face of the earth we see a city seton a hill.
a shining light of freedom for all of the nations to see and admire.
a city made great by the moral strength and self reliance of her people we are republicans and we believe in government that is our servant not our master.
source jesse jackson 1988 democratic national convention address downloaded july 26 2011 from pat robertson 1988 republican national convention address downloaded july 26 2011 from.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what did each speaker see as the fundamental source of america s strength.
what role did each assign government in making that potential strength a reality.
historical interpretation what light do these two speeches shed on the fundamental ideological divisions in american politics in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
the comedian mort sahl complained that dukakis was the only colorless greek in america.
the bush camp led by lee atwater ran tv ads featuring a black convicted criminal willie horton who had killed a man and raped a woman while on furlough from a massachusetts prison.
the fact that many states including reagans california had furlough policies did not make a difference.
the appeal to fear was strong.
in the end bush swamped dukakis by a vote of almost 49 million to 42 million and 426 to 111 electoral votes and won the presidential term he had long sought.
28 1 quick review how successfully did ronald reagan fulfill his initial goals.
how did his goals change during his term in office.
824 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present 28 2 the changing nature of the american economy explain international economic developments that shaped the united states.
presidential candidates economists and families who gathered around the dinner table or the tv trays in the living room all debated the nature of the economic changes that were taking place in the 1980s as reaganomics led to tax cuts a reduction in government services and fewer government regulations.
late in his term in july 1987 president reagan proposed what he called an economic bill of rights which he restated on several occasions first is the freedom to work to pursue ones livelihood in ones own way free from excessive government regulation and subsidized government competition freedom to enjoy the fruits of ones labor free from excessive government taxing spending and borrowing by the government the freedom to own and control ones property freedom to participate in a free market and to achieve ones full potential without government limits on opportunity.
0 o c 0 o c 0 o k 0 o.
it was a philosophy that reagan seemed to embody in his own life story.
yet by 1987 when the president spoke some americans were beginning to have second thoughts.
kevin phillips who helped republican presidential campaigns from nixon to reagan was among them.
in his book the boiling point he described what he saw as reagans term came to an end.
reagan had been elected in 1980 phillips said because government was fairly in disrepute for its swollen size and record of aggravating rather than solving problems he continued that with the cuts in taxes and government programs however h igh income persons did not suffer but middle class voters usually worried when federal and state reductions went too far see figure 28 1.
one of the striking features of the economy of the 1980s was the extraordinary fortunes made by a few individuals.
in the 1980s ivan boesky anticipated corporate takeovers and mergers buying stock just before it increased in value with stunning regularity.
in december 1986 boesky was honored with a cover photo in time magazine and by 1987 he had earned a total of more than 200 million.
michael milken an investor for the firm drexel burnham lambert who specialized in so called junk bonds earned much more.
junk bonds were high risk investments that could pay high yields.
milken arranged investments in gambling casinos and technology startups as well leveraged buyouts in which investors would buy a controlling share of a company using loans arranged by milken and thereby take it over in spite of the will of its owners and managers.
in 1987 his estimated income for that one year was 550 million.
boesky milken and other slightly lesser figures were the heroes of the 1980s.
in a speech to business students at the university of california berkeley boesky said i think greed is healthy.
you can be greedy and still feel good about yourself.
but kevin phillips noted that by early 1990 the new york times noted that wall street found an unnerving whiff of populism in the public s anger over junk bond pioneer michael milkens 550 million a year salary.
federal employees at the security and exchange commission sec became suspicious that anyone could have as much success as boesky in guessing the direction of stock values year after year.
a sec investigation showed that boesky was indeed getting illegal insider information about corporate takeovers and mergers.
when he was charged with breaking the law boesky implicated milken whose illegal dealings were even more complex.
boesky was eventually fined 100 million half of his fortune milken paid over 1 1 billion and both served almost 2 years in federal prison.
in the 1987 movie wall street average annual change in family income lowest fifth lower middle upper highest middle fifth fifth middle fifth fifth figure 28 1 real family income 1980 1990.
as this chart shows dramatically between 1980 and 1990 the poorest fifth of american much poorer the middle groups barely held their own and the top got much more wealthy during the decade.
chapter 28 the reagan revoi 1 283 28 2 thinking historically a changing world economy 283 robert reich was a respected economist in the 1980s and would serve as secretary of labor in the 1990s.
as reagan s term came to a close reich looked at the reagan tax cuts which he argued had certainly shifted money toward the rich.
however he also said that there were larger forces at work that were reshaping the world s economy and that the real issue was that the united states could not control its economy.
in 1991 reich published the work of nations in which he said we are living through a transformation that will rearrange the politics and economics of the coming century there will no longer be national economies at least as we have come to understand that concept.
trade finance indeed the whole job market of the planet reich insisted had become a single worldwide economy in which national policies mattered much less than in the past.
all that will remain rooted within national borders reich said are the people who comprise a nation.
in the new world reich believed some were going to be much better off and others worse off.
he argued that people found themselves in one of three quite different economic categories.
those who were employees in the older industries auto or steel workers for example found themselves with declining prospects.
well paying jobs that had been secure were disappearing as manufacturing moved to other countries.
a second group of workers those who provided direct services from selling hamburgers to health care workers to teachers would keep their jobs since such services were hard to export but would find their futures relatively flat.
and finally in the third category those reich called symbolic analysts the scientists inventors developers and money managers would do quite well indeed better than ever before.
for example reich noted in 1960 the chief executive of one of america s 100 largest nonfinancial corporations earned on average 190 000 or about 40 times the wage of his average factory worker.
after taxes the chief executive earned only 12 times the factory worker s wages.
by the end of the 1980s however the chief executive earned on average more than 2 million 93 times the wages of his rarely her average factory worker.
after taxes the chief executive s compensation was about 70 times that of the average factory worker.
clearly the reagan tax cuts had something to do with the change but not everything.
for reich the larger issue was the shift from a national american economy to a unified world economy all americans used to be in roughly the same economic boat.
most rose or fell together as the corporations in which they were employed the industries comprising such corporations and the national economy as whole became more productive or languished.
but national borders no longer define our economic fates.
we are now in different boats one sinking rapidly the industrial workers one sinking more slowly service workers and the third rising steadily that of managers and inventors.
in the economy that reich described americans would compete not with each one another but with people in the same sort of work around the world.
not everyone agreed with reich but it was hard to look at the nation at the end of the 1980s and not conclude that some indeed were sinking and others were rising quite spectacularly.
source robert b reich the work of nations preparing ourselves for 21st century capitalism new york vintage books 1991 p 7 and 208.
thinking critically 1.
comparison how does reich s economic analysis compare to either defenders or critics of reagan s economic policies.
contextualization how does reich help place the changing american economy of the 1980s in an international context.
kill the villain gordon gekko gave a greed is good speech based on boeskys berkeley talk which became a symbol of an era.
it was not only a few high flyers who got into trouble in the late 1980s however.
throughout much of the 1970s the down jones industrial average had hovered just under 1 000 that is the average value of a share on the list was 1 000 see chapter 22.
in 1980 the average crossed the magic 1 000 line to 1 100 and from there it just kept going up along with public optimism.
by 1987 the average was above 2 500.
then in october 1987 the bottom fell out as it had done before.
on october 19 known us black monday the market fell by 508 points closing below 2 000.
the next day the federal reserve bank seeking to avoid a repeat of the 1929 crash responded pumping millions of dollars into the market.
consumer confidence returned and the market stabilized 826 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present ml the stock market crash of october 19 1987 set off panicked selling as did every stock market crash.
but in one day american stocks had dropped 500 billion in their value and many investors lost their savings.
among the victims of black monday was the nations savings and loan industry.
in 1982 as part of the reagan efforts to deregulate government most of the restrictions on savings and loan associations were removed.
they were allowed to invest not only in houses and cars which they had long done but also in risky oil and gas ventures real estate developments and even junk bonds like those sold by michael milken.
they attracted many more depositors by paying previously unheard of high levels of interest.
they made huge fortunes for their executives and investors.
but when the stock market junk bonds and then housing prices collapsed in the late 1980s the savings and loan industry found itself in serious trouble with investments that were not worth what they owed to depositors.
some 1 200 of the nations 4 000 savings and loans required federal help or went out of business.
since the federal government guaranteed savings and loan deposits as they did bank deposits the government and taxpayers were left with the cost which came to 500 billion or 2 000 for every american.
further investigations showed that u s senators had done special favors for the savings and loan industry and six senators were censured.
savings and loan owners who made fortunes were found to have stolen from their companies.
william crawford a california official charged with investigating the scandal said the best way to rob a bank is to own one 0 quick review how did government policies and changes in the worldwide economic structure impact the average american in the 1980s.
changes in the rest of the country explain cultural changes in the united states during the 1980s.
on april 5 1985 3 months after reagans second inauguration michael jackson the most successful american rock star of the 1980s joined in a concert originally planned by bob geldof and midge ure irish and scottish musicians to raise funds for famine relief in africa.
the concert was broadcast around the world and raised 44 million in a production which included jackson lionel richie bob dylan ray charles billy joel cyndi lauper bette midler willie nelson paul simon bruce springsteen stevie wonder and tina turner.
chapter 28 the reag.
in 8l singers bob dylan and harry belafonte performing at live aid 85 concert on july 13 1985 at j f k.
stadium in philadelphia pennsylvania.
three months later on july 13 1985 some 100 000 people attended one of two simultaneous rock concerts held in philadelphia pennsylvania and london england.
another 1 5 to 1 9 billion people around the world watched the concerts on tv or listened on radio.
at the july concert jackson his guests and an audience of many million sang we are the world.
these live aid concerts eventually raised over 80 million for africa.
subsequent concerts raised more money.
they also symbolized new international connections.
without a time lag people could listen to the same concert at the same time.
they could also transfer money hold meetings and plan new enterprises creating a worldwide culture and economy.
given the speed of travel it did not take much longer for people to visit new places transmit diseases or start a new life halfway around the world.
popular culture music television theater in addition to the fundraising which was badly needed the 1985 concerts also symbolized the way american rock musicians had come to dominate the world.
michael jackson bruce springsteen and cyndi lauper first emerged in the 1970s and 1980s.
they were joined in these concerts by others ray charles bob dylan and tina turner some of whom had been international figures since the 1950s.
they represented diverse musical styles from turners start in rhythm and blues to charless jazz to lauper s rock but all had become cultural icons across the united states in major world capitals and in isolated rural villages in asia africa and tiny pacific islands.
the popularity of american music and american musicians was made possible in part by rapidly changing technologies.
michael jackson insisted that we are the world be released at exactly 3 50 p m greenwich mean time 10 50 a m on the east coast of the united states in 8 000 radio stations around the world.
the technology to transmit the music to all of these stations was new.
when the live aid concerts were held in july 1985 one of the musicians phil collins managed to perform in person at both the london and the philadelphia concerts thanks to the supersonic concord plane that brought him across the atlantic faster than the speed of sound.
music television mtv began broadcasting in august 1981 and built a worldwide audience for rock music.
generating these huge audiences would not have happened without the nonstop broadcasting of music videos aimed at audiences in the 12 to 34 year old demographic who made up the bulk of those who attended the concerts or listened to the broadcasts.
and after we are the world had been released it and 828 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present other music from the concerts was listened to over and over by individuals using sony walkman personal stereos first sold in 1979 or sony compact disc cd players which produced far better quality than older tapes and records.
american music of the 1980s could be heard worldwide because american and japanese technology made possible the easy and cheap distribution of quality musical sounds.
the music of the 1980s also connected with americans especially young americans and their counterparts around the globe.
it was their generations challenge to the traditional culture and its music.
where jazz rock and folk music all began as protests against musical and political systems so the music of the 1980s was its own forms of protest.
african american artists dominated the music but they were not alone.
tina turner an african american who with her husband had headlined the ike and tina turner revue in the 1950s and 1960s emerged after her divorce as a force in her own right in the 1980s celebrating her energy and her sexuality with recordings like private dancer in 1984.
a younger white woman madonna celebrated her sometimes off the wall sexuality in releases like her 1984 album like a virgin.
a new generation the children of the baby boomers was creating a new music and a new culture of its own in the 1980s and making sure that its country and the world listened.
the 1980s were one of the most successful decades in the history of the film industry.
the most popular film of the decade was e t the extra terrestrial a story produced by steven spielberg about a small creature from outer space who liked candy and wanted to phone home other highly successful films of the decade included the empire strikes back 1980 return of the jedi 1983 in george lucass star wars trilogy batman ghostbusters and the indiana jones movies raiders of the lost ark all in 1981 and indiana jones and the last crusade 1989.
there were also more violent movies such as terminator 1984 with arnold schwarzenegger and the rambo films with sylvester stallone.
while both schwarzenegger and stallone played classic good guys the films had plenty of blood and violence.
spike lee directed films like do the right thing which explored serious issues in a thoughtful way.
martin scorseses the last temptation of christ released in 1988 generated critical acclaim but also demonstrations in front of theaters with its portrayal of jesus as a man with ordinary temptations.
as with music so with films technology expanded beyond anything previously thought possible.
people still watched movies in theatres but they also watched them at home as vcrs made it possible for films to be distributed not only to the local theatre but also to the local living room where people could watch at their leisure.
the most successful tv series of the 1980s the bill cosby show reflected an updated version of the 1950s family shows.
but the family in the cosby show the huxtables was led by an african american doctor played by cosby.
the focus on a successful african american family in the mainstream of america and their warm acceptance by viewers was a clear shift.
in contrast when the lead character of murphy brown played by candice bergen had a child without being married and indicated that the fathers identity was not important the vice president of the united states dan quayle criticized the show.
african american artists and writers also came to play a dominant role in theater and literature in the 1980s.
the playwright august wilson began producing a series of plays that explored the black experience from 1900 to 2000 including ma rainey s black bottom in 1985 and fences in 1986.
toni morrisons novel beloved published in 1987 explored the evils of slavery and eventually won the nobel prize for literature.
culture wars the christian coalition and other critics the cultural developments of the 1980s and 1990s in music drama and creative writing also produced a considerable critical response.
looking at the era robert bork a conservative legal scholar who had been denied a position on the supreme court by a senate vote in 1987 published slouching toward gomorrah in 1996 in which he blamed a decline he saw in american culture on the nations enfeebled hedonistic 28j.
j 28 3 chapter 28 the reagan 8 28 1 282 28 3 culture its uninhibited display of sexuality and popularization of violence.
many other authors liberal and conservative worried about what the liberal african american journalist carl rowen called the sexual rot and gratuitous violence that led to decadence decay and self destruction in the united states.
in 1985 tipper gore whose husband was then democratic senator from tennessee co founded the parents music resource center after hearing her 11 year old daughter listen to music by the recording artist prince that she deemed profane.
the religious right was made up of people who were increasingly angry at many of the cultural trends of the 1980s and 1990s.
the moral majority the major political organization of the religious right declined in the late 1980s and disbanded in 1989 see chapter 27.
it had fallen victim to some of the more extremist statements of its founder jerry falwell as well as institutional mismanagement.
some commentators thought that decline would be the end of religious conservatism as a political force.
they could not have been more mistaken.
after pat robertson lost his campaign for the republican nomination in 1988 he helped launch a new conservative religious opposition to abortion became one of the major rallying cries of the growing religious right.
830 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present and political organization the christian coalition.
while launching the christian coalition robertson hired a young veteran of the college republican national committee ralph reed to run the organization on a day to day basis.
reed brought a steady hand as well as organizational and fundraising skills to the christian coalition that the moral majority never had.
he was a young fresh face and managed to portray himself as a moderating influence on the more extreme robertson.
pat robertson was born in 1930.
his father was a conservative democratic u s senator from virginia from 1946 to 1966.
robertson earned a law degree from yale before studying for the baptist ministry.
he founded the christian broadcasting network and the 700 club a religious talk show that reached millions before he began his more overt political campaigning.
in running for president and then launching the christian coalition robertson sought to resist what he saw as the increased secularization of american culture and avert what he saw as gods coming judgment on the nations sins.
another evangelical minister describing robertsons supporters said they have a bunker mentality.
they feel modernity is against them in matters dealing with sex crime pornography education ralph reed born in 1961 was a generation younger than robertson.
as a student he was fascinated with the mechanics of politics and initially put off by the religious right because of their amateurishness.
he was determined that the christian coalition would be an effective organization.
the two made a strong team.
by 1992 the christian coalition had more than 150 000 members and controlled the grass roots republican party in several southern states.
by the mid 1990s every republican candidate for president was courting the christian coalition and reed could say we have gained what we have always sought a place at the table a sense of legitimacy his goal was more than legitimacy however.
read and robertson wanted to shape the nations political agenda from the grass roots up as much as from the top down.
pat buchanan who served as an advisor to reagan in the 1980s and sought the republican nomination in the 1990s told reed you just keep working on those school board races and leave the presidency to me buchanan never won a presidential nomination but reed told the national press club there are an estimated 2 000 religious conservatives who now serve on school boards city councils state legislatures and in congress their impact throughout the 1990s testified to the coalitions power.
religious conservatives were not the only critics of american culture in the 1980s and 1990s.
robert bellah a liberal sociologist argued in his 1986 book habit of the heart that americans were becoming so individualistic and consumption oriented that they were losing their ability to work together for the common good.
a decade later in 1995 a harvard scholar robert putnam published bowling alone in which he explored the impact of individualism.
americans who in the past joined churches social and service organizations and bowling leagues now stayed home to watch television spent less time in face to face gatherings of any sort and even if they went out to a bowling alley now did it alone.
some critics thought that putnam and bellah romanticized the past but few dismissed their worries.
new immigrants new diversities in the 1980s and 1990s many who lived in the united states were very recent arrivals.
in 2000 28 4 million people or 10 4 percent of the population of the united states were foreign born.
this increase was a significant change from the 4 7 percent who were foreign born in 1970 and marked the end of almost 50 years of very tough immigration restrictions.
immigrants they came in growing numbers in every decade.
when congress passed and lyndon johnson signed the immigration and nationality hart cellar act in 1965 no one expected it to have a major impact on the overall numbers of people coming to the united states see chapter 21.
they could not have been more wrong.
the 1965 law capped the number of immigrants at the same place as the older law however it was designed to make the process fairer.
in addition to the numerical limits in the 1965 law it provided for family reunion.
if one member of a family was a legal resident or citizen of the united states then that member could bring his or her family regardless of the caps.
by the 1990s two thirds of all immigrants to the united states were coming as part of family reunions.
official government numbers showed the impact of the changes brought about by the law 4 5 million immigrants in the 1970s 7 3 million immigrants in the 1980s 9 1 million immigrants in the 1990s in addition by most estimates between 250 000 and 350 000 came to the united states every year without official documentation.
in 2000 the u s population stood at 281 million including some 28 million who had come between 1970 and 2000 more individuals than at any other 30 year time span in the nations history.
the new immigrants who came between 1970 and 2000 also came from places different from immigrants of earlier eras.
before 1924 when the united states virtually closed its doors to immigrants see chapter 26 most immigrants had come from europe and unwillingly from africa.
after 1980 most new immigrants came from latin america and asia.
between 1980 and 2000 2 million people came to the united states from europe mostly from former soviet states 5 7 million people came from asia 4 million people came from mexico 2 8 million people came from other parts of central america and the caribbean 1 million came from south america 600 000 came from africa and 250 000 came from canada.
by any counting they were reshaping the country.
immigrants moved to every part of the united states.
meatpacking plants in kansas potato farms in maine and agribusiness in southern indiana all depended on recent immigrants who were willing to do hot dirty and generally low paying work.
the majority of immigrants however settled in relatively few areas especially the states of california texas florida new jersey illinois and new york.
by 2000 californias population was 27 percent foreign born as a result of a major influx of new immigrants and a modest white exodus.
28 1 28 2 283 chapter 28 the reagan revolution 28 1 28 2 28 1 the sign at this vigil in echo park los angeles reads this fruit is the product of immigrants labor.
members of the city s latino community bless fruit baskets as they protest a state crack down on illegal immigration and the increase of border patrol guards.
many immigrants also came to the united states without official approval.
the borders with mexico and canada were hard to guard and many simply walked across.
others came on tourist visas and never left.
in 1986 congress passed legislation that president reagan signed giving anyone who had been in the united states since 1982 the right to seek amnesty and 1 7 million people most from mexico took advantage of the law.
debates about immigration became intense.
in campaigning for the republican presidential nomination in 1992 patrick buchanan staked out the anti immigrant views in the strongest terms.
he said our own country is undergoing the greatest invasion in its history a migration of millions of illegal aliens yearly from mexico a nation that cannot control its own borders can scarcely call itself a state any longer in 1986 almost three quarters of california voters approved a law that made english the official language of the state.
while the law had little formal meaning it was a slap at those who spoke other languages.
some labor union leaders and workers white and black complained that new immigrants were taking their jobs or depressing wages in whole industries.
on the other hand defenders of immigration argued that the american economy was dependent on immigrants who were willing to take jobs in restaurants agriculture and home health care that few native born americans were willing to do.
would the crops get harvested the meat packaged the dishes washed and the elderly cared for if immigrants documented and undocumented were forced to leave.
immigrants are generally younger than the average population pay taxes and contribute to the social security system though in the case of those who are undocumented they may never collect benefits.
some studies they argued indicate that immigrants are more highly educated more likely to be in stable families and less likely to be engaged in crime though other scholars disputed those numbers.
while the arguments continued people kept coming.
american indians in the 1980s casinos and rebirth while their numbers were drastically reduced by war and disease american indian tribes have survived and sometimes thrived in spite of the difficulties.
as restrictions on teaching american indian languages culture and religion were lifted in the 1940s 1950s and 1960s a surprising reservoir of an earlier cultural heritage resurfaced.
for 832 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present american voices caridad rios adela aguirre and sasa savic talk about their immigrant experiences in the united states o single immigrant experience stands for the hundreds of thousands of people who have moved from crisis poverty or war to make new lives in the united states.
these brief interviews with caridad rios a 40 year old native of lake chapala jalisco mexico adela aguirre also from mexico and sasa savic from the former yugoslavia describe some common experiences.
caridad rios i don t believe i ll ever return to my country because of them her children.
because how could i leave them.
for better or worse they need their mother here even if they re grown this country is made up of immigrants.
from the earliest times immigrants came this country belongs to the whole world i have worked now i am receiving food stamps but who cares.
i have worked i have contributed here.
adela aguirre speaking of chinese immigrant women at the workshop she attended the first time that i began to notice that i said that yes they also feel bad they also have problems.
they also go through what i m going through so adela what are you complaining about.
that was when i began to get more interested in everything.
it was when i began to pay more attention to them.
because i said i have to learn from them.
i have to learn a lot from all my companeras but even more from them the chinese women.
first of all because they are another they are another nationality they have other customs they have another language.
and maybe the nicest thing they made me learn was just that that i realized that there are people of whatever origin or whatever nationality that will help you will motivate you.
sasa savic basically i was raised in a middle class family in the former yugoslavia.
my father was an officer in the army.
so when i finished high school i served in the army because it was mandatory for everybody to serve for 1 year.
so i did that and coming out of the army there was a lot of political problems in the country.
the country was in turmoil everybody wanted to separate from each other.
so since i m from a mixed marriage my father is serbian and my mother croatian it was impossible to choose a side and say okay i want to fight in the serbian army against croatians or the croatian army against serbian.
so we decided to elope my girlfriend at the time and i decided to get married and to try to come to this country.
it was very hard to get a visa at the time because we said we wanted to go there on our honeymoon we were granted a visitor visa.
source kathleen m coll remaking citizenship latina immigrants new american politics stanford stanford university press 2010 katherine hanson dream a new world lanham md rowman littlefield forthcoming.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what challenges and opportunities did these three immigrants associate with living in the united states.
craft an argument defend or refute the following statement the essential motives experiences and expectations of immigrants to the united states have changed very little over the centuries.
ib some tribes coyote is the perfect symbol of indian life.
coyote is the trickster who disappears and reappears as he needs to in order to survive and thrive in new contexts.
at the spirit mountain casino which is operated by the grand ronde reservation in western oregon state a picture of coyote dominates the gambling hall and the tribal logo.
it is a fitting symbol.
gambling transformed many american indian communities in the 1980s.
while often a subject of derision gambling brought prosperity to many tribes that had experienced only poverty since their first engagement with europeans.
two federal court cases seminole tribe of florida v butterworth in 1981 and californio v cabazon band of mission indians in 1987 made it difficult for states to limit gambling on indian reservations.
some of those who controlled the gambling industry did not like the idea of new competitors and donald trump complained about equal treatment under the law but the united states had always used a different set of laws for indians and treaty rights created a unique situation.
in the court cases tribes and their attorneys argued that the treaty rights creating the reservations gave them all the powers of any sovereign state to handle their own affairs.
to regularize the new industry that was emerging congress passed the indian gaming regulatory act igra in 1988 and reagan signed it.
while the court cases and legislation did not give the tribes unlimited control over their own affairs a new industry was born one that brought prosperity to some though not to others.
283 by 1994 72 tribes were operating gambling operations in half of the states and many more were planned.
the gross income of these operations 1 5 billion was only a tiny fraction of the 330 billion the americans spent on gambling but it was a huge new source of income for tribes that had existed for generations on the economic margins.
the pequots foxwoods casino produced almost 900 million in 1994 and the tribal council used the money to create other job producing enterprises including a silica mine and a printing plant.
they bought the former electric boat shipyard that helped maintain the u s nuclear submarine fleet.
their goal was long term economic development that was not dependent only on the gambling industry.
other tribes did the same.
the oneida tribe of wisconsin used the income from its slot machine complex near green bay to open a chain store and a high tech research and development firm.
the choctaws of oklahoma used income from a bingo parlor in durant to build a manufacturing plant hotels and the choctaw nation travel plaza that earned 1 4 million per month in 1992.
the new wealth allowed tribes to design their own museums support retention of tribal languages and maintain aspects of their culture that were otherwise being lost.
they also allowed tribes to expand schools provide new job training programs and health services and generally support their members at a higher level.
promises of wealth also led some to rediscover their indian identity.
indians who had drifted away from reservations were now returning a change since the 1950s when a government urban relocation program had led perhaps half of all american indians to move from reservations to cities.
others who were part indian were now claiming their indian ties.
determining who was and was not a member of a specific tribe became a complex issue for some.
r david edmunds an ethnohistorian who himself is part cherokee wrote that traditionally no one questioned tribal membership if the shawnees said you were shawnee you were shawnee by the 1990s however such issues had become more complex and tribes sometimes had to make difficult decisions.
nevertheless the new prosperity was significant.
aids and the gay community in 1980 acquired immune deficiency syndrome aids was an unknown disease.
in june 1981 the center for disease control cdc the u s governments key agency for monitoring the spread of disease reported aids for the first time.
later studies found that aids may have infected people in the united states as early as 1969 but only in the 1980s did americans learn about what would quickly become a terrible new scourge first identified among gay men.
by may 1982 the new york times carried a story new homosexual disorder worries officials at first health officials did not know what the disease was.
they were starting to discover that a cluster of symptoms were appearing in certain groups of people especially homosexual men and intravenous drug users but it took some time to understand what was happening.
the symptoms were terrible tumors breathing difficulty difficult digestion and eventually death.
by 1984 researchers discovered the infectious agent the human immunodeficiency virus hiv and understood that they were not dealing with a few isolated cases but rather a growing worldwide pandemic.
in 1985 the cdc recorded 5 600 deaths from aids.
three years later 61 816 died of aids.
by then researchers had also concluded that hiv was spread through contact with bodily fluids especially but not exclusively through sex or through sharing needles or even blood transfusions that brought the blood of an infected person into contact with another.
people with many sexual partners and people who routinely shared needles were especially susceptible.
hiv they also concluded could not be spread by a hug by touching the same material or through the air but many people panicked and would not come near anyone suspected of carrying the disease.
as hiv aids spread the cdc confirmed 98 835 cases by 1988 the famous and the unknown were afflicted.
the actor rock hudson who often played tough 834 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present heterosexual male roles but was gay announced in july 1985 that he had been suffering from aids since 1984.
many including hudsons good friend ronald reagan were stunned.
hudson died in 1985.
arthur ashe a famous tennis star announced in april 1992 that he had contracted aids through a blood transfusion in the mid 1980s and he died in february 1993.
in 1987 a previously unknown teenager ryan white became a national voice for aids victims.
white who suffered from hemophilia had contracted aids from blood treatments but was then ostracized and expelled from school in his hometown of kokomo indiana.
he died in april 1990.
whites gentle personality made him a hero.
in addition to white ashe and hudson thousands of other americans were suffering and dying.
in some communities with large groups of gay men especially san franciscos castro district and new york citys greenwich village it seemed as if a whole community was dying and those who survived spent their time caring for the sick and attending funerals.
as people understood more about the disease they also turned to the federal government for action.
the government could not stop aids but it could fund research that might lead to treatment and cure.
the government could also spread information more effectively than any other agency especially as it became known that using condoms during sex resulted in significantly safer if not completely safe sex and that using sterilized needles and not sharing them offered significant protection for drug users.
but the call for government action crashed into the ideology of many of the leading players in the reagan administration.
the presidents director of communications patrick buchanan had once said the poor homosexuals.
they have declared war on nature and now nature is exacting an awful retribution other reagan supporters including secretary of education william bennett may not have agreed with buchanan but they strongly opposed supporting condom use.
requests by scientists at the cdc for more research funds were routinely denied.
when the u s.
surgeon general c everett koop himself very conservative on matters of sex education decided that it was his duty to get information out to the public on the dangers of aids and how to reduce those dangers he said he realized i would have to skate fast on thin ice to get by political appointees who placed conservative ideology over saving lives after koop issued his first report members of the domestic policy council suggested revisions that koop believed would undermine its effectiveness.
only in 1987 did reagan speak publically about aids for the first time.
breaking a silence that had irritated many including nancy reagan the president called aids public enemy number one but he continued to refuse to acknowledge or meet ryan white or mention condoms until after he left office in 1989.
gay activists became increasingly militant.
in the fall of 1987 act up aids coalition to unleash power staged a massive demonstration of 500 000 people in new york city.
in addition act up and other organizations including the american foundation for aids research continued to lobby for better public education which in the 1990s was very effective.
eventually in 1992 congress appropriated approximately 2 billion for aids research.
while no cure or medical prevention has yet been discovered important advances in the treatment of aids came as a result.
aids had once been a death sentence but by 2000 many with aids were living long and full lives as long as they continued to monitor their treatments carefully.
in combining issues of medical science health sexuality and drug use the aids epidemic illustrated a tangle of cultural issues facing the nation as it entered the 1990s.
mbhmkhhhk across the country gay and lesbian organizations especially act up shown here demonstrated to demand more funding for research into the causes and cures for aids as well as support for immediate help to aids victims.
283 quick review how did cultural and technological changes in the united states in the 1980 impact each other and government policy.
chapter 28 the reagan revolutia conclusion the reagan revolution began in 1980 when ronald reagan defeated jimmy carter in his presidential bid for reelection.
reagan supported by a broad coalition of working class whites suburbanites and social conservatives came to office with three key priorities increase military spending cut domestic spending and social programs and cut the federal income tax.
during the reagan administration all three goals were met and both political parties the republicans and the democrats became more conservative.
many new deal structures and programs were eliminated or drastically modified and the combination of tax cuts and military spending increased the national debt significantly.
reagan and his advisors rejected the idea that federal spending was the best way to stimulate a sluggish economy.
instead they sought to foster private investment and create new jobs by cutting taxes.
relying on what they called supply side economics reagan drastically reduced both taxes and domestic expenditures.
reagans initiatives at first did very little to improve the nations economy.
during his first term unemployment inflation and the national debt all rose steadily.
but by 1983 the economy in the eyes of most americans was improving.
although the stock market was strong throughout much of reagans presidency the bottom fell out in 1987.
by the late 1980s several economic events including the savings and loan crisis suggested that the u s economy was in trouble again.
reagan came to office with very little foreign policy experience but he quickly focused on destabilizing existing communist governments and acted to prevent the spread of communism especially in latin america.
as a result the united states intervened in both overt and covert ways in many countries in the middle east and latin america.
later in his administration the efforts to build new contacts within iran and to fund the opposition to the nicaraguan government led to what was known as the iran contra scandal that seriously undermined the administrations credibility and foreign policy record.
as part of his anticommunism agenda reagan also initiated the strategic defense initiative sdi or star wars with the intention of destroying any soviet missiles in space before they could strike the united states.
while sdi greatly troubled the soviets it was never a viable technology and despite his hardline stance against communism reagan forged a diplomatic relationship with soviet leader mikhail gorbachev.
before he left office reagan and gorbachev had essentially brought the 40 year long cold war to an end.
in the 1980s the culture wars began to dominate american politics as technological changes brought the world closer together and new forms of music and entertainment dominated the culture.
at the same time the christian coalition gained increasing power and influence.
the religious conservatives of the christian coalition were alarmed by liberalizing cultural trends and by the ways that immigration was transforming the country.
by the end of the decade the country had been rocked by the aids epidemic which some tried to ignore but which was indeed one of the great public health crises in history.
chapter review how did american culture and politics change during the 1980s with the advent of the reagan revolution and so many other changes at the same time.
836 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present chapter 28 chapter review 28 1 a rapidly changing u s government explain reagan s impact on the united states and the world.
review questions 1.
contextualization why did working class whites in both the north and the south throw their support behind reagan in the 1980 and 1984 elections.
cause and effect what were reagans domestic priorities and how did their implementation impact the economy and the federal government.
construct an argument in your opinion should ronald reagan be given credit for ending the cold war.
why or why not.
historical interpretation what major trends in american politics were reflected in the results of the 1988 presidential election.
the changing nature of the american economy explain international economic developments that shaped the united states.
review questions 5.
historical interpretation what connections can you make between the financial scandals of the 1980s and larger trends in american economic history.
construct an argument in your opinion was the net impact of reagans economic policies positive or negative.
what evidence can you present to support your position.
changes in the rest of the country 283 explain cultural changes in the united states during the 1980s.
review questions 7.
cause and effect what role did technology play in the spread of american popular culture around the world in the 1980s.
historical interpretation how and why did the christian coalition become a major political force in the 1990s.
comparison compare and contrast immigration to the united states in 1900 and 2000.
how would you account for the differences you note.
chapter 28 the reagan isiiaabiiaiiisiiiiiiiiissii bill clinton here surrounded by an enthusiastic crowd of supporters was enormously effective as a political campaigner.
chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the changes in the united states as the threat of communism ended new foreign problems arose and new economic and technological issues shaped the country.
learning objectives the bush administration 1989 1993 explain the new world order that george bush described.
the clinton presidency analyze the impact of the clinton presidency and the clinton gingrich conflict on the country.
technology dominates an era analyze the changes in technology and their impact on u s culture.
on inauguration day january 20 1989 as ronald reagan left the white house the nation was prosperous his loyal vice president was replacing him and perhaps even more significant the long cold war with the soviet union seemed to be coming to an end.
george h w.
bush would lead the nation in a very different international context than any predecessor since world war ii.
in april 1989 just after bushs inauguration the communist government of poland with gorbachevs permission legalized the prodemocracy solidarity and agreed to free elections.
in june for the first time in history a communist government was voted out of office and yielded power peacefully to its non communist successor.
that fall hungary followed the same course and ousted its communist government.
demonstrations in east germany led to a change in leadership and on november 9 the berlin wall that had divided the city and europe for almost 30 years came down.
with the fall of the berlin wall berliners who had never met each other embraced and celebrated.
leaders of east and west germany talked of unification which came 2 years later.
in december czechoslovakia inaugurated a non communist government.
what had begun as a conversation between two leaders in a house in iceland in 1986 had become by 1989 what the new president called a new world order the end of the cold war drastically changed u s foreign policy and allowed 838 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present significant dates at the berlin wall which had divided the city for almost 30 years people from east and west greeted each other and celebrated a new freedom.
1989 1991 1993 29 1 29 1 people to see the world differently.
tracing the changes in u s foreign policy and politics in the post cold war world as well as the domestic changes especially those brought about by technology in the decade after the cold war ended is the focus of this chapter.
the bush administration 1989 1993 1994 explain the new world order that george bush described.
few people came to the white house as well prepared to manage the rapid changes in the international situation as george h w.
as a former u s.
ambassador to china former head of the cia and former vice president he knew the key players and understood the context of events as well as anyone.
unlike his predecessor bush came to office with a 1996 prime interest in foreign policy.
it was an expertise that might serve him well in the rapidly changing world of the 1990s.
the united states was also changing economically and technologically but president bush was less prepared to deal with some of the rapid domestic changes that were taking place which in the end cost him a second term in office.
1998 foreign policy between 1989 and 1993 bush and his foreign policy team secretary of state james baker secretary of defense richard cheney national security adviser brent scowcroft a retired air force general and joint chiefs of staff chair general colin powell were initially skeptical of the agreements by which reagan and gorbachev had sought to end the cold war and 1999 they did not propose to reduce defense spending.
however the pace of international developments only accelerated after bush took office.
bush maintained a hands off policy toward the dissolution of soviet control in eastern europe.
he said that the united 2000 states did not want to poke a stick in the eyes of mr gorbachev.
but he insisted in spite of pleas by gorbachev and european leaders that germany had the right to be united and that the new nation should be part of nato.
bush showed less inclination to state a position when lithuania declared independence in march 1990 leaving it to the lithuanians and the soviets to work out the terms of their own agreement.
chinese tanks crush tiananmen square protests leading to u s sanctions on china first free elections in poland lead to solidarity winning and creating a non communist government education summit of national governors j berlin wall falls velvet revolution in czechoslovakia marines land in panama to oust panamanian dictator manuel noriega operation desert storm restores kuwait s independence rodney king beaten by los angeles police clarence thomas confirmed on the supreme court east and west germany unified soviet union disbands waco texas assault and suicide kills 80 military don t ask don t tell policy begins oslo accords between israel and plo announced at white house u s troops attacked in somalia nafta treaty approved by congress and signed by clinton republican contract with america announced newt gingrich elected speaker of the house first republican in the position since 1955 oklahoma city federal building bombed dayton peace accords for bosnia clinton s end welfare as we know it legislation welfare reform act passes clinton reelected defeating republican robert dole washington post announces clinton affair with monica lewinsky osama bin laden announces holy war against united states google founded house votes to impeach president clinton senate acquits clinton of all charges two gunmen at columbine colorado highschool kill 13 the world survives the y2k scare beginning of dot com bust george w bush inaugurated as president h l after contested election against al gore napster system for sharing music goes.
chapter 25 complacency and cl i 1952 eisenhower defeats stevenson for president i united states tests h bomb 1953 soviet union tests h bomb eisenhower proposes atoms for peace at un u s supreme court m board of education ruling defeat of french forces at dien bien phu vietnam u s supported coup overthrows government in guatemala senate censures joseph mccarthy 1955 eisenhower khrushchev summit meeting in geneva rosa parks arrested in montgomery alabama 1956 elvis presley heartbreak hotel released khrushchev secret speech denouncing stalin eisenhower signs interstate highway act suez canal crisis hungarian uprising eisenhower defeats stevenson for a second time conclusion of montgomery bus boycott 1957 riots at central high school little rock arkansas soviet union launches sputnik satellite 1959 castro comes to power in cuba u s u 2 reconnaissance plane shot down over soviet union kennedy defeats nixon for president 1961 john f kennedy inaugurated as president newton minow speech television and the public interest 1963 march on washington for civil rights 1964 civil rights act passed mississippi freedom democratic party challenges regular mississippi delegation at democratic convention malcolm x makes pilgrimage to mecca 1965 malcolm x assassinated 25 1 massive retaliation a policy adopted by the eisenhower administration to limit the costs of the cold war.
rather than keep a large military presence the administration used the threat to use the hydrogen bomb if the soviet union expanded its grasp to new territory.
eisenhowers america americas world explain the continuation of the cold war under a new republican administration.
the successful test of a u s hydrogen bomb in november 1952 followed only months later by the successful test of a similar bomb by the soviet union united soviet socialist republic or u s s r in august 1953 meant that eisenhower and every subsequent president would govern in a world that was quite different from any of their predecessors.
while alliances like the u s led nato and the soviet led warsaw pact might position ground forces the reality was that each of the superpowers had the capacity to destroy the other in a single stroke and probably for the first time in history to destroy all life on earth.
the cold war between the united states and the soviet union was a daunting reality for every person on the planet in the 1950s and for a long time thereafter.
foreign policy in a world of hydrogen bombs early in his first term eisenhower lamented we are in an armaments race.
where will it lead us.
at worst to atomic warfare.
at best to robbing every people and nation on earth of the fruits of their own toil eisenhower tried to diffuse the situation.
in december 1953 he proposed an atoms for peace plan to the united nations by which the united states the soviet union and the united kingdom would turn over some of their nuclear material to an international agency for peaceful use.
however little came of the plan.
the distrust between the two superpowers was too great.
influential political leaders in the united states would not support a reduction in defense spending because they worried about the soviets and because military spending a total of more than 350 billion during eisenhowers two terms was key to defense industries and jobs in almost every congressional district in the country.
so the united states and the soviets continued to build.
the united states tested 203 nuclear weapons in the pacific and at nevada test sites exposing some 200 000 civilians and soldiers to radiation and even more people to the radioactive fallout in more distant areas.
the soviets conducted at least as many tests if not more.
along with his secretary of state john foster dulles eisenhower tried to craft a foreign policy that kept the financial costs of the cold war to a minimum protected u s influences in key corners of the globe and avoided war.
this foreign policy comprised two key elements.
the first was a policy of massive retaliation announced by dulles in january 1954.
the united states was not prepared to take on the cost of keeping troops in every corner of the globe especially after the war in korea.
rather the united states would try to protect the noncommunist world with programs like the marshall plan and the berlin airlift where possible but also with the promise that if the soviets tried to expand their sphere of influence if they were to invade european or other countries allied with the west then said dulles the united states was prepared to retaliate instantly by means and at a place of our choosing some called the policy brinkmanship since the united states was ready to go to the brink of destruction if the soviets moved outside their sphere of influence and the soviets were being put on notice that the united states was prepared to use its h bombs and use them quickly.
the soviets might have had a larger army and navy but the united states had plenty of bombs polaris submarines as well as atlas and minuteman rockets that could hit the soviet union any time and any place.
from a force of 1 500 nuclear weapons the u s stockpile increased to 6 000.
relying on those weapons the country could reduce the size of the military and overall military expenditures keep taxes relatively low and avoid inflation yet still ensure u s power around the globe.
716 partvill fears joys and limits 1945 1980 the second element in eisenhowers foreign policy depended on secret activities organized by the central intelligence agency cia.
during world war ii the united states developed the capacity to spy on and disrupt the axis countries through the office of strategic services.
at the end of the war president truman disbanded that office.
two years later he received congressional authorization to re create it now as the cia to spy and conduct covert operations in foreign countries that the united states feared might become communist.
in the summer of 1953 the cia organized a coup against the elected prime minister of iran muhammad mussadegh who had nationalized oil interests belonging to british companies and who some feared might have communist sympathies.
with the covert help of the cia he was overthrown and replaced with the pro western muhammad reza shah pahlevi who ruled the country for more than 20 years before being displaced by an anti u s islamic revolution in the late 1970s.
then in june 1954 the cia helped overthrow the democratically elected government of jacobo arbenz guzman in guatemala.
arbenz was promoting land reform by expropriating land owned by the u s based united fruit company.
although the arbenz administration had compensated united fruit for the land the company was angry and the u s government feared a communist movement until cia operatives working with local insurgents drove arbenz from office.
neither action received much publicity in the united states but the not very secret u s involvement built up significant anti u s sentiment in the middle east and latin america.
later in 1958 the cia tried unsuccessfully to overthrow the government of indonesia.
in 1959 it played a role in installing a new pro western government in laos.
while eisenhower knew of those actions he may not have known about plans to assassinate the popular elected leader of the congo patrice lumumba who was killed by dissidents before the cia reached him and the new leader of cuba fidel castro.
the eisenhower administration also found itself caught up in other world crises that could not easily be handled by massive retaliation or cia intervention.
after world war ii france sought to reclaim control of its former colonies in indochina but many there wanted independence.
in september 1945 with initial support from the united states ho chi minh proclaimed vietnamese independence using words familiar to the americans we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal but the french were determined to reclaim vietnam.
they installed bao dai the former emperor of annam a part of vietnam as the leader in vietnam.
ho chi minhs forces attacked the french.
the united states fearing a communist government under ho and more worried about alienating france in cold war europe than events in asia sided with the french.
by late 1953 the french were isolated in a fortified area dien bien phu and facing defeat.
some including vice president nixon urged u s intervention even the use of nuclear weapons.
eisenhower responded you boys must be crazy.
we can t use those awful things against asians for the second time in less than ten years.
there was no u s intervention at that time.
when the french were defeated in 1954 an international conference temporarily divided vietnam into north vietnam to be led by ho chi minh and south vietnam to be led by bao dai and a pro western nationalist ngo dinh diem.
elections to unify the country were scheduled for 1956.
when diem refused to participate in the 1956 elections knowing that ho a national hero would win the united states did not intervene the united states relied on the south east asian treaty organization seato a much weaker version of nato that it had helped to create in 1955 to keep communists out of southeast asia but the organization had little effect.
the next crisis also occurred in asia.
chiang kai sheks nationalist government had been defeated on the chinese mainland in 1949 and was ensconced on heavily fortified offshore islands the largest of which was taiwan then known as formosa n 1954 the communist government of china began shelling two tiny nationalist held central intelligence agency cia established by president truman and expanded by president eisenhower the cia was the nation s spy agency charged with keeping tabs on developments in other countries and with engaging in secret missions to advance american interests.
chapter 25 complacency and chang 25 1 pacific ocean arctic military alliances in the 1950s hum u s allies hi u s allies nato members cz3 ussr allies ussr allies warsaw pact members l i neutral nation map 25 1 a world divided.
as the cold war continued in the 1950s the world was divided into two major spheres of influence the west led by the united states which included the members of nato and other allies and the east see page 719 led by the soviet union which included the members of the warsaw pact and other allied nations.
both competed for influence in the remaining neutral nations especially in africa.
islands quemoy and matsu just off the chinese coast.
eisenhower wanted to protect chiang s government but quemoy and matsu were small islands that were much closer to mainland china than to taiwan.
having seen the war in korea eisenhower was determined not to fight communist china over quemoy and matsu.
eventually both sides tired of the conflict and the islands remained under nationalist rule.
nevertheless the incident pointed to larger possible threats.
718 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 25 1 i p52 253 challenges to maintaining peace in july 1955 eisenhower met in geneva with the new soviet leader nikita khrushchev and leaders of britain and france.
the summit meeting whose purpose was to reduce international tensions produced a treaty recognizing the independence of austria which had been jointly occupied by the four powers after world war ii much like germany had been.
although the summit did not accomplish all that eisenhower wished many were optimistic about a new spirit of coexistence.
in february 1956 khrushchev surprised the world with a speech originally a secret speech to soviet leaders only but word spread quickly in which he said that stalin had been a tyrant who had inflicted purges show trials forced labor terror and mass executions on his people.
khrushchev declared it was time to begin the de stalinization of the soviet union.
the speech was a relief to those who saw the beginning of a new era in russia though devastating to die hard communists.
chapter 25 complacency and ch 25 1 2 5 2 j i 133.
i despite these advances conflicts and differences continued to produce tensions to which u s leaders were challenged to respond.
in october hostilities flared up in the middle east.
gamal abdel nasser the arab nationalist ruler of egypt sought funding from both the united states and the soviet union to build the aswan high dam on the upper nile river to irrigate new areas of egypt provide electricity and promote industrialization.
his flirtation with both sides angered both countries and in 1956 dulles cancelled the u s loan.
nasser responded by taking control of the suez canal the essential waterway between the mediterranean and the red sea that was owned by a british and french canal company and crucial to the flow of oil to europe.
nasser said he wanted the revenue from the canal to build his dam but his actions angered and frightened the british and french.
on october 29 with british and french backing israel attacked egypt.
eisenhower was outraged.
he sponsored a un resolution demanding an israeli withdrawal.
it was an ironic moment with the united states and the soviet union united in opposition to britain france and israel.
when the british and french ignored the un and bombed egypt nasser sank ships and blocked the canal.
the united states condemned the british action and threatened to send troops to egypt.
the british never expected the united states to take a hard line.
british prime minister anthony eden and ike were wartime friends but the president was furious.
a cease fire was arranged and the canal was reopened under egyptian management.
the soviet union and the united states looked good to arab countries.
israel remained strong.
only britain and france suffered.
eden resigned as prime minister and neither britain nor france was again a major influence in the middle east.
in october 1956 in the midst of the suez crisis discontent with soviet rule boiled over in hungary.
khrushchevs denunciation of stalin had raised hopes for a more liberal policy in eastern europe.
the soviet government granted some concessions to the hungarians but when they pressed for more independence khrushchev sent 200 000 troops and 4 000 tanks to budapest to end the uprising.
some 40 000 hungarians were killed and another 150 000 fled the country seeking asylum in the west.
some called for american intervention after all eisenhower had talked about the liberation of captive peoples but the old general understood the military reality that hungary was surrounded by other communist nations.
most americans seemed satisfied to label the uprising as more proof of soviet tyranny and leave it at that.
while the suez crisis and the hungarian uprising were taking place the united states was in the midst of a presidential election.
the democrats again nominated adlai stevenson.
although eisenhower had a serious heart attack in 1955 and was hospitalized for 6 weeks he had recovered fully.
the republicans again nominated their highly popular president and his not very popular running mate.
the democrats ran anti nixon television ads that they thought might be more effective than any attack on eisenhower.
eisenhower was well liked the country was at peace and prosperity was evident.
eisenhower won 57 percent of the popular votes but the outcome rested on eisenhowers personal popularity the democrats carried both houses of congress.
neither the country nor the president expected any major change of course in the next 4 years.
however new developments on the international front presented not only new crises but also an opportunity unimagined when ikes second term began.
a small satellite and a big impact sputnik on october 4 1957 the soviet union launched sputnik a space satellite.
although the world s first space satellite launched by sputnik was small about the size of a large beach ball and weighed only 184 pounds the soviet union in 1957 it was the first orbiting satellite ever launched into space.
a month later a much larger sputnik ii was launched which carried a dog laika as well as scientific and medical instruments.
while the soviet union celebrated americans panicked.
the soviets were clearly winning the space race critics said.
democratic senator henry jackson of washington state talked of the shame and danger of the moment.
g mennen 720 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 national aeronautics and space administration nasa a new government agency created in 1958 in response to sputnik and specifically charged with fostering american space efforts eventually led to the first manned moon landing and the space shuttle.
national defense education act ndea federal aid to improve education especially science and math education approved by congress in 1958.
sputnik i the first space satellite.
chapter 25 complacency and.
williams michigans democratic governor wrote of sputnik its a commie sky.
and uncle sams asleep because of u s spy flights over the soviet union eisenhower knew that although the soviets might launch a satellite the united states was far ahead in missile development.
however he could not say so without admitting to the spying which he did not want to do.
it was a difficult moment for an administration that worried as much about national security as they did about a race to space.
nevertheless two important results came from sputnik and the fears that the satellite induced a new government space agency and improved education.
in 1958 the administration proposed the creation of the national aeronautics and space administration nasa and before long nasa scientists and engineers had launched the first u s satellite and soon closed the gap with the soviet union.
later nasa led efforts resulted in human flight in space a moon landing a string of satellites that could be used for telecommunications and spying and a space shuttle that could bring cargo to replacement crews to orbiting space stations.
for all of the fears of 1957 and 1958 the united states had far greater resources than the soviets to devote to these efforts once the determination was made to do so.
the fears that resulted from the soviet launch of sputnik also had a major impact on american education.
many saw the soviet advances in space as the result of superior soviet education.
eisenhower proposed the national defense education act ndea which was passed by congress in september 1958.
after many failed efforts to get federal aid for the nations schools funding was approved because of sputnik.
the ndea provided funds to improve science education provided scholarships and created an education division within the national science foundation.
although national worries had led to ndea and the new curriculum materials that resulted the 1950s had already been a time of considerable advances in education.
in 1940 less than half 49 of the nations 17 year olds graduated from high school.
by 1950 57 4 percent of 17 year olds completed high school in 1960 63 4 percent and in 1970 75 6 percent graduated.
before 1950 more girls than boys had finished high school but more males than females went to college.
for a time after that graduation and college attendance ratios began to even out though imbalance would return later.
although white graduation rates remained far ahead of those for african american and latino students many more students of color attended and graduated from high school in the 1950s than ever before.
given the perceived national need federal programs began to encourage more females to study in the sciences.
at the college level the gi bill had generated a rapid increase in college attendance for military veterans overwhelmingly white men but as the decade went on more students of all races and genders attended college.
college faculty in the sciences benefitted from grants for military research though some worried about the impact of these grants.
even before sputnik was launched a time magazine article asked is the military about to take over u s science lock stock and barrel calling the tune for u s universities and signing up the best scientists for work fundamentally aimed at military results in spite of mutually assured destruction and the space race with the soviets eisenhower who had seen more of war than most americans desperately wanted to find a path to peace not only to avoid the economic costs of war but also to create a lasting peace.
although the july 1955 summit conference at geneva had been disappointing the spirit of geneva and the commitment to coexistence was something on which eisenhower wanted to build especially in his last years in office.
on october 31 1958 during the goodwill that emerged between the united states and the soviet union in 1958 and 1959 soviet premier nikita khrushchev visited the united states and was a hit on tours such as this one of an iowa farm.
the united states announced that it was suspending nuclear testing in the atmosphere.
the soviets also suspended their testing.
by 1958 atmospheric nuclear testing was found to be a health risk to millions around the world as well as an unnecessary military provocation and the cessation was important.
when a new crisis arose over berlin in early 1959 eisenhower and khrushchev managed to avoid escalation.
each of the two leaders agreed to invite the other to visit his respective country in the next year.
khrushchevs tour of the united states in september 1959 was a major success in spite of khrushchevs ill timed boast that we will bury you the two leaders agreed to another summit in paris in may 1960.
progress seemed to be in the air.
on may 1 1960 the progress stopped.
a u 2 reconnaissance plane the type that had been providing the kind of information about soviet military capability that eisenhower had kept secret was shot down by a soviet rocket as it flew 1 300 miles inside russia.
khrushchev announced that the soviets not only had the wreckage of the u 2 and it was no weather plane but also had captured the pilot francis gary powers alive and had found both the poison needle with which he was supposed to kill himself rather than risk capture and a pistol with a silencer that he had been supplied.
why the silencer khrushchev asked and then answered to blow mens brains out.
the men who supplied him with the silence gun pray in church and call us godless atheists the u 2 incident dominated the paris summit.
khrushchev insisted that eisenhower condemn the u 2 flights and punish those responsible which eisenhower could not do though he did agree to suspend the flights.
khrushchev withdrew the invitation for eisenhower to visit the soviet union.
there would be little talk of friendly coexistence in the next 2 years.
from oldest to youngest the transition to the next president while the administration dealt with the u 2 incident the united states was in the midst of the 1960 presidential election.
eisenhowers popularity was high and if the constitution had allowed it and he had wanted it he could easily have won a third term.
but the constitution had been changed and eisenhower at 70 the oldest serving president had no interest in a third term.
the republican party nominated vice president richard nixon as their presidential candidate.
the democratic race was contested between several candidates including senators lyndon b johnson of texas hubert humphrey of minnesota stuart symington of missouri and john f kennedy of massachusetts.
many remembered the defeat of al smith in 1928 the last time a major party had nominated a catholic and wondered if kennedy a catholic could be successful.
liberals also worried about kennedy.
eleanor roosevelt remembered how slow he had been to attack mccarthy and how little he had done for civil rights.
she preferred adlai stevenson.
but kennedy had several important strengths.
he had extraordinary personal charisma charming most everyone he met.
he also had virtually unlimited campaign funds because of the wealth of his father joseph p kennedy and could far outspend his opponents.
under the leadership of his brother robert kennedy he had a superb campaign team.
he won the democratic nomination on the first ballot asked lyndon johnson to be his running mate and entered the general election as a strong candidate.
nixon having been vice president for two terms was the better known.
for the first time in american politics the two candidates held a series of television debates.
722 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 those who listened to the debates on radio thought nixon had won due to the clarity of his argument.
for the much larger television audience however nixon seemed tired and haggard while kennedy who arrived from california well rested and with a tan seemed at the height of new youthful vigor.
in response to kennedys charisma newsweek reported that there were jumpers who leapt to see him runners who chased his car and others who simply screamed themselves hoarse.
people applauded politely for nixon.
although eisenhower despised the kennedys whom he saw as rich ambitious and unprincipled his lack of enthusiasm for his vice president was hard to hide.
when a reporter asked ike to name a major nixon contribution to the administration he replied if you give me a week i might think of one although he immediately recanted the damage was done.
during the competitive campaign kennedy accused eisenhower of allowing a missile gap to develop between the united states and the soviet union and promised that if elected the united states would expand its defenses and its missions in space.
he also addressed his catholicism in a well received speech to protestant clergy in houston texas.
late in the campaign when martin luther king jr was arrested in georgia nixon tried to intervene quietly but kennedy made a very public call to kings wife coretta and bobby kennedy made a successful request for kings release.
many blacks key voters in some states decided to vote democratic that fall.
on election day with the high est turnout since world war ii kennedy won by one of the smallest margins in history 49 7 percent to nixons 49 6 percent though he won in the electoral college 303 to 219.
on inauguration day january 20 1961 the youngest person ever elected president replaced the oldest serving president.
the general who had commanded all allied troops in europe in world war ii was replaced by a man who had commanded a small p t.
patrol torpedo boat in the pacific and who became a hero when his pt 109 was sunk.
the new president made much of the leadership change telling the nation let the word go forth from this time and place to friend and foe alike that the torch has been passed to a new generation of americans in the first ever televised presidential debate john kennedy managed to project charm and confidence to the viewers.
0 quick review how did eisenhower continue fighting the cold war.
how were his cold war and domestic policies similar to or different from truman s.
a culture on the move 252 explain the impact of cultural and technological changes on the country.
during and after the 1950s many looked on that era as one of complacency at home and trouble abroad.
by i960 however the united states was a very different place at home from what it had been in 1950.
during the 1950s the nation became much more prosperous.
in 1960 the average family income of 5 620 was 30 percent higher than it had been in 1950 and 62 percent of homes were owner occupied up from 55 percent in 1950 and 44 percent in 1940.
after the end of the korean war in 1953 the decade was one of relative peace for the united states despite conflicts elsewhere.
but the decade of the 1950s was also as the writer morris dickstein noted a fertile period a seedbed of ideas that would burgeon and live in the more activist less reflective climate that followed chapter 25 complacency and chan the growing impact of television in 1948 wayne coy a member of the federal communications commission that regulated television and radio said make no mistake about it television is here to stay.
it is a new force unloosed in the land.
i believe it is an irresistible force.
from 104 commercial stations broadcasting to 5 million homes in 1950 television expanded to almost 600 stations received in 45 750 000 homes in 1960 almost 80 percent of all of u s homes.
some of the early television programs were impressive.
playhouse 90 the goodyear television playhouse and the kraft television theater brought serious drama to the television screen.
talented young actors including grace kelly paul newman joanne woodward and eva marie saint were seen by wider audiences than ever before.
the abc concert carried weekly concerts by the chicago symphony orchestra around the country.
television news though generally limited to a 15 minute program included the camel news caravan with john cameron swayze and the cbs television news with douglas edwards and brought current events into living rooms.
beginning with trumans 1949 inauguration and eisenhowers 1952 campaign commercials television changed politics people felt a new intimacy with candidates and leaders.
edward r murrows see it now programs brought investigative journalism to television including coverage of senator mccarthys hearings.
lighter entertainment was very successful too.
radio had been available to many since the 1930s and some programs like jack bennys comedy routines shifted from radio to television with little change.
the long running i love lucy show with lucille ball and desi arnaz was the most popular show on television.
other comedies especially the adventures of ozzie and harriet father knows best and leave it to beaver used humor to reaffirm the white middle class suburban lifestyle in which the wise sometimes befuddled father supported the family while the passive if sometimes conniving mother stayed home to happily manage the house.
a middle class white family sitting at home and watching the lone ranger on television epitomized the 1950s for some.
724 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 american voices newton n minow television and the public interest 1961 25 2 s he began his presidency john f kennedy appointed attorney and long time democratic party activist newton n minow to chair the federal communications commission fcc.
although minow had little background in the media he and attorney general robert f kennedy had strong opinions about television.
in may 1961 only a few months into his tenure at the fcc minow gave this controversial speech to the national association of broadcasters declaring that television was a vast wasteland.
while many in the television industry strongly disagreed many critics thought minow was on target.
your industry possesses the most powerful voice in america.
it has an inescapable duty to make that voice ring with intelligence and with leadership.
in a few years this exciting industry has grown from a novelty to an instrument of overwhelming impact on the american people.
it should be making ready for the kind of leadership that newspapers and magazines assumed years ago to make our people aware of their world.
when television is good nothing not the theater not the magazines or newspapers nothing is better.
but when television is bad nothing is worse.
i invite each of you to sit down in front of your television set when your station goes on the air and stay there for a day without a book without a magazine without a newspaper without a profit and loss sheet or a rating book to distract you.
keep your eyes glued to that set until the station signs off.
i can assure you that what you will observe is a vast wasteland.
you will see a procession of game shows formula comedies about totally unbelievable families blood and thunder mayhem violence sadism murder western bad men western good men private eyes gangsters more violence and cartoons.
and endlessly commercials many screaming cajoling and offending.
and most of all boredom.
source delivered may 9 1961 national association of broadcasters washington dc downloaded from may 11 2011.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis in minow s view what was the most important negative impact of poor television programming.
historical interpretation what light does minow s speech shed on the nature of the growing discontent with mainstream 1950s culture.
on the ed sullivan show the poker faced ed sullivan introduced elvis presley who sullivan insisted be shown only from the waist up and later the beatles to american audiences.
daytime soap operas their original sponsors were soap companies moved from radio to television and guiding light love of life and search for tomorrow provided a dash of scandal to daytime viewers.
families gathered to eat tv dinners first marketed in 1954 on tv trays rather than around a dining room table to watch gunsmoke featuring a stronger and more silent marshal dillon than had been possible on radio plus maverick and have gun will travel as well as detective stories including dragnet 77 sunset strip and perry mason.
children s cartoons took over saturday mornings.
reruns of old movies were shown in the late evening.
while some of the first programs had a single sponsor such as the goodyear television playhouse the kraft television theater and the camel news caravan broadcasters quickly discovered that they could make higher profits with multiple advertisers and 30 second commercials urged americans always seen as white and middle class to see the usa in your chevrolet or move up to chrysler and handle their indigestion with speedy alka seltzer.
television was rocked by not only a series of scandals in the late 1950s but also significant criticism.
the most popular quiz show the 64 000 question turned out to be rigged.
charles van doren a major winner on the show had been given answers in advance.
as commercial stations focused on advertising revenue they became increasingly cautious.
one advertiser reminded the station owners a program that displeases any substantial segment of the population is a misuse of the advertising dollar since showing americans in all of their diversity could displease some television became bland.
even president eisenhower said if a citizen has to be bored to death chapter 25 complacency and change i interstate highway system a national system of super highways that congress approved at the urging of president eisenhower in 1956 to improve car and truck travel across the united states.
it is cheaper and more comfortable to sit at home and look at television than it is to go outside and pay a dollar for a ticket it was hardly a ringing endorsement of the new medium.
the kennedy administration would not be any more positive in its appraisal.
the impact of the automobile automobiles had been invented before 1900 mass produced in the 1910s and had a significant impact by the 1920s see chapter 21.
nevertheless the automobile like the tv came to dominate american culture in the 1950s as never before.
once wartime shortages ended the sales of private automobiles grew rapidly.
by 1960 80 percent of american families owned an automobile the same percentage as owned televisions.
the total number of cars registered at the end of the decade was 74 million almost double the 39 million registered in 1950.
in addition the cars were becoming larger faster more powerful and much flashier.
in an era of cheap gasoline the symbolism of power sexiness and speed was far more important than fuel efficiency.
automobiles needed support services and infrastructure most of all highways.
by the early 1950s the american road builders association was able to successfully lobby for the creation of the highway trust fund in which all revenue generated from automobiles especially the tax on gasoline could be used only to build highways with the result that in the united states funding for road building was ample though funds for mass transit were more scarce.
european countries used similar funds not only for roads but also for mass transit schools and hospitals.
president eisenhower who remembered a miserable cross country journey he had made as a young army officer on the nations ill maintained highways of the 1920s adopted a plan that had been put together during the truman administration and proposed the interstate highway act which became law in 1956.
the act created the interstate highway system a numbered network of 41 000 miles of roads from interstate 5 in california oregon and washington to interstate 95 that ran from florida to maine connected to east west interstates 70 80 and 90 as well as feeder highways for which the federal government paid 90 percent of the cost see map 25 2.
these highways made travel by car truck or bus much easier and cheaper than ever before.
at the same time urban suburban and rural sprawl was exacerbated.
suburban houses sprang up and tight knit urban communities went into decline.
shopping malls replaced main street.
mass transit declined.
in los angeles what had once been the largest electric interurban railway in the world with 1 100 miles of track was replaced with a system of highways using buses produced by general motors with tires from firestone rubber.
new industries sprang up to service the automobile and the highway.
fast food restaurants allowed busy drivers to pick up a meal and keep moving.
medical legal and insurance services for the victims of traffic accidents grew.
motels became a new place to stay replacing grand downtown hotels that had catered to those who traveled by train or ship.
kemmons wilson and wallace e johnson opened the first holiday inn in memphis tennessee in 1952 and by 1960 there were 60 000 motels many belonging to chains like holiday inn or howard johnson catering to people who valued cleanliness comfort and the convenience of being able to drive directly to the door of a room.
between 1920 and 1950 gasoline service stations offering fuel and automobile services some in a grand style became the most widely built new commercial structure in the united states.
with their signs advertising mobil shell and esso later exxon they made it possible to keep cars fueled and on the move.
the gasoline these stations pumped also had an impact on u s foreign policy as american political leaders understood the nation s love affair with the automobile and the need to maintain a steady supply of cheap gasoline much of it from the middle east and latin american if they were to stay in office.
726 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 seattle map 25 2 the interstate highway system.
the current interstate highway system is surprisingly close to the original plan approved by the federal government in 1956 for a system of super highways linking all parts of the 48 states.
critics worried about the impact of the automobile on american culture.
in the city in history lewis mumford complained that the automobile annihilates the city whenever it collides with it for mumford it was the city not suburban sprawl that created community.
raymond tucker mayor of st louis also noted the plain fact of the matter is that we just cannot build enough lanes of highways to move all of our people by private automobile and create enough parking space to store the cars without completely paving over our cities nevertheless in the 1950s more americans agreed with new yorks master highway builder robert moses who designed a series of bridges in and around new york as well as the brooklyn queens expressway the cross bronx expressway and the long island expressway and who kept advocating for more roads even as some protested.
the boom of religion in the 1950s americans drove to church and watched religious programs on television in numbers never seen before.
the religious boom of the 1950s was both a cultural and a spiritual phenomenon.
for most of the nations history a little over one third of the people were involved in religious activities.
however in the 1950s that number grew to over two thirds and on some sunday mornings more than half of all of the people in the country were in church.
after world war ii americans became active in religious organizations in numbers chapter 25 complacency never seen before and their participation kept rising for the next 15 years.
visitors from other countries were stunned by the american embrace of religion.
in no other country was there a similar upsurge certainly not in war weary europe.
americans identified with religious communities built new churches at an astounding rate especially in the new suburbs and enjoyed songs like i believe its no secret what god can do and vaya con dios as popular secular music.
historians continue to ask what accounted for this upsurge in religious activity.
the roots of something as elusive as religious faith and as hard to discover as social conformity may be impossible to find but the signs of the times that pointed to a more religious culture were numerous.
no one represented the religious movements of the 1950s more dramatically than billy graham.
graham was born on a farm near charlotte north carolina in 1918.
in 1949 he led a revival in los angeles that brought him national attention and remained the nations best known religious leader for the next 50 years.
the billy graham evangelistic association had an annual budget of 2 million and a staff of 200 in the 1950s.
it produced books television programs radio and its own films.
most of all the association organized massive religious revivals that were held in football stadiums and civic auditoriums around the country.
to the frustration of some conservative supporters graham would not plan a religious crusade as he called a revival without the support of the local council of churches which included liberal as well as conservative clergy.
graham also refused to hold racially segregated revivals even in the deep south.
graham was immensely successful in bringing out thousands of people night after night.
at the end of each event individuals were invited to come forward and make a personal confession of faith to counselors who were waiting for them as the audience sang just as i am without one plea although he was a baptist graham did not worry about religious denominations and urged the converted to attend any church that appealed to them.
grahams success was such that he also became a religious advisor to several u s presidents.
while graham was by far the best known and most successful revivalist of the 1950s many others black and white and increasingly latino evangelists conducted their own religious revivals in churches tents and fields across the united states.
oral roberts a pentecostal holiness revivalist and faith healer built up his own media empire that rivaled grahams.
less emotional versions of religion including the sermons of the presbyterian minister peter marshall published in 1949 as mr jones meet the master also attracted a wide audience.
a protestant minister within the reformed church in america norman vincent peale took the quest for peace of mind to a wide audience through his books guide to confident living published in 1948 and the power of positive thinking published in 1952 which broke all previous records for the sales of a religious book.
peales message was believe in yourself and develop a humble but reasonable confidence religious groups known as the mainstream of american protestantism methodists baptists presbyterians congregationalists and episcopalians flourished in the 1950s with large memberships and with influence rivaling any point in their history.
reinhold niebuhr s book moral man and immoral society challenged religious people to find ways to make ethical decisions in a complex world.
both reinhold niebuhr and the german born theologian paul tillich appeared on the cover of time magazine.
in the 1950s american catholics were still a minority but were more numerous than any single protestant denomination.
as white catholics moved to new suburban communities catholic bishops created new parishes where none had been.
some catholic prelates such as new york s francis cardinal spellman continued to keep their distance from protestants but others such as boston s richard cardinal cushing found ways to reach out to non catholics while building catholic churches and parochial schools at a furious rate.
the walls of distrust were still high in the 1950s parish priests warned young people not to date a protestant and many protestants still saw catholicism as inherently foreign and undemocratic.
nevertheless many of those who sat in the pews of catholic and protestant churches were ready to ignore the old divides.
728 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 monsignor fulton j sheen became a popular preacher not only at catholic religious gatherings never called revivals but also on television.
he brought catholic teachings into the mainstream of american culture and his book peace of soul published in 1949 anticipated some of the positive thinking themes in peales work.
sheen restated traditional catholic beliefs in ways that appealed to a wide audience catholic and non catholic.
while 66 percent of americans identified themselves as protestant and 26 percent as catholic only 3 percent were jews but jews also participated in the religious upsurge of the 1950s.
before world war ii secularism and assimilation seemed to go hand in hand among many jewish immigrants.
although a growing awareness of the holocaust brought despair and cynicism to some it brought a renewed interest in their faith to others.
a new generation of leaders like rabbi abraham joshua heschel spoke of the need to link modern thinking with traditional jewish practices and inner piety.
many american jews wanted to rediscover their faith.
the children of parents who had argued over politics now argued over theology.
attendance at synagogues reached peaks never seen before.
the orthodox reform and conservative branches of judaism all grew.
african american communities also had their own revivals of religion usually quite separately from white communities.
the national baptist convention the african methodist episcopal and the african methodist episcopal zion churches the nations three largest african american religious bodies all grew during the 1950s.
black pentecostalism flourished in northern cities as it long had in the rural south.
the church of god in christ founded in the 1890s saw its largest growth in the 1950s and by 1965 had 420 000 members in 4 150 churches.
the united house of prayer for all people led by sweet daddy grace promised grace in return for strict obedience to the churchs teaching.
in addition elijah muhammad built up the nation of islam from the small detroit temple number one founded in 1931 to perhaps a community of 100 000 members.
a much smaller number of americans also looked beyond the bounds of the traditional western faiths.
the inspiration of mohandas gandhi in india led some to look at hinduism.
from the teachings of the vedanta society or the california based self realization fellowship some people turned to yoga or transcendental meditation.
others were attracted to the bahai movement an offshoot of shiite islam in iran that sought to synthesize the teachings of all world religions.
buddhism remained small in the united states in the 1950s mostly limited to communities of asian immigrants though in the 1960s that status would change quickly.
as americans became more actively engaged in their religious communities political leaders sought to catch up.
in the midst of the cold war they saw american religious sentiment as an important counter to atheistic communism.
in 1954 congress voted to add the phrase one nation under god to the pledge of allegiance to the flag.
a year later congress added the words in god we trust to american paper currency.
while some believers and nonbelievers found this public religiosity offensive most americans embraced the sort of civic religion embedded in the new pledge and coins with enthusiasm.
president eisenhower said our government makes no sense unless it is founded on a deeply felt religious faith and i don t care what it is.
dissent although the 1950s have been described as a time of conformity not everyone conformed.
born in brooklyn new york in 1897 dorothy day joined the socialist party and later the iww as a young woman opposed u s entry into world war i and was arrested for picketing the white house as she demanded the vote for women.
in the 1920s she lived a bohemian life with poets and communists in new yorks greenwich village.
then in 1927 she experienced a dramatic conversion to catholicism left the man with whom she was living and was baptized along with her new baby.
in the 1930s along with the chapter 25 complacency 729 catholic mystic peter maurin founded the civil catholic worker movement and its related newspaper the catholic worker which day edited until her death in 1980.
day embraced voluntary poverty set up the st josephs house of hospitality in new york to provide food and clothing to those in need and protested the buildup of nuclear arms and the wars in korea and later vietnam.
the catholic worker movement sometimes made church officials uncomfortable because it represented a voice of dissent within the catholic church and the larger american culture in the 1950s.
a protestant from the rural south myles horton had much in common with dorothy day.
horton studied with reinhold niebuhr and later jane addams joined the socialist party picketed for the international ladies garment workers union and participated in endless seminars and late night discussions.
in 1931 he moved back to tennessee where he opened the highlander folk school to work with people from the bottom who could change society from the bottom in the 1930s and 1940s highlander trained grass roots leadership for the labor movement and in the 1950s and 1960s for the civil rights movement.
these groundbreaking dissidents however seemed tame to many compared with the influence of rock n roll and no rock n roll figure got more attention or worried more people in the 1950s than elvis presley.
presley grew up poor in mississippi and tennessee learning to sing and play a guitar in his assembly of god congregation.
music producer sam phillips knew that although many young white americans loved black music even the best of black entertainers could not break through the cultures rigid color barrier.
if i could find a white man with a negro sound phillips said i could make a billion dollars with elvis he came close.
with phillips handling the marketing elvis presley became a star.
the music in hound dog and heartbreak hotel represented a new amalgam of rhythm and blues jazz and pop as well as the earlier rock n roll of groups like bill haley and the comets whose rock around the clock sold 16 million records.
elvis sold more than his music.
his alienated look and his gyrating sexuality connected with young audiences who loved what he represented.
critics were appalled.
elvis presley s music and performance style captivated fans and frightened more cautious observers but transformed rock and roll music in american culture.
730 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 one said that his performances were strip teases with clothes on not only suggestive but downright obscene.
exactly that sultry suggestiveness is just what made him so popular to a generation tired of conformity.
when elvis appeared on the ed sullivan show 54 million people watched the largest television audience in history.
elvis was the top musical star leading many other musicians such as black rock n roll artists chuck berry chubby checker and fats domino as well as traditional pop music and jazz greats but it was the new rock n roll that defined the era.
leonard bernstein one of the great composers of the century once described elvis presley as the greatest cultural force in the 20th century even in science more overt attention to human sexuality challenged traditional norms in the 1950s.
alfred kinsey the indiana university researcher whose book sexual behavior in the human male had produced an outcry in 1948 published sexual behavior in the human female in 1953 which though long and full of dry scientific data sold 250 000 copies.
while kinsey insisted that he was simply reporting not making value judgments findings like the fact that 37 percent of all men and 13 percent of women had at least one homosexual experience or the fact that 50 percent of married men and 26 percent of married women had committed adultery shocked americans and simultaneously created an everybodys doing it mentality.
hugh hefner played into that mentality when he first published playboy magazine in december 1953 which represented pure hedonistic pleasure.
playboy linked sexuality with upward mobility and defined the good life as enjoying sex liquor smoking and consumer products without restraint.
when hefner published the first issue with marilyn monroe as the centerfold he was deeply in debt but sold enough copies that he could issue another and by 1960 playboy sold over a million copies a month.
novelists joined in the celebration of sexuality.
grace metalious who had never written a book before published peyton place in 1956 a novel that detailed scandalous affairs in a suburban context.
vladimir nabokov a respected writer published lolita about the life of a young sex addicted woman and a sex obsessed middle aged man.
in 1958 grove press published an unexpurgated edition of d h lawrences lady chatterleys lover unavailable previously in the united states.
whatever else americans were doing in the privacy of their homes larger numbers of them were clearly reading much more sexually explicit material in the 1950s than in any previous generation.
within this context of breaking from traditional cultural norms other artists explored their own alienation in a conformist society.
salingers novel the catcher in the rye the books teenage hero holden caulfield saw adults as phonies who kept up pretenses that did not fit reality.
novelists like ralph ellison flannery oconnor saul bellow bernard malamud james baldwin john updike mary mccarthy and philip roth explored americas racism and the quiet desperation of many.
in the late 1950s poets and political radicals like allen ginsberg and jack kerouac took dissent to new levels.
the beat generation challenged not only cultural pretentions of eisenhowers america but the artistic pretentions of its major critics.
in howl ginsbergs 1956 poem he wrote i saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness it was ginsbergs good luck that police in san francisco seized howl and other poems as obscene and forced a trial that brought ginsberg to national attention.
kerouacs on the road published in 1957 glorified escape from expectations and conventions.
some in the 1950s found themselves embracing kerouac s belief that ihe only people for me are the mad ones the ones who are mad to live mad to talk mad to be saved desirous of everything at the same time the ones who never yawn or say a commonplace thing but burn burn burn like fabulous yellow roman candles exploding like spiders across the stars.
a quick review how did the media play a strong role in both the conformity and rebellion of the 1950s.
what other forces supported conformity or rebellion.
chapter 25 compla lange 731 race and civil rights 25 3 analyze the growth and impact of the civil rights movement between 1954 and 1965.
25 3 segregation economic marginalization and political disenfranchisement were reality for most african americans in the 1950s as they had been since the collapse of reconstruction in the 1870s and 1880s see chapter 15 and chapter 19.
however the african american community never accepted segregation or second class citizenship and in the 1950s it seemed as if african american resistance to separate but equal burst forth in many different places at about the same time see map 25 3.
legal challenges to school segregation that had been building for decades achieved a major victory in 1954.
soon thereafter long simmering opposition to segregation in public transportation led to a year long bus boycott in montgomery alabama.
meanwhile young african americans and some white supporters sat in at segregated lunch counters organized voter registration drives and found themselves considering significant alternatives to american culture.
brown v board of education a supreme court decision in 1954 declaring that separate but equal schools for children of different races violated the constitution.
the long road to brown v board of education on may 17 1954 the united states supreme court announced its unanimous decision in the legal challenge to the racial segregation of public schools a case known as brown v board of education.
chief justice earl warren wrote we conclude that in the field of public education the doctrine of separate but equal has no place.
separate educational facilities are inherently unequal.
it had been a long road to the day of that finding.
the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp though founded in 1909 was often only whispered in black communities in the south throughout the 1930s 1940s and 1950s.
in the early 1950s anne moody then a high school student in centerville mississippi asked her homeroom teacher what naacp meant.
the teacher said you see the naacp is trying to do a lot for the negroes and get the right to vote for negroes in the south she also warned moody i shouldnt be telling you all of this it could cost me my job the teacher was gone the following year.
in the 1930s the naacp began to challenge state separate but equal laws bypassing state legislatures and governors with federal court cases arguing that the separate facilities were in fact far from equal.
two brilliant lawyers took charge of the naacp legal effort charles hamilton houston then dean of the howard university law school and his former student thurgood marshall.
when houston retired in 1938 marshall then just 30 years old became the naacp chief counsel a position he held for 23 years.
in 1961 marshall was appointed as a federal judge serving on the u s court of appeals and from 1967 to 1991 he served as the first appointed african american justice of the u s supreme court.
the houston marshall strategy at the naacp was to chip away at segregation.
in a 1938 case missouri ex rel.
gaines v canada registrar of the university et al the u s supreme court ruled that lloyd gaines could not be rejected by the university of missouri law school on the basis of his race unless the university could offer him an equally good legal education within the state of missouri.
to offer legal education to whites but not to blacks or to force blacks to leave the state for their education chief justice hughes said is a denial of the equality of legal right in alston v school board of the city of norfolk in 1940 the naacp won a ruling that said separate salary schedules for black and white teachers violated the fourteenth amendment.
in 1950 the court issued two rulings.
in sweatt v painter it said that separate law schools for blacks and whites were not equal and in mclaurin v oklahoma state regents it ruled that segregating graduate students violated their equal protection rights.
with each case segregation was becoming more expensive for states to maintain and the arena 732 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 in brown v ihe topeka board of education the u s supreme court ruled in 1954 that public school segregation was unconstitutional topeka kansas president eisenhower ordered troops to enforce the intergration of central high school in 1957 oklahoma routes of 1961 freedom rides core congress on racial equality route from washington d c to birmingham alabama sncc student nonviolent coordinating committee route from birmingham alabama to jackson mississippi map 25 3 civil rights events 1953 1963.
most of the major events of the civil rights movement took place in the states of the south.
some are indicated in this map.
nebraska in 1962 james meredith integrated j the university of mississippi texas in 1955 the murder of i emmett till age 14 by i whites drew national attention in which it could be exercised smaller.
the time was coming for a direct challenge to plessy v ferguson the 1896 decision by which the supreme court had originally approved separate but equal arrangements.
while the naacp lawyers were winning cases students at the all black r r morton high school in farmville virginia called a strike to protest conditions at their school in 1951.
although the white school in farmville had comfortable facilities some classes at r r.
morton were held in tar paper shacks students had to wear coats to keep warm and the teachers had to gather wood for the wood stoves.
the authorities had long promised new facilities but construction was continually postponed.
only after going on strike did the students appeal to the naacp.
the national organization sent word that they would consider taking the case but only if the challenge was for completely integrated schools.
the students agreed and called on the adults in their community to follow them.
thus was launched one of the five cases that would be consolidated as brown v board of education.
the five states whose policies were challenged in the naacp suit hired the 1924 democratic presidential nominee john w davis as their attorney to defend the separate but equal policies.
however the supreme court agreed with the naacps argument that separate education always violated the 14th amendments guarantee of the equal protection of the laws the unanimous 1954 decision said we come then to the question presented does segregation of children in public schools solely on the basis of race even though the physical facilities and other tangible factors may be equal deprive the children of the minority group of the equal educational opportunities.
we believe that it does.
there were those who thought that with the brown decision the battle was over.
many years later kenneth clark whose testimony was central to the case recalled ruefully how naive i was i thought that within ten years or so america would be free of it.
i expected southern states to resist but i thought that their resistance would decrease and that we were on the road to some sort of functional democracy.
it would take much more.
chapter 25 complacency and ch.
some governors began massive resistance to school integration.
the most dramatic took place in little rock arkansas in the fall of 1957.
rather than allow the racial integration of previously all white central high school the state s segregationist governor orval faubus ordered the arkansas national guard to stop nine african american students from enrolling in the school.
in a speech the night before school was scheduled to begin faubus said he was making the move because of a fear of violence.
blood will run in the streets he said if black students tried to enter central high.
nine brave young students known as the little rock nine were scheduled to test the integration of central high school.
elizabeth eckford remembered the terror when she found herself face to face with a white mob somebody started yelling lynch her.
lynch her i tried to see a friendly face somewhere in the mob someone who maybe would help.
i looked into the face of an old woman and it seemed a kind face but when i looked at her again she spat on me.
it was a harrowing experience that eckford never forgot.
the students the mob and the national guard were all recorded on national television.
while president eisenhower was no advocate of school integration he was not about to allow an order of the u s supreme court to be flouted.
he told his attorney general herbert brownell well if we have to do this and i dont see any alternative then lets apply the best military principles to it and see that the force we send there is strong enough that it will not be challenged and will not result in any clash eisenhower sent riot trained units of the 101st airborne.
before nightfall a thousand u s soldiers were in little rock securing the high school and ensuring the safety of the students.
montgomery alabama in 1955 a year and a half after the brown decision rosa parks finished her work day in montgomery alabama and began her bus ride home.
she took a seat in the prescribed negro section in the back of the bus.
a few blocks later when more whites boarded h t b ac stu ents wh0 sou9ht to enroll at little rock central high school in september 1957 endures the taunts of an angry white crowd as she tries to make her way to the school.
734 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 5 i the arrest of rosa parks in 1955 for refusing to abide by the rules of the segregated buses of montgomery alabama represented an important moment in civil rights history one of many developments that undermined the image of the 1950s as an era of total complacency with the status quo.
the driver j p blake moved the line between the sections so that all of the whites could have seats.
when none of the blacks moved blake warned them you better make it light on yourselves and let me have those seats when others moved rosa parks stayed where she was.
are you going to stand up blake asked.
parks said quite simply no blake summoned the montgomery police who arrested parks.
when she was allowed to call home parks told her mother of her arrest and her mother immediately got in touch with e d nixon the acknowledged leader of montgomerys civil rights community who was not a newcomer to making tough decisions.
nixon then 56 was president of montgomerys chapter of the naacp.
he worked as a porter on the railroad and was vice president of the alabama branch of the brotherhood of sleeping car porters the most powerful black led union in the united states.
he had been one of the planners for the 1941 march on washington.
nixon asked clifford and virginia durr montgomery whites who were civil rights activists to join him and the three went to the montgomery jail to sign the bond for rosa parks release.
within a few hours parks was free and at home.
early in that evening the matter could have ended.
the court would probably have let parks off with a small fine and the segregated world of montgomery could have returned to normal.
but as nixon and the durrs talked with rosa parks her husband and her mother the question arose was this incident the test case they had all been waiting for.
in brown v board of education the year before the supreme court had ruled that segregated schools were illegal.
but what about transportation.
if she were willing if she could overcome her husband raymonds fear that the white folks will kill you rosa there could not be a better person than rosa parks for the test case they all sought.
parks had a long history as a civil rights activist.
she first tried to register to vote in 1943 when only a very tiny percentage of alabama blacks voted.
she was told she did not pass the literacy test.
the same thing happened in 1944.
in 1945 she hand copied every question on the literacy test while she was taking it in an obvious first step toward a legal challenge.
apparently the authorities wanted to avoid a legal challenge more than they wanted to avoid her vote.
she received her registration in the mail and began voting in alabama elections in 1946.
in the summer of 1955 parks attended a desegregation workshop at highlander.
i was forty two years old and it was one of the few times in my life up to that point when i did not feel any hostility from white people parks said.
given her background many have wondered whether parkss action on the bus had been planned.
she insisted it had not.
but her life had prepared her for what happened.
a few months later parks said there had to be a stopping place and this seemed to have been the place for me to stop being pushed around and to find out what human rights i had if any parks nixon and the durrs retained a young african american lawyer fred gray as her attorney.
nixon began calling the local ministers.
the new minister at dexter avenue baptist church martin luther king jr was third on his list.
among the people gray called that evening was jo ann gibson robinson a professor at montgomerys all black alabama state college and a leader in the black women s political caucus wpc in montgomery who remembered telephones jangled people congregated on street corners and in homes and talked but a numbing helplessness seemed to paralyze everyone without consulting other leaders robinson and the wpc decided to call a boycott of the montgomery buses when chapter 25 complacenc lange 735 i southern christian leadership conference sclc the leading clergy led voice of the southern nonviolent civil rights movement founded in 1957 by martin luther king jr and some 60 other black ministers many veterans of the montgomery bus boycott.
parks went on trial.
she another professor and two students pretended that they needed to grade papers and went to their offices in the middle of the night.
by 4 a m the next morning using the schools mimeograph machine they had prepared thousands of leaflets that said another negro woman has been arrested and thrown in jail because she refused to get up out of her seat on the bus for a white person to sit down.
this has to be stopped we are therefore asking every negro to stay off the buses monday in protest.
between 4 a m and 7 a m robinson and her students distributed the leaflets.
they finished in time for robinson to teach her 8 a m class on schedule and then distributed more leaflets.
robinsons leaflet fell into the hands of the white montgomery advertiser which published news of the plan on its front page on saturday inadvertently helping the campaign along.
the story was meant to inform the white community what was afoot but it also meant that every black knew about the boycott.
nearly all of montgomerys blacks stayed off the buses that first day.
at a planning meeting on monday afternoon martin luther king jr then 26 years old was elected president of what would be called the montgomery improvement association mia.
as president king was the main speaker at a monday evening service.
he called on montgomerys african american community to protest with courage and dignity.
after kings sermon ralph abernathy minister of montgomerys first baptist church proposed that the boycott continue until the demands courteous treatment by the bus operators and the seating of passengers on a first come first served basis whites from the front blacks from the back were met.
segregation itself was not yet challenged only the kind of humiliating enforcement of segregation experienced by parks.
from that evening it was clear it was not to be a one day boycott.
people would wait as long as it took.
ultimately it took a year long boycott of the montgomery buses to win the victory the black community wanted and it took a combination of careful planning and inspirational preaching to get there.
people needed courage and inspiration but they also needed taxis and car pools to get them to work.
black owned taxis offered reduced fares.
the ministers organized car pools to help people who needed to go the longest distances.
the nations black leadership was not enthusiastic about events in montgomery.
the montgomery bus boycott was a spontaneous outburst that national leaders had played no role in organizing.
roy wilkins the long time national leader of the naacp invited king to address the naacp convention in san francisco but also expressed deep doubts about the boycott.
thurgood marshall openly criticized king preferring to stick with court cases.
all that walking for nothing.
they might as well have waited for the court decision marshall said of the boycott.
but as the year wore on the boycott had its impact.
the boycott received favorable national media attention.
fundraising became easier and king found himself becoming a national celebrity.
the aged w e b.
du bois wrote that though he still had his doubts about boycotts if kings passive resistance could undermine american racism it would be a huge victory.
on june 4 an appeals court ruled in favor of rosa parks and on november 13 1956 the united states supreme court concurred.
early in the morning of december 21 1956 1 year and 3 weeks after rosa parks had refused to move king and a few others followed by reporters boarded the first bus of the day.
we are glad to have you the polite driver said.
in january 1957 king abernathy and some 60 black ministers created the southern christian leadership conference based in atlanta georgia.
the mia had been a temporary organization focused on the bus boycott.
the sclc institutionalized the energy and the planning that had started in montgomery and created a permanent national organization and a long term platform for king.
736 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 ill thinking historically the many faces of the civil rights movement rosa parks refusal to give up her bus seat in montgomery alabama in december 1955 led to a year long boycott of the buses launched the career of a young montgomery minister martin luther king jr and changed the course of american history.
but the boycott worked only because of many who never became famous.
besides parks and king some among the many who made the montgomery boycott a national event claudette colvin a young african american who was arrested for refusing to give up her seat on a bus 9 months before parks but who local leaders thought was not the right candidate for a test case because she was pregnant and unmarried.
her legal appeal was later combined with that of rosa parks.
nixon a long time civil rights and union activist who commanded great respect in black and white communities in montgomery.
clifford and virginia durr white residents of montgomery who had long supported civil rights for african americans at considerable personal cost and who had national connections to help the local organizers.
fred gray then a 24 year old lawyer in montgomery who represented rosa parks.
gray had gone to law school with a private promise to become a lawyer return to alabama and destroy everything segregated i could find.
jo ann gibson robinson and the members of the women s political caucus were already urging male civil rights leaders to protest montgomery s segregated buses.
ralph abernathy a respected senior minister and an officer of the naacp who convinced king to support the bus boycott.
mother pollard an elderly member of king s congregation who responded to her pastor s concern that she was too old to keep walking replying my feets is tired but my soul is rested.
and thousands of additional residents of montgomery committed supporters who attended rallies organized alternative forms of transportation or simply walked to and from work for a year rather than break the boycott.
in thinking about how best to teach the history of the civil rights movement diana turk a professor at new york university said ask most middle and secondary level students what they have learned about the civil rights movement and most likely they will tell you a story of great leaders who through their bravery and inspiring words led millions to stand with them in the struggles for freedom equality and civil rights but as engaging and inspiring as this tale of brave and inspiring leaders may be much is lost when we look at history as a story of only a few individuals and their acts of heroism.
as dr adam green an historian of the black civil rights movement in the united states importantly argues great leaders don t get very far unless they have great organizers behind them someone needs to plan and announce boycotts and marches set up rallies arrange for speeches and press coverage and spread the word about the events that together make up movements not only can a focus on organizers give students a sense of some of the important and often forgotten forces that helped shape history but such an approach also can empower students to see how seemingly small localized and unheralded actions can truly change the course of human events.
source diana turk rachel mattson terrie epstein and robert cohen teaching u s history dialogues among social studies teachers and historians new york routledge 2010.
thinking critically 1.
historical interpretation what role did each of the figures described above play in the boycott.
how did their efforts reinforce each other.
construct an argument defend or refute the following statement the montgomery bus boycott proves that the most important social change is produced by action on the local level.
tudents and sit ins n february 1 1960 3 years after the buses in montgomery were integrated and as hn f kennedy battled to win presidential primaries four african american fresh ten at north carolina agricultural and technical college sat down at the whites only meh counter of the woolworths store in greensboro north carolina.
they asked olitely for service and ordered coffee.
after sitting at the counter all day they still had ot received their orders.
nineteen students joined the sit in the next day and on the lird day they numbered 85.
on the fourth day more than 300 people joined the sit in chapter 25 complacency and chi 7 expanding it to another stores lunch counter.
this group action was not a well planned event.
the established civil rights leaders in neither the naacp nor king s sclc had been involved and indeed knew nothing of it until after the fact.
they struggled to decide whether to support ignore or lead the sit ins.
but it didnt matter what they did.
the student led sit ins that started in greensboro spread like wildfire across the south.
before february ended there were sit ins in 31 cities in eight southern states.
one of the largest and longest took place in nashville tennessee.
after hearing of the greensboro actions over 500 well dressed african american college students walked into downtown nashville and sat down at lunch counters in all of the major stores.
the nashville police allowed a mob to beat many of the demonstrators and more than 60 protesters were jailed in nashville.
the mayor sought compromise and agreed to appoint a biracial committee to look at segregation in the stores.
the appointment of the committee was a victory long sought by nashvilles older civil rights leaders and it had been won by the students.
by july the lunch counters in greensboro had also become desegregated.
while many of kings peers were not sure what to make of the sit ins and the naacp legal defense fund was not willing to defend those arrested king endorsed them seeing the sit ins as a way to confront segregation nonviolently and directly.
he continued to defend the sit ins to an older and very wary civil rights community and the sit ins continued to grow in significance.
from freedom rides to birmingham to washington i have a dream 1963 while the sit ins continued the u s supreme court in a 1960 ruling boynton v virginia declared that any segregation in interstate transportation was unconstitutional.
james farmer and others in the congress of racial equality core decided to test the decision with freedom rides to hasten integration of interstate bus service the lunch counter sit ins launched by these students at a segregated lunch counter in greensboro north carolina in february 1960 began a new and powerful phase of the civil rights movement.
738 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 and terminals through the south.
they warned the attorney general and the fbi in advance.
when the seven blacks and six whites on the two buses began their trip in may 1961 they encountered violence first in rock hill south carolina where john lewis was beaten when trying to enter a white rest room then in anniston alabama where one of the buses was burned and most of the riders beaten.
all of the riders were beaten again when a bus reached birmingham alabama one white rider so badly he suffered permanent brain damage.
an fbi informer had reported ku klux kian plans to attack the freedom riders but at no point did they get any federal protection.
new riders who joined the effort were also beaten and arrested.
eventually 328 freedom riders were arrested in the summer of 1961.
when the new kennedy administration called for a cooling off period farmer responded that blacks have been cooling off for 150 years.
if we cool off any more well be in a deep freeze finally in the fall attorney general robert kennedy convinced the interstate commerce commission to order that any bus or train that crossed a state line and thus under the constitution became subject to federal rules could not use any segregated facilities.
in september 1962 james meredith became the first black to enroll at the university of mississippi backed by a federal court order.
in response mississippi governor ross barnett promised that no school will be integrated in mississippi while i am your governor robert kennedy thought he had a promise from barnett to keep order on the campus but when barnett instead whipped up a crowd of some 3 000 whites who began throwing rocks and eventually shooting kennedy sent federal marshals and then federal troops who restored order at the university.
early in 1963 king began a campaign to desegregate birmingham alabama perhaps the most segregated city in the south.
he expected resistance.
king was promptly arrested during a protest and used the time to write one of his most famous publications letter from birmingham jail the birmingham police under their chief bull connor also arrested some 3 000 protesting children and turned fire hoses and attack dogs on children and adults.
civil rights organizers also met with violent resistance elsewhere.
medgar evers the naacp field secretary in jackson mississippi was murdered on his front porch that june.
riots erupted in northern cities in july.
who knew what was coming next.
lm j the birmingham alabama police force used dogs to attack civil rights demonstrators a response that brought worldwide condemnation.
chapter 25 complacency anc student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc black civil rights organization founded in 1960 that drew heavily on younger activists and college students.
widespread television coverage brought an international outcry about the violence in birmingham including criticism by the soviet union.
president kennedy who had been slow to act on civil rights but feared bad publicity especially in the context of the cold war introduced his long promised civil rights bill in june 1963.
kennedy told congress that the heart of the question is whether all americans are to be afforded equal rights and equal opportunities to support the proposed civil rights bill civil rights leaders a philip randolph and bayard rustin called for a march on washington.
on august 28 1963 more than 20 years after randolph first proposed a march on washington and 100 years after abraham lincoln signed the emancipation proclamation over 200 000 americans marched in the nation s capital and listened to speeches at the lincoln memorial.
the keynote address of the march on washington was delivered by martin luther king jr.
in words that have become immortal king declared his hope for america in spite of all the injustice that the civil rights movement was encountering.
in spite of all the setbacks king said i still have a dream that the situation in america could change.
in the cadences of traditional black preachers using words from katherine lee bates thomas jefferson and the biblical prophet isaiah king preached the hope that in america black people and white people could indeed be sisters and brothers.
martin luther kings i have a dream speech is now iconic but in august 1963 it took courage to make that speech not only because civil rights workers and leaders were being beaten and killed as king would be but also because many would think such hopes foolish and empty.
even as king spoke it was unclear whether kennedy or the congress would do much to expand freedom or pass a civil rights bill.
martin luther king jr at the 1963 march on washington.
the student nonviolent coordinating committee and mississippi on easter weekend of 1960 some of the students who had been participating in sit ins across the south gathered at shaw university in raleigh north carolina.
ella baker who helped organize the raleigh meeting later recalled just as the sit ins had skyrocketed or escalated without rhyme or reason so too the response to the concept of a conference escalated beyond our expectations james lawson who had played a major role in the sit in movement in nashville and had been expelled from the vanderbilt university divinity school for his efforts also joined the raleigh conference.
he told the students that their actions were a judgment upon middle class conventional halfway efforts to deal with radical social evil the students voted to form their own organization rather than affiliate with either the sclc or the naacr thus the student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc was born.
no one did more to shape sncc than ella baker.
baker had worked for the naacp in the 1940s.
martin luther king recruited her to the sclc in the 1950s but she found herself deeply frustrated by the male dominance of the minister led sclc.
her own philosophy was that people have to be made to understand that they cannot look for salvation anywhere but to themselves john lewis the youngest speaker at the march on washington and another sncc founder said we all recognize the fact that if any radical social political and economic changes are to take place in our society the people the masses must bring them about like many in sncc lewis was distrustful of any single charismatic leader even king.
in the sit in movement and in sncc baker and lewis found like minded souls.
740 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 bob moses arrived in atlanta in the summer of 1960 to volunteer with sncc during his vacation from his job as a teacher in new york city.
as moses traveled through the rural south he met some amazing people like amzie moore who lived far from the centers of civil rights activity.
moses described meeting moore he was the only adult i met on this trip who had clearly fixed the students in his sights.
it was as if he had been sitting there in cleveland mississippi watching the student movement unfold waiting for it to come his way knowing it had to eventually come and planning ways to use it in light of his fifteen year effort since world war ii at making changes in the cotton plantation land of the mississippi delta.
moses would encounter more people like moore on his travels and they changed him.
moses learned that while moore appreciated the legal work of the naacp integration was not his priority.
his passion was the vote.
living in a congressional district that was two thirds black it was obvious to moore what the vote could do.
moses wrote to the sncc office in atlanta amzie thinks and i concur the adults here will back the young folks but will never initiate a program strong enough to do what needs to be done thus was born snccs focus on a massive student led campaign for the vote.
in 1961 moses returned to mississippi to work full time on voter registration for sncc.
in september 1961 herbert lee a supporter of the voter registration effort in amite county mississippi was shot by e h hurst a white state representative.
hurst admitted that he had shot lee but was never prosecuted for the murder.
other murders followed.
even when the threat of violence and murder was not imminent people who had lived with segregation and violence all their lives were reluctant to challenge the system.
in the winter of 1963 64 sncc developed a plan to bring a thousand mostly white college students to mississippi to help with the voter registration effort and to focus national attention on the denial of rights in mississippi.
some sncc field organizers worried that so many whites would undermine the strength of the black community.
on the other hand grass roots leaders like fannie lou hamer argued if were trying to break down this barrier of segregation we cant segregate ourselves in june 1964 thousands of student volunteers white and black arrived for what became mississippi freedom summer to register local african americans to vote and to demonstrate to the nation what an interracial coalition looked like.
they were met with considerable hostility.
three of the volunteers james chaney a black and andrew goodman and michael schwerner both white were killed in late june near philadelphia mississippi.
there were also tensions within the movement yet mississippi freedom summer garnered national publicity for voting rights and changed the lives of many who participated.
as more blacks registered to vote they also organized the mississippi freedom democratic party mfdp to challenge the official all white mississippi delegation for the august 1964 democratic convention at which lyndon johnson then president was to be nominated for reelection.
just weeks before the national convention hundreds of newly registered mississippi voters having been turned away from the regular all white democratic party meetings in mississippi met in jackson and elected 68 delegates to the convention.
the mfdp succeeded in raising the denial of voting rights in mississippi to national attention even though its delegation was not seated at the national convention.
the convention made fannie lou hamer a 47 year old mississippi sharecropper and spokeswoman for mfdp a national voice.
bob moses described the mfdp delegates as sharecroppers domestic workers and farmers who were asking the national democratic party to truly be the party of such people while also taking the first step toward gaining control over their lives.
25 3 mississippi freedom democratic party mfdp a separate democratic delegation launched as a result of the sncc led voter registration campaign that challenged the right of the regular all white delegation to represent mississippi at the 1964 democratic convention.
chapter 25 complacency ie 741 fannie lou hamer spoke to the mississippi freedom party delegation after they were barred from the democratic convention in 1964.
american voices fannie lou hamer testimony to the credentials committee 1964 j hen fannie lou hamer gave her testimony at the national j w democratic convention she had come a long way from a sncc voter registration meeting.
until then she said id never heard of no mass meeting and i didn t know that a negro could register and vote.
when they asked for those to raise their hands who d go down to the courthouse the next day i raised mine.
had it up as high as i could get it.
it was the 31st of august in 1962 that eighteen of us traveled twenty six miles to the county courthouse in indianola mississippi to try to register to become first class citizens.
we was met in indianola by policemen highway patrolmen and they only allowed two of us in to take the literacy test at the time.
after we had taken this test we continued on to ruleville where i had worked as a timekeeper and sharecropper for eighteen years.
i was met there by my children who told me that the plantation owner was angry because i had gone down to try to register.
he said if you don t go down and withdraw your registration you will have to leave.
said then if you go down and withdraw said you still might have to go because we are not ready for that in mississippi.
and i addressed him and told him and said i didn t try to register for you.
i tried to register for myself.
i had to leave that same night hamer also described her subsequent arrest i was carried to the county jail and putin the booking room.
i was carried out of that cel into another cell where they had two negro prisoners.
the state highway patrolmen ordered the first negro to take the blackjack a wooden club.
the first negro prisoner ordered me by orders from the state highway patrolman for me to lay down on a bunk bed on my face.
i laid on my face and the first negro began to beat i began to scream and one white man got up and began to beat me in my head and tell me to hush.
i was in jail when medgar evers was murdered.
al of this is on account of we want to register to become first class citizens.
and if the freedom democratic party is not seated now i question america.
is this america the land of the free and the home of the brave where we have to sleep with our telephones off the hooks because our lives be threatened daily because we want to live as decent human beings in america.
source downloaded july 8 2011 thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what light does the document shed on hamer s motives in registering to vote.
historical interpretation what do hamer s experiences suggest about the nature of white resistance to the civil rights movement.
742 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 the north and malcolm x by the 1960s half of the nations african americans lived in the north most in racially segregated urban neighborhoods.
while the hopes of blacks in the south generally focused on ending the brutal segregation and on winning the right to vote the hopes of northern blacks focused on ending segregated housing patterns poor quality schooling and economic marginalization.
one of the most prominent voices for northern urban blacks was malcolm x.
as marcus garvey had done for a previous generation malcolm spoke of pride self sufficiency and self determination.
malcolm was born malcolm little in omaha nebraska in 1925.
he remembered the grinding poverty racism and violence of depression era america.
as a young adult malcolm pursued a life of crime and in february 1946 just before his 21 birthday received a 10 year sentence for a string of burglaries.
in his autobiography he said i had sunk to the very bottom of the american white mans society while he was in prison malcolm experienced a religious conversion and joined the nation of islam or the black muslims as they were commonly known.
when he was released in 1952 he moved to detroit and was soon named assistant minister at detroit temple number one.
the black muslims believed that it was important to reject traditional last names which they saw as slave names since many came from former slave owners and so malcolm little became malcolm x.
his message as a minister was we didnt land on plymouth rock my brothers and sisters plymouth rock landed on us.
it was a mix of pride and separation from white people the white devils along with a call for total allegiance to allah and allahs messenger elijah muhammad.
malcolm disdained integration and the southern civil rights movement.
while he was gaining fame as the fiery black muslim malcolm was also starting to have his doubts about elijah muhammad.
early in 1964 he broke with the nation of islam and set off on a pilgrimage to mecca as is required of every devout muslim man.
in mecca malcolm found himself among muslims from all over the world.
he was transformed by the experience.
when a fellow pilgrim asked him what about the hajj had impressed him the most malcolm answered the brotherhood.
the people of all races colors from all over the world coming together as one.
it has proved to me the power of the one god no longer would he preach separation for its own sake.
he was not any less militant but malcolm returned from mecca as el hajj malik el shabazz a devout traditional muslim.
when he returned to new york in 1964 malcolm explained his new beliefs.
he said of his experience in mecca in the past yes i have made sweeping indictments of all white people.
i never will be guilty of that again as i know now that some white people are truly sincere that some truly are capable of being brotherly toward a black man he was willing to join interracial coalitions to achieve immediate goals and would work within as well as against the political system.
malcolm was not willing to adopt kings nonviolence and believed african americans needed to defend themselves.
in 1964 he met fannie lou hamer.
when he heard her describe the beating she had received he said when i listened to mrs hamer a black woman could be my mother my sister my daughter describe what they had done to her in mississippi i asked myself how in the world can we ever expect to be respected and we do nothing about it.
he was not the advocate of violence that others portrayed him to be but at one point he said let sincere whites go and teach non violence to white people after his break with the nation of islam he established his own independent muslim mosque incorporated to preach what he believed was a truer islam than that taught by the black muslims.
he also established a political organization chapter 25 complacency am explore the civil rights movement on myhistorylab how did conditions for african americans begin to change in the mid 1900s.
laws in the south known as jim crow laws regulations that banned african americans and whites from for example marrying dining going to school or socializing together ensured racial discrimination.
in the north segregation undergirded the social structure.
however african american leaders started to make advancements in their fight for equality in the 1950s and 1960s.
civil rights activists protested across the south making national headlines.
in the industrial cities of the north and west large numbers of african americans arrived in the second great migration between 1940 and 1970 as they sought better opportunities than the south afforded them.
from these cities many also began to speak out for an end to racism.
young black man drinking from a segregated drinking fountain.
shifts in african american population in selected counties 1940 1950 county change in persons percent change columbia county georgia 1 108 20 cook county illinois 226 822 60 los angeles county california 142 672 94 quitman county mississippi 2 416 i 9 wayne county michigan 172 122 70 source 1950 census historic gis data slavery citizenship civil rights teaching american history project.
key questions use myhistorylab explorer to answer these questions cause what challenges did african americans face during the era of segregation.
use socioeconomic patterns to consider discrimination.
comparison in what parts of southern cities did african americans live.
map segregation in selected urban centers.
consequence what was the demographic impact of the second great migration.
consider the results of this move to the urban north and west.
744 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 the organization of afro american unity oaau to advance his political agenda.
his top priority he said was to submit the case of the american negro before the united nations.
rather than focus on federal legislation malcolm believed that african americans had a case to bring their continuing marginalization before the un and with the support of african and middle eastern nations he was confident they would win.
more important than any organization however malcolm fostered a new sense of pride in a generation of northern african americans.
he challenged the quality of education in black communities.
he led demonstrations against police violence.
he called on african americans to control the politics in his own residential areas by voting and investing in the businesses he had a vision of african americans making international alliances with the people of the then newly independent african nations and with the muslim world.
as the scholar manning marable said of him malcolm s great strength was his ability to speak on behalf of those to whom society and state had denied a voice due to racial prejudice the new malcolm was willing to accept white coworkers but not to be led or controlled.
he dreamed that the day might come when in our mutual sincerity we might be able to show a road to the salvation of americas very soul malcolm was assassinated by nation of islam followers in february 1965.
but he would continue to inspire great hopes long after he was gone.
malcolm x 1925 1965 was eloquent passionate a courageously outspoken champion of black people and a critic of american racism.
today he is an iconic figure memorialized in poems song films books and operas.
quick review why were organizations like sncc core the sclc and the naacp essential to the civil rights movement.
conclusion the 1950s was a decade of contrasts.
for many they were the complacent decade when dwight eisenhower presided over a nation that had won world war ii and was happy to move to new suburban homes and domestic contentment.
at the same time threat of the hydrogen bomb greatly influenced u s foreign and domestic policy throughout the 1950s and the space race with the soviet union prompted americans to panic about the state of its education system.
among african americans the many faceted civil rights movement transformed their lives and u s practices of segregation.
during the eisenhower administration 1953 1961 the united states pursued policies that attempted to minimize the costs of the cold war protect the non communist world from communist infiltration and avoid armed confrontation.
key pieces of eisenhowers foreign policy included the threat of massive retaliation with hydrogen bombs and the extensive use of spying and covert operations in foreign countries.
when the soviet union launched the first space satellite the american government responded by creating the national aeronautics and space administration nasa to manage space exploration and by establishing new domestic programs linking education to national defense.
the 1950s were relative peaceful and prosperous for many americans.
the economy continued to grow and many experienced a substantial increase in family income.
americans also became much more religious during the period a phenomenon still not fully understood.
at the same time television came to dominate american popular culture.
most of the programming of the 1950s sought to reaffirm the suburban lifestyles of the white middle class and new 30 second television commercials encouraged americans to buy everything from alka seltzer to automobiles.
the automobile also rose to prominence in 1950s america giving rise to new industries to support cars and to an interstate highway system.
however america s love affair with the automobile required a steady supply of cheap gasoline an issue that would come to dominate american politics.
chapter 25 complacence 745 in the 1950s although segregation marginalization and political disenfranchisement were commonplace for african americans the modern civil rights movement came into full swing.
after decades of court challenges by the naacp the u s supreme court finally ruled in 1954 that racial segregation of public schools was unconstitutional.
civil rights protesters also successfully boycotted segregation of the public transportation system in montgomery alabama and of lunch counters across the nation.
while the southern christian leadership conference and the student nonviolent coordinating committee worked for integration and voting rights in the south a very different civil rights leader emerged in the north.
malcolm x became a prominent northern voice for the nations african americans.
he rejected the integration focused strategy of southern civil rights leaders and spoke of pride self sufficiency and self determination for blacks free from white interference.
malcolm was assassinated in february 1965 but the civil rights movement led largely by martin luther king jr continued to press for full equality throughout the 1960s.
chapter review in what ways was the united states a different country in 1960 than in 1950.
how did domestic and international events influence these changes in american society.
746 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 chapter 25 chapter review 25 1 eisenhower s america america s world explain the continuation of the cold war under a new republican administration.
review questions 1.
contextualization what were eisenhowers overarching foreign policy objectives.
how successful was he in achieving those objectives.
cause and effect what were the most important long term consequences of the soviet launch of the sputnik satellite.
historical interpretation why did the united states and the soviet union find it so difficult to move past their mutual distrust and build a less confrontational relationship.
a culture on the move explain the impact of cultural and technological changes on the country.
review questions 4.
cause and effect what were the most important consequences of the surge in automobile ownership in the 1950s.
25 2 253 5.
historical interpretation how did television transform american culture in the 1950s.
create an argument how would you explain the religious boom of the 1950s.
race and civil rights analyze the growth and impact of the civil rights movement between 1954 and 1965 review questions 7.
contextualization why was rosa parks an ideal person to challenge montgomery bus segregation.
historical interpretation how did students and other young people shape the civil rights movement of the early 1960s.
comparison compare and contrast malcolm x and martin luther king jr what were the most important similarities and differences in their responses to racial discrimination and segregation.
chapter 25 complacen lives changed this widely publicized picture of an antiwar demonstrator putting a flower in the end of a rifle at the october 1967 march on the pentagon reflects some of the deepest divisions of the 1960s.
chapter objective demonstrate an understanding of the unique time known as the sixties.
learning objectives 26 1 new voices new authorities explain the growing social protest in books films and student movements starting in the early 1960s.
26 2 263 camelot the white house and dallas the kennedy administration analyze the successes and failures of the kennedy administration and how they interacted with popular culture in the united states.
the coming of lyndon b johnson analyze the successes and failures of the johnson administration in terms of the two issues that dominated his years in office the launching of the great society programs and the war in vietnam.
in 1960 while kennedy and nixon contested the presidency a handful of white students organized students for a democratic society sds.
sds represented a new birth of activism on the part of white young people just as the student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc had given voice to the activism of african american students see chapter 25.
the birth of groups like sds and sncc guaranteed that the 1960s would not be as quiet as the 1950s.
as bob dylan the best known folk singer of the early 1960s sang the times they are a changing student protesters and folk singers were far from the only signs that something new was brewing in american culture after 1960.
new literature signaled the change that was coming.
between 1961 and 1963 three women authors published books challenging fundamental issues jane jacobs the way cities were developing rachel carson the pollution of the environment and betty friedan the quiet desperation of many womens lives.
they were not alone authors increasingly challenged various aspects of american life.
the new president also represented a generational change in american politics.
this chapter traces the many changes that some americans embraced others rejected but few ignored as the united states experienced the decade known to many simply as the sixties 748 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 26 1 new voices new authorities explain the growing social protest in books films and student movements starting in the early 1960s.
though it was formative for many the civil rights movement was only one of many challenges to american culture in the 1960s.
writers and artist had often been uncomfortable with the conformity of the 1950s and their uneasiness took on new forms as the new decade began.
small political movements burst onto a larger stage.
the result was a number of books films and songs that reflected and helped shape a rapidly changing culture while wide ranging protest movements often led by students changed not only college campuses but also the country.
books films music jane jacobs was a writer and activist in new yorks greenwich village when she wrote the death and life of great american cities in 1961.
in the opening line of that book jacobs said this book is an attack on current city planning and rebuilding indeed it was an amazingly successful attack.
reflecting on the books impact one urban planner wrote when an entire field is headed in the wrong direction then it probably took someone from outside to point out the obvious after jacobs city planners in new york and most cities turned away from massive highway development sprawling suburbs and isolated urban high rise buildings to focus on smaller more neighborhood friendly options.
projects to bulldoze slums and build highways were replaced in the 1960s by the redevelopment of existing urban neighborhoods.
jacobs did not bring about this change single handedly but her book was a guidebook to a new generation of urban planners.
two books published in 1962 played a similar role in other movements.
rachel carsons silent spring is often called the bible of the conservation movement.
other people dating back to theodore roosevelt talked about conserving rather than taming nature but carson gave the preservation movement a new voice in the 1960s.
while most earlier conservation efforts focused on protecting land from development carson described in graphic detail what pesticides were doing to birds and animals.
michael harringtons the other america also published in 1962 is sometimes credited with launching the kennedy johnson era war on poverty.
harringtons was far from the only voice urging a new look at the urban and rural poverty that had gone unnoticed in the affluent 1950s but harringtons book sold over a million copies and the critic dwight mcdonald convinced president kennedy to read it.
in his own way harrington like carson and jacobs put a human face on an otherwise easily ignored domestic issue.
describing the way poverty was hidden in modern america cities harrington wrote the poor still inhabit the miserable housing in the central area the failures the unskilled the disabled the aged and the minorities are right there across the tracks where they have always been.
but hardly anyone else is they have no face they have no voice the war on poverty began to change that situation in 1964 and 1965.
betty friedans the feminine mystique published in 1963 played an equally central role in the development of the new womens movement of the late 1960s and early 1970s see chapter 27.
the feminine mystique named what friedan called the problem that has no namethe comfortable concentration camp where white middle class suburban women lived.
in the late 1960s and early 1970s a generation of women found multiple ways to break out of this and other concentration camps.
each of these books sold thousands sometimes hundreds of thousands of copies.
they were read by college students and people of every age bracket and were discussed on the radio and television in newspaper editorials in sermons in religious communities and around family dinner tables bringing their ideas to many who never read them.
each book reflected changes that were already underway and at the same time each speeded change.
significant dates 26 1 1960 kennedy defeats nixon for u s president 1961 bay of pigs invasion of cuba fails jfk meets with khrushchev in vienna berlin wall is built new berlin crisis u s supreme court s engle v vitale decision sds port huron statement september silent spring by rachel carson published 1963 betty friedan s the feminine mystique published protests in south vietnam u s supreme court s abingdon v schempp decision john f kennedy assassinated lyndon b johnson becomes president 1964 lbj announces great society free speech movement at university of california berkeley lbj defeats goldwater elected to a full term as president 1965 martin luther king awarded nobel peace prize malcolm x assassinated bombing of north vietnam and troop increases lbj signs elementary and secondary education act lbj signs medicare medicaid act lbj signs voter registration act lbj signs immigration reform act 1967 martin luther king s riverside speech attacking the war in vietnam 1968 tet offensive in vietnam eugene mccarthy s success in new hampshire primary robert kennedy enters presidential race johnson announces he will not seek reelection martin luther king jr assassinated riots in major cities columbia university sit in robert kennedy assassinated democratic national convention and riots richard m nixon elected president joan baez and bob dylan singing together at the 1963 newport folk festival represented a new folk music that was often linked directly to protest movements.
films and music had possibly even more influence on americans.
in the 1960s film and music took on a new and harder edge.
stanley kubricks dr strangelove portrayed the leaders of the united states and the soviet union as crazed militarists willing to destroy the world.
later in the decade bonnie and clyde 1967 the wild bunch and easy rider both 1969 showed a level of violence not previously seen in film reminding audiences that this world was still a very violent one.
many who had enjoyed the provocative rock n roll sexuality of elvis in the 1950s listened to the provocative protest folk songs of bob dylan and joan baez in the early 1960s and later to the drug influenced acid rock of jimi hendrix pink floyd and the grateful dead in the later 1960s.
change protest and disengagement were increasingly reflected in film and song.
protest songs and angry movies however did not completely dominate the media in the 1960s.
the sentimental celebration of love and marriage the sound of music 1965 earned 100 million the highest gross income of any movie up to that time.
the adventures of ozzie and harriet continued to be one of the most popular tv series up to 1966.
in addition the traditional music on the lawrence welk show and the symphonic pop music of henry mancini competed with folk and rock throughout the decade.
the sixties were far from a unified decade in culture or politics but the very depth of the disunity was one of the hallmarks of the times.
the student movement of the 1960s universities had long been the location for challenges to the norms of the larger society.
during the great depression of the 1930s there were many student demonstrations.
but the sheer numbers of students and the new attitudes of the baby boom generation who came to college in the 1960s transformed college life.
in 1947 as a result of the gi bill college enrollments reached an historic high and they continued to grow in each following decade.
budgets for higher education grew even faster than enrollments.
as sociologist and 1960s student activist todd gitlin noted by 1960 the united states was the first society in the history of the world with more college students than farmers ten years later the nation had three times as many students as farmers.
although most of the students of the late 1940s and 1950s had been relatively quiet the students of the 1960s were not.
students who had founded the students for a democratic society sds in 1960 met at port huron michigan in 1962 to draft a statement of their beliefs.
the 1962 port huron statement of which tom hayden then a graduate student was the prime author began we are people of this generation bred in at least modest comfort housed now in universities looking uncomfortably to the world we inherit recognizing their baby boom origins the statement continued many of us began maturing in complacency but then a s we grew however our comfort was penetrated by events too troubling to dismiss the southern struggle against racial bigotry and the enclosing fact of the cold war.
the port huron statement noted a yearning to believe there is an alternative to the present that something can be done to change circumstances in the school the work places the bureaucracies the 750 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 thinking historically rachel carson s silent spring 1962 rachel carson grew up in an isolated rural community 15 miles northeast of pittsburgh on the allegheny river.
as an adult she worked for the federal fish and wildlife service while also writing independently publishing the sea around us a description of life in the ocean in 1951 the book was a great success and carson decided to then take on a study of the impact of ddt and other chemicals on the environment.
the result was carson s most famous book silent spring which not only caught public imagination but also changed the way many americans thought about the environment.
silent spring was first published as a series of articles in the new yorker in 1962 then published as a book that same year and in 1963 aired as part of a cbs television series in 1963.
carson warned since the mid 1940s over 200 basic chemicals have been created for use in killing insects weeds rodents and other organisms described in the modern vernacular as pests and they are sold under several thousand different brand names.
these sprays dusts and aerosols are now applied almost universally to farms gardens forests and homes nonselec tive chemicals that have the power to kill every insect the good and the bad to still the song of birds and the leaping of fish in the streams to coat the leaves with deadly film and to linger on in the soil all this though the intended target may be only a few weeds or insects.
can anyone believe it is possible to lay down such a barrage of poisons on the surface of the earth without making it unfit for all life.
they should not be called insecticides but biocides.
along with praise for the book carson was criticized most of all by the chemical industry whose products her research and writings indicted.
spokespersons for some of the major chemical companies and even some of carson s former colleagues in the department of agriculture attacked the book as an effort to turn the clock back to a time when insect born diseases most of all malaria killed thousands and wiped out crops causing widespread starvation.
president kennedy however was impressed enough with the book to order his science advisory committee to review it.
when the committee confirmed her findings kennedy and subsequent administrations took further action banning the domestic use of ddt.
later in 1970 president nixon signed the legislation creating the environmental protection agency to consolidate the government s efforts to protect the environment that carson loved.
source rachel carson silent spring boston houghton mifflin 1962.
two of the several studies analyzing rachel carson and silent spring as well as its impact on the subsequent environmental movement mark hamilton lytle the gentle subversive rachel carson silent spring and the rise of the environmental movement new york oxford university press 2007 and priscilla coit murphy what a book can do the publication and reception of silent spring amherst university of massachusetts press 2005.
thinking critically 1.
historical interpretation how might carson have responded to critics in the chemical industry.
how might the public have evaluated their criticism.
how might people s jobs or political views impact their response.
contextualization thinking about earlier conservation efforts like those of teddy roosevelt how was carson different.
nra government it is to this latter yearning at once the spark and engine of change that we direct our present appeal the spark and the yearning to believe there is an alternative to the present would characterize the decade of the 1960s for many people especially the young.
not long after sds was launched another student movement emerged at the university of california at berkeley.
in the fall of 1964 the berkeley administration issued a directive that student organizations that were raising funds for off campus causes such as civil rights using tables set up on the university grounds had to move those efforts off campus.
opposition to the directive quickly united students.
when petitions and meetings with the university administration did not resolve the issue a group of students some of whom had spent the previous summer in the south as part of mississippi freedom summer called for civil disobedience in berkeley.
students brought their tables back to campus and waited to see what would happen.
before long campus police arrived and arrested jack weinberg who had been chapter langed 751 sitting at one of the tables placing him in a police car.
quickly some 3 000 students surrounded the car and for the next 32 hours while weinberg sat in the car speaker after speaker used the top of the car as a platform.
the long spontaneous rally launched the free speech movement at berkeley.
in december of that year at a much larger student rally on the berkeley campus mario savio a junior philosophy major who emerged as the prime voice of the student protest during the siege of the police car told his fellow students there s a time when the operation of the machine becomes so odious youve got to put your bodies upon the gears and upon the wheels upon the levers upon all the apparatus and youve got to make it stop hundreds marched into the administration building to stop the universitys wheels.
they sat in for two days until arrested.
berkeley remained a center of student protest.
quick review how did student protest changes in popular music and the inauguration of john f kennedy symbolize the changes coming to the united states in the early 1960s.
26 2 camelot the white house and dallas the kennedy administration analyze the successes and failures of the kennedy administration and how they interacted with popular culture in the united states.
the student protests were but one aspect of the changes taking place in the early 1960s.
the january 1961 inauguration of john f kennedy referred to often as jfk brought the youngest president elected in the nations history to replace the oldest.
a new generation was taking charge of the country from college campuses to the white house.
kennedy partisans remembered his years in office as one brief shining moment to cite the lines of the then popular camelot a broadway play about medieval glory to which the kennedys glamour was often compared.
certainly john kennedy his young and attractive wife jacqueline bouvier kennedy and their extended family made for a dramatic comparison with the sometimes dowdy eisenhowers.
they were able to project an image of glamour youth vigor the presidents favorite word pronouncing it with his boston accent as vigah and wit.
the press loved to spar with kennedy and he with them.
during the kennedy years the white house was the scene of gala events concerts and dinner parties not seen in washington for some time.
the hopes and expectations for change that arrived with kennedy were unmistakable.
the new frontier civil rights advocates also had high hopes for the kennedy administration believing that the new president who had gone out of his way as a candidate to support martin luther king jr would do more to support the cause of civil rights than eisenhower.
the kennedy administration created a committee on equal employment opportunities headed by vice president johnson to look into discrimination in hiring.
they hired blacks in the federal government including some in high positions in the civil and foreign service.
jfk nominated african americans including thurgood marshall to federal judgeships.
during the presidential campaign in 1960 kennedy promised to introduce a new federal civil rights bill if elected.
but throughout 1961 and 1962 no such bill emerged from the white house.
he also had promised to end racial discrimination in federal housing with the stroke of a pen but when no order emerged civil rights organizers started sending thousands of pens to him.
kennedy was slow to move on civil rights for many reasons.
he could count votes in the congress and southern senators with high seniority made congressional action hard to imagine.
the kennedys were also good at gauging voter interest and in 1961 752 partvill fears joys and limits 1945 1980 jacqueline kennedy and her husband made the white house a center of grace and culture as in this reception honoring nobel prize winners including the poet robert frost and the novelist pearl buck.
and 1962 not that many white voters seemed interested in civil rights issues.
at the same time j edgar hoover hated martin luther king jr and was convinced that he was a sexual degenerate and a communist.
he had tapes to prove extramarital activity on kings part if nothing to show that he was a communist.
hoover also had tapes to prove president kennedys considerable extramarital activities which may well have made both kennedy brothers reluctant to challenge hoover who they allowed to tap kings telephones.
whatever the reasons the vaunted kennedy vigor was not brought to civil rights.
in other areas kennedys new frontier as he called his domestic policy was more successful.
working closely with house speaker sam rayburn the administration was able to win an increase in the federally mandated minimum wage.
at their urging congress also provided funds for job training and tougher regulations for testing new drugs before they went on the market.
jfk was the first president since herbert hoover to include no women in the cabinet but he appointed eleanor roosevelt to head the presidential commission on the status of women that recommended federal laws against sex discrimination.
kennedy issued executive orders ending sex discrimination in the federal civil service and signed a 1963 equal pay act that mandated equal pay for equal work.
in part because of his mentally ill sister kennedy cared deeply about mental health and at his urging congress passed the mental retardation facilities and community mental health act in 1963 that funded support for mental health programs.
in may 1961 kennedy who had been critical of the lack of interest in space exploration by the eisenhower administration advocated a significant increase in funding for the national aeronautics and space administration nasa and made a promise that within 10 years the united states would safely land a man on the moon.
although kennedy did not live to see the promise fulfilled in 1969 the nation celebrated that accomplishment.
ihe chair of his council of economic advisers walter heller convinced kennedy that a tax cut would stimulate the economy leading to greater prosperity for americans and improved standing of the kennedy administration with voters.
kennedy fought new frontier the name given to the domestic programs of the kennedy administration 1961 1963.
chaptei banged 753 engel v vitale u s supreme court decision that banned mandated prayers or devotional bible reading in american public schools.
hard for the tax cut and won.
nevertheless the domestic record was disappointing to the administration which would have liked to see faster congressional action on many of its proposals.
the new york times for november 12 1963 said rarely has there been such a pervasive attitude of discouragement around capitol hill this has been one of the least productive sessions of congress within the memory of most of its members religion education and the courts just as kennedy had his reasons for not wanting to deal with civil rights he also had very strong reasons for not wanting to deal with the issue of religion.
as the first catholic to be elected president he wanted to steer clear of anything that might imply his religion was influencing his work.
but as with civil rights issues of religion were bubbling.
on june 25 1962 the u s supreme court announced its decision in the case of engel v vitale.
by a 6 1 vote the court declared that schools in new york state could not open the school day with prayer.
the specific issue in engel v vitale was of relatively recent origin.
as the cold war led to a fear of godless communism the new york state board of regents which had responsibility for all public schools in the state of new york recommended but did not require opening the school day with prayer.
then in 1958 the board composed a short official prayer almighty god we acknowledge our dependence upon thee and we beg thy blessings upon us our parents our teachers and our country it was as inoffensive as a prayer could be and any students who objected could be excused when it was recited.
nevertheless the prayer caused problems.
nonbelievers did not want to say any prayer.
devout believers found such a bland prayer close to blasphemy.
when joseph and daniel roth asked to be excused from their long island classroom during the prayer because their father asked them to they were taunted.
their father lawrence roth challenged the prayer in court.
as the case was combined with others and moved through the courts it generated public attention and anger.
in the end justice hugo black spoke for the supreme court majority in saying we think that the constitutional prohibition against laws respecting an establishment of religion must at least mean that in this country it is no part of the business of government to compose official prayers a year later the court went further.
edward and sidney schempp challenged the policy of the abington township school board pennsylvania which opened the school day with a bible reading and the lords prayer.
in a 1963 decision abington school board v schempp the u s supreme court ruled that no matter who composed the prayers the school boards practices or any devotional reading of scriptures or recitation of prayers was unconstitutional.
the court went out of its way to insist that the academic study of religion including the study of the bible for its literary and historic qualities was not only constitutional but also to be encouraged.
however it was not the business of government the court said to lead devotional activities.
the supreme courts decisions provoked a fire storm.
many americans protestants and catholics claimed that the court was legislating god out of the public schools and that historic practices that had never bothered anyone were being undermined by an unusually activist warren court.
new york congressman frank j becker proposed an amendment to the constitution to allow voluntary prayer and bible reading.
the evangelist billy graham said the trend of taking god and moral teaching from the schools is a diabolical scheme alabama governor george wallace said i don t care what they say in washington we are going to keep right on praying and reading the bible in the public schools of alabama while catholics had once opposed devotional activities in public schools sure that they would be protestant now new york archbishop francis cardinal spellman said he was shocked and frightened by the courts decisions.
for large numbers of americans the decisions were the beginnings of a cultural war that would last for decades.
754 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 kennedy s foreign policy from the bay of pigs to the cuban missile crisis in a private conversation with his defeated rival richard nixon president kennedy asked nixon foreign affairs is the only important issue for a president to handle isnt it.
kennedy said he really didnt care about the minimum wage compared to something like cuba.
while americans receiving minimum wage might care a great deal about it kennedy s focus was indeed cuba germany vietnam china and perhaps most of all the soviet union.
in his inaugural address kennedy had promised to pay any price bear any burden meet any hardship support any friend oppose any foe to assure the survival and success of liberty.
he came to office a devout cold warrior and remained one.
the first test of kennedys cold war resolve came early.
the corrupt government of cuban dictator fulgencio batista had been overthrown at the beginning of 1959 in the middle of eisenhowers second term.
the new revolutionary government led by fidel castro was very popular in the united states during its first few months in office.
castro was welcomed in the united states and even appeared on the ed sullivan show.
organized crime which had enjoyed a haven for gambling and prostitution in cuba under batista was driven out by castro to the applause of most americans.
however the cuban american relationship quickly soured.
the new revolutionary government executed a number of batista supporters too many most americans thought.
as part of its land reform efforts the castro government seized the islands large commercial enterprises including vast holdings of american sugar and oil companies.
unhappy business interests legitimate and illegitimate began a public relations campaign against the new cuban government.
castros communist leanings also became clearer as cuba developed close ties with the soviet union.
before long soviet military advisers arrived in cuba.
by the time kennedy came to office in january 1961 many considered cuba to be a virtual satellite of the soviet union.
the eisenhower administration had developed plans to train a volunteer force to invade the island.
influential people including jfks father former ambassador joseph p kennedy urged kennedy to take action.
while some advisers had reservations allen dulles the head of the central intelligence agency cia was a strong advocate and secretary of defense mcnamara and the joint chiefs of staff approved the invasion.
on april 15 1961 less than 3 months after jfk took office american based planes made an initial bombing run against the island.
two days later a brigade of 1 400 u s volunteer troops landed at the bay of pigs on cubas south coast.
the plan was for the force to connect with other cuban anti castro forces that the cia was convinced were ready to rise up against the regime.
in fact no internal revolt sprang up.
cuban defenses were strong.
when the attackers called for further air support from the united states kennedy refused.
he had become convinced that the attack was doomed.
within hours 114 of the invaders were killed and 1 189 taken prisoner.
the bay of pigs fiasco was a huge embarrassment for kennedy.
he took personal responsibility for the failure.
he also fired allen dulles.
for the rest of his term kennedy would be more cautious and less willing to trust advisers in the cia.
kennedys first summit with soviet leader nikita khrushchev took place in june 1961 in vienna just 2 months after the bay of pigs crisis.
the meeting did not go well.
khrushchev gloated over the soviet union s success in getting the first man into space when yuri gagarin orbited the earth in april.
he also made threatening comments about berlin.
khrushchev seemed to believe that the new president was weak and could be brow beaten.
in fact his actions only strengthened kennedy s inclination to show he could be tough.
two months later khrushchev ordered the construction of what came to be known as the berlin wall to separate the soviet zone of the city from the western zone and the construction of similar barriers separating all of east germany from west germany.
german communists complained that their socialist system provided free education for people who then took their skills west to make more money.
after august 1961 no such easy movement nor were family visits or other travel possible.
26 1 26 2 263 bay of pigs a 1961 invasion of cuba by anti castro rebels backed by the kennedy administration that was quickly defeated much to kennedy s embarrassment.
berlin wall a substantive partition built by east germany on instructions from the soviet union that cut off all travel between east and west berlin from 1961 to 1989.
ch fim lives changed 755 medium range ballistic missile base in cuba san cristobal cuban missile crisis a tense standoff between the united states and the soviet union in october 1962 at which each country stood on the brink of nuclear war over the placement of soviet missiles in cuba.
an american surveillance plane took pictures like this one of missile facilities in cuba that deeply worried the kennedy administration.
by fall berlin had become very tense.
some kennedy advisers suggested that the united states should use force to stop construction of the berlin wall.
others wondered whether access would be blocked as it was at the time of the berlin airlift.
by the end of october u s and russian tanks faced off in berlin.
some wondered whether world war iii was about to begin.
eventually the united states and the soviet union compromised.
kennedy acknowledged that he would rather have a wall than a war and that the soviets had a right to build the berlin wall.
khrushchev did not try to close off american or western access to berlin as stalin had done.
while the city remained a flash point in the cold war and the berlin wall stayed in place until november 1989 the berlin crisis of 1961 passed.
the third major foreign policy crisis of the kennedy administration and the most dangerous took place in october 1962.
again the focus was cuba.
after the u s failure in the bay of pigs invasion cuban russian ties grew stronger and the soviets sent more military personnel to cuba.
in the summer of 1962 the soviets began building missile bases in cuba that could house medium range missiles pointed at the united states.
as u s reconnaissance flights showed proof of the missiles in cuba it became clear that a major crisis the cuban missile crisis was brewing.
in this crisis atmosphere kennedy convened an executive committee of the national security council.
for 13 tense days in october 1962 these advisers debated the next u s step.
moderates led by un ambassador adlai stevenson urged restraint.
why panic about a new missile site they asked when the united states had missiles in turkey and there were enough submarine based missiles to destroy the planet.
756 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 hard liners including former secretary of state dean acheson and national security adviser mcgeorge bundy urged an immediate u s attack on the missile site.
a third group led by robert kennedy opposed a surprise strike which rfk said would make his brother the tojo the japanese premiere who ordered the attack on pearl harbor of the 1960s.
the president agreed with his brothers position and overruled the hard liners but he was also determined to be tough.
on october 22 president kennedy informed khrushchev in both a diplomatic communication and a prime time television speech that the united states would enforce a complete quarantine against future military shipments to cuba and that the united states would meet any soviet retaliation anywhere in the world with a full retaliatory response.
the stakes could not be higher.
if a soviet ship ran the blockade it would be fired on by the united states.
if the soviets made a military move the united states was prepared to fire missiles.
many worried that the world was on the brink of nuclear war.
the next morning as the first soviet ships approached people held their breaths.
then the soviet freighters turned around.
secretary of state dean rusk said were eyeball to eyeball and the other fellow just blinked behind the scenes kennedy and khrushchev had come to an agreement.
the soviets agreed to remove the missiles in return for an end to the quarantine of the island and a promise that the united states would not invade.
the united states also agreed to remove its missiles from turkey but did not announce its decision.
an unthinkable war had been avoided.
both leaders quickly took steps to avoid a repeat of the crisis and new communication systems especially a hot line from the pentagon and white house to the kremlin were set up so there would be no delay in communication in any future crisis.
some military leaders and cuban exiles were furious at kennedy.
u s air force general curtis lemay who had commanded the bombing of tokyo in 1945 stunned the president when he told him its the greatest defeat in our history mr president we should invade today others wondered whether kennedy allowed his machismo to get the best of him when the missiles in cuba were no more of a threat than others already in place and hardly worth a world war.
while the crises in cuba berlin and then cuba again were the most significant of kennedys foreign policy the president also faced others.
in spite of the 1960 campaign rhetoric in which kennedy had accused eisenhower of allowing a missile gap to develop between the united states and the soviet union once in office kennedy acknowledged that no such gap existed.
nevertheless the kennedy administration increased military spending from 47 4 billion when it took office to 53 6 billion in its last budget.
the united states expanded the number of polaris submarines armed with missiles as well as the number of land based missiles in the united states.
each side had enough missiles to destroy the world multiple times.
the administration created a new flexible response policy as an alternative to eisenhowers mutually assured destruction they gave high priority to creating counterinsurgency forces named the green berets that could engage in small scale military operations in hot spots around the world.
in planning for cuba where the administration had a special interest they developed operation mongoose a secret cia program to destabilize the castro regime by contaminating cuban sugar causing explosions in cuban factories and developing at least 33 plans to assassinate castro all of which failed.
in addition to kennedys foreign policy efforts to contain communism the administration launched a new effort at peace in laos support for the u s agency for international development aid and efforts at economic reform in latin america and elsewhere.
kennedy also launched the peace corps through an executive order to recruit young idealistic americans to spend 2 years abroad as volunteers working on education and development projects.
in the spring of his first year in office the president joined by first lady jacqueline kennedy dazzled europe.
20 26 2 20 cl jves changed 757 lyndon johnson took the oath of office on board the presidential plane flanked by his wife lady bird and jacqueline kennedy still wearing a bloodstained suit.
by the end of his first term however kennedys foreign policy legacy was mixed.
chester bowles who served for a time as undersecretary of state in the kennedy administration said that the kennedy inner circle were full of belligerence and sort of looking for a chance to prove their muscle a nuclear armed world was a dangerous place to do such a thing.
nevertheless in november 1963 in spite of ongoing tensions in southeast asia berlin and cuba jfk was still immensely popular in many parts of the world and the world was at peace.
the president turned his attention to his 1964 reelection campaign.
dallas conspiracies and legacies the kennedy team wanted to ensure that texas home of the vice president stayed democratic in 1964.
but the democratic party in texas was deeply divided.
there was also deep distrust of kennedy in texas by 1963 indeed even a deep visceral hatred among some texans.
in november 1963 kennedy dreaded the trip he needed to make to build his standing in the lone star state.
after the president and jackie kennedy arrived in dallas on november 22 1963 they rode into the city center in a caravan the president and first lady along with texas governor john connally and his wife in the first car vice president johnson in the next one.
a little after noon as they passed the texas school book depository several shots rang out.
one wounded connally.
two hit the president.
a back brace he wore for constant back pain held him erect and the second shot hit his head.
by the time the presidents car reached the nearest emergency room the president was dead.
a catholic priest offered the last rites.
vice president lyndon johnson had been right behind kennedys car and quickly understood what had happened.
neither johnson nor anyone else knew how many people were involved in the assassination or how widespread the danger might be so johnson insisted that the presidential party wait until kennedys coffin was brought to air force one still parked at the airport where it had arrived that morning.
in the afternoon johnson flanked by his wife lady bird and by jacqueline kennedy took the presidential oath of office.
then they flew to washington.
kennedys death provoked an outpouring of national grief.
suddenly the youthful vigor that the president had projected and the hopes that many americans had projected onto him seemed to dim.
lee harvey oswald was arrested for the murder.
his fingerprints were on the gun and he had easy access to the window where the shots were fired.
two days later another troubled man jack ruby shot oswald in the dallas police station.
many suspected a widespread conspiracy.
president johnson asked supreme court chief justice earl warren to lead a high level bipartisan commission to find out the truth.
the commissions report known as the warren report concluded that oswald acted alone.
not everyone was convinced no one could confirm for sure the whole story behind kennedys death.
whatever the truth a very different kind of person became president on november 22 one who would lead the administration and the country with a dramatically different style and set of priorities.
262 quick review what were the major accomplishments and frustrations of the kennedy administration.
758 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 the coming of lyndon b johnson 26 3 analyze the successes and failures of the johnson administration in terms of the two issues that dominated his years in office the launching of the great society programs and the war in vietnam.
john f kennedy had been born to wealth and had attended harvard college.
as a child he had met franklin d roosevelt because his father was roosevelts ambassador to great britain.
he was elected to congress as a war hero after his small boat pt 109 had been sunk in the pacific during world war ii and he had served 8 years in the u s senate before becoming president.
kennedy was handsome and charismatic important factors in his election and continuing popularity.
lyndon johnson was born to poverty in the texas hill country northwest of san antonio and grew up in a small house in johnson city when there were no sidewalks or electricity.
his tough and slightly wild father served in the texas legislature trying hard to make ends meet and his strong willed mother yearned for a better life.
lbj as he was often called attended southwest texas state teachers college.
he arrived in washington as a congressional secretary a year before roosevelt was elected and managed to meet fdr whom he idolized and who in 1935 appointed the then 26 year old lbj as the director of the national youth administration for the state of texas.
johnson worked harder than any other nya state director got important services for texas and never forgot the value of government when he saw the new deal bring jobs electricity and hope to people living isolated lives in rural poverty.
johnson had a long and distinguished career in congress before becoming vice president.
he was first elected to the house of representatives in 1937.
he campaigned tirelessly and worked equally tirelessly once in office building strong ties and coalitions.
lbj and his wife lady bird became a family for the sometimes lonely bachelor sam rayburn another texan who served as speaker of the house for all but 4 years between 1940 and 1961.
lbj lost a primary race for a senate seat in 1941 but won the seat in 1948.
once in the senate johnson built connections to the powerful committee chairs.
in 1953 at the age of 45 he was elected democratic leader in the senate.
in 1955 he suffered a severe heart attack recovered quickly and kept working kept building coalitions becoming known for the johnson treatment when he would grab a colleague by the coat lapels and hold his face an inch away while using anger humor and statistics to win a wavering vote.
he was highly respected for his ability to get things done in the senate even if he was often feared and seldom liked.
few said he was handsome or charismatic.
everyone said he was effective.
johnson hated his tenure as vice president.
many of kennedy s inner circle especially attorney general robert kennedy made sure he was kept out of the most significant decisions.
once he became president lbj desperately wanted to be loved as kennedy had been but most of all was determined to get things done in a way that kennedy had not been able to do.
on the domestic front he succeeded masterfully at moving his agenda along before slowly sinking into the morass of vietnam.
the war on poverty and the great society in his first speech as president 5 days after kennedy was shot lbj mourned with the nation but he also demonstrated a confident leadership that the country was looking for.
johnson told the congress that he was determined to continue the kennedy dream of education jobs care for the elderly and equal rights for all americans.
one could question whether given his focus on foreign policy those goals had actually been kennedys dream but they would certainly be johnsons.
thus the first president from a former confederate state insisted no memorial or oration or eulogy could more eloquently honor president kennedys memory than the earliest possible passage of the civil rights bill for which he fought so long congress was being put on notice that the former powerful democratic majority leader of the senate now president was determined to see his legislation passed.
263 20 263 c 20 20 american voices lyndon b johnson great society speech 1964 263 six months after he had taken the oath of office in dallas lyndon johnson gave the commencement address at the university of michigan.
he used the speech to outline a new program a johnson program to be known as the great society to improve the quality of life for all americans.
i have come today from the turmoil of your capital to the tranquility of your campus to speak about the future of your country.
your imagination your initiative and your indignation will determine whether we build a society where progress is the servant of our needs or a society where old values and new visions are buried under unbridled growth.
for in your time we have the opportunity to move not only toward the rich society and the powerful society but upward to the great society.
the great society rests on abundance and liberty for all.
it demands an end to poverty and racial injustice to which we are totally committed in our time.
but that is just the beginning.
the great society is a place where every child can find knowledge to enrich his mind and to enlarge his talents.
so i want to talk to you today about three places where we begin to build the great society in our cities in our countryside and in our classrooms our society will never be great until our cities are great.
today the frontier of imagination and innovation is inside those cities and not beyond their borders.
new experiments are already going on.
it will be the task of your generation to make the american city a place where future generations will come not only to live but to live the good life a second place where we begin to build the great society is in our countryside.
we have always prided ourselves on being not only america the strong and america the free but america the beautiful.
today that beauty is in danger.
the water we drink the food we eat the very air that we breathe are threatened with pollution.
our parks are overcrowded our seashores overburdened.
green fields and dense forests are disappearing a third place to build the great society is in the classrooms of america.
there your children s lives will be shaped.
our society will not be great until every young mind is set free to scan the farthest reaches of thought and imagination.
we are still far from that goal.
these are three of the central issues of the great society.
so will you join in the battle to give every citizen the full equality which god enjoins and the law requires whatever his belief or race or the color of his skin.
will you join in the battle to give every citizen an escape from the crushing weight of poverty.
will you join in the battle to make it possible for all nations to live in enduring peace as neighbors and not as mortal enemies.
will you join in the battle to build the great society to prove that our material progress is only the foundation on which we will build a richer life of mind and spirit.
source lyndon b johnson speech to the graduating class university of michigan ann arbor may 22 1964 public papers of the presidents of the united states lyndon b johnson book i 1963 64 pp.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what are some of the specific elements that johnson included in his definition of the great society.
historical interpretation knowing that johnson idolized franklin roosevelt what parallels do you see between the great society and the new deal.
later after he left office johnson explained his approach to the presidency.
if its really going to work the relationship between the president and the congress has got to be almost incestuous.
hes got to know them even better than they know themselves.
and then on the basis of this knowledge hes got to build a system that stretches from the moment a bill is introduced to the moment it is officially enrolled as the law of the land and that was exactly what johnson did.
he made sure he knew who would support each bill knew what the specific desires were of those who might be brought to support a measure and knew how to cajole those who did not want to support it.
he rewarded supporters with phone calls personal notes white house invitations and special services in their states and districts and he never hesitated to punish opponents.
he came to office with a democratic majority in both houses of congress and a nation mourning a fallen president.
he used that circumstance plus his incredible legislative skill to move significant legislation through an often reluctant congress.
760 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 johnson s first agenda was the stalled civil rights bill.
everyone expected the bill that kennedy had submitted to be watered down.
johnson normally the great compromiser would not allow any tampering with the bill.
he was determined to keep every section intact.
he broke with his senate mentor richard russell of georgia who led the opposition to the bill and instead made an alliance with the republican senate minority leader everett dirksen of illinois.
with dirksens help republicans and democrats overcame a russell led filibuster.
the most sweeping civil rights bill since reconstruction was passed and signed by johnson on july 2 1964.
it included not only provisions for equal access and equal opportunity but also specifically forbade discrimination in employment based on race color religion and national origin as well as outlawed discrimination based on sex a clause that later feminists would use most effectively.
the law established a new equal employment opportunity commission to ensure enforcement.
as johnson pushed hard for the civil rights act of 1964 he also tackled a broader agenda.
in his first state of the union speech in january 1964 johnson said this administration today here and now declares unconditional war on poverty in america then in may he used the commencement speech at the university of michigan to describe what he called the great society which would be how he described all of his domestic programs.
kennedy had already started efforts to attack poverty in the united states but johnson the new dealer from texas had seen what federally financed rural electrification did to change the lives of poor people and was passionate see map 26 1.
he idolized franklin roosevelt and wanted to imitate him.
he also knew that if he wanted to remain in office he would have to face a skeptical electorate in only 11 months and he wanted to present a solid track record.
the first legislation of the war on poverty was passed by congress in august 1964.
it included provision for many of the programs later associated with the great society including volunteers in service to america vista a domestic peace corps that recruited young people to work for a year serving in high poverty urban and rural settings a neighborhood youth corps to provide jobs for poor youth modeled on the civilian conservation corps of the new deal era work study loans and grants to support college students small business loans community action programs directed at building up grass roots organizing ventures head start to provide poor children with the same sort of readiness for kindergarten that their more well off counterparts got at home neighborhood legal services that provided government funded lawyers for the poor and to coordinate all of these ventures an office of economic opportunity.
this impressive agenda was only a first step for johnson but to do more he needed to be elected in his own right.
johnson wanted to not only win election in 1964 but also win with such a mandate that nothing could stand in the way of his programs.
before he could do that however johnson had to face a divided democratic party a republican opponent and his own inner demons.
johnsons insecurities ran deep.
he knew that the kennedy family despised him.
he knew that he did not have their urbane sophistication and that a century after the civil war much of the country still distrusted southerners.
he also knew powerfully so that he had become president the office he had wanted all his life only through a terrible tragedy.
despite his concerns however americans saw lbj as the sitting president who had taken command of the situation when jfk was killed and johnson had no serious resistance to the 1964 nomination.
notwithstanding johnson was under great pressure to name attorney general robert kennedy as his running mate.
there was a logic to the move bobby as he was always known was keeper of the kennedy legacy and his nomination would unite the party.
still as johnson later wrote with bobby on the ticket id never know if i could be elected on my own in addition johnson deeply disliked bobby kennedy.
he was convinced that bobby had tried to derail his own vice presidential nomination in 1960.
eventually lbj informed bobby that he 26 1 20 26 3 the great society the name lyndon johnson gave to his far reaching domestic program which included federal aid to education medicare and medicaid health insurance immigration reform and a voting rights act.
ch map 26 1 americans in poverty.
this map shows the percentage and distribution of americans living below the poverty line at the end of the 1960s.
would not be his running mate and instead supported him in a successful run for the u s senate from new york.
johnson selected liberal minnesota senator hubert humphrey to be his vice president.
humphrey though more liberal than kennedy or johnson was also deeply loyal to johnson perhaps even to a fault.
the most serious challenge to johnsons easy nomination came from the mississippi freedom democratic party mfdp in which grass roots civil rights activists sought the convention seats of the regular mississippi delegation that had been elected in white only caucuses see chapter 25.
although johnson was a supporter of civil rights he was concerned that if the regular mississippi delegates were unseated by the mississippi freedom delegates and walked out and those from 762 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 cl changed 763 one of the most effective political advertisements of all time began with a little girl pulling petals off of a daisy and as she finishes the screen morphs into a nuclear explosion and ends vote for president johnson on november 3.
the ad was part of an effective campaign in which democrats painted the republican nominee barry goldwater as ready to lead america into nuclear war.
alabama and other nearby states joined them then it would threaten the democrats hold on several southern states.
johnson did not want to risk a repeat of the 1948 dixiecrat revolt.
neither johnson nor other party leaders understood the depth of anger that stirred the mfdp protest nor did they see as the mfdp leaders did the way in which the movement represented a new form of grass roots democracy.
neither the choice of running mate nor the mfdp challenge hurt johnsons election chances but both illustrated deep divides in american politics that even johnsons masterful negotiating skills could not bridge.
the republican party was also deeply divided in 1964.
the original front runner for the republican nomination new yorks liberal governor nelson rockefeller had left his wife of many years to marry a younger woman.
at that point the country had never elected a divorced person as president.
there was also further opposition to rockefellers nomination.
many conservative republicans were determined that in 1964 the party would nominate a real conservative and rockefellers main opponent for the nomination was a true conservative arizona senator barry goldwater.
goldwater an affable and tolerant individual had friends across the political spectrum and spurned personal racial prejudice.
however he opposed civil rights legislation as an invasion of personal freedom.
he felt the same way about the graduated income tax and most other government programs.
further he called for a more aggressive opposition to communism than that taken by eisenhower kennedy or johnson even in places where communist regimes were well established saying that america could lob one into the mens room at the kremlin he won most of the primary contests and when the republican convention met in san francisco the delegates were so committed to him that they shouted down nelson rockefeller.
when goldwater spoke he said let me remind you that extremism in defense of liberty is no vice and that moderation in pursuit of justice is no virtue it was just what the delegates wanted to hear.
it was less popular however with the wider electorate.
the democrats made good use of goldwaters statements developed a sophisticated television advertising campaign and painted goldwater as a dangerous man.
johnson won in a landslide.
as he left the inaugural ball in january 1965 johnson told his staff dont stay up late.
theres work to be done.
were on our way to the great society the next day that work started.
in the spring of 1965 the triumphant johnson pushed four major pieces of legislation through congress in addition to a raft of other bills that on their own would have been considered significant with any other congress.
the core great society legislation of 1965 included federal aid to education medicare and medicaid immigration reform and a voting rights act.
johnson knew that federal aid to education had been blocked for many years by civil rights activists out of the fear that aid might go only to segregated schools and by a deadlock between catholic representatives who would not support aid unless it went to parochial as well as public schools and many protestant representatives who would never support aid to catholic schools.
johnson was determined to break the deadlock.
the civil rights act of 1964 solved the first issue since it made it illegal for any segregated institution to receive federal aid.
johnson solved the divide on religion with a policy by which federal education funds would follow the child whichever school the 25 1 j j 1 i 262 5 263 child was in.
the elementary and secondary education act was submitted to congress in january 1965 and passed in 3 months.
johnson signed it at a ceremony in front of a school that he had once attended with one of his former teachers sitting beside him.
every democratic president since franklin roosevelt had also sought to provide federal health insurance especially for the elderly.
a coalition led by the american medical association fearing government control of medical practices stopped every effort.
however half of all americans over 65 had no health insurance and they too were a powerful constituency.
within months of being proposed congress created medicare offering basic medical insurance to everyone over 65.
arkansas congressman wilbur mills a close johnson ally added a provision to the medicare bill creating medicaid which provided federal funding for medical insurance to americans living in poverty.
for some old and poor people the resulting medicare and medicaid legislation enabled the first visit to a medical doctor in their lives.
even though there was not a lot of pressure to reform the nation s immigration laws in the 1960s johnson was determined to make immigration reform a part of the great society.
the highly restrictive laws of 1921 and 1923 drastically limited immigration virtually cutting off anyone from eastern europe africa or asia see chapter 19.
pressure for change came from new york representative emanuel celler who had tried and failed to get an exception to the old and restrictive national origin quotas so that jews could flee nazi germany and who was now determined to change the law see chapter 23.
the immigration act of 1965 abolished the old quotas though it hardly made immigration easy.
the legislation held the total number of immigrants at 290 000 the number who were expected annually under the old law but established priorities for education and skills rather than national origin.
the law also provided an important loophole allowing immigration above the new quota for close relatives of u s citizens including foreigners who married a citizen.
although little change was expected when the legislation was signed the new immigration law represented the beginning of a significant new era of immigration one that matched and then exceeded the number of immigrants who came to the united states from 1890 to 1920.
the fourth major piece of legislation that congress enacted in 1965 was the voting rights act.
as 1965 began johnson did not have additional civil rights legislation on his agenda.
the civil rights act of 1964 was the most significant congressional intervention in civil rights since reconstruction.
johnson wanted to focus in 1965 on other aspects of his great society and did not relish another round of conflict with richard russell and other southern senators.
civil rights leaders however did not mean to take a back seat to anyone elses agenda.
martin luther king jr decided to create a national confrontation around the right to vote see chapter 25.
the 1964 civil rights act banned segregation in public accommodations and the use of federal funds for any segregated institution but it did not address the right to vote.
in many parts of the deep south more than 90 percent of blacks were kept off the voting rolls.
as they had for decades county voting registrars used literacy tests and other techniques to make it extremely hard for a black person to register to vote and as fannie lou hammer s eloquent testimony at the 1964 democratic convention showed when legal techniques failed outright violence was used.
the mississippi freedom democratic party may not have gotten seated at that 1964 convention but they had made an impression on many americans.
king and the sclc were determined to keep the issue of the vote for african americans alive.
when they selected selma alabama as the site for a major confrontation sncc which had focused on voting rights from its founding agreed to join.
segregation in selma was rigid despite the civil rights act.
the city of 29 000 included 15 000 blacks of voting age.
only 355 of those black citizens were registered to vote.
the demonstrations in selma alabama and the violent response shocked the world.
on sunday march 7 as the selma marchers began to cross the edmund pettis 764 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 bridge sheriffs deputies charged them on horseback clubbing people right and left.
john lewis the head of sncc and a future member of congress was one of several people who were knocked unconscious.
pictures of bloody sunday as the day became known were shown around the world.
two weeks later marchers now protected at johnson s directive by the alabama national guard finally completed a march to the state capital of montgomery.
that evening the marchers happily sang we have overcome but the same evening kkk members followed one of their supporters viola liuzzo of detroit as she drove black marchers home from the event and killed her.
the country had had enough of this sort of violence.
only a week after the bloody sunday march johnson went before congress to give one of his most memorable speeches.
he told congress and the nation this time on this issue there must be no delay no hesitation and no compromise with our purpose because it is not just negroes but really it is all of us who must overcome the crippling legacy of bigotry and injustice.
and we shall overcome.
263 20 263 hearing the first president from the south since the civil war speak uncompromisingly of the right to vote while using the words of the civil rights movements hymn moved many to tears.
the voting rights act which with unrelenting pressure from johnson passed congress by overwhelming majorities gave the u s department of justice the right to intervene in any county where 50 percent or fewer of the eligible voters were registered virtually all of the deep south.
agents could monitor literacy or other tests and if necessary appoint new federal registrars.
on august 6 1965 johnson signed 263 262 263 with the voting rights act the immigration act medicare and medicaid and the elementary and secondary education act and a host of other measures johnson was doing what he knew how to do best getting federal legislation federal money and federal enforcement powers to address specific issues.
he was certainly not without his critics.
many worried that the education funds were being used to expand already bloated school bureaucracies.
medicare and medicaid seemed to be a huge new federal program that would eventually bankrupt the country.
the civil rights and voting rights acts though popular also created disaffection with johnson and the democratic party that would as johnson knew turn many southerners into republicans.
johnsons own personality was also a problem.
although he was a master of legislation and gave some of the most memorable speeches of any president he was also a very difficult person.
he could be crude and cruel especially to those closest to him.
george reedy who served as johnsons press secretary and saw him close up said a s a human being he was a miserable person a bully sadist lout and egoist h is lapses from civilized conduct were deliberate and usually intended to subordinate someone else do to his will such behavior might be effective when arm twisting was the only way to get a bill through congress but they also left precious little reservoir of good will when johnson got into trouble.
after 1965 johnson got into a lot of trouble especially in foreign policy.
reflecting on the johnson administration averill harriman a senior adviser to every president from roosevelt to johnson said lbj was great in domestic affairs i f it hadnt been for vietnam hed have been the greatest president ever in analyses of the johnson presidency if it hadnt been for vietnam is a steady refrain.
the war in vietnam destroyed national support for johnson and the great society.
the war divided americans as no war since the civil war.
opposition to and support for the war created a new political divide within the country and destroyed many long standing allegiances.
cynicism about the conduct of the war became cynicism about government itself and eventually all authorities.
the war cost 58 000 american lives and many thousands more were wounded in body and mind in the turmoil of vietnam.
whatever ones ultimate judgments about the u s effort in vietnam it is impossible to understand the history of the united states in the late 1960s and beyond without understanding the impact of that war.
vietnam kennedys foreign policy priorities were cuba and berlin.
until the final weeks of his life he did not pay a lot of attention to vietnam.
when kennedy became president the united states had less than 1 000 troops in vietnam sent to train the south vietnamese army.
slowly jfk authorized small increases not only to train troops but also to join them on combat missions against infiltrators from the north vietnamese army nva and their allied south vietnamese insurgents organized as the national liberation front nlf.
so called counterinsurgency and strategic hamlet programs were designed to find and destroy enemy forces.
unfortunately the violence of these missions and the corruption of the south vietnamese regime under the leadership of the increasingly despotic ngo dinh diem undermined popular support.
diem was part of a catholic elite minority in a country where the majority was buddhist.
although his christianity and his anti communism made him an appealing figure in the united states his despotic and corrupt administration alienated many vietnamese.
in the summer of 1963 fierce protests were mounted within south vietnam against the diem regime.
quang due a buddhist monk burned himself to death on june 11 to protest conditions and more protests and self immolations followed.
kennedys new ambassador to vietnam henry cabot lodge jr lost all faith in diem and with kennedy s tacit agreement supported a military coup against diem.
the cia backed coup took place on november 1 and diem and his brother were killed something kennedy had not necessarily expected.
and then 3 weeks later kennedy was dead and some 17 000 u s military advisers were in vietnam.
766 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 as he became president lbj wanted to use the office to focus on domestic policy.
from the beginning however he felt he could not ignore vietnam and like kennedy eisenhower and truman he insisted i am not going to be the president who saw southeast asia go the way china went to communism it was a fateful vow.
equally fateful was the fact that on balance johnson himself was as insecure about foreign policy as he was secure about domestic policy.
winning a war was a very different thing from getting congress to pass a bill.
lbj kept kennedys foreign policy advisers and most of them were convinced that communism had to be contained around the globe.
if communist north vietnam threatened noncommunist south vietnam then they believed the united states needed to protect the noncommunist south however unpalatable the fight might be.
plans for expanding the war were on johnsons desk from the day he became president and although he eventually implemented them he did delay expanding the u s involvement in vietnam see map 26 3.
he wanted to defeat barry goldwater in the 1964 elections and part of his strategy was to paint goldwater as a crazy warmonger.
he also wanted to get the great society legislation through congress.
even so johnson said in retrospect i knew from the start that i was bound to be crucified either way i moved.
if i left the woman i really loved the great society in order to get involved with that bitch of a war on the other side of the world then i would lose everything at home but if i left that war and let the communists take over south vietnam then i would be seen as a coward and my nation would be seen as an appeaser johnson convinced himself that being seen as an appeaser in vietnam would lead to new soviet and chinese aggression elsewhere just as appeasement with germany had led to world war ii.
he was intimidated by the kennedy legacy of toughness in foreign policy and was convinced that if he did not find a way to save south vietnam there would be robert kennedy out in front leading the fight against me telling everyone that i had betrayed john kennedys commitment to south vietnam that i was a coward for a texan who had grown up on stories of the heroes of the alamo being called a coward was simply beyond contemplation.
johnsons fear proved to be ironic since 4 years later robert kennedy would run as an antiwar candidate against johnson.
throughout 1964 lbj increased the military advisers modestly from 17 000 to 23 000 but he did all he could to keep vietnam off of the front pages in the election year after the 1963 cia backed coup in south vietnam.
the one big exception came on august 1 when there were reports that a north vietnamese torpedo boat fired on the u s destroyer maddox johnson ordered an immediate military response.
johnson also went to congress and asked for a resolution granting him the right to use all necessary measures to repel any attacks against the u s forces in vietnam.
the gulf of tonkin resolution passed easily unanimously in the house and with only two dissenting votes in the senate and in later years it was this resolution rather than any further congressional action that presidents johnson and nixon used to prosecute the war.
only years later did historians discover that there was no solid evidence that anything had been fired at the maddox or a second destroyer that had come to aid it during the august encounter but johnson got the power he wanted.
after johnsons inauguration in january 1965 the military situation in south vietnam deteriorated badly north vietnamese forces controlled perhaps half the land and people of the south.
johnsons key foreign policy advisers especially secretary of state dean rusk and secretary of defense robert mcnamara urged a major escalation of u s involvement.
some especially undersecretary of state george ball opposed escalation but in early 1965 most were calling for more troops.
in february 1965 johnson said i cant ask our american soldiers out there to continue to fight with one hand tied behind their backs and launched a major bombing campaign against north vietnam to stop the flow of supplies to the south.
as the bombing expanded 3 600 runs in april 4 800 by june the united states also sent more ground forces to protect the american air base at danang.
once there these 26 1 20 26 3 gulf of tonkin resolution legislation passed by congress in 1964 that allowed the united states to use force to protect u s interests in vietnam.
china bill vietnam major battles or actions major north vietnamese supply routes into south vietnam nlf north vietnamese victory and u s withdrawal april 30 1975 capitals u s and south vietnamese troop movements boat people refugees after 1975 la drang m ban me thuoi nha trang dalat s o u 1 h china se bien hoa cholon saigon tet offensive jan 30 feb 1968 hue tet offensive jan 30 feb 1968 ia nang ioian quang ngai dak to map 26 3 the war in vietnam.
vietnam south and north and sites of major battles in the u s led war.
troops also engaged in battle and then needed more troops to support them.
fifty thousand troops were in vietnam by april of 1965 and the number rose to 75 000 by midsummer.
by july secretary mcnamara noting that the bombing alone was not defeating the northern forces urged that the u s troop strength be increased from 75 000 to more than 200 000.
johnson agreed.
but he did not want to go to congress for authorization fearing that it would disrupt the great society legislation.
so he quietly asked for an additional appropriation for the war and announced a troop increase at a midday news conference devoted to other issues.
the result was that although johnson won short term success for his domestic programs he planted the seeds of long term distrust.
for the next 2 years combat in vietnam expanded.
eventually half a million u s troops were in vietnam.
numbers at that level could be sustained only by an increased 768 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 as more and more u s soldiers arrived in vietnam they found themselves on more patrols such as the one pictured here.
military draft.
deferments became difficult to get especially for minority and working class men.
casualty numbers also grew undermining morale among the troops and at home.
costs mushroomed.
in 1965 the military budget was 49 6 billion by 1968 it was 80 5 billion.
try as they might the u s commanders could not get the south vietnamese army to play a major role in the war.
they avoided battle when they could and seemed to have an uncanny way of knowing where danger was and leaving those sites to the americans.
as u s soldiers did more of the fighting they also saw less purpose to what they were doing.
troops went out on search and destroy missions and then came back to their bases with little to show other than a list of enemy soldiers killed.
one soldier asked what am i doing here.
we dont take any land we just mutilate bodies an american officer speaking of his companys attack on the village of ben tre which was suspected of harboring nlf supporters said we had to destroy the village in order to save it destroying villages to save them marching into the jungle engaging in battles with enemy forces battles that the u s troops almost always won but then coming back to their bases while the enemy forces reorganized in the jungle were strategies that seemed pointless to most soldiers.
the u s commander in vietnam general william westmoreland kept providing optimistic reports.
few were convinced.
racial tensions often exploded in vietnam.
in 1965 12 6 percent of the troops were black but 24 percent of combat deaths were of black soldiers.
black soldiers who knew that civil rights workers were being killed in alabama and mississippi at home believed that they were often being sent on the most dangerous missions.
many became increasingly angry at their fellow troops at their officers and at the war.
263 20 american voices paul thomas coe vietnam letters 1969 70 263 i aul thomas coe was a devout mormon and a student at the university of california at berkeley.
in 1969 he lost his draft deferment.
these letters reflect his experience in vietnam.
the president of the united states march 17 1969 to pault.
coe greetings you are hereby ordered for induction into the armed forces of the united states and to report to local board no.
31 on april 16 1969 wednesday at 6 00 a m morning for forwarding to an armed forces induction station.
basic training i m tired of trying to rationalize things in my mind.
all my beliefs seem to form a giant paradox.
there is no room in my heart to justify killing i can t ever justify the training to kill and yet i can t justify copping out.
i can t justify desertion although that seems the only logical course of action.
i know inside that a time is drawing near when our families will need to draw together and the world will be in an uproar so leaving for another country is out.
the church speaks so loudly against breaking the law and so loudly for supporting our constituted way of life that i can t justify refusing my orders.
i want to do what is called of me for my country but i can t justify the senseless loss of life.
but with every day i become more conscious of the ominous power we ve given the military and hate it so much more peace on earth p t.
in vietnam 11 september 1970 there really isn t that much i can tell you.
rain has begun and the monsoons will be here soon another thing the chow is sorry.
i mean ungood food i m sick of dried up burnt gristly cold roast beef nearly every day.
you d think they d at least learn how to cook that one thing if that s all they cook but no not them.
by the way have you taught barb paul s wife to make decent gravy yet.
miss you mom.
give love to all.
paul 24 sept 70 rather than go out with some battalion recon reconnaissance team and sit in the rain i joined what is called the 3rd brigade air cavalry.
it s an instant recon team.
they insert us into trouble spots for a day or two then extract us you can take anything when you know they re gonna pull you out in 2 days.
just got back from a 3 day mission directly west of hue about 3 ridgelines east of the a shau valley.
we were sent in there to investigate enemy supply routes then we found that the lz landing zone we were supposed to go to was up the ridge and washed out so nobody could get up to it.
we made it to the lz the birds helicopters were beautiful.
after circling for 10 minutes they figured how to get in but they didn t like it either because there was high ground all around.
but they came in anyway about 10 feet off the water so i threw my weapon in grabbed that skid pulled myself to a boulder and jumped in.
let my legs dangle out the door all the way back paul department of the army 08 dec 1970 dear mr and mrs coe by this time i am sure that you have been notified of the death of your son paul t coe.
i want you to know that paul s death came as a tragic shock to me and to all the men who knew him.
on behalf of the entire company i extend our deepest and most sincere sympathy.
on 14 november 1970 paul was a member of a daylight patrol in the vicinity of camp evans with the headquarters reconnaissance platoon when the patrol hit a booby trapped area.
your son was killed by multiple fragmentation wounds when one of the hostile booby traps exploded.
i hope that it may be of some comfort to you to know that paul died instantly and did not suffer.
sincerely frank a lightle captain infantry commanding officer source karen manners smith and tim koster time it was american stories from the sixties.
upper saddle river nj pearson pp.
27 32 36 39.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how did coe characterize the war while in basic training.
how did he view his own military service.
comparison in what ways were coe s letters similar to those written by soldiers in previous american wars.
in what ways do they reflect the specific context and experiences of the war in vietnam.
mi 770 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 african american troops in vietnam who bore a disproportional share of the fighting and dying quickly lost faith in the effort.
ml 263 while morale disintegrated on the ground in vietnam public support for the war also evaporated.
by launching the war quietly johnson had not built public support.
many americans had a natural tendency to support the president and the troops at first but that support declined rapidly.
vietnam was the nations first televised war.
television did not actually show a lot of combat many of the battles were at night or far from cameras.
nevertheless footage of troops going into combat as well as pictures of dead and wounded american soldiers brought the war into american living rooms.
lack of clear progress created doubt.
opposition to the war built with each news report each draft call and each casualty list.
while critics have rightly pointed out that no more than 20 percent of college students took part in antiwar demonstrations and those demonstrations were mostly on elite campuses such as the university of california at berkeley columbia and harvard few campuses anywhere were untouched by antiwar fervor especially as many students worried about draft calls or felt the guilt at being protected by their student status while friends went off to vietnam.
as the war escalated those participating in campus based teach ins gatherings at which experts or better informed students taught others about vietnam heard mostly from critics of the war.
the first march on washington to end the war took place in april 1965.
at that rally 25 000 people heard sds president paul potter say the incredible war in vietnam has provided the razor the terrifyingly sharp cutting edge that has finally severed the last vestige of illusion that morality and democracy are the guiding principles of american foreign policy in 1966 1967 and 1968 the teach ins became angrier and the disaffection with the government greater.
as early as 1966 demonstrators were not only calling for american withdrawal from vietnam but also waving nlf flags and chanting ho ho ho chi minh the nlf is gonna win students were far from the only opponents of the war.
the women s strike for peace the fellowship of reconciliation and the catholic worker movement were pacifist organizations who had opposed the war from the beginning.
in addition more religious leaders began to speak out about the specific war in vietnam.
catholic priests daniel and philip berrigan and henry sloan coffin the protestant chaplain at yale university became leading antiwar activists.
established civil rights groups did not want to risk a break with the johnson administration when lbj was doing so much to support civil rights.
even so sncc.
chapter 26 led 771 m3 20 263 was the first among them to oppose the war.
a 1966 sncc position paper attacked a war to preserve a democracy which does not exist at home.
in april 1967 martin luther king jr stood in the pulpit at new yorks riverside church to tell the civil rights movement and the nation that he had come to see that the war was sending poor and black americans 8 000 miles away to fight for rights that they did not have in the united states.
somehow this madness must cease he pleaded.
as the war continued some opponents took their opposition to a new level.
when some 35 000 demonstrators surrounded the pentagon and tried to disrupt daily business in washington in october 1967 the government reacted harshly with mass arrests of the protestors.
between 50 000 and 100 000 young men left the united states most of them moving to canada to avoid serving in a war they thought was wrong.
many of those who moved to canada eventually returned to the united states especially after presidential pardons granted by presidents ford and carter but some 50 000 americans became permanent residents of canada as a result of the vietnam war while others stayed in neutral nations like sweden.
in 1967 a group of young men in san francisco announced that they were staying in the united states but refusing to cooperate with the military draft in any way.
we will renounce all deferments and refuse to cooperate with the draft in any manner at any level they said.
draft resistance and a willingness to be arrested for the act was a new stage in the protest movement.
later dr benjamin spock whose book on child care had been the bible for the parents of many of those now refusing the draft and rev.
william sloan coffin were arrested for urging draft resistance.
still others took their protests to other forms of direct action to try to stop the war.
in may 1969 opponents of the war including some religious leaders walked into the offices of dow chemical company which made the napalm jelly that was used to burn kill and maim in vietnam and poured blood into filing cabinets and on office equipment to disrupt the workings of the offices.
while opposition to the war in vietnam broadened johnson isolated himself with trusted advisers.
he agonized about casualty reports wept while signing letters of condolence to those who had lost a loved one in the war and regularly got up at 4 00 and 5 00 a m to check on casualty figures.
he never seriously considered changing course and stopped talking to those who suggested that he should.
he authorized the cia which was only supposed to operate abroad to spy on american antiwar leaders who he became convinced were communists and he authorized the fbi to infiltrate and disrupt the antiwar movement.
johnson brought the army commander in vietnam general westmoreland to washington dc in november 1967 to tell americans that there was light at the end of the tunnel in vietnam.
by that time fewer americans were convinced.
1968 tet offensive a significant north vietnamese assault on amer ican bases across vietnam.
in 1968 the growing tensions of war race and change in america seemed to explode.
few were untouched by the anger and fear that the year provoked.
two months after general westmorelands optimistic assessment the light at the end of the tunnel in vietnam dimmed considerably.
on january 30 1968 the first day of tet the vietnamese lunar new year north vietnamese and nlf forces attacked everywhere across south vietnam all at once.
they blew a hole in the wall surrounding the american embassy in saigon and came close to getting into the inner compound.
they attacked the distant marine post at khe sanh.
they took control of the old vietnamese capital city of hue.
and they attacked american and south vietnamese forces all over the country.
eventually the tet offensive was beaten back at terrible cost to the north vietnamese.
by one estimate the north lost 40 000 troops compared to 2 300 south vietnamese and 1 100 americans.
even so the north had won an important victory.
public trust in westmoreland and johnson was never restored.
the president and the general had said that the united states was winning the war but now it certainly looked like it was losing.
johnsons popularity dropped 772 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 from its already low 40 percent approval rating to 26 percent.
walter cronkite the anchor of the cbs evening news and perhaps the most trusted journalist in the country who had maintained careful neutrality in his reporting traveled to vietnam after tet and returned to tell his viewers it seems more certain than ever that the bloody experience of vietnam is to end in a stalemate many agreed.
when westmoreland responded to the tet offensive by asking for even more troops beyond the 525 000 americans already in vietnam johnsons new secretary of defense told the president we seem to have a sinkhole.
i see more and more fighting with more and more casualties on the u s side and no end in sight to the action.
secretary of state rusk long a supporter of the war recommended a bombing halt and an offer of negotiations with north vietnam.
johnson hated the advice but he could no longer ignore it.
at the same time johnsons lack of popularity was catching up with him.
everyone assumed that as an incumbent president johnson would seek and easily win his partys nomination for another term in office.
but the antiwar mood was growing in the country and in the democratic party.
on march 12 1968 in the nations first primary vote in new hampshire minnesota senator eugene mccarthy who had become a strong opponent of the war won 42 percent of the votes against lbjs 49 percent.
many who had participated in antiwar demonstrations decided to be clean for gene and campaign door to door in new hampshire.
they found a ready electorate people of many different persuasions including those who were fed up with the seemingly endless war and those who were frustrated because lbj seemed unwilling either to commit the force needed to win or to withdraw.
the new hampshire vote was far too close for a sitting president.
even worse than the challenge from mccarthy at least from johnsons perspective was one from new york senator robert kennedy whom johnson loathed.
bobby kennedy realized that mccarthys win could mean lbjs defeat for the nomination and that since mccarthy had opened the way it was a good time to challenge an incumbent of his own party.
while mccarthy was little known bobby was perhaps the best known politician in the country.
soon after the new hampshire vote kennedy announced that he was entering the contest.
for many who opposed the war wanted further social change and dreamed of a return to the glory days of the jfk presidency bobbys 1968 campaign was a dream come true.
his campaign struck an emotional chord among both supporters and opponents seldom seen in american politics.
on march 31 1968 just weeks after the new hampshire vote johnson gave a nationally televised speech.
he announced plans to reduce the bombing as the first step to deescalate the conflict he called on ho chi minh to respond positively and favorably to this new step for peace then he surprised the country perhaps himself by adding i shall not seek and will not accept the nomination of my party for another term as your president johnson the ultimate politician knew that public trust was essential to govern.
and by march 1968 he had lost that trust.
north vietnam did respond and the road to peace had begun.
it would be a long and painful road however one that would last far beyond the end of johnsons term.
johnson s career and his hopes for the country had become casualties of vietnam though very far from the only casualties.
four days after johnsons surprise announcement martin luther king jr was shot and killed in memphis tennessee where he was supporting a strike by the citys garbage collectors.
with the murder of king the leading spokesperson for nonviolence many felt that the cause of nonviolence itself had been damaged.
riots erupted all over america.
police arrested 20 000 people in 130 cities in the week following kings assassination.
forty six people 41 of them black were killed.
urban america seemed to be coming unglued.
the riots that followed kings death reflected the deep anger in much of the african american community.
in oakland california huey newton and bobby seale had founded the black panther party for self defense in 1966.
newton and seale insisted that urban police forces had become occupying armies in the black community.
following a black panther party founders huey p newton and bobby seale.
the panthers advocated a radical economic social and educational agenda that made it the target of a determined campaign of suppression and elimination by the police and the fbi.
california law then in place allowing unconcealed weapons the panthers conducted their own armed patrols of oakland as a defense.
such an armed presence however almost assured violence.
a 17 year old panther bobby hutton was killed the same month as king.
many more panthers would be killed in subsequent years.
the panthers always remained a tiny fringe group as popular for swagger as for their breakfast programs and their commitment to armed self defense.
even so while small they were a symbol that many blacks embraced a move away from the self sacrificing nonviolence of king to a more angry and militant stance.
two weeks after kings death and the urban riots students at columbia university led by the sds chapter took over the presidents office and refused to leave.
four buildings were held by white students and a fifth building separately by black students.
the columbia sit in was a protest over the universitys war related research and a university plan to build a new gymnasium in the park that separated the university from harlem.
in addition it reflected far reaching anger toward all authorities.
after 8 days the university administration called on the police to clear the buildings and they did.
the violence of the police move onto the campus during which more than a hundred demonstrators were injured also pointed to the deep fault lines in the nation.
the mostly working class white police were furious at the white students whom they considered privileged snobs.
the student revolt at columbia was one of many.
students protesting the war or local issues took over buildings held mass rallies disrupted classes and burned war related research materials on more than 150 campuses in the 1968 69 academic year.
in the face of this violent some said crazy time in american history bobby kennedy continued his campaign for the presidency.
on june 5 kennedy won the california democratic primary.
it was the capstone to his campaign.
he not only championed the antiwar cause but befriended cesar chavez of the farm workers union rural whites in appalachia puerto rican immigrants living in new york city american indians on isolated reservations and urban blacks in city after city as no candidate had ever done.
then only moments after his california victory speech kennedy was shot by an arab nationalist.
he died days later.
as with king many hopes died with kennedy.
when the democratic party convention finally took place in chicago in august 1968 kennedy was dead.
the mccarthy campaign had been sidelined.
the party nominated hubert humphrey lbjs loyal vice president who had not entered a single primary.
humphrey had long been a darling of the liberal wing of the party but his silence on vietnam and his steadfast loyalty to the increasingly unpopular johnson meant that he had lost the trust of many.
while the convention met to hear speeches and act on the nomination protests erupted inside and outside the convention hall.
many delegates protested on the floor of the convention itself.
huge demonstrations were also planned for chicago during convention week by demonstrators who had their own divisions.
one faction led by long time pacifist david dellinger wanted a nonviolent but militant protest against the war lbj and humphrey.
another group for whom tom hayden and rennie davis of the sds were the most prominent wanted a more direct confrontation that they knew might provoke police violence.
finally a group who called themselves yippies led by abbie hoffman and jerry rubin believed that the best way to protest was to make fun of the democrats and the chicago police in every way possible.
chicago s mayor richard daley was determined to quash all demonstrations.
as the convention met the police attacked the demonstrators with tear gas and billy clubs in the glare of television cameras.
they attacked delegates.
they attacked the press.
nationally known reporters 774 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 dan rather and mike wallace were both roughed up.
as crowds chanted the whole world is watching the violence in chicago was broadcast around the world.
one mccarthy delegate described what he saw from his hotel window cops chased kids off into the park and out of sight among the trees emerged with one cop dragging a boy or girl by the leg and another cop running alongside clubbing in the groin.
a man tried to carry a bleeding woman into the hotel and they were both clubbed and thrown into the wagon in the aftermath of the convention a commission appointed to investigate what had happened described it as a police riot the fact that this could happen with the whole world watching represented how deeply divided americans were in 1968.
the november 1968 presidential election presented three choices.
first was hubert humphrey and his vice presidential nominee maine senator edmund muskie a ticket that barely seemed to limp out of the chicago convention.
humphrey said later broken battered and beaten chapter changed 7 in what was later termed a police riot by an investigating commission chicago police officers attacked and beat demonstrators at the 1968 democratic party convention.
my wife and i went home heart but there were two other contenders in the 1968 race.
in addition governor george wallace of alabama who had made his name blocking school integration had launched a strong third party campaign in 1968.
to the surprise of many he qualified for the ballot in all 50 states.
wallace and his running mate air force general curtis lemay seemed to have broad support ranging from the most conservative groups in the country including the kkk and the john birch society to the many white southerners opposed to racial integration to many in the north who were appalled by riots and antiwar demonstrations.
with comments like if any demonstrator every lays down in front of my car itll be the last car hell every lay down in front of wallace courted what he called the law and order vote.
third the republican party emerged from its summer convention as united as the democrats were divided.
richard m nixon who had lost to john kennedy in 1960 spent the intervening 8 years quietly laying the ground work for a political comeback.
he collected many political debts and cashed them all in to win the 1968 nomination on the first ballot.
his running mate was maryland governor spiro agnew who had once been seen as a liberal but who especially after the baltimore riots following kings death had become a voice of white backlash against what he called the circuit riding hanoi visiting caterwauling riot inciting burn america down types in the black and white community.
nixon announced a secret plan to end the war in vietnam and otherwise ran a carefully scripted television sawy and very expensive campaign.
the republicans outspent the democrats almost two to one.
in early fall it seemed as if nixon was unstoppable in spite of wallace s popularity.
nixons major theme working americans have become the forgotten americans his promise to do something different in vietnam no one knew what and his success in representing anti johnson sentiment without getting specific all worked in his favor.
an early poll gave him 43 percent of the vote to humphreys 28 percent and wallaces 21 percent.
humphrey however ran a surprisingly strong campaign.
he tried to repair the democratic coalition distanced himself from johnson and reached out to his longtime supporters.
at the same time nixon struck some as too smooth and a vote for wallace seemed a wasted vote.
by election day the polls said the race between humphrey and nixon was too close to call.
nixon won the november election by a close vote of 37 7 million to 37 1 million while wallace took almost 10 million votes.
nixons electoral college lead was greater 301 to 191 the democrats retained both houses of congress however.
humphrey won 97 percent of the black vote but only 35 percent of the white vote.
between them nixon and wallace had won 57 percent of all of the votes a significant backlash against johnsons huge 1964 victory against the war and against the demonstrators who opposed it.
in 1968 americans were more deeply divided by race and class and region than they had been in many years and anything approaching national consensus was a distant dream.
the election results also showed that vietnam would remain an unsolved issue for a new administration.
263 quick review how did the war in vietnam impact great society programs the johnson presidency and the country.
conclusion in contrast to the 1950s which represented a time of relative stability and complacency for some americans the 1960s ushered in a period of intense activism and social upheaval that in one way or another touched most.
writers and artists began to criticize almost all aspects of american culture and helped set in motion the modern ecological conservation movement the feminist movement a new focus on poverty and a vocal antiwar movement.
perhaps the most iconic of these movements was the student movement.
in 1960 a small group of students formed students for a democratic society which sought to end war racial injustice and economic inequality.
in its early years members of that organization engaged in marches protests and other forms of direct action to counter government policies inconsistent with their stated mission.
despite increasing social activism across the nation president john f kennedy remained concerned more with foreign than domestic issues.
president kennedy and his wife jacqueline kennedy brought youth charm and energy to the white house.
although kennedy achieved some domestic victories he was preoccupied to a large extent with cuba germany especially berlin and the soviet union.
after the failed bay of pigs invasion in 1961 cuban ties to russia grew.
the soviets sent military personnel to the caribbean island and in 1962 the russians began building bases in cuba for housing missiles capable of reaching the united states.
a clash between the united states and the soviet union seemed inevitable but the two nations reached an agreement that resolved the crisis and thereby avoided a potentially cataclysmic confrontation.
in november 1963 kennedy was assassinated and lyndon johnson became president.
unlike his predecessor johnson attempted to focus more on domestic rather than on foreign policy issues and in fact was remarkably successful in advancing his domestic policy goals which he called the great society.
during his tenure congress passed the civil rights act a new immigration law and the voting rights act as well as created medicare and medicaid health insurance and greatly expanded federal aid to education and the poor.
still vietnam was a lingering problem.
as johnson steadily increased u s involvement in vietnam opposition to the war intensified at home.
in 1968 mounting tensions in american society exploded.
in the midst of the violence at home and abroad johnson announced that he would not seek another term as president.
four days afterward martin luther king jr was assassinated and race riots broke out across the country.
two months later robert kennedy was shot and killed.
at the 1968 democratic party convention protests erupted outside the convention hall and the police attacked demonstrators as well as onlookers in what was later called a police riot while the democratic party was fracturing the republican party seemed strong.
nevertheless the presidential race of 1968 was a very close one.
the tumultuous year ended with the election of republican candidate richard nixon to the presidency.
chapter review the 1960s have been seen as a decade of protests.
what evidence would you give for or against that assumption.
how did the focus and tone of protests change from the early to the late 1960s.
776 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 chapter 26 chapter review 26 1 new voices new authorities explain the growing social protest in books films and student movements starting in the early 1960s.
review questions 1.
crafting an argument what might explain the dramatic impact in the 1960s of books like michael harringtons the other america.
why did similar books published in the 1950s have less influence.
historical interpretation what changes in american society were reflected in popular film and music in the 1960s.
in what ways did popular entertainment also reflect social and cultural continuity.
cause and effect how did the growth of american colleges and universities contribute to the emergence of the student protest movements of the 1960s.
camelot the white house and dallas the kennedy administration analyze the successes and failures of the kennedy administration and how they interacted with popular culture in the united states.
review questions 4.
crafting an argument how would you explain the paucity of kennedys domestic accomplishments.
in your opinion why does he enjoy a much better reputation today than his record would seem to support.
26 2 26 3 5.
contextualization what goals and assumptions shaped kennedys foreign policy.
historical interpretation what does the public response to the supreme courts rulings in abington school board v schempp and engel v vitale tell us about the society and culture of the united states in the 1960s.
the coming of lyndon b johnson analyze the successes and failures of the johnson administration in terms of the two issues that dominated his years in office the launching of the great society programs and the war in vietnam.
review questions 7.
comparison compare and contrast johnson and kennedys domestic policy agendas.
how would you explain the differences you note.
cause and effect what impact did developments in the war in vietnam have on domestic politics in the united states during the 1960s.
historical interpretation what divisions in american society were revealed by the events of 1968.
chapter 26 lm led 27 1 chapter objective demonstrate an understanding about the mix of liberalism and conservatism that emerged after 1968.
the new politics of the late 1960s explain nixon s policies and politics domestic and international.
the movements of the 1960s and 1970s 27 2 analyze the many political and cultural movements that followed in the track of the civil rights movement.
the culture wars of the 1970s 273 analyze the reaction to the liberal and radical politics of the 1960s and 1970s and the growth of new militant conservative movements.
politics economics and the impact of watergate 27 4 explain the political impact of watergate and subsequent developments that set the stage for the reagan revolution.
widely diverse groups of american began to protest conditions and policies that they found intolerable.
among them members of the american indian movement took over the closed prison on alcatraz island in san francisco bay claiming it as surplus federal land that rightly belonged to them.
basic contradictions in american life came to the surface between 1968 and 1980.
the new republican president elected thanks to a backlash against the unresolved war in vietnam initially widened the war.
nixon elected with conservative support also began a new era of relations with communist china and signed some of the most far reaching social legislation in history.
while the civil rights and antiwar movements splintered more americans began demanding their rights in other areas.
a womens movement transformed intimate relationships the work world and american culture.
the civil rights campaigns of latinos asians american indians gay men and lesbians also made their impact.
public discourse became more divisive and angry after 1969.
the new vice president spiro t agnew called protesters nattering nabobs of negativism a new conservative ideology emerged built on barry goldwaters campaigns but also on cultural issues which included opposition to the equal rights amendment and the growth of a new religious right before the decade was over the united states was defeated in vietnam richard nixon had resigned in disgrace his appointed successor gerald ford was defeated in his bid for reelection and his successor jimmy carter was also defeated in his reelection attempt.
the decade was one that held much anger much sordidness and few moments of greatness.
778 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 the new politics of the late 1960s 27 1 explain nixons policies and politics domestic and international.
significant dates.
early in 1969 kevin phillips a special assistant during richard nixons successful presidential campaign published the emerging republican majority.
phillips analyzed what he saw as the significance of the election and focused on two major changes in american politics.
the new republican party phillips said was based in the rising insurgency of the south the west the new york city irish and middle class suburbia.
phillips offered a detailed statistical analysis to show that the suburbs especially were overwhelmingly middle class white and republican.
the elections as phillips described them were a reaction against the civil rights movement which had generated considerable anger in white america and a repudiation of johnson s great society.
expanded government programs and services offended people who wanted small government who distrusted an intrusive state and who feared racial integration.
many found the analysis convincing even though phillips did not assess the impact that the war in vietnam had on the politics of 1968.
even so many including lyndon johnson attributed the 1968 democratic presidential losses to the war.
while antiwar protesters were furious at johnson and the democrats for continuing the war many other americans were angry that the war was not being won.
anger at antiwar dissidents also ran deep.
for a substantial number of americans celebrations of freedom from restraint political cultural and sexual were abhorrent.
the roots of the conservative reaction of the 1960s while the suburban based conservatism was new it was deeply rooted in the early development of suburban culture.
some americans had long disagreed with the direction of the country.
william f buckleys conservative journal the national review appeared in 1955.
ayn rands novel atlas shrugged appeared in 1957 the themes of which argued that any interference with individual rights would destroy human freedom.
ministers such as james fifield at the first congregational church in los angeles preached that the blessings of capitalism come from god as late as 1960 there were plenty of conservatives and liberals in both parties.
after the 1960 election however the two parties began to move in opposite directions and over time most liberals moved to the democratic party while most conservatives became republicans.
the drift toward fairly rigid and uniform positions in each party was clear by the late 1960s.
in the 1960s and 1970s the conservative shift among republicans was led by arizona senator barry goldwater who emerged as the hero of the conservative wing of the republicans.
in his first senate campaign in 1952 goldwater asked audiences do you believe in expanding federal government do you want federal bureaus and federal agencies to take over an ever increasing portion of your life if the answer was no then goldwater said he was their man.
in 1960 he criticized eisenhower as representing a dime store new deal.
he criticized the u s supreme courts brown v board of education decision as an unconstitutional federal intervention in the rights of states and he voted against the 1964 civil rights act saying that the race relations issue is best handled by the people directly concerned his book the conscience of a conservative published in april 1960 spoke to a white middle class that was unhappy with taxes and government intrusion no longer interested in the new deal safety net frightened by the civil rights movement and fiercely anticommunist.
it was this conservative movement that took over the republican party in 1964 even though their hero went down to defeat.
four years later in 1968 it was goldwaters philosophy not eisenhowers that richard nixon used to make his comeback.
nevertheless nixons actual presidency 1969 nixon inaugurated as president hhhi stonewall inn riot j neil armstrong becomes the first person to walk on the moon j woodstock new york music and art fair i f.
moratorium largest antiwar demonstration in u s history.
i v 1970 first earth day celebration 46 women employees sue newsweek u s invasion of cambodia kent state and jackson state demonstrations 1972 first issue of ms magazine nixon visit to china nixon signs title ix banning sex discrimination in higher education watergate break in congress sends equal rights amendment to the states phyllis schlafly launches stop era nixon defeats mcgovern for president 1973 last u s combat troops leave vietnam supreme court s roe v wade decision american indian movement occupies wounded knee vice president spiro agnew resigns replaced by gerald ford 1974 richard nixon resigns gerald ford becomes president 1975 communist forces occupy saigon vietnam war ends 1976 carter defeats ford in presidential election 1978 camp david peace talks lead to camp david accords united states normalizes diplomatic ties with china 1979 shah leaves iran ayatollah khomeini returns three mile island nuclear accident american hostages taken in iran soviet invasion of afghanistan 1980 unsuccessful u s attempt to rescue hostages in iran ronald reagan defeats carter for election as president.
chapter 27 rights reaflm limits 779 27 1 contradicted his campaign assertions.
richard nixon himself was a jumble of insecurities and contradictions.
his insecurities and his sense that there were many enemies about to attack him made it hard for nixon to build warm personal relationships or inspire the broad popularity of presidents like eisenhower or kennedy.
he isolated himself and often lied to hide the inner workings of his administration.
even though he had been elected as the voice of those who had supported goldwater his administration would be relatively liberal.
many federal programs were still popular and nixon was happy to support them and reap the political benefit even as he attacked liberals and liberalism as a way to win yet other voters to his side.
nixon domestic policies liberal legislation conservative politics although a self proclaimed conservative nixon seemed to some to be a liberal in disguise.
in july 1969 nixon led the celebrations when john f kennedys goal was achieved and neil armstrong became the first person to walk on the moon propelled there by american technology.
in spite of the revulsion against lbj the 1968 election retained many great society democrats in congress.
congressional democrats and the republican president worked together to pass significant legislation.
johnsons 1965 voting rights act was renewed in 1970.
new federal funds were provided for a war on cancer and other medical research.
offended when she heard a group of school superintendents dismiss the educational needs of girls representative edith green of oregon joined by representatives patsy mink of hawaii and shirley chisholm of new york proposed title ix which was added to the civil rights act in 1972 banning sex discrimination in higher education in sports but also in all college and university activities and nixon signed the law.
funds for medicare medicaid and social security were increased.
federal affirmative action regulations were toughened by nixons department of labor.
nixon did much more than any of his predecessors to strengthen environmental protection.
while the kennedy and johnson administrations had pressed passage of the clean air act clean water act and endangered species act it was under nixon that the new cabinet level environmental protection agency epa was created as well as the occupational safety and health administration osha.
the 1973 endangered species act expanded protection for animals and plants.
new clean air and clean water acts mandated the cleanup of polluted areas without regard to the cost.
nixon also approved government support of arts and culture particularly regional art programs and folk art.
when nixon took office the annual budget of the national endowment for the arts nea was 7 7 million.
many worried that nixon who had never shown any appreciation of art would cut the budget but he proposed increases each year.
by the time he left office the nea budget was over 60 million almost a 10 fold increase.
nixon championed the family assistance plan fap that was designed by daniel moynihan then a nixon policy adviser and later a democratic senator.
it would have replaced aid to families with dependent children known simply as welfare to most with a guaranteed annual income.
fap was defeated by a combination of liberals who thought it did not provide enough money to people in poverty and by conservatives who thought it expanded government handouts.
nixon also proposed a system of federally mandated health insurance the only republican to do so.
overall federal spending for people in poverty rose by some 50 percent and total federal spending for social insurance which always includes more middle class than poor beneficiaries rose from 27 3 billion in the year nixon took office to 64 7 billion at the time of his second inauguration.
it is impossible to call anyone who presided over such spending a conservative.
nixon could be seen as the last of the new deal presidents and many goldwater conservatives saw him that way and were furious with him.
from nixons perspective the programs were popular he basked in the praise for what he was doing and he remained confident that the goldwater conservatives were certainly not going to desert the republican party for the democrats.
780 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 however nixon was an unusually ruthless win at all costs politician more than he was either a liberal or conservative.
if a policy like increasing social security benefits or launching the epa brought him votes he was all for it.
if fanning the flames of divisiveness brought more votes nixon fostered division.
he encouraged vice president agnew s attacks on protestors and experts.
nixon himself condemned protestors as the vicious and lawless elements in our society in planning his reelection campaign nixon and his campaign manager former attorney general john mitchell developed a southern strategy to win over wallace voters.
the administration slowed enforcement of federal guidelines for school desegregation and courted segregationist politicians.
when officials in the justice department sought to enforce desegregation rules nixon wrote to john ehrlichman his closest aide do what the law requires and not one bit more he approved a plan that would involve the cia and fbi in illegal bugging and wiretapping.
he maintained a freeze list of those who must never be invited to the white house and a larger enemies list including reporters politicians and others who should be watched regularly.
27 1 f international issues vietnam china and beyond before he left office lbj had reduced the bombing of north vietnam and begun the paris peace talks.
even so the war itself dragged on.
in his presidential campaign nixon had promised a secret plan to end the war but the end would still be a long time coming.
nixon and his national security adviser henry kissinger had a habit of bypassing the state department and sometimes even their own staff.
in vietnam and other foreign policy arenas the nixon kissinger policies were the closely guarded work of these two men.
paris peace talks talks with north vietnam that led to an agreement by the nixon administration to with draw all u s troops from vietnam in 1972.
the continuing saga of vietnam in the first months of the nixon kissinger tenure the paris peace talks went nowhere.
nixon expanded the bombing of north vietnam and started bombing supply routes and north vietnamese enclaves in neutral cambodia.
in the next 4 years from early 1969 until the bombing ended in december 1972 more u s bombs were dropped on cambodia than were dropped by the united states during world war ii.
the expanded bombing did nothing to break the will of the north vietnamese leadership though damage and civilian casualties were high.
the bombing of cambodia took a higher toll.
a year after the bombing began cambodias prime minister lon nol overthrew the chief of state prince sihanouk.
from his exile in china sihanouk then urged cambodians to join the anti american communist resistance the khmer rouge.
the result was a devastating civil war in heretofore relatively peaceful cambodia.
when the khmer rouge a very different communist insurgency from that in vietnam defeated the lon nol government they launched a decade of horror in which they tried to turn the clock back to year zero and make cambodia a preindustrial state.
in the process they killed teachers or anyone showing signs of american vietnamese or western education or influence.
perhaps a quarter of all cambodians died and many who survived had then to live through years of 14 hour work days and constant hunger.
ironically the horror of the khmer rouge rule in cambodia ended only when vietnam invaded the country in 1978.
while nixon and kissinger expanded the bombing they sought to withdraw american ground troops from vietnam.
it was after all sending young americans to vietnam that was fueling most of the resistance to the war.
in may 1969 the administration announced plans to change the draft regulations so a new lottery system would give young men a better sense of the odds of their being called while reducing the overall size of the call up pool eventually the nixon administration moved from a draft to an all volunteer army to reduce public resistance to vietnam and future wars.
the administrations new policy was called vietnamization.
money and arms would be sent to the south vietnamese government so more and better trained vietnamese troops might replace american troops.
in 1969 the south vietnamese army expanded from 850 000 to 1 000 000 troops while the first 25 000 u s troops ind limits 781 were withdrawn.
in the years that followed fewer and fewer american troops were stationed in vietnam.
however the people of south vietnam had never embraced the war with the enthusiasm that either the south vietnamese or american governments wanted so it was difficult for the south vietnamese government to rely on their loyalty.
maintaining the morale of the u s troops who remained in vietnam was very difficult.
the war seemed to have no purpose.
those on leave sometimes refused to return.
desertions spiked as soldiers sought asylum in canada or sweden.
in vietnam there were near mutinies as soldiers refused to fight for strategic positions that seemed to have no value fragging of officers sometimes lethal attacks on officers by enlisted men increased dramatically with over 1 000 reported between 1969 and 1972.
racial tensions among the troops escalated.
drug use increased.
by one estimate 40 000 of the 250 000 troops remaining in vietnam in 1971 were using heroin.
protests against the war mounted within the army itself.
after 1968 protests against the war were larger and angrier than ever.
in the fall of 1969 600 000 to 750 000 people gathered on the washington mall to protest the war.
when nixon confirmed that u s troops had invaded cambodia in april 1970 protests took place on 350 college campuses around the country.
a quarter of all the nations college students may have been involved.
on may 4 ohio national guard troops opened fire at protesters at kent state university killing four.
two days later local police killed two protesting students at historically black jackson state college in mississippi.
in april 1971 1 000 veterans of the war camped out in washington to protest the war while they read the names of dead buddies and flung medals on the capitol steps.
one of the veterans 27 year old john kerry a future senator and presidential candidate testified before the senate foreign relations committee.
he asked how do you ask a man to be the last man to die for a mistake president nixon insisted that the protests made no impact on him.
when students from a number of universities gathered in may 1970 to remember the four who died at kent state construction workers jumped into the crowd hitting the students with i i it.
f discerns b t ha w w e teading amehcana shoo and am 782 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 their hard hats.
a few days later officials of the construction unions presented nixon with an honorary hard hat which he accepted as a symbol along with our great flag for freedom and patriotism to our beloved country a newsweek poll reported that 58 percent of americans blamed the kent state students for the violence only 11 percent the national guard.
the same poll showed that 50 percent of americans approved of the invasion of cambodia while 39 percent opposed it.
the anger swirling around the war took many forms not only protests against the war but also anger at the protesters and anger at two presidential administrations as much for the failure to expand the war as for making war in the first place.
then as the 1972 presidential election approached the united states and north vietnam meeting at the so far unproductive paris peace talks agreed to a compromise.
henry kissinger in private meetings with the north vietnamese negotiators agreed that north vietnamese troops in south vietnam could remain there pending a final resolution.
le due tho the north vietnamese negotiator at the talks agreed that the south vietnamese thieu government could stay in place pending the resolution and that american prisoners of war mostly bomber pilots some of whom had been held for years would be returned.
on october 31 1972 kissinger announced peace is at hand it turned out to be a premature announcement.
south vietnamese president thieu who had not been informed of the changing u s position objected to the continued presence of northern troops and after nixon had won a second term on november 7 he backed thieu.
the war continued.
in december 1972 after his reelection nixon expanded the bombing of the north.
more bombs were dropped in the 12 day christmas bombing than in the previous 3 years.
in january 1973 peace talks led back to the same agreement as had been considered in october in spite of thieus continuing skepticism.
on january 27 1973 a cease fire took effect u s combat troops soon left the country.
american prisoners of war were returned and went home.
the direct u s involvement in vietnam was over.
the united states continued to provide aid for the thieu government kept advisers in south vietnam and bombed supply routes in cambodia.
but without u s fighting forces the south vietnamese government lost ground and would lose more ground in the years ahead.
china while the war to stop a communist victory in vietnam continued nixon in perhaps the most surprising move of his administration began to normalize u s relations with communist china.
ever since the communist victory in 1949 the peoples republic of china and the united states had remained deeply hostile to each other.
ihe united states continued to recognize the chinese government in exile on the island of taiwan as the official government of china in spite of the fact that the communist government based in beijing ruled the land.
then in july 1971 national security adviser kissinger made a secret trip to china and laid the groundwork for a highly publicized trip by president nixon to china in february 1972.
nixons every move was televised including his handshake with chairman mao zedong his toasts with premier zhou en lai and his tour of the great wall.
the trip had a number of substantive benefits for all concerned.
from nixons perspective he got a promise that china would not intervene in vietnam.
china got a promise of a smaller u s military presence in taiwan.
both countries established new diplomatic channels and expanded trade and travel opportunities.
for china the trip also meant an end to decades of isolation and for nixon it was a publications boost at the beginning of an election year.
long after the trip nixon said this was the week that changed the world a bridge across 16 000 miles and 22 years of hostilities in a tense world it certainly began a new era of cooperation and coexistence.
expanded foreign dealings while nixons trip to china received the most publicity u s dealings with the soviet union may have been more substantive.
in september 1970 nixon and soviet premier leonid brezhnev came to an agreement about cuba.
while the soviet union continued to provide cuba with aid and the 27 1 president richard nixon who had made his reputation as a staunch anticommunist ended years of hostility between the united states and communist china with his february 1972 trip.
strategic arms limitation treaty known as salt i and an anti ballistic missile treaty abm major treaties negotiated with the soviet union to reduce the world s supply of nuclear weapons.
united states continued its embargo on trade with the island relations thawed considerably when the soviets agreed to suspend building a submarine base there and the united states promised there would not be another invasion of the island.
a year later the united states and soviet leaders reduced tensions in berlin.
in may 1972 nixon traveled to moscow for a meeting with brezhnev in which they agreed to a strategic arms limitation treaty known as salt i and an anti ballistic missile treaty abm that began the process of reducing the worlds supply of nuclear weapons.
other elements in the nixon kissinger foreign policy were less successful.
the six day war in the middle east had taken place in june 1967 a year and a half before nixons election but the new administration had to deal with the outcome.
in a deceptive move using american supplied weapons but keeping the americans in the dark about their intentions israel attacked egypt and syria.
the egyptian army was devastated and israeli troops came close to overthrowing the government of syria until stopped by the united states at the insistence of the soviets who used the hotline between washington and moscow for the first time.
israel seized 42 000 square miles and tripled its size.
nixon supported friendly arab governments especially the then twin pillars of saudi arabia and iran.
nixon was delighted that with their oil money much of it u s supplied through massive oil purchases saudi arabia and iran could also handle their own defense and purchase american arms.
when a crisis emerged in jordan in the summer of 1970 israel and the united states jointly defended a friendly government there.
but real peace in the middle east remained elusive.
nixon and kissinger sought to project american influence in other parts of the world with mixed results.
they disliked indias prime minister indira gandhi and believed that india was intent on an alliance with the soviet union.
although gandhi could be difficult and indian links to the soviet union were real the long term result was a u s policy to strengthen ties to a military dictatorship in pakistan.
the alliance led the united states to support that government when it tried to put down a rebellion in the bengali region that cost perhaps a million lives.
it would be a long time before indian or bengali people warmed to the united states.
784 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 in chile the united states tried hard to keep a marxist salvadore allende from winning the 1970 election.
when he did win the cia kept trying to destabilize the allende government.
the efforts worked and allende was overthrown and killed in a military coup in 1973.
the u s backed military forces that overthrew the democratically elected government launched chile on a course of years of tyranny and terror.
finally in august 1971 almost 3 decades after the world war ii leaders meeting at bretton woods new hampshire had made the u s dollar the currency against which all other would be pegged as a way to stabilize exchange rates see chapter 24 nixon announced a new economic policy and ended that practice.
in the future the dollar would float freely in relationship to other international currencies.
nixon hoped that by cutting the dollar loose from other currencies the new exchange rates would make it easier for people in other countries to buy u s goods.
he wanted to bolster the economy before the 1972 election and the economy received a valuable jolt.
the long term result of ending the stability in international exchange rates was less certain.
27j new economic policy a policy that ended the decades long plan in which all other currencies would be based on the u s dollar.
quick review nixon s policy has been described as liberalism at home and a tough cold war stance abroad.
explain why you would agree or disagree with this position.
the movements of the 1960s and 1970s analyze the many political and cultural movements that followed in the track of the civil rights movement.
the civil rights movement had captivated the countrys attention in the 1950s and 1960s but it was not until the late 1960s and 1970s that many other groups of americans formed their own movements to demand new rights and freedoms.
women latinos american indians and members of the white counterculture all formed their own organizations made their own demands and pushed the society to acknowledge their concerns between 1968 and 1980.
the women s movement through the 1960s the place of women in society remained surprisingly unchanged and unconsidered.
newspapers still ran separate listings for male and female jobs.
only a token number of women were admitted to law medical or other professional schools.
husbands still had to sign off on a wifes credit card application.
in november 1964 stokely carmichael made his infamous comment the position of women in sncc is prone women who went to mississippi to fight for civil rights ended up doing domestic chores as well as organizing and women in the antiwar movement found it very difficult to be seen as credible leaders.
women started to see the reality of their circumstances and they did not like what they saw.
women also began running for office in larger numbers than ever before.
only a tiny number of women served in state legislatures or congress before the late 1960s.
nevertheless during the 1960s momentum grew as more women and a more diverse group of women started running for and winning elections.
more women were elected to congress including patsy mink d hawaii in 1965 the first asian woman and shirley chisholm d new york the first african american woman in 1969.
in 1971 chisholm mink bella abzug and other women in elective and appointed offices created the national womens political caucus nwpc a bipartisan organization to encourage women to seek office.
in 1972 chisholm also ran for president and carried 151 delegates in the democratic national convention.
in 1975 ella grasso was elected governor of connecticut the first woman to be elected a state governor who was not following her husband.
chapter 27 rights iion and limits 785 in the 1970s many different groups of women came together to protest inequality raise consciousness and change the ways men and women interacted in american society.
at the end of the 1960s some younger women began consciousness raising groups discussing their experiences as women as well as the emotional political and economic toll that sexism was taking in their lives.
like the students who founded sncc these younger women had far less patience with working inside the system than their elders.
some began to separate from larger organizations and political movements while others also separated from the men with whom they were previously aligned politically or personally.
a month after the violent demonstrations at the democratic convention in chicago in 1968 robin morgan began organizing women to disrupt the miss america pageant in atlantic city new jersey.
the pageant was very popular in the 1950s and 1960s.
women representing each state were judged for their beauty and poise.
miss america was perfect for us lefty womens liberationists morgan insisted she touched capitalism militarism racism and sexism all in one fell swoop women who came to atlantic city had a freedom trash can in which they threw underwire bras constricting girdles copies of playboy magazine and other symbols of womens oppression.
when the new york post carried the story the editors wanted to make a comparison to draft card burning and erroneously coined the term bra burning though as far as anyone knows no bras were burned in atlantic city or at any other womens event.
a short time later the office of federal contract compliance at the department of labor supported bernice bunny sandler when she filed a complaint against the university of maryland after she had been turned down for a faculty appointment because she was told lets face it bunny you come on too strong for a woman sandler decided to challenge the decision.
the case eventually became a nationwide class action suit against university discrimination.
in august 1970 moderate and radical feminists came together to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the womens suffrage amendment.
on womens strike for equality day fifty thousand 50 000 women marched down new yorks fifth avenue including congresswoman bella abzug national organization for women founder betty friedan and newer leaders such as gloria steinem and kate millett.
joining friedan and pauli murray the co founders of now younger women like kate millett germaine greer and gloria steinem began their activist careers at the end of the 1960s bringing the issues of womens struggles and womens rights to the foreground.
in 1970 florence howe founded the feminist press to reissue the work of earlier feminist writers and publish the work of new women authors.
in massachusetts 12 women founded the boston womens health book collective and published a small booklet women and their bodies in 1970.
an expanded version our bodies ourselves became a best seller.
a group of african american feminists calling themselves the combahee river collective in honor of a civil war battle led by harriet tubman issued a statement in 1977 saying black other third world and working women have been involved in the feminist movement from its start and they wanted to be sure that elitism within the movement did not marginalize them.
the poetry of the black lesbian feminist audre lorde began to gain wide circulation at the same time.
in 1972 gloria steinem who had become a major voice of womens liberation sometimes to the irritation of betty friedan launched ms magazine which turned into a mass market success when it sold 250 000 copies in its first 8 days.
too tame for some and too much of a one woman show for others ms remained a voice of new ideas and important challenging thinking.
it also successfully encouraged a switch from mrs and miss to the marriage neutral term ms that matched the equally neutral mr 786 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 other women were lobbying state legislatures to make abortions legal.
among them was a young attorney sarah weddington who took on a texas case that would eventually change the abortion laws of the united states.
the u s supreme court heard the initial arguments of the case of roe v wade in the spring of 1972.
jane roe was a fictitious name to protect the plaintiffs identity.
in january 1973 the court announced the 7 2 decision that the right to privacy prevented any state from outlawing abortion in the first two trimesters of a womans pregnancy.
roe v wade would lead to battles about abortion and the role of the courts for decades.
still other women endeavored to change their working conditions or to open new careers to women.
in 1973 boston office workers organized a group they called 9 to 5 which became a union.
using new federal laws against workplace discrimination women also entered nontraditional careers in business and the construction trades that had been closed to them.
women began to appear as plumbers bus drivers and senior business executives.
the leaders of now especially pauli murray were determined to revive the struggle for an equal rights amendment to the u s constitution.
an equal rights amendment era was first proposed by the womens party in the early 1920s immediately after the success of the womens suffrage amendment.
by the 1970s it seemed like the next logical step.
newly elected representative shirley chisholm gave a passionate speech equal rights for women to the house in 1969.
now began serious lobbying of the senate in 1970.
the era passed by a vote of 354 to 24 in the house and 84 to 8 in the senate.
president nixon endorsed the amendment that said simply equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of sex as we will see however as it moved through state legislatures for ratification the era fell victim to a much changed political atmosphere.
the united farm workers 1965 1970 cesar chavez began organizing in the grape growing town of delano california in 1961.
he was soon joined by dolores huerta.
the farm workers association fwa which later became the united farm workers union drew on both the community organizing model developed by saul alinsky in chicago and on the older tradition of a mutual benefits association within the catholic church.
catholic priests and nuns protestant ministers and members of the united auto workers union all helped the fwa grow.
college students many fresh from campus based protest and civil rights activity joined the effort.
it was a powerful coalition stretching far beyond the small towns of californias little noticed agricultural regions.
in september 1965 chavez huerta and larry itliong a leader of the filipino farm workers planned a coordinated effort by filipino and latino organizers and called a major strike for the fall harvest in delano.
a meeting of 1 200 mexican american workers on september 16 1965 began with a chant viva la huelga.
viva la causa.
the drawn out delano strike and subsequent grape boycott had begun and received widespread support across the country.
it took 5 years but on july 29 1970 the delano grape growers signed a contract recognizing the farm workers union as their bargaining agent.
chavez declared from now on all grapes will be sweet.
the american indian movement from alcatraz to wounded knee in november 1969 american indians began a year and a half siege of the abandoned federal prison on alcatraz island that gained national attention.
earlier in 1964 vine deloria a 30 old standing rock sioux won leadership of the national congress of american indians that had been founded in 1944 to support the development of indian tribal governments.
a new direction began for the nations largest indian organization.
the american indian movement aim was founded in minneapolis among urban indians in the late 1960s but become a major force on the reservations in the 1970s making some of its leaders like russell means and dennis banks national figures.
27j roe v wade the u s supreme court s landmark 1973 decision declaring antiabortion laws unconstitutional and protecting a woman s right to choose.
272 united farm workers a union of migrant workers of california which bargained for better salaries and working conditions.
american indian movement aim the most widely recognized of several american civil rights organizations in tl 1970s.
chapter 27 rights reaction and limits american voices three views on womens rights jimhen betty frieda and pauli murray launched now in 1966 ww they wanted the equivalent of the naacp for women a national organization to lobby raise issues in the media and reach a wide audience.
in 1969 shulamith firestone spoke for more radical feminists through the redstockings manifesto.
while now blamed a system of oppression redstockings blamed men.
in response to both phyllis schlafly challenged their basic approach and specifically the momentum building for an equal rights amendment.
national organization for women statement of purpose 1966 we men and women who hereby constitute ourselves as the national organization for women believe that the time has come for a new movement toward true equality for all women in america and toward a fully equal partnership of the sexes as part of the world wide revolution of human rights now taking place we believe that the power of american law and the protection guaranteed by the u s constitution to the civil rights of all individuals must be effectively applied and enforced to isolate and remove patterns of sex discrimination to ensure equality of opportunity in employment and education and equality of civil and political rights and responsibilities on behalf of women we reject the current assumptions that a man must carry the sole burden of supporting himself his wife and family and that a woman is automatically entitled to lifelong support by a man upon her marriage or that marriage home and family are primarily a woman s world and responsibility hers to dominate his to support.
we believe that a true partnership between the sexes demands a different concept of marriage an equitable sharing of the responsibilities of home and children and the economic burdens of their support.
source ellen skinner women and the national experience sources in women s history upper saddle river new jersey prentice hall 2011 pp 358 360.
redstockings manifesto july 7 1969 i after centuries of individual and preliminary political struggle women are uniting to achieve their final liberation from male supremacy.
redstocking is dedicated to building this unity and winning our freedom.
ii women are an oppressed class.
our oppression is total affecting every facet of our lives.
we are exploited as sex objects breeders domestic servants and cheap labor.
we are considered inferior beings whose only purpose is to enhance men s lives.
our humanity is denied.
our prescribed behavior is enforced by the threat of physical violence.
because we have lived so intimately with our oppressors in isolation from each other we have been kept from seeing our personal suffering as a political condition.
this creates the illusion that a woman s relationship with her man is a matter of interplay between two unique personalities and can be worked out individually.
in reality every such relationship is a class relationship and the conflicts between individual men and women are political conflicts that can only be solved collectively.
788 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 iii we identify the agents of our oppression as men.
male supremacy is the oldest most basic form of domination.
all other forms of exploitation and oppression racism capitalism imperialism etc.
are extensions of male supremacy men dominate women a few men dominate the rest.
all power structures throughout history have been male dominated and male oriented.
men have controlled all political economic and cultural institutions and backed up this control with physical force.
they have used their power to keep women in an inferior position.
all men receive economic sexual and psychological benefits from male supremacy.
all men have oppressed women.
iv attempts have been made to shift the burden of responsibility from men to institutions or to women themselves.
we condemn these arguments as evasions.
institutions alone do not oppress they are merely tools of the oppressor.
to blame institutions implies that men and women are equally victimized obscures the fact that men benefit from the subordination of women and gives men the excuse that they are forced to be oppressors.
on the contrary any man is free to renounce his superior position provided that he is willing to be treated like a woman by other men.
we also reject the idea that women consent to or are to blame for their own oppression.
women s submission is not the result of brainwashing stupidity or mental illness but of continual daily pressure from men.
we do not need to change ourselves but to change men.
the most slanderous evasion of all is that women can oppress men.
the basis for this illusion is the isolation of individual relationships from their political context and the tendency of men to see any legitimate challenge to their privileges as persecution.
vwe regard our persona experience and our feelings about that experience as the basis for an analysis of our common situation.
we cannot rely on existing ideologies as they are all products of male supremacist culture.
we question every generalization and accept none that are not confirmed by our experience.
our chief task at present is to develop female class consciousness through sharing experience and publicly exposing the sexist foundation of all our institutions.
consciousness raising is not therapy which implies the existence of individual solutions and falsely assumes that the male female relationship is purely personal but the only method by which we can ensure that our program for liberation is based on the concrete realities of our lives.
the first requirement for raising class consciousness is honesty in private and in public with ourselves and other women.
vi we identify with all women.
we define our best interest as that of the poorest most brutally exploited woman.
we repudiate a11 economic racial educational or status privileges that divide us from other women.
we are determined to recognize and eliminate any prejudices we may hold against other women.
we are committed to achieving internal democracy.
we will do whatever is necessary to ensure that every woman in our movement has an equal chance to participate assume responsibility and develop her political potential.
vi we cal on al our sisters to unite with us in struggle.
we call on all men to give up their male privilege and support women s liberation in the interest of our humanity and their own.
in fighting for our liberation we will always take the side of women against their oppressors.
we will not ask what is revolu tionary or reformist only what is good for women.
the time for individual skirmishes has passed.
this time we are going all the way.
source 2000 2013 by redstockings inc phyllis schlafly what s wrong with equal rights for women.
february 1972 of all the classes of people who ever lived the american woman is the most privileged.
we have the most rights and rewards and the fewest duties women s lib is a total assault on the role of the american woman as wife and mother and on the family as the basic unit of society.
women s libbers are trying to make wives and mothers unhappy with their career make them feel that they are second class citizens and abject slaves.
women s libbers are promoting free sex instead of the slavery of marriage.
they are promoting federal day care centers for babies instead of homes.
they are promoting abortions instead of families.
why should we trade in our special privileges and honored status for the alleged advantage of working in an office or assembly line.
most women would rather cuddle a baby than a typewriter or factory machine.
most women find that it is easier to get along with a husband than a foreman or office manager.
offices and factories require many more menial and repetitious chores than washing dishes and ironing shirts.
women s libbers do not speak for the majority of american women.
american women do not want to be liberated from husbands and children.
we do not want to trade our birthright of the special privileges of american women for the mess of pottage called the equal rights amendment.
source phyllis schlafly report 5 no.
7 february 1972.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis how did each author define marriage.
what role did each author see marriage as playing or potentially playing in american society.
contextualization what was the audience for each of the three documents included here.
what strategies did the authors use to influence their intended audiences.
in 1973 traditionalists among the sioux on the pine ridge reservation in south dakota staged a dramatic takeover of the village of wounded knee site of the massacre of 1890.
dennis banks and russell means became the spokespersons for aim and dared the federal government to repeat the attack.
the standoff lasted 71 days as aim held the town as agents of the u s marshall service and the fbi surrounded them.
in may after an fbi agent had been seriously wounded and two aim members killed both sides agreed to end the siege and the sioux won a government agreement to reconsider the treaty rights of the oglala sioux.
another demonstration soon followed when indians staged a sit in at the bureau of indian affairs offices in washington dc.
in 1975 two fbi agents were killed in another standoff at pine ridge and one of the aim leaders leonard peltier was arrested and sentenced to prison for life although his involvement in the violence and the verdict in his case remain hotly contested almost 40 years later.
the upsurge of indian activity at alcatraz wounded knee the bureau of indian affairs office in washington and elsewhere gained more than publicity.
in 1970 the nixon administration negotiated the return of the blue lake in new mexico considered sacred by the taos people to the taos pueblo.
in 1971 the alaska native claims settlement act was passed by congress resolving long standing land disputes.
the 1972 indian education act also provided funds for new schools that would be under tribal control.
in 1973 the government began again to recognize indian tribes as legitimate agents starting with the menominees in wisconsin.
changing issues of race and diversity in the 1970s the most dramatic scenes of the black civil rights movement in the 1950s and 1960s took place in the south.
in the 1970s integration efforts moved north.
although boston had a national reputation for liberalism bostons tightly knit ethnic neighborhoods could be hostile to outsiders.
in 1974 federal courts found chapter 27 rights lkj 272 27j thinking historically the young lords party and the origin of political movements in the 1970s 27 j 27 a historians have debated why so many different political movements among women latinos american indians gay men and lesbians and others emerged in the late 1960s and 1970s.
in the 1950s and early 1960s the civil rights movement had been confined almost exclusively to the black freedom struggle.
a new white student movement also emerged in the 1960s.
in the next 10 years it seemed every group of americans was starting to demand its own rights and to challenge social injustice wherever it was found.
one of the most colorful if short lived movement groups was the young lords party a puerto rican group that came into existence in new york city in 1969.
pablo guzman one of the founders of the young lords remembered their origins.
his description of the diverse forces that led them to organize sheds light on the experience of many other groups.
in guzman s account the young lords began with a street protest in the summer of 1969.
all we had been trying to do after sweeping up the streets on previous sundays was talk with sanitation about once a week pickups and nonexistent trash cans and about how to decently treat people asking for help instead of blowing them off.
if protests helped win victories for the african american community they reasoned why not them.
but when the protest produced an angry police presence guzman and his friends decided to recruit others.
it was the summer of 1969 and the first stateside organization of radical young puerto ricans was announcing itself we hoped as a political force.
they quickly learned about la raza unida the people united that was emerging among mexican americans in the west about the weather underground that had broken off from the students for a democratic society to embrace more violent tactics and about the black panther party the militant black organization on which the young lords would model themselves.
they were also influenced by international connections in a world where many were challenging american dominance.
guzman had spent a semester studying in mexico.
he said i left as paul guzman a nervous only child of a puerto rican cuban mother and a puerto rican father i came back to the states as pablo guzman.
while other groups influenced young urban puerto ricans like guzman there were also other roots to the protest movement as guzman reflected but it didn t come from nowhere my parents and my grandparents after all had first instilled in me a sense that there was far too long a history of injustice in this society.
only as my father would say later at my trial your mother and i never thought you would actually try to do something about it.
not on such a scale anyhow.
but with deep roots in their own communities and with the inspiration of seeing others the young lords like the american indian movement or the gay men of the stonewall inn were not going to remain quiet in the face of what they saw as significant injustice.
note today pablo guzman is a senior journalist with cbs news.
source pablo guzman the village voice march 21 1995.
thinking critically 1.
compare and contrast how does guzman s description compare with the emergence of other movements described in this chapter.
historical interpretation how much did guzman s family history impact what he did in comparison to other civil rights movements that were developing in 1969.
nvi that the boston school committee the local name for the school board had engaged in a deliberate policy of redrawing school district lines to maintain racial segregation and the court ordered an immediate integration of the schools transferring students across the city by bus for the opening of school in the fall of 1974.
boston exploded.
it was many years before peace returned to the boston schools.
while boston was split over school integration new york was split over a proposal developed by community leaders the mayor and the ford foundation for local community control of public schools.
in certain experimental districts in predominantly puerto rican east harlem and an african american neighborhood in brooklyn local school boards were elected and given powers previously held by the 790 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 the occupation of wounded knee site of the 1890 massacre took on great symbolic significance for many american indians.
central office.
when the brooklyn board transferred 12 white teachers out of the district in may 1968 the overwhelmingly white new york teachers union called a citywide strike that lasted for much of the 1968 69 school year crippled the schools and exacerbated racial tensions in new york.
in other cities such as detroit cleveland baltimore st louis milwaukee and buffalo whites virtually deserted the city for the suburbs.
as a result more african americans were elected to mayors offices.
richard hatcher had been elected mayor of gary indiana and carl stokes mayor of cleveland ohio in 1967 tom bradley was elected in los angeles coleman young in detroit and maynard jackson in atlanta all in 1973 and walter washington in washington dc in 1974.
blacks and latinos also began to seek opportunities in higher education in numbers never seen before.
a growing black middle class could afford college in substantial numbers for the first time and johnson era affirmative action programs opened doors.
but some whites felt that affirmative action subjected them to reverse discrimination the arguments about affirmative action came to a head when allan bakke a white applicant was rejected for admission to the medical school at the university of california at davis in 1973.
bakke sued claiming that he had been denied because the university held 16 percent of the slots for minority students.
in the u s supreme courts bakke decision in june of 1978 four justices ruled that race based programs were illegal and that the university had discriminated against bakke while four justices ruled that race based affirmative action was constitutional.
the ninth justice lewis powell joined with those ordering bakke s admission but on much more limited grounds.
powell said that an individual could not be excluded solely on the basis of race but that race could be a consideration.
one law professor remarked it was a landmark occasion but the court failed to produce a landmark decision.
bakke decision the u s supreme court s 1978 decision th.
limited but did not end affirmative actioj programs to achieve racial diversity in a university s student body.
chapter 27 rights ind limits 791 woodstock music and art fair a countercultural music festival that attracted an audience of over 400 000 in 1969.
in 1974 the u s supreme court in lau v nichols ruled that school districts must make accommodations for students who came to school not speaking english.
these accommodations could include english immersion programs or full bilingual programs.
they could not as san francisco had been doing simply tell a non english speaker like kenny lau to make the best of it and learn english on his own.
a year later in november 1975 congress passed and president ford signed the education for all handicapped children act requiring the least restrictive possible accommodation for students with special needs.
the 1970s were also a time in which the nature of american racial diversity began to change.
in 1965 when lyndon johnson signed a new immigration law only five percent of immigrants to the united states were from asia.
in the 1970s that number climbed to 50 percent.
small japanese and chinese communities grew dramatically while immigrants began to arrive from india pakistan and korea.
especially in california the growing asian population changed state and local politics.
immigration from latin america also increased significantly not only from mexico but also from many countries of central and south american as well as the racially diverse islands of the caribbean.
with this growing racial diversity interracial marriages became more common.
a child with one asian parent and one parent from central america was not adequately described with traditional ethnic labels.
out of the closet stonewall and gay lesbian rights the new york times for june 29 1969 carried an article that reported a shift in the citys gay community that would eventually spread to the nation.
of particular note it said hundreds of young men went on a rampage in greenwich village shortly after 3 a m yesterday after a force of plainclothes men raided a bar that the police said was well known for its homosexual clientele.
something shifted when a group of gay men whom the police assumed would submit quietly to arrest as they had in the past refused to do so.
many who had long kept their identities hidden stood up.
many would never return to a closeted life.
in the 1970s gay liberation became a political movement.
while the american psychological association apa had traditionally defined homosexuality as a form of mental illness pressure from outside and from within its own ranks led to a 1973 change when its board voted to remove homosexuality from its list of psychiatric disorders.
we will be removing one of the justifications for the denial of civil rights to individuals whose only crime is that their sexual orientation is to members of the same sex an apa leader said.
in november 1974 elaine nobel was elected to the massachusetts state legislature as the first openly lesbian or gay state representative in the united states.
the following january minnesota state senator allan spear announced that he too was gay and inspired by nobel would no longer keep his sexual orientation a secret.
then in 1977 harvey milk a gay man was elected to the san francisco board of supervisors symbolizing the radical change that was taking place.
a counterculture and its critics sex drugs and rock n roll the summer after richard nixons inauguration more than 400 000 young americans gathered on august 15 17 1969 on a farm in bethel new york for the woodstock music and art fair.
many more would have attended if massive traffic jams and rain induced mud had not made travel to woodstock exceedingly difficult.
those who attended woodstock heard janis joplin jimi hendrix and jefferson airplane as well as folk performers including joan baez.
many smoked marijuana swam in the nude and generally enjoyed a weekend free from the constraints of traditional society.
if any event stands as a symbol of the counterculture of the late 1960s woodstock was that event.
it was also a symbol that stood closer to the end of the countercultures life than the beginning.
792 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 several factors helped create the countercultures hippies of the 1960s.
one was the creation of hallucinogenic drugs.
the creation of a diethylamide of lysergic acid lsd by albert hoffman no relation to abbie hoffman who was seeking a way to treat schizophrenia set a new generation on a drug assisted search for vision quests and heightened ecstasy in body and soul.
lsd was popularized by timothy leary and ken kesey as the key to the ultimate revelation or a way to blow your mind music was also essential to the counterculture.
rock n roll had gone through extraordinary changes in the 1960s.
two british rock groups the beatles and the rolling stones became huge hits in the united states in the early 1960s with music that mocked mainstream music including songs like a hard days night bob dylan moved from folk music to rock.
his like a rolling stone moved to number one on the charts.
in sergeant pepper s lonely hearts club band and their first movie yellow submarine the beatles embraced the psychedelic world.
finally anger at a war that seemed always to be escalating led some notably abbie hoffman and jerry rubin to conclude that the best protest was street theater and humor that mocked those who they thought were leading the country to ruin.
if the counterculture had a physical home it was in san franciscos haight ashbury district from 1966 to 1969.
in haight ashbury the counterculture ruled its own small domain.
street theater could be seen on every corner.
a group called the diggers gave out free food.
relationships were casual and informal.
drugs were easily available.
the summer of 1967 was declared the summer of love and young people from every corner of the united states streamed into the haight to make love not war but drugs led to too many emergency room visits and violence.
rock heroes janice joplin and jimi hendrix both died of drug overdoses in 1970 and jim morrison died in 1971 each 27 years old.
venereal disease spread rapidly.
the free food disappeared and the street actors went elsewhere.
utopia it seemed could not last long.
the woodstock festival of 1969 was a 3 day celebration of new freedoms that were already passing for many.
quick review how might an historian account for the many political and cultural movements that emerged in the 1960s and 1970s.
the culture wars of the 1970s 27 j analyze the reaction to the liberal and radical politics of the 1960s and 1970s and the growth of new militant conservative movements.
in the 1970s the united states was a deeply divided nation.
among activist women there were major conflicts between feminist and with antifeminist groups.
conservative protestants catholics and jews found new common ground often in opposition to liberals in their own traditions.
the nations deep racial divides shifted as various groups representing specific ethnicities whites blacks latinos asians and american indians moved in different directions.
phyllis schlafly and the defeat of the equal rights amendment perhaps no one symbolized the new political situation what some have called the culture wars of the 1970s as much as phyllis schlafly.
schlafly was born phyllis stewart in a middle class family in st louis missouri in august 1924 3 years after betty friedan another child of the midwest.
however their paths diverged dramatically.
schlafly deeply influenced by her roman catholic background and the commitment to individual responsibility she was taught as a child became a republican party activist.
throughout the 1940s and 1950s schlafly was a conservative activist within the republican party.
she organized grassroots efforts for barry goldwater and wrote a choice not an echo an attack on liberals within the republican party.
chapter 27 rights reaction and limits 7 map 27 1 support and opposition to the era.
although the majority of state legislatures voted to approve the proposed equal rights amendment to the constitution the amendment fell three states short of the required three fourth s approval.
after the goldwater defeat a new opportunity opened for her.
in december 1971 schlafly was invited to a debate in connecticut.
she wanted to focus on national defense but was told that the focus would be the equal rights amendment that was being debated at that time in the u s senate.
schlafly had no opinion of the amendment but agreed to read up on it before coming to connecticut.
she did and the result was her decision to make opposition to the era her prime focus.
in 1972 as congress was voting on the era schlafly wrote whats wrong with equal rights for women and then launched the stop era initiative.
schlafly pulled in women whom she knew from anticommunist organizing.
by early 1973 stop era had chapters in 26 states.
eventually 35 states ratified the era but it fell three short of the required 38 states and was not added to the constitution see map 27 1.
schlafly claimed much of the credit for its defeat.
new cultural issues including opposition to feminism to abortion rights to homosexual rights and to the defense of prayer in school as well as a particular definition of morality and law and order in the larger society became the keys to a new conservative constituency and for phyllis schlafly a new career as an activist.
for the republican party they would be the keys to victory in several future election cycles.
equal rights amendment a proposed amendment to the u s constitution giving women equal rights with men ratified by 35 states three short of the needed number.
moral majority one of the first large scale organizations of the emerging religious right which organized support for conservative candidates and was a major force in american politics in the early 1980s.
phyllis schlafly gave nundreds of speeches like this one at the illinois state capitol building convincing enough states to defeat the proposed equal rights amendment to the u s constitution.
the rise of the religious right looking back at the 1972 election charles colson one of nixons prime advisers said it was the first time in modern american political history that social issues became dominant they would become even more dominant in later campaigns.
in 1978 pat robertson who had founded the christian broadcasting network in 1960 said that if traditionalist catholics and evangelical protestants long distrustful of each other could come together we have enough votes to run the country these were fighting words and they made robertson a central player in the religious right in the 1980s.
by far the most powerful expression of the growing religious right in the 1970s was a new organization the moral majority founded by reverend jerry falwell pastor of the thomas road baptist church in lynchburg virginia which claimed 17 000 members.
falwell was also president of liberty baptist college later liberty university and host of the television old time gospel hour which ran on 300 stations for an audience of some 1 5 million people.
the moral majority was falwell said pro life pro family pro morality and pro american it was anti era in favor of prayer in schools the teaching of alternatives to evolution and like some earlier secular conservative movements intensely anticommunist.
falwell opposed u s foreign policy that favored the relaxation of tensions with the soviet union and called on the nations leaders to fight communism.
he said our government has the right to use its armaments to bring wrath upon those who would do evil falwell who had opposed civil rights in the 1960s said if you would like to know where i am politically i am to the right of wherever you are.
i thought goldwater was too liberal the moral majority helped to register perhaps 2 million new voters before the 1980 election.
they were a force to be reckoned with.
273 quick review were the culture wars of the 1970s stop era and the moral majority reactions to earlier liberalism or something new in american culture and politics.
support your answer.
794 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 27 4 politics economics and the impact of watergate explain the political impact of watergate and subsequent developments that set the stage for the reagan revolution.
u s leadership and the u s economy faltered in the 1970s.
the three presidents who served during that decade were ultimately viewed as flawed or weak.
nixon was driven from office in a scandal called watergate.
his successor gerald ford disappointed many particularly for pardoning nixon and fords successor jimmy carter was unable to pull a nation out of a crisis with iran and out of a gas crisis at home.
the country desperate for strong leadership put its faith in a movie star turned politician ronald reagan to start a new decade.
the economic context the 1950s and 1960s had been decades of almost constant economic growth.
during the 1960s the nations poverty rate dropped from 22 2 percent to 12 6 percent.
the income of many americans rose dramatically.
more americans had more to spend and more financial security than in any previous generation.
while the 1970s did not see anything like a return to the financial distress of the 1930s they were not such good times.
the sense of decline was widespread.
although the u s economy grew in the 1960s the economies of other countries especially germany and japan grew more quickly.
u s corporations failed to invest in research and development as much as companies in competing countries.
americans began buying foreign made goods that were less expensive or of better quality.
u s manufacturers moved production to other countries where wages were lower costing u s workers their jobs.
in 1971 for the first time since 1900 the united states imported more than it exported.
throughout the 1970s unemployment continued to be much higher than in the 1960s.
while high unemployment normally meant low inflation inflation also remained high during the decade and the combination came to be known as stagflation to keep taxes low and foster public support for the great society while also increasing military spending for vietnam lyndon johnson had allowed government debt to grow dramatically.
nixon also did little to reduce government debt using government programs to build popularity while keeping taxes low for the same reason.
the result was continued inflation in spite of the unemployment.
when federal officials tried to reduce unemployment by providing stimuli to the economy inflation got worse.
when they cut spending unemployment soared.
the country began to talk about a misery index the combined harm done by unemployment and inflation.
between march and december 1974 the dow jones industrial average fell from 892 to 577 a major loss for investors.
the economy was further undermined by a rapid rise in energy costs.
in retaliation for u s support for israel during the yorn kippur war in october 1973 arab members of the organization of petroleum exporting countries opec raised the price of oil on the world market.
oil which had sold for 1 77 a barrel in october 1973 rose to 12 a barrel by the spring of 1974.
suddenly gasoline and heating oil were very expensive.
presidents nixon ford and carter were all bedeviled by public anger over long lines at gas stations something americans had not experienced since world war ii.
average americans saw their disposable income decline as more money had to be spent to keep their cars running and their houses warm.
american automakers were slow to anticipate the impact of the rising prices for gasoline and kept making only large gas guzzling cars.
as a result sales of japanese imports toyotas hondas and datsuns which had held only a small share of the u s auto market soared.
steel mills tire manufacturers auto parts makers and of course ford chrysler and general motors all cut back and laid off workers.
unemployment rose especially in the northeast and midwest a region that took on the new name of the rustbelt.
a 1976 new york times series described the shift from the old industrial 27 1 272 273 27 4 chapter 27 rights reaction and lin ts 795 watergate the crisis that began with a illegal break in at the democratic headquarters in the watergate complex and ended with richard nixon s resignation.
northwest and midwest to the south and southwest all day and through the lonely night the moving vans push southward the 14 wheeled boxcars of the highway changing the demographic face of america ihe rapid decline of the rustbelt and the equally rapid growth of the south and southwest meant many things to the united states in the 1970s.
the south itself had certainly changed.
it was no longer the rigidly racially segregated economic backwater it was in the 1950s.
indeed the south was more racially integrated than the north.
tanya tuckers 1974 song the south is gonna rise again told her audience that the south would rise but not the way they thought it would back then.
i see everybody hand in hand in the new economy tucker sang i see sons and daughters of sharecroppers but theyre not pickin cotton anymore but they were also not joining unions and wages in the south stayed lower than in the north.
elected representatives of the new south tended to oppose what they saw as an intrusive government.
for some the rise of the air conditioned sunbelt stretching from the old confederacy through the southwest of arizona and california was a chance for a fresh start in fast growing cities like houston texas or phoenix arizona and the suburbs around them.
for others especially those left behind in the north it was a disaster.
in 1975 76 new york city suffered a major financial crisis.
when the decline in city tax revenue and federal aid meant that the city could not pay its bills it was forced to lay off 3 400 police officers 1 000 firefighters and 4 000 hospital workers.
cleveland eventually defaulted on its debts in 1978.
throughout the north city services declined and crime spiraled.
there seemed to be relatively little that the federal government could do through the 1970s to change the economic situation or address stagflation.
tax cuts proposed by every administration did not have the impact that some hoped and in the absence of corresponding cuts in federal spending which were highly unpopular tended to fuel further inflation.
americans found themselves in an unaccustomed era of limits and they regularly took their anger out on political leaders of both parties.
watergate and the end of the nixon presidency when he was reelected in november 1972 nixon seemed to be at the peak of his powers.
in fact he was beginning a long slow decline that would make his second term a torture for him his administration and ultimately the country until he finally resigned in disgrace in august 1974.
the constitutional crisis known as watergate began with a simple burglary in june 1972.
as the election campaign heated up the special operations group known as the plumbers was set up within the ill named committee to re elect the president creep.
g gordon liddy leader of the plumbers recommended to creeps director former attorney general john mitchell and his deputy jeb stuart magruder that they break into the offices of democratic committee chair lawrence obrien which were housed in the watergate complex in washington d c to put a tap on his telephone.
mitchell and magruder approved the plan but the plumbers were caught.
police found an address book on the burglars that included a number for e howard hunt a former plumber now working for creep and both hunt and liddy were soon arrested as co conspirators in the break in.
the white house dismissed the whole thing as a third rate burglary if nixon had simply admitted the stupidity and fired hunt and liddy perhaps even mitchell and magruder the issue might have ended there.
but such a move was not nixons style.
his orders to his chief aide haldeman were to play it tough and most fatefully to order the cia to stop an fbi investigation of the burglary.
in those moves the grounds for the eventual impeachment of the president were laid since the cia order to the fbi was an obstruction of justice.
while the democratic candidate george mcgovern tried to raise the issue during the fall campaign not much came of it.
but when hunt and liddy went to trial in front 796 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 of federal district judge john j sirica the judge quickly determined that there was more to the case than a simple burglary.
in addition two washington post reporters carl bernstein and robert woodward also began a search for more information including the cultivation of a secret source who they called deep throat.
only decades later was it revealed that deep throat was mark felt deputy director of the fbi who was angry that the fbi had been ordered out of the case and angry at nixon for passing him over for the director s position when the fbis long time director j edgar hoover died.
in january 1973 just as nixon began his second term the watergate burglars were found guilty in federal court.
sirica gave them all maximum sentences but promised to reconsider if they would break their silence.
one of the burglars james mccord started to talk to federal prosecutors.
by april not only mccord but also john dean nixon s white house lawyer and deputy campaign director magruder were talking to the grand jury.
they also talked to staff of a senate select committee chaired by senator sam ervin of north carolina.
at that point several of nixons closest advisers including haldeman and ehrlichman resigned.
still proof of the presidents knowledge or involvement of the affair was lacking.
then in may the ervin committee started to hold televised hearings and the nation first watched mccord accuse dean and mitchell and then watched dean accuse the white house.
they also learned that nixon had secretly taped conversations in the oval office to preserve a record for his memoirs.
by fall ervin sirica and archibald cox a justice department special prosecutor all demanded the oval office tapes.
nixon refused to turn them over claiming executive privilege the right of the president to keep white house deliberations confidential.
on october 20 the president ordered his attorney general elliot richardson to fire cox as special prosecutor.
richardson refused and nixon fired richardson then fired deputy attorney general william ruckelshaus.
finally the third ranking person at the justice department robert bork fired cox.
the moment was known as the saturday night massacre nixon surrendered only some of the tapes including one from days after the break in that had an accidental eighteen and one half minute erasure.
public opinion started turning against the president.
the administration so thoroughly embroiled in scandal and secrecy was not able to pursue much else in foreign or domestic policy.
it was in the middle of the watergate crisis that arab leaders angry at nixons efforts first to reduce the dollars value in international exchange rates since oil was paid for in u s dollars and then to support israel retaliated by increasing the cost of oil by some seven times.
when in june 1974 nixon tried to deflect his domestic troubles with another dramatic international trip to moscow to meet with soviet leaders the summit produced no meaningful results.
in the meantime things seemed to go from bad to worse for the president.
in october 1973 vice president spiro agnew was convicted of soliciting kickbacks and forced to resign.
nixon appointed house republican leader gerald ford as vice president.
ford a popular leader with no particular ties to the white house was quickly confirmed.
as the investigation uncovered more of nixons dealings the president responded i am not a crook it was a low point in presidential history.
but more was to come.
in march 1974 haldeman ehrlichman and former attorney general mitchell were indicted.
federal courts ordered that the white house tapes be turned over to the courts and to the house committee which had begun drawing up charges that would lead to the impeachment of the president.
nixon appealed the decision about the tapes.
on july 24 the supreme court ruled that watergate was a criminal matter and executive privilege did not apply.
the tapes had to be handed over.
on july 27 democrats and many republicans on the house committee began voting to recommend the impeachment of the president for obstruction of justice.
rather than face the full house vote and the trial in the senate both of which he now knew he would lose nixon went on television on the evening of august 8 and told the nation i have never been a quitter.
to leave office before my term is completed is abhorrent to every instinct in my body.
but as president i must put the interest of america first therefore i shall resign the presidency effective at noon tomorrow 27j 272 273 27 4 chapter 27 rights reaction ancugmjfc 797 273 272 273 27 4 detente the policy of building better understanding and a more peaceful relationship between the united states and the soviet union.
as the nixon family began a sad journey to their home in san clemente california gerald ford was sworn in as president.
the nation breathed a sigh of relief that a long and distracting ordeal was over.
conservative columnist james j kilpatrick wrote the swearing in of gerald ford cant come one hour too soon.
at noon on april 9 chief justice warren burger just after administering the presidential oath to ford turned to pennsylvania senator hugh scott and said hugh it worked.
thank god it worked burger was celebrating the victory of the constitution.
ford tried hard to live up to the trust that people liberal and conservative now placed in him.
but he did not inherit an easy situation.
gerald ford gerald ford entered the white house with high approval ratings.
he also inherited an economy that was staggering from inflation and unemployment as well as an international scene that included the last stages of the defeat of south vietnam.
fortunately for him there was a sense of bipartisan good will in his early days in office.
george reedy a staunch democrat and former press secretary for lyndon johnson said ford is one of the very few men in public life whose absolute honesty i do not question such a reputation was a precious if limited asset as ford faced the nations problems that were now his.
ford came from grand rapids michigan.
he had been an eagle scout a star football player at the university of michigan in the 1930s and a navy veteran of world war ii.
like several other world war ii veterans including kennedy and nixon ford entered politics soon after the war winning a seat in the house of representatives in 1948.
he gained a reputation for hard work and honesty and was elected house minority leader in 1965.
even so not everyone respected him.
lyndon johnson said that the house minority leader had played football once too often without a helmet.
before and during his presidency he was often portrayed as long winded and bumbling.
the new president believed that his top priority was to heal a wounded nation.
a month after taking office he made a controversial proposal that draft evaders be given amnesty in return for alternative service as a way to heal the divisions of the vietnam war.
ford gave richard nixon a full free and absolute pardon for any crimes committed during his administration.
some hinted that ford had made a deal with nixon but the new president insisted during and after his term in office that his top priority was healing the country which included moving beyond watergate.
ford was convinced that the best way to counter inflation and unemployment was to get government spending under control and reduce the federal deficit.
congress however was very reluctant to accept any of fords proposals to cut federal spending.
by january 1975 as the economy continued to worsen ford supported a tax cut.
congress approved an even larger cut than ford had requested and he reluctantly signed the popular bill in march 1975.
he then proceeded to infuriate democrats by vetoing a number of federal spending bills.
throughout most of the rest of his term ford and the congress battled over tax and spending issues both sides wanting tax cuts but ford insisting they be offset by spending cuts.
each side was determined to blame the other for ongoing economic woes and to claim the credit when the economy did improve modestly in late 1975 and early 1976.
however no one could claim that the economy was healthy during fords term.
in addition to economic challenges ford had also inherited a number of foreign policy crises.
the cold war was still very real and when the soviet union expelled the author aleksandr solzhenitsyn in february 1974 public opinion in the united states was inflamed undermining some of nixons detente efforts to build a new and better relationship with the soviet union.
ford calmed u s soviet relations when he met with soviet premier leonid brezhnev and signed the helsinki accords promising peaceful resolution of outstanding issues and new scientific cooperation.
the middle east however remained tense and india tested its first nuclear weapon in may 1974.
in addition kissinger whom ford had retained as secretary of state supported a military coup in argentina in 1976 as he had in chile in 1973.
798 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 american voices gerald r ford remarks upon taking the oath of office as president 1974 ichard nixon resigned as president on august 9 1974 the first president in american history to do so.
nixon s elected vice president spiro agnew had already resigned and following a new constitutional amendment nixon had appointed gerald ford to the office.
thus when ford became president in 1974 he was the first president in history to be unelected as either president or vice president.
as he took office he had a strong sense of the kind of national healing that the country needed from him.
moments after being sworn in he spoke to the nation mr chief justice my dear friends my fellow americans the oath that i have taken is the same oath that was taken by george washington and by every president under the constitution.
but i assume the presidency under extraordinary circumstances never before experienced by americans.
this is an hour of history that troubles our minds and hurts our hearts.
i am acutely aware that you have not elected me as your president by your ballots and so i ask you to confirm me as your president with your prayers.
and i hope that such prayers will also be the first of many.
i believe that truth is the glue that holds government together not only our government but civilization itself.
that bond though strained is unbroken at home and abroad.
in all my public and private acts as your president i expect to follow my instincts of openness and candor with full confidence that honesty is always the best policy in the end.
my fellow americans our long national nightmare is over.
our constitution works our great republic is a government of laws and not of men.
here the people rule.
but there is a higher power by whatever name we honor him who ordains not only righteousness but love not only justice but mercy.
as we bind up the internal wounds of watergate more painful and more poisonous than those of foreign wars let us restore the golden rule to our political process and let brotherly love purge our hearts of suspicion and of hate god helping me i will not let you down.
source downloaded july 1 2011 from speeches 740001 asp.
thinking critically 1.
historical context beyond the nixon resignation what extraordinary circumstances might ford be referring to.
comparison why might americans be willing to trust gerald ford s words after the dishonesty of the johnson and nixon administrations.
bill most frustrating however was vietnam.
the last u s troops had been out of vietnam for more than a year when ford took office but military advisers cia and state department officers remained and the united states continued to provide crucial aid.
congress was out of patience with the war.
in march 1975 ford briefly considered a recommendation from kissinger to resume the bombing of north vietnam but ultimately rejected it.
nevertheless he was furious when in april congress refused his request for emergency military aid to south vietnam.
in early 1975 the pro american government of laos fell to communists.
in early april the pro american lon nol government of cambodia fell to the khmer rouge.
on april 29 1975 the government of south vietnam surrendered.
as north vietnamese tanks crashed through the gate of the presidential palace in saigon and the last u s helicopters took off from the roof of the american embassy there was little ford could do but attempt the rescue of some vietnamese orphans mostly children born as a result of relationships between vietnamese and u s service personnel.
the long american presence was over.
south vietnam disappeared and the communist government renamed saigon as ho chi minh city.
as the 1976 presidential election approached ronald reagan the popular two term governor of california challenged ford in the republican primaries.
reagan was staunchly anticommunist attacking ford and kissinger for yielding too much to the soviet union and he appealed to conservative voters.
but reagan was not able to dislodge a sitting president.
ford sought to unify the party by replacing his current appointed vice president former new york governor nelson rockefeller on the ticket with a more conservative candidate kansas senator robert dole whom reagan liked.
chapter 27 rights reaction and limits 799 as the last helicopters left the roof of the u s embassy in saigon in 1975 hundreds of vietnamese who had supported the u s effort tried to get out.
most were left behind.
democrats believed that after watergate and especially after fords pardon of nixon 1976 was to be their year and they waged a vigorous campaign.
at the beginning of the primary season former georgia governor jimmy carter was considered a long shot in a race that involved some of the nations best known leaders including washington senator henry jackson and representative morris udall of arizona.
to the surprise of many carter won primary after primary and went on to a first ballot nomination.
he selected the well known liberal senator from minnesota walter mondale as his vice president.
carter started the race with a 20 point lead in the polls but ford was a better campaigner than many expected.
in the end carters focus on the continued high inflation and unemployment the misery index the lingering national anger about watergate and carters success in positioning himself as the outsider won the election.
ihe final vote was very close with carter winning 50 percent of the popular vote to fords 48 percent.
ford took his loss in stride saying i want to be remembered as a nice person who worked at the job and who left the white house in better shape than when i took over most agreed he deserved that tribute.
many also looked forward to a more wholesale change of national management in january 1977.
jimmy carter s difficult years gas lines inflation iran by tradition after taking the oath of office at the capitol a new u s president leads the inaugural parade back to the white house.
normally the president rides in a limousine but in 1977 jimmy carter chose to walk so he could be closer to the people something that carter very much wanted to have as a hallmark of his presidency.
in the long campaign carter promised never to tell a lie or to make a misleading statement after the lies and cover up of watergate and lyndon johnsons credibility gap carter was a refreshing change.
800 partvill fears joys and limits 1945 1980 jimmy carter was born in 1924 in the still rigidly segregated south in the small town of plains georgia.
his father was a successful farmer but plains was a small place and carter left it to attend the u s.
naval academy at annapolis maryland.
after his navy service carter returned to plains to run the family peanut farm and soon entered politics serving in the georgia state senate in the 1960s.
in 1970 he was elected governor of georgia.
some civil rights leaders never trusted carter.
but in his inaugural address as governor he said the time for racial discrimination is over as governor carter courted the king family and created a biracial coalition that he thought should be typical of the new south which he sought to represent.
jimmy carter and his wife rosalynn were deeply religious active members of their southern baptist church in plains and later in washington dc where carter taught a sunday school class.
carter s christian faith reassured some and worried others but his unapologetic sincerity and his equally clear commitment to the separation of church and state uninterested in imposing his beliefs on others tended to win him respect.
carter s openness his down home style and his fresh approach heightened his popularity.
two months into his administration the new president had an extraordinary 75 percent public approval rating.
the new administration knew from the beginning that the economy was the key to any success they would have.
in spite of some modest improvements stagflation remained a reality and the rising costs from the energy crisis seemed to grow worse by the minute.
during his first year in office carter proposed a large economic stimulus package that included 4 billion for public works programs.
although an economic conservative carter was willing to risk inflation to get a sluggish economy moving and put more americans back to work.
he also sought to end government regulations that he thought got in the way of a more robust economy.
he signed the airline deregulation act that ended government control of airline prices with significant benefit to consumers.
later in his term he also supported an expansion of the food stamp program to provide food to the hungry and stimulate the economy.
carter appointed former republican cabinet member james schlesinger as his special adviser on energy later secretary of energy when congress approved the new cabinet department and told schlesinger to come up with a comprehensive energy plan and do so in 3 months.
schlesinger did and carter appeared on television to tell the nation of his new proposals which included a gas guzzler tax on high mileage cars tax credits for conservation and a total of 113 separate proposals to reduce energy consumption and increase its availability.
newsweek summarized the speech some of the time he was jimmy the evangelist preaching to a nation living in energy sin.
then he was jimmy the engineer rattling off statistics and throwing around terms like retrofitting and cogeneration.
and then he was jimmy the leader summoning the nation to fight the moral equivalent of war unfortunately for carter the energy plan had been developed in secret and the congress was far from enthusiastic about it.
carter also tried to deal with both unemployment and inflation but by the fall of 1978 he had become convinced that he had to make inflation his top priority.
robert strauss a special counselor in the white house tried with some success to jawbone business and labor persuade them through public appeals to keep wage increases and prices down.
later in 1978 carter appointed alfred kahn to institute wage and price freezes.
still inflation increased.
as americans used credit cards to keep up with the increases in costs credit card and other consumer debt grew from 167 billion when carter took office to 315 billion in 1979 further fueling the inflationary spiral.
only late in carters presidency did inflation decline when paul volcker chair of the federal reserve board dramatically shrank the nations money supply causing a major upsurge in unemployment but that achievement too was at great cost to carter s popularity.
fueling the inflationary spiral and causing a crisis of its own the price of fuel just kept going up.
in march 1979 the nuclear reactor at three mile island in central pennsylvania j malfunctioned and the reactor core began to melt down.
more than 100 000 pennsylvania residents were required to flee.
the disaster led to a national fear and disdain against nuclear energy.
no new nuclear plants were built in the united states leading to increased chapter 27 rights reactioj ailimits 801 113 212 2 3 27 4 dependence on oil see map 27 2.
however oil was a volatile source of energy.
the united states had long since ceased being able to produce all of the oil it needed and imported a significant amount from the middle east see map 27 3.
in the middle of carter s energy crisis opec increased the price of oil by 60 percent.
carter predicted that the move would cost 800 000 people their jobs in the united states.
the immediate result was further inflation and very real shortages.
gas stations across the country simply ran out of gas.
the public uproar was palpable and much of the anger focused on the president.
at the end of june 1979 as carter returned from foreign policy triumphs the signing of the salt ii arms control agreement with the soviet union in vienna and an economic summit in tokyo japan he received a call from his pollster and confidant patrick caddell who insisted that carter come to washington immediately saying you have no idea how bad it is here the president cancelled a planned vacation in hawaii and headed to washington.
after a 10 day retreat at camp david carter spoke to the nation on july 15 1979 about what he saw as its crisis of confidence it was a visionary statement but it did not shorten the gas lines or improve carters standing in the polls.
some of carters greatest early successes came in foreign policy but foreign policy was also the arena of his greatest failures.
he announced one of his goals in his short inaugural address we will move this year a step toward our ultimate goal the elimination of all nuclear weapons from this earth to accomplish the goal carter sought to expand detente with the soviet union.
he also meant to increase respect for human rights at home and abroad.
under carter there would be none of henry kissingers realpolitik stances in foreign affairs that ignored human rights or democratic institutions.
early in his term carter took a number of steps in all of these directions.
he quickly pardoned draft evaders from the vietnam era.
he halted production of the b l bomber which was planned as a more advanced and expensive version of the b 52.
he ended development of the neutron bomb.
he also established full diplomatic relations with the peoples republic of china furthering the new relationship that nixon had begun.
in 1978 carter won senate ratification of treaties for the eventual turnover of the panama canal to the republic of panama.
all of these moves brought harsh critiques but most americans supported them.
greatest use of nuclear energy eacn siaie generaxea oy nuclear 1 i none 1 24 sb8 25 50 l j more than 50 nuclear reactors in operation in 2006 there were 104 nuclear power plants operating in 31 states.
hlo 6k u s electricity generation by energy source 2004 map 27 2 nuclear plants around the united states.
by 1980 the united states had 103 nuclear reactors that produced power for commercial use supplying approximately 20 percent of the nation s electricity.
after the crisis at three mile island that number would not grow.
802 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 3000 4000 miles j i 27 1 j j 27 j i j 273 i 27 4.
30 world s leading oil producers percent of world production 1973 1977 1984 leading opec producers saudi arabia 13 15 9 iran 10 9 5 venezuela 6 9 5 opec total 54 51 33 soviet union 16 18 22 united states 16 13 16 mexico 1 2 5 i eo s 1150 map 27 3 oil producing nations as the united states became more and more dependent on imported oil it became deeply engaged with the sometimes unstable nations that produced the bulk of the world s supply.
carters greatest foreign policy triumph was the signing of the camp david accords between egypt and israel in september 1978.
carter was determined to be a middle east peacemaker.
he visited both egypt and israel and then invited menachem begin of israel and anwar sadat of egypt to come to the presidential retreat at camp david for 13 days in september 1978.
carter remembered the easy gentle atmosphere was very helpful.
it kept tensions down after some very tough negotiations the leaders achieved a major breakthrough.
the camp david accords included formal recognition of the state of israel by egypt while israel agreed to return the sinai peninsula to egypt.
carter was dogged in his pursuit of detente with the soviet union.
in june 1979 carter negotiated the salt ii agreement that built on earlier agreements and placed a limit on the numbers of missiles and bombers each side would have.
it was an important development however the effort at detente was undermined by events halfway around the world.
in december 1979 the soviet union invaded afghanistan to protect a beleaguered pro soviet government there.
carter saw the vastly expanded soviet presence in afghanistan as a violation of the decades old american policy of containing soviet communism.
he ended the export of grain to the soviet union and ordered a u s boycott of the 1980 summer olympic games scheduled for moscow.
in spite of the fact that more than 60 other nations honored the olympic boycott it was a deep disappointment to athletes who had been preparing for years to compete.
carter s moves had hurt his popularity at home and had undermined his efforts toward detente.
camp david accords an agreement between israel and egypt that brought mutual recognition between the countries and a step toward peace in the middle east.
chapter 27 rights reactl imits 803 carter s greatest triumph was presiding over a new peace treaty between anwar al sadat of egypt and menachem begin of israel.
iranian hostage crisis the invasion of the american embassy in iran by revolutionary guards who then took 66 hostages holding them from november 1979 until january 1981.
carters worse foreign policy disaster however was with iran.
in january 1979 the government of the shah of iran who had been installed by a u s backed coup in the 1950s was overthrown.
ayatollah ruhollah khomeini the exiled leader of the muslim radicals returned to iran and created an islamic republic with a government that was based on religious law and that gave religious leaders like khomeini ultimate authority.
when in october the ailing shah was admitted to the united states for medical treatment khomeini and his followers were furious.
on november 4 1979 a mob stormed the u s embassy in tehran taking 66 americans hostage.
the iranian hostage crisis became the dominant event of carters last year in office.
the government froze iranian assets in the united states expanded the pressure on iran and tried every way possible to negotiate the release of the american hostages.
in april 1980 feeling that negotiations were a failure carter approved an attack on iran to rescue the hostages.
the attack was a failure as a sandstorm and hydraulic problems disabled some of the helicopters and another crashed into a cargo plane.
eight americans were killed but none got close to the hostages.
secretary of state cyrus vance resigned in protest.
later that year after iraq attacked iran the iranian government agreed to negotiate but the process was slow.
only on the day carter left office in january 1981 and after reagan had taken the oath of office were the hostages released.
the coming of ronald reagan carters problems with the economy energy and hostages formed the backdrop to the 1980 election campaign.
within the democratic party there was great unease with the president.
his cautious economic policies and determination to balance the federal budget alienated liberals.
his go it alone style alienated congress.
massachusetts senator edward ted kennedy challenged carter in the primaries.
public opinion polls showed a two to one preference for kennedy last of the charismatic kennedy brothers over carter.
but kennedy never seemed able to articulate the reasons he was challenging 804 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 carter.
and for all of his popularity memories persisted of the time in 1969 when kennedy had driven a car off a bridge near chappaquiddick on marthas vineyard and left a young woman mary jo kopechne to drown.
in the end carter defeated kennedy for the nomination.
kennedy supported carter in the general election but the wounds of a tough primary fight remained.
carter stayed close to the white house and focused on the hostage crisis.
the president who once prided himself on his openness and accessibility now adopted a rose garden strategy leaving his office only rarely even to campaign.
the republicans entered the campaign with great confidence.
the contest for the nomination quickly came down to one between former california governor and movie actor ronald reagan and former cia director and u s ambassador to china george h w.
bush fought a tough campaign calling reagans economic plan voodoo economics but reagan was hugely popular with conservatives who were known as the republican base he was also an effective and articulate campaigner and easily won the nomination.
reagan named bush as his running mate.
conservatives who had felt marginalized since barry goldwaters loss in 1964 believed that their day had come.
reagan was an effective campaigner impressing many with his sunny optimism.
in the one presidential debate that was held reagan scored points with his poise and his response there you go again to a carter critique.
reagan won in a landslide.
the republicans gained 34 seats in the house though it still had a democratic majority but they took over the senate with a 53 to 47 majority that included the defeat of democratic stalwarts frank church of idaho and george mcgovern of south dakota.
the democratic speaker of the house tip oneill said of the election a tidal wave hit us bill moyers who had served in the johnson administration said we didnt elect this guy reagan because he knows how many barrels of oil are in alaska.
we elected him because we want to feel good the 1980s and the time of the reagan revolution would be a very different one than the decade that had just ended.
quick review what could ford and carter have done to be more effective during their terms in office.
blindfolded american hostages are paraded outside the u s embassy in teheran by their militant captors after iranian students stormed the embassy in november 1979.
sixty americans and 40 nationals from other countries were taken by the students and held captive inside the embassy.
conclusion public discourse in the united states which had been heated in the 1960s became even more divisive and angry after 1969.
in the 1970s new civil rights movements emerged as women gays and lesbians latinos asians and american indians began to demand equality and fair treatment.
against this expanding civil rights backdrop a new conservative ideology surfaced focusing on religion morality and culture.
compared with the 1950s and 1960s the 1970s ushered in an economic downturn that undercut the security of many americans.
the 1970s also gave rise to political turmoil as one president was forced to resign in disgrace and two others lost their bids for reelection.
the new civil rights movements of the 1970s resulted in advancements for many segments of the american population.
women achieved significant legislative and judicial victories which allowed them to improve both their working conditions and their social status.
filipino and mexican american farm workers successfully bargained for recognition of a union in california.
american indians staged protests at alcatraz wounded knee and the offices of the bureau of indian affairs achieving modest gains with respect to civil rights and tribal autonomy.
gay and lesbian americans began to step out of the closet and the modern gay rights movement was born.
at the same time traditional conservatives were bewildered and angered by the chapter 27 rights react.
its 805 rapidly shifting culture of the united states and the so called culture wars began.
the moral majority organized a political response to repudiate both the civil rights agendas of the 1960s and 1970s and the great society legislation of lyndon johnson.
the republican party became increasingly conservative in the 1970s but richard nixon was an inconsistent conservative at best.
during nixons tenure title ix was added to the civil rights act the environmental protection agency and the occupational safety and health administration were created and overall government spending to aid the poor rose significantly.
on the international front nixon authorized a relentless bombing campaign against north vietnam and secretly expanded the fighting into cambodia.
at the same time nixon sought to withdraw all ground troops from vietnam.
despite the war in vietnam nixon normalized relations with communist china and successfully negotiated two treaties with the soviets designed to reduce the supply of nuclear weapons.
ultimately the watergate scandal ended nixons presidency.
when vice president gerald ford took office he hoped to heal a wounded nation but controversial domestic decisions and multiple foreign policy crises seriously damaged the effectiveness of his administration.
in 1976 jimmy carter a little known governor from georgia was elected president.
carter successfully brokered a peace between egypt and israel.
nonetheless ongoing economic problems at home inflation a high unemployment rate and gas shortages and his failure to secure the release of american hostages in iran resulted in carters stunning reelection defeat to ronald reagan in 1980.
chapter review how do you account for the political dissatisfaction with presidents nixon ford and carter in the midst of so much change in the united states.
what changes might have helped them.
which hurt the most.
806 part viii fears joys and limits 1945 1980 chapter 27 chapter review 27 1 the new politics of the late 1960s explain nixon s policies and politics domestic and international.
review questions 1.
crafting an argument in your opinion how should richard nixons domestic record be characterized.
as conservative.
as liberal.
in some other way.
comparison compare and contrast nixon and johnsons approaches to the war in vietnam.
how would you account for the differences you note.
contextualization what did nixon hope to gain by visiting china in 1972.
273 the movements of the 1960s and 1970s analyze the many political and cultural movements that followed in the track of the civil rights movement.
review questions 4.
comparison what similarities and differences do you see between the african american civil rights movement of the 1950s and early 1960s and the civil rights movements launched by other group in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
how did the fight for racial equality for african americans influence other movements.
chronological reasoning how did the struggle for african american rights change over the course of the 1960s.
why did it change.
273 the culture wars of the 1970s analyze the reaction to the liberal and radical politics of the 1960s and 1970s and the growth of new militant conservative movements.
review questions 6.
historical interpretation what connections can you make between the defeat of the equal rights amendment and the larger cultural and political trends of the 1970s.
contextualization what role did religious organizations play in the conservative movement of the 1970s and 1980s.
how did religious organizations both facilitate the rise of conservatives to political power and help redefine the conservative movement.
politics economics and the impact of watergate 27 4 explain the political impact of watergate and subsequent developments that set the stage for the reagan revolution.
review questions 8.
chronological reasoning why did the prosperity of the 1950s and 1960s give way to the economic downturn of the 1970s.
why did american political leaders find the economic problems of the 1970s so difficult to solve.
comparison compare and contrast the ford and carter presidencies.
what challenges did both presidents face.
chapter 27 rights reaction and limits part w beginning 1980 to the present part outline.
