chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 increases thereby seemingly demonstrating bad faith.
the president erupted in wrath.
my father always told me that all businessmen were sons of bitches he said but i never believed him till now he called the big steel men onto the oval ofce carpet and unleashed his irish temper.
overawed the steel operators backed down.
the steel episode provoked ery attacks by big business on the new frontier but kennedy soon appealed to believers in free enterprise when he announced his support of a general tax cut bill.
he rejected the advice of those who wished greater government spending and instead chose to stimulate the economy by slashing taxes and putting more money directly into private hands.
when he announced his policy before a big business group one observer called it the most republican speech since mckinley kennedys new frontier vision also extended to the nal frontier early in his term the president promoted a multibillion dollar project dedicated as he put it to landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth when skeptics objected that the money could be better spent elsewhere kennedy on the moon this moons eye view of the earth greeted the rst men to land on the lunar surface.
right astronaut edwin buzz aldrin descends from the spacecraft.
as he stepped onto the moons surface his companion neil armstrong said thats one small step for man one giant leap for mankind summoned stirring rhetoric of rising to challenges and expanding human possibilities.
in reality the moonshot was a calculated plan to restore americas prestige in the space race severely damaged by the soviet sputnik successes see p 962.
twenty four billion dollars later in july 1969 two nasa astronauts triumphantly planted their footprints and the american ag on the moons dusty surface.
as people around the globe huddled around televisions to watch the apollo mission live the world had never seemed so small and interconnected nor the united states so dominant.
rumblings in europe a few months after settling into the white house the new president met soviet premier khrushchev at vienna in june 1961.
the tough talking soviet leader adopted a belligerent attitude threatening to make a treaty with east germany and cut off western access to berlin.
though visibly shaken the president refused to be bullied.
troubles abroad the berlin wall 1961 1989 the wall separating east and west berlin stood for nearly thirty years as a hated symbol of the division of europe into democratic and communist camps.
left east german soldiers stand guard as the concrete wall is constructed november 20 1961.
right demonstrators celebrating the impending reunication of east and west germany begin to tear down the wall in 1989.
the soviets backed off from their most bellicose threats but suddenly began to construct the berlin wall in august 1961.
a barbed wire and concrete barrier it was designed to plug the heavy population drain from east germany to west germany through the berlin funnel.
but to the free world the wall of shame looked like a gigantic enclosure around a concentration camp.
the wall stood for almost three decades as an ugly scar symbolizing the post world war ii division of europe into two hostile camps.
kennedy meanwhile turned his attention to western europe now miraculously prospering after the tonic of marshall plan aid and the growth of the american encouraged european economic community eec the free trade area that later evolved into the european union.
he nally secured passage of the trade expansion act in 1962 authorizing tariff cuts of up to 50 percent to promote trade with eec countries.
this act led to the so called kennedy round of tariff negotiations concluded in 1967 and to a significant expansion of european american trade.
these liberalized trade policies inaugurated a new era of such robustly invigorated international commerce that a new word was coined to describe it globalization.
but not all of kennedys ambitious designs for europe were realized.
american policymakers were dedicated to an economically and militarily united atlantic community with the united states the dominant partner.
but they found their way blocked by towering stiff backed charles de gaulle president of france.
with a haughty non de gaulle vetoed the british application for common market membership in 1963 fearing that the british special relationship with the united states would make britain a trojan chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 horse for deepening american control over european affairs.
de gaulle deemed the americans unreliable in a crisis so he tried to preserve french freedom of action by developing his own small atomic force.
despite the perils of nuclear proliferation or soviet domination de gaulle demanded an independent europe free of yankee inuence.
foreign flare ups and flexible response special problems for u s foreign policy emerged from the worldwide decolonization of european overseas possessions after world war ii.
sparsely populated laos freed of its french colonial overlords in 1954 was festering dangerously by the time kennedy came into ofce.
the eisenhower administration had drenched this jungle kingdom with dollars but failed to cleanse the country of an aggressive communist element.
a red laos many observers feared would be a river on which the inuence of communist china would ood into all of southeast asia.
as the laotian civil war raged kennedys military advisers seriously considered sending in american troops.
but the president found that he had insufcient forces to put out the re in asia and still honor his commitments in europe.
kennedy thus sought a diplomatic escape hatch in the fourteen power geneva conference which imposed a shaky peace on laos in 1962.
these brushre wars intensied the pressure for a shift away from secretary dulless dubious doctrine of massive retaliation kennedy felt hamstrung by the knowledge that in a crisis he had the devils choice between humiliation and nuclear incineration.
with defense secretary mcnamara he pushed the strategy of exible response that is developing an array of military options that could be precisely matched to the gravity of the crisis at hand.
to this end kennedy increased spending on conventional military forces and bolstered the special forces green berets.
they were an elite antiguerrilla outt trained to survive on snake meat and to kill with scientic nesse.
stepping into the vietnam quagmire the doctrine of exible response seemed sane enough but it contained lethal logic.
it potentially lowered the level at which diplomacy would give way to shooting.
it also provided a mechanism for a progressive and possibly endless stepping up of the use of force.
vietnam soon presented grisly proof of these pitfalls.
the corrupt right wing government of ngo dinh diem in saigon despite a deluge of american dollars had ruled shakily since the partition of vietnam in 1954 see p 960.
anti diem agitators noisily threatened to topple the pro american government from power.
in a fateful decision late in 1961 kennedy ordered a sharp increase in the number of military advisers u s troops in south vietnam.
american forces allegedly entered vietnam to foster political stability to help protect diem from the communists long enough to allow him to enact basic social reforms favored by the americans.
but the kennedy administration eventually despaired of the reactionary diem and encouraged a successful coup against him in november 1963.
ironically the united states thus contributed to a long process of political disintegration that its original policy had meant to prevent.
kennedy still told the south vietnamese that it was their war but he had made dangerously deep political commitments.
by the time of his death he had ordered more than fteen thousand american men into the far off asian slaughter pen.
a graceful pullout was becoming increasingly difcult see map 38 1.
modernization theory provided the theoretical underpinnings for an activist u s foreign policy in the underdeveloped world.
its proponents believed that the traditional societies of asia africa and latin map 38 1 vietnam and southeast asia 1954 1975 le ly hayslip b.
1949 was born in a peasant village in south vietnam just south of da nang.
in her memoir when heaven and earth changed places she describes the trauma endured by ordinary vietnamese as a result of americas ght against the viet cong in 1963 the year the viet cong came to my village american warplanes bombed man quang.
it was at noon just when the children were getting out of school.
my aunt thu and her pregnant daughter in law were making lunch for her husband and four grandchildren when the air raid signal blared.
they all jumped under the wooden table and sheltered the pregnant woman with their bodies even the little kids.
a bomb fell in aunt thus front yard.
hot shrapnel tore through everyone except the pregnant woman.
aunt thu and one of her grandchildren were killed.
the passing fragment left only a weeping hole where her generous heart had been interactive map 100 km.
c ho chi minh trail re d bla c boat people refugees after 1975 i n a r k dienbienphu r french surrender may 7 1954 harbor mined hanoi m y a n m a r haiphong burma h 100 mi.
enemy supply routes major battle of the tet offensive january 1968 major u s base during the war u s bombing begins 1964 communist pathet lao victory 1975 north v i et n a m p lai n of jars g u l f o f to n k i n 20n alleged attacks on american naval vessels august 1964 gulf of tonkin incident r ca r m ek ong l a vinh o keo nua pass s vientiane u s.
seventh fleet operations during the war mu gia pass udon thani nakhon phanom demilitarized zone spone khe sanh lang vei khon kaen t h a i l a quang tri hue n demarcation line 1954 a shau valley da nang 17n south china sea d chu lai kham duc ubon ratchathani ta khli r ratchasima mekong kontum pleiku an khe c e ntral h i g h lan ds kampuchea u s bombing begins 1969 u s nha trang i n v a s i o n 19 70 gulf of thailand mayaguez incident vi etna mese in va phnom penh dalat 100e sion 1 c a mau pe n i n su l a 105e cam ranh bay so ut h v i et n a m 110e bien hoa long binh saigon tan son nhut cholon my tho vung tau vinh long ben tre can tho chau duc ca mau tuy hoa ban me thuot bu dop communist khmer rouge victory 1975 qui nhon duc co c a m b o d i a sattahip 15n dak to don muang bangkok my lai quang ngai n 10n mekong delta vietcong north vietnamese victory and u s withdrawal chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 to help the good neighbors close the gap between the callous rich and the wretched poor and thus quiet communist agitation.
but results were disappointing there was little alliance and even less progress.
american handouts had little positive impact on latin americas immense social problems.
president kennedy also struck below the border with the mailed st.
he had inherited from the eisenhower administration a cia backed scheme to topple fidel castro from power by invading cuba with anticommunist exiles.
on april 17 1961 some twelve hundred exiles landed at cubas bay of pigs.
when the ill starred bay of pigs invasion bogged down kennedy stood fast in his decision to keep hands off and the bullet riddled band of anti castroites surrendered.
president kennedy assumed full responsibility for the failure remarking that victory has a hundred fathers and defeat is an orphan the bay of pigs blunder along with continuing american covert efforts to assassinate castro and overthrow his government naturally pushed the cuban leader even further into the soviet embrace.
wily chair backbone the united states supports south vietnam.
america could develop into modern industrial and democratic nations by following the wests own path.
noted economic historian walt whitman rostow one of the most inuential modernization theorists charted the route from traditional society to the age of high mass consumption in his book the stages of economic growth 1960.
though it would later come under attack for its eurocentric bias modernization theory offered a powerful intellectual framework for policymakers ensnared in the cold war.
rostow himself served as an inuential adviser to the kennedy and johnson administrations.
cuban confrontations although the united states regarded latin america as its backyard its southern neighbors feared and resented the powerful colossus of the north.
in 1961 kennedy extended the hand of friendship with the alliance for progress alianza para el progreso hailed as a marshall plan for latin america.
a primary goal was failed bay of pigs invasion 1961 cuban soldiers demonstrate a beach gun they used against a brigade of ex cubans who furtively invaded cuba as agents of the united states.
the debacle was one of several unsuccessful american attempts to overthrow cuban leader fidel castro.
the cuban missile crisis man khrushchev lost little time in taking full advantage of his cuban comrades position just ninety miles off floridas coast.
in october 1962 the aerial photographs of american spy planes revealed that the soviets were secretly and speedily installing nuclear tipped missiles in cuba.
the soviets evidently intended to use these devastating weapons to shield castro and to blackmail the united states into backing down in berlin and other trouble spots.
kennedy and khrushchev now began a nerveracking game of nuclear chicken the president atly rejected air force proposals for a surgical bombing strike against the missile launching sites.
instead on october 22 1962 he ordered a naval quarantine of cuba and demanded immediate removal of the threatening weaponry.
he also served notice on khrushchev that any attack on the united states from cuba would be regarded as coming from the soviet union and would trigger nuclear retaliation against the russian heartland.
for an anxious week americans waited while soviet ships approached the patrol line established by the u s navy off the island of cuba.
seizing or sinking a soviet vessel on the high seas would unquestionably be regarded by the kremlin as an act of war.
the world teetered breathlessly on the brink of global atomization.
only in 1991 did the full dimensions of this nuclear peril become known when the russians revealed that their ground forces in cuba already had operational nuclear weapons at their disposal and were authorized to launch them if attacked.
in this tense eyeball to eyeball confrontation khrushchev nally inched.
on october 28 he agreed to a partially face saving compromise by which he would pull the missiles out of cuba.
the united states in return agreed to end the quarantine and not invade the island.
the american government also quietly signaled that it would remove from turkey some of its own missiles targeted at the soviet union.
fallout from the cuban missile crisis was considerable.
a disgraced khrushchev was ultimately hounded out of the kremlin and became an unperson hard liners in moscow vowing never again to be humiliated in a nuclear face off launched an enormous program of military expansion.
the soviet buildup reached a crescendo in the next decade stimulating in turn a vast american effort to catch up with the russians the democrats did better than expected in the midterm elections of november 1962 allegedly because the republicans were cubanized kennedy apparently sobered by the appalling risks he had just run pushed harder for a nuclear test ban treaty with the soviet union.
after prolonged negotiations in moscow a pact prohibiting trial nuclear explosions in the at mosphere was signed in late 1963.
another barometer indicating a thaw in the cold war was the installation august 1963 of a moscowwashington hot line permitting immediate teletype communication in case of a crisis.
most signicant was kennedys speech at american university in washington d c in june 1963.
the president urged americans to abandon a view of the soviet union as a devil ridden land lled with fanatics and instead to deal with the world as it is not as it might have been had the history of the last eighteen years been different kennedy thus tried to lay the foundation for a realistic policy of peaceful coexistence with the soviet union.
here were the modest origins of the policy that later came to be known as dtente french for relaxation of tension.
the struggle for civil rights kennedy had campaigned with a strong appeal to black voters but he proceeded gingerly to redeem his promises.
although he had pledged to eliminate racial discrimination in housing with a stroke of the pen it took him nearly two years to nd the right pen.
civil rights groups meanwhile sent thousands of pens to the white house in an ink for jack protest against the presidents slowness.
political concerns stayed the presidents hand on civil rights.
elected by a wafer thin margin and with shaky control over congress kennedy needed the support of southern legislators to pass his economic and social legislation especially his medical and educational bills.
he believed perhaps justiably that those mea sures would eventually benet black americans at least as much as specic legislation on civil rights.
bold moves for racial justice would have to wait.
but events soon scrambled these careful calculations.
after the wave of sit ins that surged across the south in 1960 groups of freedom riders fanned out to end segregation in facilities serving interstate bus passengers.
a white mob torched a freedom ride bus near anniston alabama in may 1961 and attor ney general robert kennedys personal representative was beaten unconscious in another anti freedom ride riot in montgomery.
when southern ofcials proved unwilling or unable to stem the violence washington chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 freedom ride 1961 rampaging whites near anniston alabama burned this bus carrying an interracial group of freedom riders on may 14 1961 dispatched federal marshals to protect the freedom riders.
reluctantly but fatefully the kennedy administration had now joined hands with the civil rights movement.
because of that partnership the kennedys proved ultrawary about the political associates of martin luther king jr.
fearful of embarrassing revelations that some of kings advisers had communist af liations robert kennedy ordered fbi director j edgar hoover to wiretap kings phone in late 1963.
but for the most part the relationship between king and the kennedys was a fruitful one.
encouraged by robert kennedy and with nancial backing from kennedyprodded private foundations sncc and other civil rights groups inaugurated the voter education project to register the souths historically disfranchised blacks.
because of his support for civil rights president kennedy told a group of black leaders in 1963 i may lose the next election.
i dont care integrating southern universities threatened to provoke wholesale slaughter.
some desegregated painlessly but the university of mississippi ole miss became a volcano.
a twenty nine year old air force veteran james meredith encountered violent opposition when he attempted to register in october 1962.
in the end president kennedy was forced to send in four hundred federal marshals and three thousand troops to enroll meredith in his rst class in colonial american history.
in the spring of 1963 martin luther king jr launched a campaign against discrimination in birmingham alabama the most segregated big city in america.
although blacks constituted nearly half of the citys population they made up fewer than 15 percent of the citys voters.
previous attempts to crack the citys rigid racial barriers had produced more than fty cross burnings and eighteen bomb attacks since 1957.
some of the people sitting here will not come back alive from this campaign king advised his organizers.
events soon con rmed this grim prediction of violence.
watching developments on television screens a horried world saw peaceful civil rights marchers repeatedly repelled by police with attack dogs and electric cattle prods.
most fearsome of all were the high pressure water hoses directed at the civil rights demonstrators.
they delivered water with enough force to knock bricks loose from buildings or strip bark from trees at a distance of one hundred feet.
water from the hoses bowled little children down the street like tumbleweeds.
jolted by these vicious confrontations president kennedy delivered a memorable televised speech to the nation on june 11 1963.
in contrast to eisenhowers cool aloofness from the racial question kennedy called the situation a moral issue and committed his personal and presidential prestige to nding a solution.
drawing on the same spiritual traditions as martin luther king jr kennedy declared that the marching to washington hosing down civil rights demonstrators birmingham alabama 1963 principle at stake is as old as the scriptures and is as clear as the american constitution he called for new civil rights legislation to protect black citizens.
in august king led more than 200 000 black and white demonstrators on a peaceful march on washington in support of the proposed legislation.
in an electrifying speech from the lincoln memorial king declared i have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character still the violence continued.
on the very night of kennedys stirring television address a white gunman shot down medgar evers a black mississippi civil rights martin luther king jr addresses the march on washington august 1963 this was the occasion of kings famous i have a dream speech in which he declared when the architects of our great republic wrote the magnicent words of the constitution and the declaration of independence they were signing a promissory note to which every american was to fall heir.
this note was a promise that all men yes black men as well as white men would be guaranteed the inalienable rights of life liberty and the pursuit of happiness chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 in his civil rights address of june 11 1963 president john f kennedy 1917 1963 said if an american because his skin is dark cannot eat lunch in a restaurant open to the public if he cannot send his children to the best public school available if he cannot vote for the public ofcials who represent him if in short he cannot enjoy the full and free life which all of us want then who among us would be content to have the color of his skin changed and stand in his place.
in september 1963 an explosion blasted a baptist church in birmingham kill ing four black girls who had just nished their lesson called the love that forgives by the time of kennedys death his civil rights bill was making little headway and frustrated blacks were growing increasingly impatient.
the killing of kennedy violence haunted america in the mid 1960s and it stalked onto center stage on november 22 1963.
while riding in an open limousine in downtown dallas texas president kennedy was shot in the brain by a concealed rieman and died within seconds.
as a stunned nation grieved the tragedy grew still more unbelievable.
the alleged assassin a furtive gure named lee harvey oswald was himself shot to death in front of television cameras by a self appointed avenger jack ruby.
so bizarre were the events surrounding the two murders that even an elaborate ofcial investigation conducted by chief justice warren could not quiet all doubts and theories about what had really happened.
vice president johnson was promptly sworn in as president on a waiting airplane and own back to washington with kennedys body.
although he mistrusted the harvards johnson retained most of the bright kennedy team.
the new president managed a dignied and efcient transition pledging continuity with his slain predecessors policies.
for several days the nation was steeped in sorrow.
not until then did many americans realize how fully their young vibrant president and his captivating wife had cast a spell over them.
chopped down in his prime after only slightly more than a thousand days in the white house kennedy was acclaimed more for the ideals he had enunciated and the spirit he had kindled than for the concrete goals he had achieved.
he had laid one myth to rest forever that a catholic could not be trusted with the presidency of the united states.
in later years revelations about kennedys womanizing and allegations about his involvement with organized crime gures tarnished his reputation.
but despite those accusations his apparent vigor charisma and idealism made him an inspirational gure for the generation of americans who came of age in the 1960s including bill clinton who as a boy had briey met president kennedy and would himself be elected president in 1992.
the lbj brand on the presidency the torch passed to craggy faced lyndon baines johnson a texan who towered six feet three inches.
the new president hailed from the populist hill country west of austin texas whose people had rst sent him to washington as a twenty nine year old congressman in 1937.
franklin d roosevelt was his political daddy johnson claimed and he had supported new deal mea sures down the line.
but when lbj lost a senate race in 1941 he learned the sobering lesson that liberal political beliefs did not necessarily win elections in texas.
he trimmed his sails to the right and squeezed himself into a senate seat in 1948 with a questionable eighty seven vote margin hence the ironic nickname landslide lyndon entrenched in the senate johnson developed into a masterful wheeler dealer.
he became the democratic majority leader in 1954 wielding power second only to that of eisenhower in the white house.
he could move mountains or checkmate opponents as the occasion demanded using what came to be known as the johnson treatment a ashing display of backslapping esh pressing and arm twisting that overbore friend and foe alike.
his ego and vanity were legendary.
on a visit to the pope johnson was presented with a precious fourteenth century painting from the vatican art collection in return lbj gave the pope a bust of lbj.
as president johnson quickly shed the conser vative coloration of his senate years to reveal the latent liberal underneath.
no memorial oration or eulogy johnson declared to congress could more eloquently conflicting press accounts of the march on washington 1963 he day after the march on washington of august 28 1963 see p 981 newspapers all over the country carried reports of this historic assembly of more than 200 000 people to demand civil rights and equal job opportunities for african americans.
although the basic outlines of the story were the same in most papers ancillary articles photographs and editorials revealed deep seated biases in coverage.
shown here are continuations from the front page stories in the new york times a bastion of northeastern liberalism below and the atlanta constitution a major southern newspaper right.
while the times called the march orderly in its headline the constitutions story in its right columns highlighted the potential for violence and the precautions taken by police.
the article read there was such a force of uniformed ofcers on hand to cope with any possible trouble that one senator was prompted to comment it almost looks like we had a military coup dtat during the night in addition to stressing the marchs potential for disruption the constitution ran an advertisement right below the march on washington story for a national ku klux klan rally two days hence featuring promi nent speakers and a cross burning.
this comparison of newspaper coverage of a controversial event serves as a reminder that press reporting t top new york times above atlanta constitution must always be scrutinized for biases when it is used as historical evidence.
what other differences in coverage separated these two newspapers.
what factors contribute to press biases.
chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 had created in 1961 to enforce the law.
when conser vatives tried to derail the legislation by adding a prohibition on sexual as well as racial discrimination the tactic back red.
the bills opponents cynically calculated that liberals would not be able to support a bill that threatened to wipe out laws that singled out women for special protection because of their sex.
but the acts title vii passed with the sexual clause intact.
it soon proved to be a powerful instrument of federally enforced gender equality as well as racial equality.
johnson struck another blow for women and minorities in 1965 when he issued an executive order requiring all federal contractors to take afrmative action against discrimination.
johnson also rammed kennedys stalled tax bill through congress and added proposals of his own for a billion dollar war on poverty johnson voiced special concern for appalachia where the sickness of the soft coal industry had left tens of thousands of mountain folk on the human slag heap.
johnson dubbed his domestic program the great society a sweeping set of new dealish economic and welfare mea sures aimed at transforming the american way of life.
public support for lbjs antipoverty war was aroused by michael harringtons the other america 1962 which revealed that in afuent america 20 percent of the population and over 40 percent of the black population suffered in poverty.
president lyndon baines johnson 1908 1973 dedicated and hard working johnson saw his presidency shattered by the trauma of vietnam.
by the end of his term he was so unpopular that he could nd nonheckling audiences only on military bases or navy ships.
honor president kennedys memory than the earliest possible passage of the civil rights bill for which he fought so long after a lengthy conser vative libuster congress at last passed the landmark civil rights act of 1964.
the act banned racial discrimination in most private facilities open to the public including theaters hospitals and restaurants.
it strengthened the federal governments power to end segregation in schools and other public places.
title vii of the act barred employers from discriminating based on race or national origin in hiring and empowered the equal employment opportunity commission eeoc a body kennedy johnson battles goldwater in 1964 johnsons nomination by the democrats in 1964 was a foregone conclusion he was chosen by acclamation in atlantic city as his birthday present.
thanks to the tall texan the democrats stood foursquare on their most liberal platform since trumans fair deal days.
the republicans convening in san franciscos cow palace nominated box jawed senator barry goldwater of arizona a bronzed and bespectacled champion of rock ribbed conservatism.
the american stage was thus set for a historic clash of political principles.
goldwaters forces had galloped out of the southwest to ride roughshod over the moderate republican eastern establishment insisting that the gop offer a choice not an echo goldwater attacked the federal income tax the social security system the tennessee valley authority civil rights legislation the nuclear test ban treaty and most loudly the great johnson reelected negative campaigning this infamous attack ad was televised only once as a paid political advertisement but it signaled the emergence of a newly noxious style of political campaigning.
the ad showed a child dreamily pulling petals from a ower.
suddenly her voice gave way to that of a man reciting an ominous countdown followed by an exploding nuclear bomb and a throaty voice warning vote for president johnson on november 3.
the stakes are too high for you to stay home the ad implied that a goldwater presidency would risk nuclear armageddon.
controversy forced the ads sponsors to take it off the air but it was repeatedly reshown in news coverage of the controversy itself raising serious questions about the very denition of news society.
his ercely dedicated followers proclaimed in your heart you know hes right which prompted the democratic response in your guts you know hes nuts goldwater warmed right wing hearts when he proclaimed that extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice.
moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue democrats gleefully exploited the image of goldwater as a trigger happy cowboy who would barry us in the debris of world war iii.
johnson cultivated the contrasting image of a resolute statesman by seizing upon the tonkin gulf episode early in august 1964.
unbeknownst to the american public or congress u s navy ships had been cooperating with south vietnamese gunboats in provocative raids along the coast of north vietnam.
two of these american destroyers were allegedly red upon by the north vietnamese on august 2 and 4 although exactly what happened still remains unclear.
later investigations strongly suggested that the north vietnamese red in self defense on august 2 and that the attack of august 4 never happened.
johnson later reportedly wisecracked for all i know the navy was shooting at whales out there johnson nevertheless promptly called the attack unprovoked and moved swiftly to make political hay out of this episode.
he ordered a limited retaliatory air raid against the north vietnamese bases loudly proclaiming that he sought no wider war thus implying that the truculent goldwater did.
johnson also used the incident to spur congressional passage of the all purpose tonkin gulf resolution.
with only two dissenting votes in both houses the lawmakers virtually abdicated their war declaring powers and handed the president a blank check to use further force in southeast asia.
the tonkin gulf resolution johnson boasted was like grandmas nightshirt it covered every thing the towering texan rode to a spectacular victory in november 1964.
the voters were herded into johnsons column by fondness for the kennedy legacy faith in great society promises and fear of goldwater.
a stampede of 43 129 566 johnson votes trampled the republican ticket with its 27 178 188 supporters.
the tally in the electoral college was 486 to 52 see map 38 2.
goldwater carried only his native arizona and ve other states all of them signicantly in the traditionally democratic but now racially restless south.
johnsons record breaking 61 percent of the popular vote swept lopsided democratic majorities into both houses of congress.
chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 sd 4 ne 5 nm 4 ca wi in ok 8 tx oh md mt or id ri nv ca ks ok nm tx il in mo la oh ky ms al wv va nc tn ar me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 14 ri pa nj ct 4 17 8 mi ak fl ak ia ne co wi d c sc ga ut mn sd de va 12 al nd wy az nc 13 tn 11 ms wa nj wv ky 9 la me pa mo ar nh ma 14 ct il ks 7 az 5 ut wy nv 4 3 co 6 or 6 ny mi ia 9 id mt 4 4 nd 4 wa 9 mn 10 vt ga sc de md dc fl hi hi candidate party electoral vote popular vote johnson democrat 90 3 43 129 566 61 1 9 7 27 178 188 38 5 goldwater republican map 38 2 presidential election of 1964 in the map on the left the size of each state is distorted according to its weight in the electoral college.
in new orleans toward the end of the campaign a gutsy johnson displayed his commitment to civil rights when he told a story about an old senator who once said of his deep south constituents i would like to go back down there and make them just one more democratic speech.
the poor old state they havent heard a democratic speech in 30 years.
all they hear at election time is negro negro negro johnsons open voicing of sentiments like this contributed heavily to his losses in the traditionally democratic solid south the great society congress johnsons huge victory temporarily smashed the conservative congressional coalition of southern democrats and northern republicans.
a wide open legislative road stretched before the great society programs as the president skillfully ringmastered his two to one democratic majorities.
congress poured out a ood of legislation comparable only to the output of the new dealers in the hundred days congress of 1933.
johnson condent that a growing economy gave him ample scal and political room for maneuver delivered at last on long deferred democratic promises of social reform.
escalating the war on poverty congress doubled the appropriation of the ofce of economic opportunity to 2 billion and granted more than 1 billion to redevelop the gutted hills and hollows of appalachia.
johnson also prodded congress into creating two new cabinet ofces the department of transportation and the department of housing and urban development interactive map hud to which he named the rst black cabinet secretary in the nations history respected economist robert c weaver.
other noteworthy laws established the national endowments for the arts and the humanities designed to lift the level of american cultural life.
even more impressive were the big four legislative achievements that crowned lbjs great society program aid to education medical care for the elderly and indigent immigration reform and a new voting rights bill.
johnson neatly avoided the thorny question of separation of church and state by channeling educational aid to students not schools thus allowing funds to ow to hard pressed parochial institutions.
catholic john f kennedy had not dared to touch this prickly issue.
with a keen eye for the dramatic lbj signed the education bill in the humble one room texas schoolhouse he had attended as a boy.
medicare for the elderly accompanied by medicaid for the poor became a reality in 1965.
like the new deals social security program medicare and medicaid created entitlements that is they conferred the great society giving thanks for medicare an elderly woman showed her gratitude to president lyndon b johnson for his signing of the medicare bill in april 1965 providing basic medical care for the aged.
in tribute to former president trumans unsuccessful effort to pass a national medical insurance program twenty years earlier johnson ew to trumans missouri home to sign the bill that he claimed would deliver care for the sick and serenity for the fearful no one acknowledged that trumans earlier plan had been much more comprehensive or that johnson then a young texas congressman had opposed it.
rights on certain categories of americans virtually in perpetuity without the need for repeated congressional approval.
these programs were part of a spreading rights revolution that materially improved the lives of millions of americans but also eventually undermined the federal governments nancial health.
immigration reform was the third of johnsons big four feats.
the immigration and nationality act of 1965 abolished at last the national origins quota system that had been in place since 1921 see p 773.
the act also doubled to 290 000 the number of immigrants allowed to enter annually while for the rst time setting limits on immigrants from the western hemisphere 120 000.
the new law further provided for the admission of close relatives of united states citizens outside those numerical limits.
to the surprise of many of the acts architects more than 100 000 persons per year took advantage of its family unication provisions in the decades after 1965 and the immigrant stream swelled beyond expectations.
even more surprising to the acts sponsors the sources of immigration soon shifted heavily from europe to latin america and asia dramatically changing the racial and ethnic composition of the american population.
great society programs came in for rancorous political attack in later years.
conservatives charged that the billions spent for social engineering had simply been ushed down the waste pipe.
yet the poverty rate declined measurably in the ensuing decade see figure 38 1.
medicare made especially dramatic reductions in the incidence of poverty among americas millions percent number in poverty poverty rate figure 38 1 poverty in the united states 1960 2006 in 2000 the poverty rate fell to 11 3 percent its lowest level since 1979.
in the new century it increased by a percentage point.
these gures refer to the number of people who live in families whose total income is lower than a set poverty threshold which is tied to the consumer price index so it varies with ination.
the poverty rate means the percentage of all americans living below that threshold.
source u s bureau of the census.
other antipoverty programs among them project head start sharply improved the educational perfor mance of underprivileged youth.
infant mortality rates also fell in minority communities as general health conditions improved.
lyndon johnson was not chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 fully victorious in the war against poverty but he did win several noteworthy battles.
battling for black rights with the last of his big four reforms the voting rights act of 1965 johnson made heartening headway against one of the most persistent american evils racial discrimination.
in johnsons native south the walls of segregation were crumbling but not fast enough for long suffering african americans.
the civil rights act of 1964 gave the federal government more muscle to enforce school desegregation orders and to prohibit racial discrimination in all kinds of public accommodations and employment.
but the problem of voting rights remained.
in mississippi which had the largest black minority of any state only about 5 percent of eligible blacks were registered to vote.
the lopsided pattern was similar throughout the south.
ballotdenying devices like the poll tax literacy tests and barefaced intimidation still barred black people from the political process.
mississippi law required the names of prospective black registrants to be published for two weeks in local newspapers a device that virtually guaranteed economic reprisals or worse.
beginning in 1964 opening up the polling booths became the chief goal of the black movement in the south.
the twenty fourth amendment ratied in january 1964 abolished the poll tax in federal elections.
see the appendix.
blacks joined hands with white civil rights workers many of them student volunteers from the north in a massive voter registration drive in mississippi during the freedom summer of 1964.
singing we shall overcome they zealously set out to soothe generations of white anxieties and black fears.
but events soon blighted bright hopes.
in late june 1964 one black and two white civil rights workers disappeared in mississippi.
their badly beaten bodies were later found buried beneath an earthen dam.
fbi investigators eventually arrested twenty one white mississippians including the local sheriff in connection with the kill ings.
but white juries refused to convict the whites for these murders.
in august an integrated mississippi freedom democratic party delegation was denied its seat at the national democratic convention.
only a handful of black mississippians had succeeded in registering to vote.
early in 1965 martin luther king jr resumed the voter registration campaign in selma alabama where blacks made up 50 percent of the population but only 1 percent of the voters.
state troopers with tear gas and whips assaulted kings demonstrators as they marched peacefully to the state capital at montgomery.
a boston unitarian minister was killed and a few days later a white detroit woman was shotgunned to death by klansmen on the highway near selma.
as the nation recoiled in horror before these violent scenes president johnson speaking in soft southern accents delivered a compelling address on television.
what happened in selma he insisted concerned all americans who must overcome the crippling legacy selma march 1965 alabama state troopers lie in wait for peaceful civil rights demonstrators marching from selma to the state capital at montgomery.
this cover to the march 19 1965 issue of life magazine signaled that the civil rights movement had found a national audience.
a few moments after the photo was taken state troopers started beating marchers with billy clubs and shooting tear gas at them.
dozens of demonstrators were hospitalized.
what life called the savage season led congress nally to pass the historic voting rights act of 1965.
black power of bigotry and injustice then in a stirring adaptation of the anthem of the civil rights movement the president concluded and we shall overcome following words with deeds johnson speedily shepherded through congress the landmark voting rights act of 1965 signed into law on august 6.
it outlawed literacy tests and sent federal voter registrars into several southern states.
the passage of the voting rights act exactly one hundred years after the conclusion of the civil war climaxed a century of awful abuse and robust resurgence for african americans in the south.
give us the ballot said martin luther king jr and the south will never be the same again he was right.
the act did not end discrimination and oppression overnight but it placed an awesome lever for change in blacks hands.
black southerners now had power and began to wield it without fear of reprisals.
white southerners began to court black votes and business as never before.
in the following decade for the rst time since emancipation african americans began to migrate into the south.
black power the voting rights act of 1965 marked the end of an era in the history of the civil rights movement the era of nonviolent demonstrations focused on the south led by peaceful moderates like martin luther king jr and aimed at integrating blacks into american society.
as if to symbolize the turn of events just ve days after president johnson signed the landmark voting law a bloody riot erupted in watts a black ghetto in los angeles.
blacks enraged by police brutality burned and looted their own neighborhoods for nearly a week.
when the smoke nally cleared over the los angeles basin thirty one blacks and three whites lay dead more than a thousand people had been injured and hundreds of buildings stood charred and gutted.
the watts explosion heralded a new phase of the black struggle increasingly marked by militant confrontation focusing on northern and western cities led by radical and sometimes violent spokespersons and often aiming not at interracial cooperation but at black separatism.
the pious christian moderation of martin luther king jr came under heavy re from this second wave of younger black leaders who privately mocked the dignied dr king as de lawd deepening division among black leaders was highlighted by the career of malcolm x.
born malcolm little he was at rst in malcolm x the charismatic black leader was a hypnotizing speaker who could rivet and arouse crowds with his call for black separatism.
at the end of his life malcolm began to temper his separatist creed.
spired by the militant black nationalists in the nation of islam.
like the nations founder elijah muhammed born elijah poole malcolm changed his surname to advertise his lost african identity in white america.
a brilliant and charismatic preacher malcolm x trumpeted black separatism and inveighed against the blue eyed white devils eventually malcolm distanced himself from elijah muhammeds separatist preachings and moved toward mainstream islam.
by the 1990s islam was among americas fastest growing religions and counted some 2 million african american converts or reverts as muslims described it in its ranks.
in early 1965 he was cut down by rival nation of islam gunmen while speaking to a large crowd in new york city.
the militant black panther party meanwhile brandished weapons in the streets of oakland cal i fornia even while it was establishing childrens breakfast chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 programs.
then in 1966 trinidad born stokely carmichael a leader of the student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc began to preach the doctrine of black power which he said will smash every thing western civilization has created some advocates of black power insisted that they simply intended the slogan to describe a broad front effort to exercise the political and economic rights gained by the civil rights movement and to speed the integration of american society.
but other african americans recollecting previous black nationalist movements like that of marcus dr martin luther king jr 1929 1968 and malcolm x 1925 1965 not only differed in the goals they held out to their fellow african americans king urging racial integration and malcolm x black separatism but also in the means they advocated to achieve them.
in his famous i have a dream speech during the interracial march on washington on august 28 1963 king proclaimed to a quarter of a million people assembled at the lincoln memorial in the process of gaining our rightful place we must not be guilty of wrongful deeds.
let us not seek to satisfy our thirst for freedom by drinking from the cup of bitterness and hatred.
we must not allow our creative protest to degenerate into physical violence.
again and again we must rise to the majestic heights of meeting physical force with soul force.
about three months later malcolm x angrily rejected kings peaceful turn the other cheek revolution revolution is bloody revolution is hostile revolution knows no compromise revolution overturns and destroys everything that gets in its way.
and you sitting around here like a knot on the wall saying im going to love these folks no matter how much they hate me.
whoever heard of a revolution where they lock arms.
singing we shall overcome you dont do that in a revolution.
you dont do any singing youre too busy swinging.
garvey earlier in the century see p 792 breathed a vibrant separatist meaning into the concept of black power.
they emphasized african american distinctiveness promoted afro hairstyles and dress shed their white names for new african identities and demanded black studies programs in schools and universities.
ironically just as the civil rights movement had achieved its greatest legal and political triumphs more city shaking riots erupted in the black ghettos of several american cities.
a bloody outburst in newark new jersey in the summer of 1967 took twenty ve lives.
federal troops restored order in detroit michigan after forty three people died in the streets.
as in los angeles black rioters torched their own neighborhoods attacking police ofcers and even reghters who had to battle both ames and mobs howling burn baby burn these riotous outbursts angered many white americans who threatened to retaliate with their own backlash against ghetto arsonists and killers.
innercity anarchy bafed many northerners who had considered racial problems a purely southern question.
but black concerns had moved north as had nearly half the nations black people.
in the north the black power movement now focused less on civil rights and more on economic demands.
black unemployment for example was nearly double that for whites.
these oppressive new problems seemed even less likely to be solved peaceably than the struggle for voting rights in the south.
despair deepened when the magnetic and moderate voice of martin luther king jr was forever silenced by a snipers bullet in memphis tennessee on april 4 1968.
a martyr for justice he had bled and died against the peculiarly american thorn of race.
the kill ing of king cruelly robbed the american people of one of the most inspirational leaders in their history at a time when they could least afford to lose him.
this outrage triggered a nationwide orgy of ghetto gutting and violence that cost over forty lives.
rioters noisily made news but thousands of other blacks quietly made history.
their voter registration in the south shot upward and by the late 1960s several hundred blacks held elected ofce in the old south.
cleveland ohio and gary indiana elected black mayors.
by 1972 nearly half of southern black children sat in integrated classrooms.
actually more schools in the south were integrated than in the north.
about a third of black families had risen economically into the ranks of the middle class though an equal proportion american escalation in vietnam remained below the poverty line king left a shining legacy of racial progress but he was cut down when the job was far from completed.
combating communism in two hemispheres violence at home eclipsed johnsons legislative triumphs while foreign are ups threatened his political life.
discontented dominicans rose in revolt against their military government in april 1965.
johnson speedily announced that the dominican republic was the target of a castro like coup by communist conspirators and he dispatched american troops ultimately some twenty ve thousand to restore order.
but the evidence of a communist takeover was fragmentary at best.
johnson was widely condemned at home and in latin america for his temporary reversion to the ofcially abandoned gunboat diplomacy at about the same time johnson was sinking deeper into the monsoon mud of vietnam.
guerillas loyal to the north vietnamese communists called viet cong attacked an american air base at pleiku south vietnam in february 1965.
the president immediately ordered retaliatory bombing raids against military installations in north vietnam and for the rst time or dered attacking u s troops to land.
by the middle of march 1965 the americans had operation rolling thunder in full swing regular full scale bombing attacks against north vietnam.
before 1965 ended some 184 000 american troops were involved most of them slogging through the jungles and rice paddies of south vietnam searching for guerrillas.
johnson had now taken the rst fateful steps down a slippery path.
he and his advisers believed that a ne tuned step by step escalation of american force would drive the enemy to defeat with a minimum loss of life on both sides.
but the enemy matched every increase in american repower with more men and more wiliness in the art of guerrilla warfare.
the south vietnamese themselves were meanwhile becoming spectators in their own war as the ghting became increasingly americanized.
corrupt and collapsible governments succeeded each other in saigon with bewildering rapidity.
yet american ofcials continued to talk of defending a faithful democratic ally.
washington spokespeople also defended americas action as a test of uncle sams commitment and of the reliability of his numerous treaty pledges to resist communist encroachment.
persuaded by such panicky thinking johnson steadily raised the military stakes in vietnam.
by 1968 he had poured more than the mechanized war high technology and modern equipment such as this helicopter gave the americans in vietnam a huge military advantage.
but unaccompanied by a clear political purpose and a national will to win technological superiority was insufcient to achieve nal victory.
chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 half a million troops into southeast asia and the annual bill for the war was exceeding 30 billion.
yet the end was nowhere in sight.
vietnam vexations america could not defeat the enemy in vietnam but it seemed to be defeating itself.
world opinion grew increasingly hostile the blasting of an underdeveloped country by a mighty superpower struck many critics as obscene.
several nations expelled american peace corps volunteers.
the ever censorious charles de gaulle withdrew france from nato in 1966 and ordered all american troops out of the country reportedly prompting johnson to ask if that included the thousands buried in normandy.
overcommitment in southeast asia also tied americas hands elsewhere.
attacked by soviet backed egypt jordan and syria a beleaguered israel stunned the world with a military triumph in june 1967.
when the smoke cleared after the six day war israel expanded to control new territories in the sinai peninsula the golan heights the gaza strip and the west bank of the jordan river including jerusalem see map 40 2 on p 1038.
the israeli victory brought some 1 million resentful palestinian arabs under direct israeli control while another 350 000 palestinian refugees ed to neighboring jordan.
the israelis eventually withdrew from the sinai after signing a peace treaty with egypt but they refused to relinquish the other areas without a treaty and began moving jewish settlers into the heavily arab district of the west bank.
the six day war markedly intensied the problems of the already volatile middle east leading to an intractable standoff between the israelis and palestinians now led by yasir arafat 1929 2004 head of the palestine liberation organization plo.
for decades a return to the pre 1967 boundaries would be a key negotiating aim for palestinians.
the middle east became an ever more dangerously packed powder keg that the war plagued united states proved powerless to defuse.
domestic discontent festered as the vietnamese entanglement dragged on.
antiwar demonstrations had begun on a small scale with campus teach ins in 1965 and gradually these protests mounted to tidalwave proportions.
as the long arm of the military draft dragged more and more young men off to the southeast asian slaughter pen resistance stiffened.
thousands of draft registrants ed to canada others vietnam vets protest the war 1971 public opinion gradually but inexorably turned against the war.
in 1965 polls showed that only 15 percent of americans favored withdrawal from vietnam.
but by 1969 69 percent of those interviewed indicated that they considered the war a mistake and by 1970 a majority supported withdrawal of u s troops.
in this demonstration on april 23 1971 eight hundred veterans threw away their purple hearts bronze stars silver stars and other military honors in front of the u s capitol in protest against a war they no longer could support.
publicly burned their draft cards.
hundreds of thousands of marchers lled the streets of new york san francisco and other cities chanting hell no we wont go and hey hey lbj how many kids did you kill today many americans felt pangs of conscience at the spectacle of their countrymen burning peasant huts and blistering civilians with ghastly napalm.
johnson and vietnam opposition in congress to the vietnam involvement centered in the inuential senate committee on foreign relations headed by senator william fulbright of arkansas.
a constant thorn in the side of the president he staged a series of widely viewed televised hearings in 1966 and 1967 during which prominent personages aired their views largely antiwar.
gradually the public came to feel that it had been deceived about the causes and winnability of the war.
a yawning credibility gap opened between the government and the people.
new ocks of antiwar doves were hatching daily.
even within the administration doubts were deepening about the wisdom of the war in vietnam.
when defense secretary mcnamara expressed increasing discomture at the course of events he was quietly eased out of the cabinet.
years later mcnamara wrote that we were wrong terribly wrong about vietnam.
by early 1968 the brutal and futile struggle had become the longest and most unpopular foreign war in the nations history.
the government had failed utterly to explain to the people what was supposed to be at stake in vietnam.
many critics wondered if any objective could be worth the vast price in blood and treasure that america was paying.
casualties killed and wounded already exceeded 100 000.
more bombs had been dropped on vietnam than on all enemy territory in world war ii.
the vietnam quagmire this soldier carrying a rocket launcher across a stream in the ironically named demilitarized zone dmz that separated north and south vietnam was killed in action just days after this photo was taken.
the war was also ripping apart the fabric of american society and even threatening to shred the constitution.
in 1967 president johnson ordered the cia in clear violation of its charter as a foreign intelligence agency to spy on domestic antiwar activists.
he also encouraged the fbi to turn its counterintelligence program code named cointelpro against the peace movement.
cointelpro subverted leading doves with false accusations that they were communist sympathizers.
these clandestine tactics made the fbi look like a totalitarian states secret police rather than a guardian of american democracy.
as the war dragged on evidence mounted that america had been entrapped in an asian civil war ghting against highly motivated rebels who were striving to overthrow an oppressive regime.
yet johnson clung to his basic strategy of ratcheting up the pressure bit by bit.
he stubbornly assured doubting americans that he could see the light at the end of the tunnel but to growing numbers of americans it seemed that johnson was bent on saving vietnam by destroying it.
vietnam topples johnson hawkish illusions that the struggle was about to be won were shattered by a blistering communist offensive launched in late january 1968 during tet the vietnamese new year.
at a time when the viet cong were supposedly licking their wounds they suddenly and simultaneously mounted savage attacks on twentyseven key south vietnamese cities including the capital saigon.
although eventually beaten off with heavy losses they demonstrated anew that victory could not be gained by johnsons strategy of gradual escalation.
the tet offensive ended in a military defeat but a political victory for the viet cong.
with an increasingly insistent voice american public opinion demanded a speedy end to the war.
opposition grew so vehement that president johnson could feel the very foundations of government shaking under his feet.
he was also suffering through hells of personal agony over american casualties.
he wept as he signed letters of condolence and slipped off at night to pray with monks at a small catholic church in washington.
american military leaders responded to the tet attacks with a request for 200 000 more troops.
the size of the request staggered many policymakers.
former secretary of state dean acheson reportedly advised the president that the joint chiefs of staff dont know what theyre talking about chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 ence by rmly declaring that he would not be a candidate for the presidency in 1968.
johnsons abdication had the effect of preserving the military status quo.
he had held the hawks in check while offering himself as a sacrice to the militant doves the united states could thus maintain the maximum acceptable level of military activity in vietnam with one hand while trying to negotiate a settlement with the other.
north vietnam shortly agreed to commence negotiations in paris.
but progress was glacially slow as prolonged bickering developed over the very shape of the conference table.
the presidential sweepstakes of 1968 president lyndon johnson haunted by specters of vietnam 1967 the president meanwhile was being sharply challenged from within his own party.
eugene mccarthy a little known democratic senator from minnesota had emerged as a contender for the 1968 democratic presidential nomination.
the soft spoken mccarthy a sometime poet and devout catholic gathered a small army of antiwar college students as campaign workers.
going clean for gene with shaven faces and shortened locks they helped him gain an impressive 41 4 percent of the democratic vote in the new hampshire primary on march 12 1968.
although still second to johnsons 49 6 percent mccarthys showing was devastating for the president.
johnsons star fell further four days later when senator robert f kennedy now a senator from new york and an outspoken dove on the war threw his hat into the ring.
the charismatic and handsome kennedy heir to his murdered brothers mantle of leadership stirred a passionate response among workers african americans latinos and young people.
these startling events abroad and at home were not lost on lbj.
in a bombshell address on march 31 1968 he announced on nationwide television that he would freeze american troop levels and scale back the bombing.
then in a dramatic plea to unify a dangerously divided nation johnson startled his vast audi the summer of 1968 was one of the hottest political seasons in the nations history.
johnsons heir apparent for the democratic nomination was his liberal vice president hubert h humphrey a former pharmacist college professor mayor and u s senator from minnesota.
senators mccarthy and kennedy meanwhile dueled in several state primaries with kennedys bandwagon gathering ever increasing speed.
but on june 5 1968 the night of an exciting victory in the cal i fornia primary kennedy was shot to death by a young arab immigrant resentful of the candidates pro israel views.
angry antiwar zealots deprived by an assassins bullet of their leading candidate streamed menacingly into chicago for the democratic convention in august 1968.
mayor richard daley responded by arranging for barbed wire barricades around the convention hall fort daley as well as thousands of police and national guard reinforcements.
some militant demonstrators baited the ofcers in blue by calling them pigs chanting ho ho ho chi minh shouting obscenities and hurling bags and cans of excrement at the police lines.
as people the world over watched on television the exasperated peace ofcers broke into a police riot clubbing and manhandling innocent and guilty alike.
acrid tear gas fumes hung heavy over the city even as humphrey steamrollered to the nomination on the rst ballot.
the humphrey forces blocked the mccarthyites attempt to secure an antiwar platform plank and hammered into place their own declaration that armed force would be relentlessly applied until the enemy showed more willingness to negotiate.
the election of 1968 the siege of chicago 1968 antiwar protesters staged demonstrations in the streets of chicago during the democratic national convention in august 1968.
some 2 500 members of the radical youth international party known as the yippies planned a peaceful festival of light across the street from the convention hall but instead found themselves drawn into a melee with the police and national guardsmen.
the confrontation in chicago badly tarnished democratic candidate hubert humphreys presidential campaign.
his republican opponent richard nixon won the presidency with calls for an honorable peace in vietnam and law and order at home.
scenting victory over the badly divided democrats the republicans convened in plush miami beach florida where former vice president richard m nixon arose from his political grave to win the nomination.
as a hawk on vietnam and a right leaning middleof the roader on domestic policy nixon pleased the goldwater conser vatives and was acceptable to party moderates.
he appealed to white southern voters and to the law and order element when he tapped as his vice presidential running mate marylands governor spiro t agnew noted for his tough stands against dissidents and black militants.
the republican platform called for victory in vietnam and a strong anticrime policy.
adding color and confusion to the campaign was a spoiler third party ticket the american independent party headed by a scrappy ex pugilist george c wallace former governor of alabama.
in 1963 he had stood in the doorway to prevent two black students from entering the university of alabama.
segregation now.
segregation tomorrow.
segregation forever he shouted.
wallace jabbed repeatedly at pointy headed bureaucrats and he taunted hecklers as bums in need of a bath.
speaking behind a bulletproof screen he called for prodding the blacks into their place with bayonets if necessary.
he and his running mate former air force general curtis lemay also proposed smashing the north vietnamese to smithereens by bombing them back to the stone age between the positions of the republicans and the democrats on vietnam there was little choice.
both candidates were committed to carrying on the war until the enemy settled for an honorable peace which seemed to mean an american victory.
the millions of doves had no place to roost and many refused to vote at all.
humphrey scorched by the lbj brand went down to defeat as a loyal prisoner of his chiefs policies.
nixon who had lost a cliffhanger to kennedy in 1960 won one in 1968.
he garnered 301 electoral votes with 43 4 percent of the popular tally 31 785 480 as compared with 191 electoral votes and 42 7 percent of the popular votes 31 275 166 for humphrey see map 38 3.
unlike most new presidents nixon faced congressional majorities of the opposing party in both houses.
he carried not a single major city thus attesting to the continuing urban strength of the democrats who also won about 95 percent of the black vote.
nixon had received no clear mandate to do anything.
he was a minority president who owed his election to divisions over the war and protest against the unfair draft crime and rioting.
chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 wa mt or id nv ca nd wy ut az mn sd ne co wi ia ks ok nm il mi in mo la oh wv ky tn ar tx me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 14 ri pa nj ct 4 17 8 ms al ga va nc r 12 ai 1 sc de md dc fl ak hi candidate party electoral vote popular vote nixon republican 56 1 31 785 480 humphrey democrat 35 5 31 275 166 42 7 8 4 9 906 473 13 5 wallace american independent 43 4 map 38 3 presidential election of 1968 with electoral vote by state george wallace won in ve states and he denied a clear majority to either of the two major party candidates in twenty ve other states.
a shift of some fty thousand votes might well have thrown the election into the house of representatives giving wallace the strategic bargaining position he sought.
interactive map as for wallace he won an impressive 9 906 473 popular votes and 46 electoral votes all from ve states of the deep south four of which the republican goldwater had carried in 1964.
wallace remained a formidable force for he had amassed the largest third party popular vote in american history to that point and was the last third party candidate to win any electoral votes.
in 1992 ross perot enjoyed a greater popularvote margin but won no states see p.
wallace had also resoundingly demonstrated the continuing power of populist politics which appealed to voters fears and resentments rather than to the better angels of their nature.
his candidacy foreshadowed a coarsening of american political life that would take deep root in the ensuing decades.
the obituary of lyndon johnson talented but tragedy struck lyndon johnson returned to his texas ranch in january 1969 and died there four years later.
his party was defeated and his me too hubert humphrey was repudiated.
yet johnsons legislative leadership for a time had been remarkable.
no president since lincoln had worked harder or done more for civil rights.
none had shown more compassion for the poor blacks and the ill educated.
but by 1966 johnson was already sinking into the vietnam quicksands.
great society programs began to wither on the vine as soaring war costs sucked tax dollars into the military machine.
his effort to provide both guns and butter prevented him from delivering either in sufcient quantity.
the war on poverty met resistance that was as stubborn as the viet cong and eventually went down to defeat.
great want persisted alongside great wealth.
johnson had crucied himself on the cross of vietnam.
the southeast asian quagmire engulfed his noblest intentions.
committed to some degree by his two predecessors he had chosen to defend the american foothold and enlarge the con ict rather than be run out.
he was evidently persuaded by his brightest advisers both civilian and military that massive aerial bombing and limited troop commitments would make a cheap victory possible.
his decision not to escalate the ghting further offended the hawks and his refusal to back off altogether antagonized the doves like the calvinists of colonial days luckless lyndon johnson was damned if he did and damned if he did not.
the cultural upheaval of the 1960s the struggles of the 1960s against racism poverty and the war in vietnam had momentous cultural consequences.
the decade came to be seen as a watershed dividing two distinct eras in terms of values morals and behavior.
everywhere in 1960s america a newly negative attitude toward all kinds of authority took hold.
disillusioned by the discovery that american society was not free of racism sexism imperialism and oppression many young people lost their traditional moral rudders.
neither families nor churches nor schools seemed to be able to de ne values and shape behavior with the certainty of shared purpose that many people believed had once existed.
the nations mainline protestant denominations which had dominated american religious life for centuries lost their grip in the 1960s as weekly churchgoing declined from 48 per the counterculture of the 1960s cent in the late 1950s to 41 percent in the early 1970s.
the liberal protestant churches suffered the most.
they increasingly ceded religious authority to conservative evangelicals while surrendering cultural authority to secular professionals and academic social scientists.
a new cultural divide began to take shape as educated americans became increasingly secular and the less educated became more religious.
religious upheaval even churned the tradition bound roman catholic church among the worlds oldest and most conser vative institutions.
clerics abandoned their roman collars and latin lingo folk songs replaced gregorian chants and meatless fridays became ancient history.
no matter what the topic conventional wisdom and inherited ideas came under re.
trust no one over thirty was a popular sneer of rebellious youth.
skepticism about authority had deep historical roots in american culture and it had even bloomed in the supposedly complacent and conformist 1950s.
beat poets like allen ginsberg and iconoclastic novelists like jack kerouac had voiced dark disillusion with the materialistic pursuits and establishment arrogance of the eisenhower era.
in movies like rebel without a cause 1955 the attractive young actor james dean expressed the restless frustration of many young people.
the disaffection of the young reached crisis proportions in the tumultuous 1960s.
one of the rst organized protests against established authority broke out at the university of cal i fornia at berkeley in 1964 in the aptly named free speech movement.
students objected to an administrative ban on the use of campus space for political debate.
during months of protest they accused the cold war megaversity of promoting corporate interests rather than humane values.
but in only a few years the clean cut berkeley activists and their sober minded sit ins would seem downright quaint.
fired by outrage against the war in vietnam some sons and daughters of the middle class became radical political rebels.
others turned to mind bending drugs tuned in to acid rock and dropped out of straight society.
still others did their own thing in communes or alternative institutions.
patriotism became a dirty word.
beowered women in trousers and long haired men with earrings heralded the rise of a self conscious counterculture stridently opposed to traditional american ways.
social upheaval in the 1960s was far from an american only phenomenon.
as people born in the wake of world war ii came of age across the world they questioned established authority every where.
waves of the free speech movement berkeley california 1964 the free speech movement on the campus of the university of california at berkeley marked the rst of the large scale student mobilizations that rocked campuses across the country throughout the rest of the 1960s.
here a student schooled in passive resistance is dragged by police to a waiting bus.
protests and calls for individual rights and political freedom spread like wild re.
the year 1968 was so stormy that it became synonymous with un rest in many languages.
in may of that year leftist french students organized city crippling strikes against their countrys antiquated university system.
joined by millions of workers they nearly toppled the government.
the global spirit of protest against the vietnam war racial injustice and the strictures of bourgeois society spread from berkeley cal i fornia to columbia university in chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 paris 1968 protests ripped through the world in 1968.
in paris student battles with campus authorities and police triggered a massive nationwide labor strike and nearly brought down the french government.
new york to west berlin and even to communist china.
in czechoslovakia deep within the soviet bloc western inspired reformers launched the liberating program that became known as the prague spring in january 1968.
for eight months political freedom blossomed until ruthlessly mowed down by soviet tanks.
despite backlashes by university presidents conservative politicians and communist leaders the genie of cultural and political protest was out of the bottle.
the 1960s also witnessed a sexual revolution though its novelty and scale are often exaggerated.
without doubt the introduction of the birth control pill in 1960 made unwanted pregnancies much easier to avoid and sexual appetites easier to satisfy.
the mattachine society founded in los angeles in 1951 was a pioneering advocate for gay rights as gay men and lesbians increasingly demanded sexual tolerance.
a brutal attack on gay men by off duty police ofcers at new yorks stonewall inn in 1969 proved a turning point when the victims fought back in what became known as the stonewall rebellion.
widening worries in the 1980s about sexually transmitted diseases like genital herpes and aids acquired immunodeciency syndrome nally slowed but did not reverse the sexual revolution.
launched in youthful idealism many of the cultural revolutions of the 1960s sputtered out in vio lence and cynicism.
students for a democratic society sds once at the forefront of the antipoverty and antiwar campaigns had by decades end spawned an underground terrorist group called the weathermen.
peaceful civil rights demonstrations had given way to blockbusting urban riots.
what started as apparently innocent experiments with drugs like marijuana and lsd had fried many youthful brains and spawned a loathsome underworld of drug lords and addicts.
straight laced guardians of respectability denounced the self indulgent romanticism of the ower children as the beginning of the end of modern civilization.
sympathetic observers hailed the greening of america the replacement of materialism and imperialism by a new consciousness of human values.
the upheavals of the 1960s could be largely attributed to the three ps the youthful population bulge protest against racism and the vietnam war and the apparent permanence of prosperity.
as the decade owed into the 1970s the ower children grew older and had children of their own the civil rights movement fell silent the war ended and economic stagnation blighted the bloom of prosperity.
young people in the 1970s seemed more concerned with nding a job in the system than with tearing the system down.
but if the counterculture had not managed fully to replace older values it had weakened their grip perhaps permanently.
chronology the first gay pride parade new york city 1970 on the rst anniversary of homosexuals celebrated resistance to police harassment at the stonewall inn on june 27 1969 two hundred men and women marched from greenwich village to central park initiating a tradition that now has spread to many other american cities and around the globe attracting thousands of paraders onlookers and even prominent politicians.
chronology european economic community eec common market created by treaty of rome berlin wall built alliance for progress bay of pigs invasion kennedy sends military advisers to south vietnam pressure from kennedy results in rollback of steel prices trade expansion act laos neutralized cuban missile crisis france vetoes british membership in eec anti diem coup in south vietnam civil rights march in washington d c kennedy assassinated johnson assumes presidency twenty fourth amendment abolishing poll tax in federal elections ratied freedom summer voter registration in south gulf of tonkin resolution johnson defeats goldwater for presidency war on poverty begins civil rights act great society legislation voting rights act u s troops occupy dominican republic 1965 race riots in u s cities france withdraws from nato six day war between israel and egypt north vietnamese army launches tet offensive in south vietnam worldwide protests martin luther king jr and robert kennedy assassinated prague spring crushed by soviet army nixon defeats humphrey and wallace for presidency stonewall inn riot in new york city astronauts land on moon chapter 38 the stormy sixties 1960 1968 key terms new frontier 972 peace corps 973 apollo 974 berlin wall 975 european economic community eec 975 bay of pigs invasion 978 cuban missile crisis 979 freedom riders 979 voter education project 980 march on washington 981 civil rights act of 1964 984 people to know afrmative action 984 great society 984 freedom summer 988 mississippi freedom democratic party 988 voting rights act of 1965 989 black panther party 989 black power 990 six day war 992 stonewall rebellion 998 students for a democratic society sds 998 robert f kennedy robert s mcnamara ngo dinh diem james meredith lee harvey oswald malcolm x eugene mccarthy george c wallace the sixties constructive or destructive.
t he 1960s were convulsed by controversy and they have remained controversial ever since.
con icts raged in that turbulent decade between social classes races sexes and generations.
more than three decades later the shock waves from the 1960s still reverberate through american society.
the contract with america that swept conser vative republicans to power in 1994 amounted to nothing less than a wholesale repudiation of the government activism that marked the sixties and a resounding reaf rmation of the traditional values that sixties culture supposedly trashed.
liberal democrats on the other hand continue to press af rmative action for women and minorities protection for the environment an expanded welfare state and sexual tolerance all legacies of the stormy sixties.
four issues dominate historical discussion of the 1960s the struggle for civil rights the great societys war on poverty the vietnam war and the antiwar movement and the emergence of the counterculture although most scholars praise the civil rights achievements of the 1960s they disagree over the civil rights movements turn away from nonviolence and its embrace of separatism and black power.
the freedom riders and martin luther king jr nd much more approval in most history books than do malcolm x and the black panther party.
but some scholars notably william l van deburg in new day in babylon the black power movement and american culture 1965 1975 1992 argue that the ank effect of radical black power advocates like stokely carmichael actually enhanced the bargaining position of moderates like dr king.
deburg also suggests that the enthusiasm of black power advocates for african american cultural uniqueness reshaped both black self consciousness and the broader culture as it provided a model for the feminist and multiculturalist movements of the 1970s and later.
johnsons war on poverty has found its liberal defenders in scholars like allen matusow the unraveling of america 1984 and john schwarz americas to learn more hidden success 1988.
schwarz demonstrates for example that medicare and social security reforms virtually eliminated poverty among americas elderly.
but the great society has also provoked strong criticism from writers such as charles murray losing ground 1984 and lawrence meade beyond entitlements 1986.
as those conser vative critics see the poverty issue the great society was part of the problem not part of the solution.
in their view the war on poverty did not simply fail to eradicate poverty among the so called underclass it actually deepened the dependency of the poor on the welfare state and even generated a multigenerational cycle of poverty.
in this argument johnsons great society stands indicted of creating in effect a permanent welfare class.
for many young people of the 1960s the antiwar movement protesting americas policy in vietnam provided their initiation into politics and their introduction to movement culture with its sense of community and shared purpose.
but scholars disagree over the movements real effectiveness in checking the war.
writers like john lewis gaddis strategies of containment 1982 explain americas eventual withdrawal from vietnam essentially without reference to the protesters in the streets.
others like todd gitlin the sixties years of hope days of rage 1987 insist that mass protest was the force that nally pressed the war to a conclusion.
debate over the counterculture not only pits liberals against conser vatives but also pits liberals against radicals.
a liberal historian like william oneill coming apart 1971 might sympathize with what he considers some of the worthy values pushed by student activists such as racial justice nonviolence and the antiwar movement but he also claims that much of the sixties youth culture degenerated into hedonism arrogance and social polarization.
in contrast younger historians such as michael kazin and maurice isserman argue that cultural radicalism and political radicalism were two sides of the same coin.
many young people in the sixties made little distinction between the personal and the political.
as sara evans demonstrates in personal politics 1980 the personal was the political for many women.
she nds the roots of modern feminism in the sexism women activists encountered in the civil rights and antiwar movements.
although scholars rightly see the 1960s as a liberal decade some have also started to focus on the other side of the political spectrum.
historians like lisa mcgirr suburban warriors 2001 argue that even though barry goldwater lost in a landslide in 1964 the conser vative movement he kick started laid the foundation for later successes by ronald reagan and both george bushes.
rebecca klatch shows in a generation divided 1999 how the new right fed off the new left reshaping american politics in profound ways.
liberal policies toward minorities women and the poor fueled the res of traditionalists who wanted a return to the good old days and the hedonistic counterculture sparked a religious revival that led to politically powerful groups like the moral majority by the 1970s.
while critics may argue over the good versus the bad sixties there is no denying the degree to which that tumultuous time for better or worse shaped the world in which we now live.
to learn more dan carter the politics of rage george wallace the origins of the new conservatism and the transformation of american politics 1995 robert dallek an unnished life john f kennedy 1917 1963 2003 alex haley the autobiography of malcolm x 1966 maurice isserman and michael kazin america divided the civil war of the 1960s 2000 robert f kennedy thirteen days 1969 lisa mcgirr suburban warriors the origins of the new american right 2001 james miller democracy is in the streets from port huron to the siege of chicago 1987 ann moody coming of age in mississippi 1968 bruce schulman lyndon b johnson and american liberalism 1994 jeremi suri power and protest global revolution and the rise of dtente 2003 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 in all my years of public life i have never obstructed justice.
people have got to know whether or not their president is a crook.
well im not a crook i earned every thing ive got.
richard nixon 1973 a s the 1960s lurched to a close the fantastic quartercentury economic boom of the post world war ii era also showed signs of petering out.
by increasing their productivity american workers had doubled their average standard of living in the twenty ve years since the end of world war ii.
now fatefully productivity gains slowed to the vanishing point.
the entire decade of the 1970s did not witness a productivity advance equivalent to even one years progress in the preceding two decades.
at the new rate it would take ve hundred more years to bring about another doubling of the average workers standard of living.
the median income of the average american family stagnated in the two decades after 1970 and failed to decline only because of the addition of working wives wages to the family income see figure 39 1.
the rising baby boom generation now faced the depressing prospect of a living standard that would be lower than that of their parents.
as the postwar wave of robust economic growth crested by the early 1970s at home and abroad the can do american spirit gave way to an unaccustomed sense of limits.
sources of stagnation what caused the sudden slump in productivity.
some observers cited the increasing presence in the work force of women and teenagers who typically had fewer skills than adult male workers and were less likely to take the full time long term jobs where skills might be developed.
other commentators blamed declining this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website economic woes figure 39 1 median household income 1970 2005 during the long post world war ii economic boom from about 1950 to 1970 family incomes increased dramatically but after 1970 real or ination adjusted incomes stagnated.
prosperity in the late 1990s led to a slight upward trend though adjusted median family income began to decline in the early years of the twenty rst century.
sources u s census bureau historical income tables households 2007 u s census bureau income poverty and health insurance coverage in the united states 2005 statistical abstract of the united states 2007.
dollars in thousands nominal inflation adjusted 1970 dollars investment in new machinery the heavy costs of compliance with government imposed safety and health regulations and the general shift of the american economy from manufacturing to ser vices where productivity gains were allegedly more difcult to achieve and mea sure.
yet in the last analysis much mystery attends the productivity slowdown and economists have wrestled inconclusively with the puzzle.
the vietnam war also precipitated painful economic distortions.
the disastrous conict in southeast asia drained tax dollars from needed improvements in education deected scientic skill and manufacturing capacity from the civilian sector and touched off a sickening spiral of ination.
sharply rising oil prices in the 1970s also fed ination but its deepest roots lay in decit spending in the 1960s especially lyndon johnsons insistence on simultaneously ghting the war in vietnam and funding great society programs at home all without a tax increase to nance the added expenditures.
both military spending and welfare spending are inherently inationary in the absence of offsetting tax collections because they put dollars into peoples hands without adding to the supply of goods that those dollars can buy.
whatever its cause the effects of ination were deeply felt.
prices increased astonishingly throughout the 1970s.
the cost of living tripled in the dozen years after richard nixons inauguration in the longest and steepest inationary cycle in american history.
other weaknesses in the nations economy were also laid bare by the abrupt reversal of americas nancial fortunes in the 1970s.
the competitive advantage of many major american businesses had been so enormous after world war ii that they had small in the nixon wave during richard nixons presidency americans experienced the rst serious ination since the immediate post world war ii years.
the inationary surge grew to tidal wave proportions by the late 1970s when the consumer price index rose at an annual rate of more than 10 percent.
chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 centive to modernize plants and seek more efcient methods of production.
the defeated german and japa nese people had meanwhile clawed their way out of the ruins of war and built wholly new factories with the most up to date technology and management techniques.
by the 1970s their efforts paid handsome rewards as they came to dominate industries like steel automobiles and consumer electronics elds in which the united states had once been unchallengeable.
the poor economic performance of the 1970s hung over the decade like a pall.
it frustrated both policymakers and citizens who keenly remembered the growth and optimism of the quarter century since world war ii.
the overachieving postwar generation had never met a problem it could not solve.
but now a stalemated unpopular war and a stagnant unresponsive economy heralded the end of the self condent postwar era.
with it ended the liberal dream vivid since new deal days that an afuent society could spend its way to social justice.
president richard m nixon reversing kennedys inaugural plea to bear any burden nixon told congress in february 1970 america cannot and will not conceive all the plans design all the programs execute all the decisions and undertake all the defense of the free nations of the world nixon vietnamizes the war inaugurated on january 20 1969 richard nixon urged the american people torn with dissension over vietnam and race relations to stop shouting at one another yet the new president seemed an unlikely conciliator of the clashing forces that appeared to be ripping apart american society.
solitary and suspicious by nature nixon could be brittle and testy in the face of opposition.
he also harbored bitter resentments against the liberal establishment that had cast him into the political darkness for much of the preceding decade.
yet nixon brought one hugely valuable asset with him to the white house his broad knowledge and thoughtful expertise in foreign affairs.
with calculating shrewdness he applied himself to putting americas foreign policy house in order.
the rst burning need was to quiet the public uproar over vietnam.
president nixons announced policy called vietnamization was to withdraw the 540 000 u s troops in south vietnam over an extended period.
the south vietnamese with american money weapons training and advice could then gradually take over the burden of ghting their own war.
the so called nixon doctrine thus evolved.
it proclaimed that the united states would honor its exist ing defense commitments but that in the future asians and others would have to ght their own wars without the support of large bodies of american ground troops.
nixon sought not to end the war but to win it by other means without the further spilling of american blood.
but even this much involvement was distasteful to the american doves many of whom demanded a withdrawal that was prompt complete unconditional and irreversible.
antiwar protesters staged a massive national vietnam moratorium in october 1969 as nearly 100 000 people jammed boston common and some 50 000 led by the white house carrying lighted candles.
undaunted nixon launched a counteroffensive by appealing to the silent majority who presumably supported the war.
though ostensibly conciliatory nixons appeal was in fact deeply divisive.
his intentions soon became clear when he unleashed tough talking vice president agnew to attack the nattering nabobs of negativism who demanded a quick withdrawal from vietnam.
nixon himself in 1970 sneered at the student antiwar demonstrators as bums by january 1970 the vietnam conict had become the longest in american history and with 40 000 killed and over 250 000 wounded the third most costly foreign war in the nations experience.
it had also become grotesquely unpopular even among troops in the eld.
because draft policies largely exempted college students and men with critical civilian skills the armed forces in vietnam were largely composed of the least privileged young americans.
especially in the nixon s vietnam policies a marine corps ofcer expressed the disillusion that beset many american troops in vietnam for years we disposed of the enemy dead like so much garbage.
we stuck cigarettes in the mouths of corpses put playboy magazines in their hands cut off their ears to wear around our necks.
we incinerated them with napalm atomized them with b 52 strikes shoved them out the doors of helicopters above the south china sea.
all we did was count count bodies.
count dead human beings.
that was our fundamental military strategy.
body count.
and the count kept going up.
wars early stages african americans were disproportionately represented in the army and accounted for a disproportionately high share of combat fatalities.
black and white soldiers alike fought not only against the vietnamese enemy but also against the coiled fear of oundering through booby trapped swamps and steaming jungles often unable to distinguish friend from foe among the vietnamese peasants.
drug abuse mutiny and sabotage dulled the armys ghting edge.
morale appeared to have plummeted to rock bottom when rumors ltered out of vietnam that soldiers were fragging their own ofcers murdering them with fragmentation grenades.
domestic disgust with the war was further deepened in 1970 by revelations of the my lai massacre in which american troops had murdered innocent women and children in the village of my lai two years earlier.
increasingly desperate for a quick end to the demoralizing con ict nixon widened the war in 1970 by ordering an attack on vietnams neighbor cambodia.
angry students nationwide responded to the cambodian invasion with rock throwing window smashing and arson.
at kent state university in ohio jumpy members of the national guard red into a noisy crowd killing four and wounding many more at historically black jackson state college in mississippi the highway patrol discharged volleys at a student dormitory kill ing two students.
the nation fell prey to turmoil as rioters and arsonists convulsed the land.
nixon withdrew the american troops from cambodia on june 29 1970 after only two months.
but in america the cambodian invasion deepened the bitterness between hawks and doves as right wing groups physically assaulted leftists.
disillusionment with whiteys war increased ominously among african americans in the armed forces.
the senate though not the house overwhelmingly repealed the gulf of tonkin blank check that congress had given johnson in 1964 and sought ways to restrain nixon.
the youth of america still aroused were only slightly mollied when the government reduced draft calls and shortened the period of draftability on a lottery basis from eight years to one year.
they were simi larly pleased though not pacied when the twenty sixth amend cambodianizing the vietnam war for several years the north vietnamese and viet cong had been using cambodia bordering south vietnam on the west as a springboard for troops weapons and supplies.
suddenly on april 29 1970 without consulting congress nixon ordered american forces to join with the south vietnamese in cleaning out the enemy sanctuaries in ofcially neutral cambodia.
not for some chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 off one antagonist against the other and to enlist the aid of both in pressuring north vietnam into peace.
nixons thinking was reinforced by his national security adviser dr henry a kissinger.
bespectacled and german accented kissinger had reached america as a youth when his parents ed hitlers anti jewish persecutions.
in 1969 the former harvard professor had begun meeting secretly on nixons behalf with north vietnamese ofcials in paris to negotiate an end to the war in vietnam.
he was meanwhile preparing the presidents path to beijing and moscow.
nixon heretofore an uncompromising anticommunist announced to a startled nation in july 1971 that he had accepted an invitation to visit communist china the following year.
he made his historic jour the war at home spring 1970 president nixons order to invade cambodia sparked angry protests on american campuses.
at kent state university in ohio the nation watched in horror as four student demonstrators were shot by jittery national guardsmen.
ment in 1971 lowered the voting age to eighteen see the appendix.
new combustibles fueled the res of antiwar discontent in june 1971 when a former pentagon ofcial leaked to the new york times the pentagon papers a top secret pentagon study that documented the blunders and deceptions of the kennedy and johnson administrations especially the provoking of the 1964 north vietnamese attack in the gulf of tonkin.
nixons dtente with beijing peking and moscow as the antiwar restorm ared ever higher nixon concluded that the road out of vietnam ran through beijing and moscow.
the two great communist powers the soviet union and china were clashing bitterly over their rival interpretations of marxism.
in 1969 they had even fought several bloody skirmishes along the inner border that separated them in asia.
nixon astutely perceived that the chinese soviet tension afforded the united states an opportunity to play some chicken some egg 1975 this cartoon pokes fun at henry kissinger as a global statesman.
serving rst as president nixons national security adviser and then as secretary of state in the nixon and ford administrations the german born kissinger brought with him to washington a sophisticated some said cynical view of the world honed during his nearly two decades as a political science professor at harvard.
high stakes diplomacy with china and the soviet union ney in february 1972 enjoying glass clinking toasts and walks on the fabled great wall of china.
he capped his visit with the shanghai communiqu in which the two nations agreed to normalize their relationship.
an important part of the accord was americas acceptance of a one china policy implying a lessened american commitment to the independence of taiwan.
nixon next traveled to moscow in may 1972 to play his china card in a game of high stakes diplomacy in the kremlin.
the soviets hungry for amer ican foodstuffs and alarmed over the possibility of intensied rivalry with an american backed china were ready to deal.
nixons visits ushered in an era of dtente or relaxed tension with the two communist powers and produced several signicant agreements in 1972 including a three year arrangement by which the foodrich united states agreed to sell the soviets at least 750 million worth of wheat corn and other cereals.
more important the united states and the ussr agreed to an anti ballistic missile abm treaty which limited each nation to two clusters of defensive missiles and to a series of arms reduction negotiations known as salt strategic arms limitation talks aimed at freezing the numbers of long range nuclear missiles for ve years.
the abm and salt accords constituted long overdue rst steps toward slowing the arms race.
yet even though the abm treaty forbade elaborate defensive systems the united states forged ahead with the development of mirvs multiple independently targeted reentry vehicles designed to overcome any defense by saturating it with large numbers of warheads several to a rocket.
predictably the soviets proceeded to mirv their own missiles and the arms race ratcheted up to a still more perilous plateau with over sixteen thousand nuclear warheads deployed by both sides by the end of the 1980s.
nixons dtente diplomacy did to some extent deice the cold war.
yet nixon remained staunchly anticommunist when the occasion seemed to demand it.
he strongly opposed the election of the outspoken marxist salvador allende to the presidency of chile in 1970.
his administration slapped an embargo on the allende regime and the central intelligence agency worked covertly to undermine the legitimately elected leftist president.
when allende died during a chilean army attack on his headquarters in 1973 many observers smelled a yankee rat an impression that deepened when washington warmly embraced al lendes successor military dictator general augusto pinochet.
even so by checkmating and co opting the two great communist powers the president had cleverly set the stage for americas exit from vietnam although the concluding act in that wrenching tragedy remained to be played.
a new team on the supreme bench balancing act nixon treads delicately between the two communist superpowers in 1973 holding some of the wheat with which he enticed both into dtente.
nixon had lashed out during the campaign at the permissiveness and judicial activism of the supreme court presided over by chief justice earl warren.
following his appointment in 1953 the jovial warren had led the court into a series of decisions that drastically affected sexual freedom the rights of criminals the practice of religion civil rights and the structure of political representation.
the decisions of the warren court reected its deep concern for the individual no matter how lowly.
chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 the embattled warren court the united states supreme court presided over by chief justice earl warren made historic progressive decisions in areas ranging from civil rights to political representation.
its achievements were not appreciated everywhere however as evidenced by this billboard in new mexico.
in griswold v connecticut 1965 the court struck down a state law that prohibited the use of contraceptives even among married couples.
the court proclaimed critics said invented a right of privacy that soon provided the basis for decisions protecting womens abortion rights.
in 1963 the court held gideon v wainwright that all criminal defendants were entitled to legal counsel even if they were too poor to afford it.
more controversial still were decisions in two cases escobedo 1964 and miranda 1966 that ensured the right of the accused to remain silent and enjoy other protections.
the latter case gave rise to the miranda warning that arresting police ofcers must read to suspects.
these several court rulings sought to prevent abusive police tactics but they appeared to conser vatives to coddle criminals and subvert law and order.
conservatives also objected to the courts views on religion.
in two stunning decisions engel v vitale 1962 and school district of abington township v schempp 1963 the justices argued that the first amendments separation of church and state meant that public schools could not require prayer or bible reading.
social conser vatives raised anew the battle cry impeach earl warren see p 953.
from 1954 on the court came under relentless criticism the bitterest since new deal days.
but for better or worse the black robed justices were grappling with stubborn social problems spawned by midcentury tensions even or especially if duly elected legislatures failed to do so.
ful lling campaign promises president nixon undertook to change the courts philosophical complexion.
taking advantage of several vacancies he sought appointees who would strictly interpret the constitution cease meddling in social and political questions and not coddle radicals or criminals.
the senate in 1969 speedily con rmed his nomination of white maned warren e burger of minnesota to succeed the retiring earl warren as chief justice.
before the end of 1971 the court counted four conser vative nixon appointments out of nine members.
yet nixon was to learn the ironic lesson that many presidents have learned about their supreme court appointees once seated on the high bench the justices are fully free to think and decide according to their own beliefs not according to the presidents expectations.
the burger court that nixon shaped proved reluctant to dismantle the liberal rulings of the warren court it even produced the most controversial judicial opinion of modern times the momentous roe v wade decision in 1973 which legalized abortion see p 1017.
nixon on the home front surprisingly nixon presided over signicant expansion of the welfare programs that conservative republicans routinely denounced.
he approved increased appropriations for entitlements like food stamps medicaid and aid to families with dependent children afdc while adding a generous new program supplemental security income ssi to assist the indigent aged blind and disabled.
he signed legisla nixon s domestic policies tion in 1972 guaranteeing automatic social security cost of living increases to protect the elderly against the ravages of ination when prices rose more than 3 percent in any year.
ironically this indexing actually helped to fuel the inationary res that raged out of control later in the decade.
amid much controversy nixon in 1969 implemented his so called philadelphia plan requiring construction trade unions to establish goals and timetables for the hiring of black apprentices.
nixon may have been motivated in part by a desire to weaken the forces of liberalism by driv ing a wedge between blacks and trade unions.
but whatever his reasoning the presidents new policy had far reaching implications.
soon extended to all federal contracts the philadelphia plan in effect required thousands of employers to meet hiring quotas or to establish setasides for minority subcontractors.
nixons philadelphia plan drastically altered the meaning of af rmative action lyndon johnson had intended af rmative action to protect individuals against discrimination.
nixon now transformed and escalated af rmative action into a program that conferred privileges on certain groups.
the supreme court went along with nixons approach.
in griggs v duke power co 1971 the black robed justices prohibited intelligence tests or other devices that had the effect of excluding minorities or women from certain jobs.
the courts ruling strongly suggested to employers that the only sure protection against charges of discrimination was to hire minority workers or admit minority students in proportion to their presence in the population.
together the actions of nixon and the court opened broad employment and educational opportunities for minorities and women.
they also opened a pandoras box of protest from critics who assailed the new style of af rmative action as reverse discrimination imposed by executive order and judicial decision not by democratically elected representatives.
yet what other remedy was there defenders asked to offset centuries of prejudice and opportunity denied.
among nixons legacies was the creation in 1970 of the environmental protection agency epa which climaxed two decades of mounting concern for the environment.
scientist and author rachel carson gave the environmental movement a huge boost in 1962 when she published silent spring an enormously effective piece of latter day muckraking that exposed the poisonous effects of pesticides.
on april 22 1970 millions of environmentalists around the world cele author rachel carson 1907 1964 some call her the mother of the modern conservation movement because of the impact of her 1962 book silent spring.
brated the rst earth day to raise awareness and to encourage their leaders to act.
in the wake of what became a yearly event the u s congress passed the clean air act of 1970 and the endangered species act of 1973.
the epa now stood on the frontline of the battle for ecological sanity and made notable progress in reducing automobile emissions and cleaning up befouled waterways and toxic waste sites.
the federal government also expanded its regulatory reach on behalf of workers and consumers.
late in 1970 nixon signed the occupational safety and health administration osha into law creating an agency dedicated to improving working conditions preventing work related accidents and deaths and issuing safety standards.
the consumer product safety commission cpsc followed two years later holding companies to account for selling dangerous products.
together these three mega agencies gave the federal government far more direct control over business chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 operations than in years past drawing the ire of many big companies which chastised the overbearing national nanny worried about creeping ination then running at about 5 percent nixon overcame his distaste for economic controls and imposed a ninety day wage and price freeze in 1971.
to stimulate the nations sagging exports he next stunned the world by taking the united states off the gold standard and devaluing the dollar.
these moves effectively ended the bretton woods system of international currency stabilization that had functioned for more that a quarter of a century after world war ii see p 923.
elected as a minority president with only 43 percent of the vote in 1968 nixon devised a clever but cynical plan called the southern strategy to achieve a solid majority in 1972.
appointing conser vative supreme court justices soft pedaling civil rights and opposing school busing to achieve racial balance were all parts of the strategy.
the nixon landslide of 1972 but as fate would have it the southern strategy became superuous as foreign policy dominated the presidential campaign of 1972.
vietnam continued to be the burning issue.
nearly four years had passed since nixon had promised as a presidential candidate to end the war and win the peace.
yet in the spring of 1972 the ghting escalated anew to alarming levels when the north vietnamese heavily equipped with foreign tanks burst through the demilitarized zone dmz separating the two vietnams.
nixon reacted promptly by launching massive bombing attacks on strategic centers in north vietnam including hanoi the capital.
gambling heavily on foreign forbearance he also ordered the dropping of contact mines to blockade the principal harbors of north vietnam.
either moscow or beijing or both could have responded explosively but neither did thanks to nixons shrewd diplomacy.
the continuing vietnam con ict spurred the rise of south dakota senator george mcgovern to the 1972 democratic nomination.
mcgoverns promise to pull the remaining american troops out of vietnam in ninety days earned him the backing of the large antiwar element in the party.
but his appeal to racial minorities feminists leftists and youth alienated the traditional working class backbone of his party.
moreover the discovery shortly after the convention that mcgoverns running mate missouri senator thomas eagleton had undergone psychiatric care including electroshock therapy forced eagletons ouster from european attacks on the vietnam war the prolonged american involvement in vietnam became increasingly unpopular abroad including among u s allies.
this german cartoon from 1972 decried how much tiny vietnam had suffered under an endless string of so called liberators.
the bombing of cambodia the ticket and virtually doomed the democrats hopes of recapturing the white house.
nixons campaign emphasized that he had wound down the democratic war in vietnam from some 540 000 troops to about 30 000.
his candidacy received an added boost just twelve days before the election when the high ying dr kissinger announced that peace is at hand in vietnam and that an agreement would be reached in a few days.
nixon won the election in a landslide.
his lopsided victory encompassed every state except massachusetts and the nonstate district of columbia which was granted electoral votes by the twentythird amendment in 1961 see appendix.
he piled up 520 electoral votes to 17 for mcgovern and a popular majority of 47 169 911 to 29 170 383 votes.
mcgovern had counted on a large number of young peoples votes but less than half the 18 21 age group even bothered to register to vote.
the dove of peace at hand in vietnam just before the balloting took ight after the election.
fighting on both sides escalated again and nixon launched a furious two week bombing of north vietnam in an ironhanded effort to force the north vietnamese back to the conference table.
this merciless pounding drove the north vietnamese negotiators to agree to a cease re in the treaty of paris on january 23 1973 nearly three months after peace was prematurely proclaimed.
nixon hailed the face saving cease re as peace with honor but the boast rang hollow.
the united states was to withdraw its remaining 27 000 or so troops and could reclaim some 560 american prisoners of war.
the north vietnamese were allowed to keep some 145 000 troops in south vietnam where they still occupied about 30 percent of the country.
the shaky peace was in reality little more than a thinly disguised american retreat.
the secret bombing of cambodia and the war powers act the constitutionality of nixons continued aerial battering of cambodia had meanwhile been coming under increasing re.
in july 1973 america was shocked to learn that the u s air force had secretly conducted some thirty ve hundred bombing raids against north vietnamese positions in cambodia beginning in march 1969 and continuing for some fourteen months prior to the open american incursion in may 1970.
the most disturbing feature of these sky the washington post july 19 1973 carried this news item american b 52 bombers dropped about 104 000 tons of explosives on communist sanctuaries in neutralist cambodia during a series of raids in 1969 and 1970.
the secret bombing was acknowledged by the pentagon the monday after a former air force major.
described how he falsied reports on cambodian air operations and destroyed records on the bombing missions actually own.
forays was that while they were going on american ofcials including the president had sworn that cambodian neutrality was being respected.
countless americans began to wonder what kind of representative government they had if the united states had been ghting a war they knew nothing about.
deance followed secretiveness.
after the vietnam cease re in january 1973 nixon brazenly continued large scale bombing of communist forces in order to help the rightist cambodian government and he repeatedly vetoed congressional efforts to stop him.
the years of bombing in icted grisly wounds on cambodia blasting its people shredding its economy and revolutionizing its politics.
the long suffering cambodians soon groaned under the sadistic heel of pol pot a murderous tyrant who dispatched as many as 2 million of his people to their graves.
he was forced from power ironically enough only by a full dress vietnamese invasion in 1978 followed by a military occupation that dragged on for a decade.
congressional opposition to the expansion of presidential war making powers by johnson and nixon led to the war powers act in november 1973.
passed over nixons veto it required the president to report to congress within forty eight hours after committing troops to a foreign conict or substantially enlarging american combat units in a foreign country.
such a limited authorization would have to end within sixty days unless congress extended it for thirty more days.
the war powers act was but one manifestation of what came to be called the new isolationism a mood of caution and restraint in the conduct of the nations foreign affairs after the bloody and futile misadventure in vietnam.
meanwhile the draft ended in january 1973 although it was retained on a standby basis.
future chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 members of the armed forces were to be volunteers greatly easing anxieties among draft age youth.
the arab oil embargo and the energy crisis the long rumbling middle east erupted anew in october 1973 when the rearmed syrians and egyptians unleashed surprise attacks on israel in an attempt to regain the territory they had lost in the six day war of 1967.
with the israelis in desperate retreat kissinger who had become secretary of state in september hastily ew to moscow in an effort to restrain the soviets who were arming the attackers.
believing that the kremlin was poised to y combat troops to the suez area nixon placed americas nuclear forces on alert and ordered a gigantic airlift of nearly 2 billion in war materials to the israelis.
this assistance helped save the day as the israelis aggressively turned the tide and threatened cairo itself before american diplomacy brought about an uneasy cease re to what became known as the yom kippur war.
americas policy of backing israel against its oilrich neighbors exacted a heavy penalty.
late in october 1973 the opec nations announced an embargo on oil shipments to the united states and several european allies supporting israel especially the netherlands.
what was more the oil rich arab states cut their oil production further ratcheting up pressure on the entire west whose citizens suffered a long winter uncle sams bed of nails the oil crises of the 1970s tortured the american economy.
of lowered thermostats and speedometers.
lines at gas stations grew longer as tempers grew shorter.
the shortage triggered a major economic recession not just in america but also in france and britain.
although the latter two countries had not supported israel and had thus been exempted from the embargo in an increasingly globalized interconnected world all nations soon felt the crunch.
the energy crisis suddenly energized a number of long deferred projects.
congress approved a costly alaska pipeline and a national speed limit of fty ve miles per hour to conserve fuel.
agitation mounted for heavier use of coal and nuclear power despite the environmental threat they posed.
the ve months of the arab blackmail embargo in 1974 clearly signaled the end of an era the era of cheap and abundant energy.
a twenty year surplus of world oil supplies had masked the fact that since 1948 the united states had been a net importer of oil.
amer ican oil production peaked in 1970 and then began an irreversible decline.
blissfully unaware of their dependence on foreign suppliers americans like revelers on a binge had more than tripled their oil consumption since the end of world war ii.
the number of automobiles increased 250 percent between 1949 and 1972 and detroits engineers gave nary a thought to build ing more fuel efcient engines.
by 1974 america was oil addicted and extremely vulnerable to any interruption in supplies.
that stark fact would deeply color the diplomatic and economic history of the next three decades and beyond as the the watergate scandal oil shock when opec dramatically jacked up oil prices in the 1970s many americans as represented by the henry kissinger gure in this cartoon were slow to realize that an era of low energy prices had ended forever.
middle east loomed ever larger on the map of americas strategic interests.
opec approximately quadrupled its price for crude oil after lifting the embargo in 1974.
huge new oil bills wildly disrupted the u s balance of international trade and added further fuel to the already raging res of ination.
the united states took the lead in forming the international energy agency in 1974 as a counterweight to opec and various sectors of the economy including detroits carmakers began their slow grudging adjustment to the rudely dawning age of energy dependency.
but full reconciliation to that uncomfortable reality was a long time coming.
watergate and the unmaking of a president nixons electoral triumph in 1972 was almost immediately sullied and eventually undone by the socalled watergate scandal.
on june 17 1972 ve men were arrested in the watergate apartment ofce complex in washington after a bungled effort to plant electronic bugs in the democratic partys headquarters.
they were soon revealed to be working for the republican committee to re elect the president popularly known as creep.
the watergate break in turned out to be just one in a series of nixon administration dirty tricks that included forging documents to discredit democrats using the internal revenue service to harass innocent citizens named on a white house enemies list burglarizing the ofce of the psychiatrist who had treated the leaker of the pentagon papers and perverting the fbi and the cia to cover the tricksters tracks.
meanwhile the moral stench hanging over the white house worsened when vice president agnew was forced to resign in october 1973 for taking bribes from maryland contractors while governor and also as vice president.
in the rst use of the twenty fth amendment see the appendix nixon nominated and congress con rmed agnews successor a twelve term congressman from michigan gerald jerry ford.
amid a mood of growing national outrage a select senate committee conducted widely televised hearings about the watergate affair in 1973 1974.
nixon indignantly denied any prior knowledge of the breakin and any involvement in the legal proceedings against the burglars.
but john dean iii a former white house lawyer with a remarkable memory accused top white house ofcials including the president of obstructing justice by trying to cover up the watergate break in and silence its perpetrators.
then another former white house aide revealed that a secret taping system had recorded most of nixons oval ofce conversations.
now deans sensational testimony could be checked against the white house tapes and the senate committee could better determine who was telling the truth.
but nixon stubbornly citing his executive privilege refused to hand over the tapes.
then on october 20 1973 he ordered the saturday night massacre ring his own special prosecutor appointed to investigate the watergate scandal as well as his attorney general and deputy attorney general because they had refused to go along with ring the prosecutor.
responding at last to the house judiciary committees demand for the watergate tapes nixon agreed in the spring of 1974 to the publication of relevant portions of the tapes with many sections missing including nixons frequent obscenities which were excised with the phrase expletive deleted.
but on july 24 1974 the president suffered a disastrous setback when the supreme court unanimously ruled that executive privilege gave him no right to withhold evidence relevant to possible criminal activity.
skating on thin ice over hot water nixon reluctantly complied.
seeking to soften the impact of inevitable disclosure nixon now made public three subpoenaed tapes of conversations with his chief aide on june 23 1972.
chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 nixon the law and order man fatally for his own case one of them the notorious smoking gun tape see p 1015 revealed the president giving orders six days after the watergate breakin to use the cia to hold back an inquiry by the fbi.
nixons own tape recorded words convicted him of smoking pistol exhibit a the tape recorded conversations between president nixon and his top aide on june 23 1972 proved mortally damaging to nixons claim that he had played no role in the watergate cover up.
having been an active party to the attempted cover up.
the house judiciary committee proceeded to draw up articles of impeachment based on obstruction of justice abuse of the powers of the presidential ofce and contempt of congress.
the publics wrath proved to be overwhelming.
republican leaders in congress concluded that the guilty and unpredictable nixon was a loose cannon on the deck of the ship of state.
they frankly informed the president that his impeachment by the full house and removal by the senate were foregone conclusions and that he would do best to resign.
left with no better choice nixon choked back his tears and announced his resignation in a dramatic television appearance on august 8 1974.
few presidents had own so high and none had sunk so low.
in his farewell address nixon admitted having made some judgments that were wrong but insisted that he had always acted in what i believed at the time to be the best interests of the nation unconvinced countless americans would change the song hail to the chief to jail to the chief the nation had survived a wrenching constitutional crisis which proved that the impeachment machinery forged by the founding fathers could work when public opinion overwhelmingly demanded that it be implemented.
the principles that no person is above the law and that presidents must be held to strict accountability for their acts were strengthened.
the united states of america on the eve of its two hundredth birthday as a republic had eventually cleaned its own sullied house giving an impressive demonstration of self discipline and self government to the rest of the world.
the smoking gun tape june 23 1972 10 04 11 39 a m he technological capability to record oval ofce conversations combined with richard nixons obsession with documenting his presidency to give the public and the senate committee investigating his role in the break in of the democratic national committee headquarters in the watergate ofce tower rare access to personal conversations between the president and his closest advisers.
this tape which undeniably exposed nixons central role in constructing a cover up of the watergate break in was made on nixons rst day back in washington after the botched burglary of june 17 1972.
in this conversation with white house chief of staff h r haldeman nixon devised a plan to block a widening fbi investigation by instructing the director of the cia to deect any further fbi snooping on the grounds that it would endanger sensitive cia operations.
nixon refused to turn over this and other tapes to senate investigators until so ordered by the supreme court on july 24 1974.
within four days of its release on august 5 nixon was forced to resign.
after eighteen months of protesting his innocence of the crime and his ignorance of any effort to obstruct justice nixon was nally undone by the evidence in this incriminating smoking gun tape.
while tapes documented two straight years of nixons oval ofce conversations other presidents such as franklin roosevelt john f kennedy and lyndon baines johnson recorded important meetings and crisis deliberations.
since watergate however it is unlikely that any president has permitted extensive tape recording depriving historians of a unique insight into the inner workings of the white house.
should taped white house discussions be part of the public record of a presidency and if so who should have access to them.
what else might historians learn from a tape like this one besides analyzing the watergate cover up.
t haldeman.
yesterday they concluded it was not the white house but are now convinced it is a cia thing so the cia turn off would.
president well not sure of their analysis im not going to get that involved.
im unintelligible.
haldeman no sir.
we dont want you to.
president you call them in.
president good.
play it tough.
thats the way they play it and thats the way we are going to play it.
haldeman o k.
well do it.
president yeah when i saw that news summary item i of course knew it was a bunch of crap but i thought ah well its good to have them off on this wild hair thing because when they start bugging us which they have well know our little boys will not know how to handle it.
i hope they will though.
you never know.
maybe you think about it.
president when you get in these people when you.
get these people in say look the problem is that this will open the whole the whole bay of pigs thing and the president just feels that ah without going into the details.
dont dont lie to them to the extent to say there is no involvement but just say this is sort of a comedy of errors bizarre without getting into it the president believes that it is going to open the whole bay of pigs thing up again.
and ah because these people are plugging for for keeps and that they should call the fbi in and say that we wish for the country dont go any further into this case period.
chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 the first unelected president gerald rudolph ford the rst man to be made president solely by a vote of congress entered the besmirched white house in august 1974 with serious handicaps.
he was widely and unfairly suspected of being little more than a dim witted former college football player.
president johnson had sneered that jerry was so lacking in brainpower that he could not walk and chew gum at the same time.
worse ford had been selected not elected vice president following spiro agnews resignation in disgrace.
the sour odor of illegitimacy hung about this president without precedent.
then out of a clear sky ford granted a complete pardon to nixon for any crimes he may have committed as president discovered or undiscovered.
democrats were outraged and lingering suspicions about the circumstances of the pardon cast a dark shadow over fords prospects of being elected president in his own right in 1976.
ford at rst sought to enhance the so called dtente with the soviet union that nixon had crafted.
in july 1975 president ford joined leaders from thirtyfour other nations in helsinki finland to sign several sets of historic accords.
one group of agreements ofcially wrote an end to world war ii by nally legitimizing the soviet dictated boundaries of poland and other eastern european countries.
in return the soviets signed a third basket of agreements guaranteeing more liberal exchanges of people and information between east and west and protecting certain basic passing the buck a satirical view of where responsibility for the vietnam debacle should be laid.
human rights the helsinki accords kindled small dissident movements in eastern europe and even in the ussr itself but the soviets soon poured ice water on these sputtering ames of freedom.
western europeans especially the west germans cheered the helsinki conference as a milestone of dtente.
but in the united states critics increasingly charged that dtente was proving to be a one way street.
american grain and technology owed across the atlantic to the ussr and little of comparable importance owed back.
moscow also continued its human rights violations including restrictions on jewish emigration which prompted congress in 1974 to add punitive restrictions to a u s soviet trade bill.
despite these difculties ford at rst clung stubbornly to dtente.
but the american publics fury over moscows double dealing so steadily mounted that by the end of his term the president was refusing even to pronounce the word dtente in public.
the thaw in the cold war was threatening to prove chillingly brief.
defeat in vietnam early in 1975 the north vietnamese gave full throttle to their long expected drive southward.
president ford urged congress to vote still more weapons for vietnam but his plea was in vain and without the crutch of massive american aid the south vietnamese quickly and ingloriously collapsed.
the dam burst so rapidly that the remaining americans had to be frantically evacuated by helicopter the last of them on april 29 1975.
also rescued were feminist victories about 140 000 south vietnamese most of them so dangerously identied with the americans that they feared a bloodbath by the victorious communists.
ford compassionately admitted these people to the united states where they added further seasoning to the melting pot.
eventually some 500 000 arrived see makers of america the vietnamese pp.
americas longest most frustrating war thus ended not with a bang but a whimper.
in a technical sense the americans had not lost the war their client nation had.
the united states had fought the north vietnamese to a standstill and had then withdrawn its troops in 1973 leaving the south vietnamese to ght their own war with generous shipments of costly american aircraft tanks and other munitions.
the estimated cost to america was 118 billion in current outlays together with some 56 000 dead and 300 000 wounded.
the people of the united states had in fact provided just about every thing except the will to win and that could not be injected by outsiders.
technicalities aside america had lost more than a war.
it had lost face in the eyes of foreigners lost its own self esteem lost condence in its military prowess and lost much of the economic muscle that had made possible its global leadership since world war ii.
americans reluctantly came to realize that their power as well as their pride had been deeply wounded in vietnam and that recovery would be slow and painful.
feminist victories and defeats as the army limped home from vietnam there was little rejoicing on the college campuses where dem onstrators had once braved tear gas and billy clubs to denounce the war.
the antiwar movement like many of the other protest movements that convulsed the country in the 1960s had long since splintered and stalled.
one major exception to this pattern stood out american feminists although they had their differences showed vitality and momentum.
they won legislative and judicial victories and provoked an intense rethinking of gender roles.
on the roots of this movement see makers of america the feminists pp.
thousands of women marched in the womens stride for equality on the ftieth anniversary of woman suffrage in 1970.
in 1972 congress passed title ix of the education amendments prohibiting sex discrimination in any federally assisted educational program or activity.
perhaps this acts biggest impact was to create opportunities for girls and womens athletics at schools and colleges giving birth to a new title ix generation that would reach maturity in the 1980s and 1990s and help professionalize womens sports as well.
the equal rights amendment era to the constitution won congressional approval in 1972.
it declared equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of sex twenty eight of the necessary thirty eight states quickly ratied the amendment rst proposed by suffragists in 1923.
hopes rose that the era might soon become the law of the land.
even the supreme court seemed to be on the movements side.
in reed v reed 1971 and frontiero v richardson 1973 the court challenged sex discrimination in legislation and employment.
and in the landmark case of roe v wade 1973 the court struck down the abortion wars pro choice and prolife demonstrators brandish their beliefs.
by the end of the twentieth century the debate over abortion had become the most morally charged and divisive issue in american society since the struggle over slavery in the nineteenth century.
makers of america theafricanthe great vietnamese american migration a t rst glance the towns of westminster and fountain valley cal i fornia seem to resemble other cal i fornia communities nearby.
tract homes line residential streets shopping centers ank the busy thoroughfares.
but these are no ordinary american suburbs.
instead they make up little saigons vibrant outposts of vietnamese culture in the contemporary united states.
shops offer exotic asian merchandise restaurants serve such delicacies as lemongrass chicken.
these neighborhoods living reminders of americas anguish in vietnam are a rarely acknowledged consequence of that sorrowful con ict.
before south vietnam fell in 1975 few vietnamese ventured across the pacic.
indeed throughout most of american history until the mid twentieth century the bulk of u s immigrants had come from europe with the notable exception of the chinese and to a lesser extent the japa nese see pp.
550 551 and pp.
this trend began to change in the 1960s as people from south america and asia began arriving in greater numbers.
the war weary vietnamese were at the forefront of this new immigration so much so that in 1966 the u s immigration authorities designated vietnamese as a separate category of newcomers.
most early immigrants were the wives and children of u s servicemen.
as the communists closed in on saigon in the mid1970s many vietnamese particularly those who had worked closely with american or south vietnamese authorities feared for their lives.
gathering together as many of their extended family members as they could thousands of vietnamese prepared to ee the country.
in a few hectic days in 1975 some 140 000 vietnamese escaped before the approaching communist gun re a few dramatically clinging to the bottoms of departing u s helicopters.
from saigon they were conveyed to military bases in guam and the philippines.
another 60 000 less fortunate vietnamese escaped at the same time over land and sea to hong kong and thailand where they waited ner vously for permission to move on.
to accommodate the refugees the u s government set up camps across the united states.
arrivals were crowded into army barracks affording little room and less privacy.
these were boot camps not for military ser vice but for assimilation into american society.
a rigorous program trained the vietnamese in eng lish forbade children from speaking their native language in the classroom and even immersed them in american slang.
many resented this attempt to mold them to strip them of their culture.
their discontent boiled over when authorities prepared to release the refugees from camps and board them with families around the nation.
the resettlement ofcials had decided to nd a sponsor for each vietnamese family an american family that would provide food shelter and assistance for the refugees until they could fend for themselves.
but the vietnamese people cherish their traditional extended families grandparents uncles aunts and cousins living communally with parents and children.
few american sponsors would accommodate a large extended family fewer vietnamese families would willingly separate.
the last days of saigon violence often attended the frantic american evacuation from vietnam in 1975.
preserving the past a vietnamese american boy learns classical calligraphy from his grandfather.
the refugees were dispersed to iowa illinois pennsylvania new york washington and cal i fornia.
but the settlement sites many of them tucked away in rural districts offered scant economic opportunities.
the immigrants who had held mainly skilled or whitecollar positions in vietnam bristled as they were herded into menial labor.
as soon as they could they relocated hastening to established vietnamese enclaves around san francisco los angeles and dallas.
soon a second throng of vietnamese immigrants pushed into these little saigons.
fleeing from the ravages of poverty and from the oppressive communist government these stragglers had crammed themselves and their few possessions into little boats hoping to reach hong kong or get picked up by foreign ships.
eventually many of these boat people reached the united states.
usually less educated than the rst arrivals and receiving far less resettlement aid from the u s government they were however more willing to start at the bottom.
today these two groups total more than half a million people.
differing in experience and expectations the vietnamese share a new home in a strange land.
their uprooting is an immense unreckoned consequence of americas longest war.
boat people vietnamese refugees ee to freedom.
chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 laws prohibiting abortion arguing that a womans decision to terminate a pregnancy was protected by the constitutional right of privacy.
but the feminist movement soon faced a formidable backlash.
in 1972 president nixon vetoed a proposal to set up nationwide public day care saying it would weaken the american family.
antifeminists blamed the womens movement for the rising divorce rate which tripled between 1960 and 1976.
and the catholic church and the religious right orga nized a powerful grassroots movement to oppose the legalization of abortion.
for many feminists the most bitter defeat was the death of the era.
antifeminists led by conser vative antifeminist phyllis schlay b.
1924 schlay traveled the country promoting her stop era campaign.
she argued that ratication of the equal rights amendment would undermine the american family by violating the right of a wife to be supported by her husband requiring women to serve in combat and legalizing homosexual marriage.
activist phyllis schlay argued that the era would remove traditional protections that women enjoyed by forcing the law to see them as mens equals.
they further believed that the amendment would threaten the basic family structure of american society.
schlay charged that the eras advocates were just bitter women seeking a constitutional cure for their personal problems in 1979 congress extended the deadline for ratication of the amendment but opponents dug in their heels.
the era died in 1982 three states short of success.
the seventies in black and white although the civil rights movement had fractured race remained an explosive issue in the 1970s.
the supreme court in milliken v bradley 1974 blindsided school integrationists when it ruled that desegregation plans could not require students to move across school district lines.
the decision effectively exempted suburban districts from shouldering any part of the burden of desegregating inner city schools thereby reinforcing white ight from cities to suburbs.
by the same token the decision distilled all the problems of desegregation into the least prosperous districts often pitting the poorest most disadvantaged elements of the white and black communities against one another.
af rmative action programs also remained highly controversial.
white workers who were denied advancement and white students who were refused college admission continued to raise the cry of reverse discrimination charging that their rights had been violated by employers and admissions ofcers who put more weight on racial or ethnic background than on ability or achievement.
one white cal i fornian allan bakke made headlines in 1978 when the supreme court by the narrowest of margins ve to four upheld his claim that his application to medical school had been turned down because of an admissions program that favored minority applicants.
in a tortured decision reecting the troubling moral ambiguities and insoluble political complexities of this issue the court ordered the university of cal i fornia at davis medical school to admit bakke and declared that preference in admissions could not be given to members of any group minority or majority on the basis of ethnic or racial identity alone.
yet at the same time the court said that racial race and gender controversies a sad day for old glory in 1976 americas bicentennial year anti busing demonstrators convulsed boston the historic cradle of liberty white disillusionment with the racebased policies that were a legacy of lyndon johnsons great society programs of the 1960s helped to feed the conservative antigovernment movement that elected ronald reagan in 1980 factors might be taken into account in a schools overall admissions policy for purposes of assembling a diverse student body.
among the dissenters on the sharply divided bench was the courts only black justice thurgood marshall.
he warned in an impassioned opinion that the denial of racial preferences might sweep away years of progress by the civil rights movement.
but many conser vatives cheered the decision as af rming the principle that justice is colorblind.
inspired by the civil rights movement native americans in the 1970s gained remarkable power through using the courts and well planned acts of civil disobedience.
but while blacks had fought against segregation indians used the tactics of the civil rights movement to assert their status as separate semisovereign peoples.
indian activists captured the nations attention by seizing the island of alcatraz in 1970 and the village of wounded knee south dakota in 1972.
a series of victories in the courts consolidated the decades gains.
in the case of united states v wheeler 1978 the supreme court declared that indian tribes possessed a unique and limited sovereignty subject to the will of congress but not to individual states.
the bicentennial campaign americas two hundredth birthday in 1976 fell during a presidential election year a tting coincidence for a proud democracy.
president gerald ford ener getically sought the republican nomination in his own right and defeated challenger ronald reagan former actor and governor of cal i fornia who ran as a more conser vative candidate.
the democratic standard bearer was fty oneyear old james earl jimmy carter jr a dark horse candidate who galloped out of obscurity during the long primary election season.
a peanut farmer and former georgia governor who insisted on the humble jimmy as his rst name this born again baptist touched many people with his down home sincerity.
he ran against the memory of nixon and watergate as much as he ran against ford.
his most effective campaign pitch was his promise ill never lie to you untainted by ties with a corrupt and cynical washington he attracted voters as an outsider who would clean the disorderly house of big government carter squeezed out a narrow victory on election day with 51 percent of the popular vote.
the electoral count stood at 297 to 240.
the winner swept every state except virginia in his native south.
especially important were the votes of african americans 97 percent of whom cast their ballots for carter.
carter enjoyed hefty democratic majorities in both houses of congress.
hopes ran high that the stalemate of the nixon ford years between a republican white house and a democratic capitol hill would now be ended.
at rst carter enjoyed notable success as congress granted his requests to create a new cabinet level department of energy and to cut makers of america theafricanthe great feminists american migration a well to do housewife and mother of seven elizabeth cady stanton 1815 1902 was an unlikely revolutionary.
yet this founding mother of american feminism devoted seven decades of her life to the ght for womens rights.
young elizabeth cady drew her inspiration from the ght against slavery.
in 1840 she married fellow abolitionist henry stanton.
honeymooning in london they attended the world anti slavery convention where women were forced to sit in a screened off balcony above the convention oor.
this insult awakened stanton to the cause that would occupy her life.
with lucretia mott and other female abolitionists stanton went on to organize the seneca falls convention in 1848.
there she presented her declaration of sentiments modeled on the declaration of independence and proclaiming that all men and women are created equal she demanded for women the right to own property to enter the professions and most daring of all to vote.
as visionaries of a radically different future for women early feminists encountered a mountain of hostility and tasted bitter disappointment.
stanton failed in her struggle to have women included in the fourteenth amendment to the u s constitution which granted african americans equal citizenship.
she died before seeing her dream of woman suffrage realized in the nineteenth amendment 1920.
yet by imagining womens emancipation as an expansion of americas founding principles of citizenship stanton charted a path that other feminists would follow a century later.
historians use the terms rst wave and second wave to distinguish the womens movement of the nineteenth century from that of the late twentieth century.
the woman most often credited with launching the second wave is betty friedan 1921 2006.
growing up in peoria illinois she had seen her mother grow bitter over sacricing a journalism career to raise her family.
friedan a suburban housewife went on to write the 1963 best seller the feminine mystique exposing the quiet desperation of millions of housewives trapped in the comfortable concentration camp of the suburban home.
the book struck a resonant chord and catapulted its author onto the national stage.
in 1966 elizabeth cady stanton 1815 1902 and two of her sons 1848 in the same year this photo was taken stanton delivered her declaration of sentiments to the rst womans rights convention in seneca falls new york.
friedan cofounded the national organization for women now the chief political arm and more moderate wing of second wave feminism.
just as rst wave feminism grew out of abolitionism the second wave drew ideas leaders and tactics from the civil rights movement of the 1960s.
civil rights workers and feminists alike focused on equal rights.
now campaigned vigorously for the equal rights amendment which fell just three states short of rati cation in 1982.
but second wave feminism knew marching for womens rights 1977 a multiethnic and multiracial group of women accompanied by noted second wave feminists bella abzug in hat and betty friedan far right helped to carry a torch from seneca falls new york birthplace of the feminist movement to houston texas site of the national womens conference.
no national boundaries.
in the late 1960s activists around the world resurrected the tradition of international womens day which rst wave feminists had marked through the 1920s.
march 8 became an international day of celebration and awareness of the continued inequality and violence that many women faced around the globe.
second wave feminism also had an avowedly radical wing supported by younger women who were eager to challenge almost every traditional male and female gender role and to take the feminist cause to the streets.
among these women was robin morgan b.
as a college student in the 1960s morgan was active in civil rights orga ni zations that provided her with a model for crusading against social injustice.
they also exposed her to the same sexism that plagued society at large.
women in the movement who protested against gender discrimination met ridicule as in sncc leader stokely carmichaels famous retort the only position for women in sncc is prone morgan went on to found witch womens international terrorist conspiracy from hell made famous by its protest at the 1968 miss america pageant in atlantic city new jersey.
there demonstrators crowned a sheep miss america and threw symbols of womens oppression bras girdles and dishcloths into trash cans.
contrary to news stories they did not burn the bras.
as the contrast between witch and now suggests second wave feminism was a remarkably diverse movement.
feminists disagreed over many issues from pornography and marriage to how much to expect from government capitalism and men.
some feminists placed a priority on gender equality for example full female service in the military.
others defended a feminism of gender difference such as maternity leave and other special protections for women in the workplace.
still beyond these differences feminists had much in common.
most advocated a womans right to choose in the battle over abortion rights.
most regarded the law as the key weapon against gender discrimination.
by the early twenty rst century radical and moderate feminists alike could take pride in a host of achievements that had changed the landscape of gender relations beyond what most people could have imagined at midcentury.
yet like elizabeth cady stanton second wave feminists also shared the burden of understanding that the goals of genuine equality would take more than a lifetime to achieve.
chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 celebrating the camp david agreement september 1978 anwar sadat of egypt left and menachem begin of israel right join u s president jimmy carter in conrming the historic accord that brought the hope of peace to the war torn middle east.
the new presidents popularity remained exceptionally high during his rst few months in ofce even when he courted public disfavor by courageously keeping his campaign promise to pardon some ten thousand draft evaders of the vietnam war era.
but carters honeymoon did not last long.
an inexperienced outsider he had campaigned against the washington establishment and never quite made the transition to being an insider himself.
he repeatedly rubbed congressional fur the wrong way especially by failing to consult adequately with the leaders.
critics charged that he isolated himself in a shallow pool of fellow georgians whose ignorance of the ways of washington compounded the problems of their greenhorn chief.
carters humanitarian diplomacy as a committed christian president carter displayed from the outset an overriding concern for human rights as the guiding principle of his foreign policy.
in the african nations of rhodesia later zimbabwe and south africa carter and his eloquent u n am bassador andrew young championed the oppressed black majority.
the presidents most spectacular foreign policy achievement came in september 1978 when he invited president anwar sadat of egypt and prime minister menachem begin of israel to a summit conference at camp david the woodsy presidential retreat in the maryland highlands.
skillfully serving as go between carter persuaded the two visitors to sign an accord september 17 1978 that held considerable promise of peace.
israel agreed in principle to withdraw from territory conquered in the 1967 war and egypt in return promised to respect israels borders.
both parties pledged themselves to sign a formal peace treaty within three months.
the president crowned this diplomatic success by resuming full diplomatic relations with china in early 1979 after a nearly thirty year interruption.
carter also successfully pushed through two treaties to turn over the panama canal to the panamanians.
although these treaties were decried by conser vatives such as ronald reagan who stridently declared we bought it we paid for it we built it and we intend to keep it the united states gave up control of the canal on december 31 1999.
carter s foreign and economic policies historical double take many americans who looked back reverently to theodore roosevelts rough rider diplomacy were outraged at the panama giveaway but the carter administration looking to the future argued persuasively that relinquishing control of the canal would be healthy for u s latin american relations.
despite these dramatic accomplishments trouble stalked carters foreign policy.
overshadowing all international issues was the ominous reheating of the cold war with the soviet union.
dtente fell into disrepute as thousands of cuban troops assisted by soviet advisers appeared in angola ethiopia and elsewhere in africa to support revolutionary factions.
arms control negotiations with moscow stalled in the face of this soviet military meddling.
economic and energy woes adding to carters mushrooming troubles was the failing health of the economy.
a stinging recession during fords presidency had brought the ination rate down slightly to just under 6 percent but from the moment carter took over prices resumed their dizzying ascent driv ing the ination rate well above 13 percent by 1980 see figure 39 2.
the soaring bill for imported oil plunged americas balance of payments deeply into the red an unprecedented 40 billion in 1978.
the oil shocks of the 1970s taught americans a painful but necessary lesson that they could never again seriously consider a policy of economic isolation as they had tried to do in the decades between the two world wars.
for most of american history foreign trade had accounted for no more than 10 percent of gross national product gnp.
but huge foreign oil bills drove that gure steadily upward in the 1970s and thereafter.
by centurys end some 27 percent of gnp depended on foreign trade.
unable to dominate international trade and nance as easily as they once had americans would have to master foreign languages and study foreign cultures if they wanted to prosper in the rapidly globalizing economy.
yawning decits in the federal budget reaching nearly 60 billion in 1980 further aggravated the u s economys inationary ailments.
the elderly and other americans living on xed incomes suffered from the shrinking dollar.
people with money to lend pushed interest rates ever higher hoping to protect themselves from being repaid in badly depreciated dollars.
the prime rate the rate of interest that banks charge their very best customers vaulted to an unheard of 20 percent in early 1980.
the high cost of borrowing money shoved small businesses to the wall and strangled the construction industry which was heavily dependent on loans to nance new housing and other projects.
carter diagnosed americas economic disease as stemming primarily from the nations costly dependence on foreign oil.
unfortunately his legislative proposals for energy conservation in 1977 ignited a blaze of indifference among the american people who had already forgotten the long gasoline lines of 1973.
events in iran jolted americans out of their complacency about energy supplies in 1979.
the imperious mohammed reza pahlevi installed as shah of iran with help from americas cia in 1953 had long ruled his oil rich land with a will of steel.
his repressive regime was nally overthrown in january 1979.
violent revolution was spearheaded in iran by muslim fundamentalists who ercely resented the shahs campaign to westernize and secularize his country.
denouncing the united states as the great satan that had abetted the shahs efforts these extremists engulfed iran in chaos in the wake of his departure.
the crippling upheavals soon spread to irans oil elds.
as iranian oil stopped owing into the stream of world commerce chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 annual percentage change all items right scale average price of consumer goods cpi consumer price index 1982 1984 100 1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 figure 39 2 the history of the consumer price index 1967 2005 this graph shows both the annual percentage rate of ination and the cumulative shrinkage of the dollars value since 1967.
by 2002 it took more than ve dollars to buy what one dollar had purchased in 1967.
although consumer price increases slowed between 2000 and 2002 the rising cost of oil in 2004 reversed that trend.
sources bureau of labor statistics and statistical abstract of the united states relevant years.
shortages appeared and opec again seized the opportunity to hike petroleum prices.
americans once more found themselves waiting impatiently in long lines at gas stations or buying gasoline only on specied days.
as the oil crisis deepened president carter sensed the rising temperature of popular discontent.
in july 1979 he retreated to the presidential mountain hideaway at camp david where he remained largely out of public view for ten days.
like a royal potentate of old summoning the wise men of the realm for their counsel in a time of crisis carter called in over a hundred leaders from all walks of life to give him their views.
meanwhile the nation waited anxiously for the results of these extraordinary deliberations.
when carter came down from the mountaintop on july 15 1979 he stunned a perplexed nation with his malaise speech chiding his fellow citizens for falling into a moral and spiritual crisis and for being too concerned with material goods a few days later in a bureaucratic massacre of almost unprecedented proportions he red four cabinet secretaries and circled the wagons of his georgia advisers more tightly about the white house by reorganizing and expanding the power of his personal staff.
critics began to wonder aloud whether carter the professed man of hostage to iran president jimmy carter b.
1924 delivered what became known as his malaise speech although he never used the word on television in 1979 in a nation that was proud of hard work strong families close knit communities and our faith in god too many of us now tend to worship self indulgence and consumption.
human identity is no longer dened by what one does but by what one owns.
but weve discovered that owning things and consuming things does not satisfy our longing for meaning.
weve learned that piling up material goods cannot ll the emptiness of lives which have no condence or purpose.
the symptoms of this crisis of the american spirit are all around us.
in time cultural conservatives would take up carters theme to support their call for a return to traditional values the people was losing touch with the popular mood of the country.
iled shah who had arrived in the united states two weeks earlier for medical treatment.
world opinion hotly condemned the diplomatic felony in iran while americans agonized over both the fate of the hostages and the stability of the entire persian gulf region so dangerously close to the soviet union.
the soviet army then aroused the wests worst fears on december 27 1979 when it blitzed into the mountainous nation of afghanistan next door to iran and appeared to be poised for a thrust at the oil jugular of the gulf.
president carter reacted vigorously to these alarming events.
he slapped an embargo on the export of grain and high technology machinery to the ussr and called for a boycott of the upcoming olympic games in moscow.
he proposed the creation of a rapid deployment force to respond to suddenly developing crises in faraway places and requested that young people including women be made to register for a possible military draft.
the president proclaimed that the united states would use any means necessary including force to protect the persian gulf against soviet incursions.
he grimly conceded that he had misjudged the soviets and the salt ii treaty became a dead letter in the senate.
meanwhile the soviet army met unexpectedly stiff resistance in afghanistan and bogged down in a nasty decade long guerrilla war that came to be called russias vietnam foreign affairs and the iranian imbroglio hopes for a less dangerous world rose slightly in june 1979 when president carter met with soviet leader leonid brezhnev in vienna to sign the long stalled salt ii agreements limiting the levels of lethal strategic weapons in the soviet and american arsenals.
but conser vative critics of the presidents defense policies still regarding the soviet union as the wicked witch of the east unsheathed their long knives to carve up the salt ii treaty when it came to the senate for debate in the summer of 1979.
political earthquakes in the petroleum rich persian gulf region nally buried all hopes of ratifying the salt ii treaty.
on november 4 1979 a mob of rabidly anti american muslim militants stormed the united states embassy in tehran iran and took all of its occupants hostage.
the captors then demanded that the american authorities ship back to iran the ex two way salt talks the grim specter of nuclear holocaust haunted the salt ii talks between president carter and soviet leader leonid brezhnev in vienna in june 1979.
chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 iranians denounce president jimmy carter november 1979 scenes like this one appeared almost nightly on american television during the 444 days of the iranian hostage crisis humiliating carter and angering american citizens.
the iranian hostage crisis was carters and americas bed of nails.
the captured americans languished in cruel captivity while the nightly television news broadcasts in the united states showed humiliating scenes of iranian mobs burning the american ag and spitting on efgies of uncle sam.
carter at rst tried to apply economic sanctions and the pressure of world public opinion against the iranians while waiting for the emergence of a stable government with which to negotiate.
but the political turmoil in iran rumbled on endlessly and the presidents frustration grew.
carter at last ordered a daring rescue mission.
a highly trained commando team penetrated deep into irans sandy interior.
their plan re quired ticktock perfect timing to succeed and when equipment failures prevented some members of the team from reaching their destination the mission had to be scrapped.
as the commandos withdrew in the dark desert night two of their aircraft collided kill ing eight of the would be rescuers.
this disastrous failure of the rescue raid proved anguishing for americans.
the episode seemed to underscore the nations helplessness and even incompetence in the face of a mortifying insult to the national honor.
the stalemate with iran dragged on throughout the rest of carters term providing an embarrassing backdrop to the embattled presidents struggle for reelection.
people to know chronology my lai massacre witch protests miss america pageant in atlantic city new jersey nixon orders invasion of cambodia kent state and jackson state incidents environmental protection agency epa created clean air act pentagon papers published twenty sixth amendment lowering voting age to eighteen passed nixon visits china and soviet union shanghai communiqu begins normalization of u s chinese relations abm and salt i treaties ratied nixon defeats mcgovern for presidency equal rights amendment passes congress not ratied by states title ix of education amendments passed treaty of paris enacts cease re in vietnam and u s withdrawal agnew resigns ford appointed vice president war powers act yom kippur war opec oil embargo endangered species act key terms vietnamization 1004 nixon doctrine 1004 silent majority 1004 my lai massacre 1005 kent state university 1005 pentagon papers 1006 dtente 1007 miranda warning 1008 philadelphia plan 1009 environmental protection agency epa 1009 earth day 1009 chilean president salvador allende killed in cia backed coup frontiero v richardson roe v wade 1973 watergate hearings and investigations nixon resigns ford assumes presidency opec ends embargo increases oil prices international energy agency formed milliken v bradley helsinki accords south vietnam falls to communists carter defeats ford for presidency camp david accords between egypt and israel united states v wheeler iranian revolution and oil crisis salt ii agreements signed never ratied by senate soviet union invades afghanistan 1979 iranian hostage crisis u s boycotts summer olympics in moscow people to know southern strategy 1010 war powers act 1011 watergate 1013 smoking gun tape 1014 equal rights amendment era 1017 roe v wade 1017 malaise speech 1026 salt ii 1027 iranian hostage crisis 1028 henry a kissinger warren e burger rachel carson george mcgovern gerald jerry ford john dean iii james earl jimmy carter jr leonid brezhnev chapter 39 the stalemated seventies 1968 1980 to learn more stephen ambrose nixon the triumph of a politician 1962 1972 1989 carl bernstein and bob woodward all the presidents men 1974 james bill the eagle and the lion 1987 robert dallek nixon and kissinger partners in power 2007 alice echols daring to be bad radical feminism in america 1967 1975 1989 david greenberg nixons shadow the history of an image 2003 linda greenhouse becoming justice blackmun harry blackmuns supreme court journey 2005 walter lafeber inevitable revolutions the united states in central america 2nd ed 1993 bruce schulman the seventies the great shift in american culture society and politics 2001 bob woodward and scott armstrong the brethren inside the supreme court 1979 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 it will be my intention to curb the size and inuence of the federal establishment and to demand recognition of the distinction between the powers granted to the federal government and those reserved to the states or to the people.
i ts morning in america was the slogan of republican candidate ronald reagan in his 1984 presidential campaign.
certainly the 1980s were a new day for americas conser vative right.
census gures con rmed that the average american was older than in the stormy sixties and much more likely to live in the south or west the traditional bastions of the old right where many residents harbored suspicions of federal power.
the conser vative cause drew added strength from the emergence of a new right movement partly in response to the countercultural protests of the 1960s.
spearheading the new right were evangelical christian groups such as the moral majority dedicated believers who enjoyed startling success as political fund raisers and organizers.
many new right activists were far less agitated about economic questions than about cultural concerns the so called social issues.
they denounced abortion pornography homosexuality feminism and af rmative action.
they championed prayer in the schools and tougher penalties for criminals.
together the old and new right added up to a powerful political combination devoted to changing the very character of american society.
the election of ronald reagan 1980 ronald reagan was well suited to lead the gathering conser vative crusade.
reared in a generation whose values were formed well before the upheavals of the 1960s he naturally sided with the new right on social issues.
in economic and social matters alike he denounced the activist government and failed social engineering of the 1960s.
just as his early political this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
chapter 40 the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 hero franklin roosevelt had championed the forgotten man against big business reagan championed the common man against big government.
he condemned federal intervention in local affairs favoritism for minorities and the elitism of arrogant bureaucrats.
he aimed especially to win over from the democratic column working class and lower middle class white voters by implying that the democratic party had become the party of big government and the exclusive tool of its minority constituents.
though reagan was no intellectual he drew on the ideas of a small but inuential group of thinkers known as neoconser vatives their ranks included norman podhoretz editor of commentary magazine and irving kristol editor of the public interest.
reacting against what they saw as the excesses of 1960s liberalism the neoconser vatives championed free market capitalism liberated from government restraints and they took tough harshly anti soviet positions in foreign policy.
they also questioned liberal welfare programs and af rmative action policies and called for the reassertion of traditional values of individualism and the centrality of the family.
an actor turned politician reagan enjoyed enormous popularity with his crooked grin and aw shucks manner.
the son of a neer do well impoverished irish american father with a fondness for the bottle he had grown up in a small illinois town.
reagan got his start in life in the depressed 1930s as a sports announcer for an iowa radio station.
good looks and a way with words landed him acting jobs in hollywood where he became a b grade star in the 1940s.
he dis in a speech to the national association of evangelicals on march 8 1983 president ronald reagan 1911 2004 dened his stand on school prayer the declaration of independence mentions the supreme being no less than four times.
in god we trust is engraved on our coinage.
the supreme court opens its proceedings with a religious invocation.
and the members of congress open their sessions with a prayer.
i just happen to believe the schoolchildren of the united states are entitled to the same privileges as supreme court justices and congressmen.
president ronald reagan older than any man previously elected to the presidency reagan displayed youthful vigor both on the campaign trail and in ofce.
played a air for politics as president of the screen actors guild in the mccarthy era of the early 1950s when he helped purge communists and other suspected reds from the lm industry.
in 1954 he became a spokesman for general electric and began to abandon his new dealish political views and increasingly to preach a conser vative antigovernment line.
reagans growing skill at promoting the conservative cause inspired a group of wealthy cal i fornia businessmen to help him launch his political career as governor of cal i fornia from 1966 to 1974.
by 1980 the republican party was ready to challenge the democrats hold on the white house.
bedeviled abroad and becalmed at home jimmy carters administration struck many americans as bungling the election of 1980 and befuddled.
carters inability to control doubledigit ination was especially damaging.
frustrated critics bellyached loudly about the georgians alleged mismanagement of the nations affairs.
disaffection with carters apparent ineptitude ran deep even in his own democratic party where an abc anybody but carter movement gathered steam.
the liberal wing of the party found its champion in senator edward kennedy of massachusetts the last survivor of the assassin plagued kennedy brothers.
he and carter slugged it out in a series of bruising primary elections while delighted republicans decorously proceeded to name reagan their presidential nominee.
in the end kennedys candidacy fell victim to the countrys conser vative mood and to lingering suspicions about a 1969 automobile accident on chappaquiddick island massachusetts in which a young woman assistant was drowned when kennedys car plunged off a bridge.
a badly battered carter his party divided and in disarray was left to do battle with reagan.
the republican candidate proved to be a formidable campaigner.
using his professional acting skills to great advantage reagan attacked the incumbents fumbling per for mance in foreign policy and blasted the big government philosophy of the democratic party a philosophy that carter did not fully embrace.
galloping ination sky high interest rates and a faltering economy also put the incumbent president on the defensive.
carter countered ineffectively with charges that reagan was a trigger happy cold warrior who might push the country into nuclear war.
carters spotty record in ofce was no defense against reagans popular appeal.
on election day the republican rang up a spectacular victory bagging over 51 percent of the popular vote while 41 percent went to carter.
reecting a small but vocal protest against both candidates nearly 7 percent of the electorate voted for liberal republican congressman john anderson who ran as an independent.
the electoral count stood at 489 for reagan and 49 for carter making him the rst elected president to be unseated by voters since herbert hoover in 1932 see map 40 1.
equally startling the republicans gained control of the senate for the rst time in twenty six years.
leading democratic liberals including george mcgovern had been targeted for defeat by well heeled new right groups.
they went down like dead timber in the conservative windstorm that swept the country.
carter showed dignity in defeat delivering a thoughtful farewell address that stressed his efforts wa mt or id nv ca nd wy sd co wi ia ne ut az mn ks ok nm tx il mi in mo ky ms al pa wv va nc tn ar la oh ga me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 14 ri nj ct 4 17 8 de md sc dc fl ak hi candidate party electoral vote reagan republican 90 9 43 899 248 50 8 9 1 35 481 435 41 0 5 719 437 6 6 carter democrat anderson independent popular vote map 40 1 presidential election of 1980 with electoral vote by state this map graphically displays reagans landslide victory over both carter and anderson.
interactive map to scale down the deadly arms race to promote human rights and to protect the environment.
in one of his last acts in ofce he signed a bill preserving some 100 million acres of alaska land for national parks forests and wildlife refuges.
an unusually intelligent articulate and well meaning president he had been hampered by his lack of managerial talent and had been badly buffeted by events beyond his control such as the soaring price of oil runaway ination and the galling insult of the hostages still held in iran.
though unsuccessful in the white house carter earned much admiration in later years for his hu manitarian and human rights activities.
he received the nobel peace prize in 2002.
the reagan revolution reagans arrival in washington was triumphal.
the iranians contributed to the festive mood by releasing the hostages on reagans inauguration day january 20 1981 after 444 days of captivity.
the new president a hale and hearty sixty nineyear old was devoted to scal tness and a leaner federal government.
he sought nothing less than the dismantling of the welfare state and the reversal of chapter 40 the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 coming home after more than a year in captivity in iran these hostages were released on the very day of ronald reagans presidential inauguration.
the political evolution of the preceding half century.
assembling a conser vative cabinet of the best and the rightest he took dead aim at what he regarded as the bloated federal budget.
government is not the solution to our problem he declared.
government is the problem years of new deal style tax and spend programs reagan jested had created a federal government that reminded him of the de nition of a baby as a creature who was all appetite at one end with no sense of responsibility at the other.
on his conser vative crusade for smaller government less bureaucracy and freer markets reagan found common cause with the new leader of americas oldest ally great britain.
conservative margaret thatcher became britains rst female prime minister in 1979.
with a mandate to improve her nations economy which had suffered through the 1970s as the united states had she embarked on a mission to reduce the power of labor unions and government involvement in business two of reagans chief goals.
the philosophic kinship between ronnie and maggie as the press dubbed the two heads of state went beyond economics.
emboldened by each other they strengthened the anglo american alliance through muscular foreign policy against a number of foes especially the soviet bloc.
their common refrain was that free markets made free peoples and that shrinking government meant keeping their nations safer from communism.
by the early 1980s this antigovernment message found a receptive audience in the united states.
in the two decades since 1960 federal spending had risen from about 18 percent of gross national product to nearly 23 percent.
at the same time the composition of the federal budget had been shifting from defense to entitlement programs including social security and medicare see the chart in the appendix.
in 1973 the budget of the department of health education and welfare surpassed that of the department of defense.
citizens increasingly balked at paying the bills for further extension of government benets after four decades of advancing new deal and great society programs a strong countercurrent took hold.
californians staged a tax revolt in 1978 known by its ofcial ballot title of proposition 13 that slashed property taxes and forced painful cuts in government services.
the cal i fornia tax quake jolted other state capitals and even rocked the pillars of congress in faraway washington d c ronald reagan had ridden this political shock wave to presidential victory in 1980 and now proceeded to rattle the welfare state to its very foundations.
the triumph of the right 1980 republican conservatives scored a double victory in 1980 winning control of both the white house and the senate.
aided by conservative democratic boll weevils they also dominated the house of representatives and a new era of conservatism dawned in the nations capital.
reaganomics and star wars reagan pursued his smaller government policies with near religious zeal and remarkable effectiveness.
he proposed a new federal budget that necessitated cuts of some 35 billion mostly in social programs like food stamps and federally funded job training centers.
reagan worked naturally in harness with the republican majority in the senate but to get his way in the democratic house he undertook some oldfashioned politicking.
he enterprisingly wooed a group of mostly southern conser vative democrats dubbed boll weevils who abandoned their own partys leadership to follow the president.
the new president seemed strong and motivated all the more so after a failed assassination attempt in march 1981 brought an outpouring of sympathy and support.
the battle of the budget swept along on a tide of presidential popularity congress swallowed reagans budget proposals.
the new presidents triumph amazed political observers especially defeated democrats.
he had descended upon washington like an avenging angel of conservatism kicking up a blinding whirlwind of political change.
his impressive per for mance demonstrated the power of the presidency with a skill not seen since lyndon johnsons day.
out the window went the textbooks that had concluded largely on the basis of the stalemated 1970s that the oval ofce had been eclipsed by a powerful uncontrollable congress.
reagan hardly rested to savor the sweetness of his victory.
the second part of his economic program called for substantial reductions in marginal tax rates over a period of three years.
many democrats the president quipped had never met a tax they didnt hike thanks largely to reagans skill as a television performer and the continued defection of the boll weevils from the democratic camp the president again had his way.
in late 1981 congress approved a set of far reaching tax reforms that lowered individual tax rates reduced federal estate taxes and created new tax free savings plans for small investors.
reagans supply side economics advisers assured him that the combination of budgetary discipline and tax reduction would stimulate new investment boost productivity foster dramatic economic growth and eventually even reduce the federal decit.
but at rst supply side economics seemed to be a beautiful theory mugged by a gang of brutal facts as the economy slid into its deepest recession since the 1930s.
unemployment reached nearly 11 percent in 1982 businesses folded and several bank failures jolted the nations entire nancial system.
the automobile industry once the brightest jewel in americas industrial crown turned in its dimmest performance in history.
battling against japanese imports major automakers reported losses in the hundreds of millions of dollars.
fuming and frustrated democrats angrily charged that the presidents budget cuts slashed especially cruelly at the poor and the handicapped and that his tax cuts favored the well to do.
in reality the anti inationary tight money policies that led to the so called reagan recession of 1981 1982 had been launched by the federal reserve board in 1979 on carters watch.
ignoring the yawping pack of democratic critics president reagan and his economic advisers serenely waited for their supply side economic policies reaganomics to produce the promised results.
the supply siders seemed to be vindicated when a healthy economic recovery nally got under way in 1983.
yet the economy of the 1980s was not uniformly sound.
for the rst time in the twentieth century income gaps widened between the richest and the poorest americans.
the poor got poorer and the very rich grew fabulously richer while middle class incomes largely stagnated.
symbolic of the new income stratication was the emergence of yuppies or young urban professionals.
sporting rolex watches and bmw sports cars they made a near religion out of conspicuous consumption.
though something of a stereotype and numbering only about 1 5 million people yuppies showcased the values of materialism and the pursuit of wealth that came to symbolize the high rolling 1980s.
some economists located the sources of the economic upturn neither in the presidents budget cuts and tax reforms nor in the go get em avarice of the yuppies.
it was massive military expenditures they argued that constituted the real foundation of 1980s prosperity.
reagan cascaded nearly 2 trillion dollars onto the pentagon in the 1980s asserting the need to close a window of vulnerability in the armaments race with the soviet union.
ironically this conser vative president thereby plunged the government into a red ink bath of decit spending that made the new deal look downright stingy.
federal budget decits topped 100 billion in 1982 and the governments books were nearly 200 billion out of balance in every subsequent year of the 1980s.
massive government borrowing to cover those decits kept interest rates high and high interest rates in turn elevated the value chapter 40 the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 wallowers reagans budget cuts fell almost exclusively on social programs whereas military outlays increased substantially.
of the dollar to record altitudes in the international money markets.
the soaring dollar was good news for american tourists and buyers of foreign cars but it dealt crippling blows to american exporters as the american international trade decit reached a record 152 billion in 1987.
the masters of international commerce and nance for a generation after world war ii americans suddenly became the worlds heaviest borrowers in the global economy of the 1980s.
lin leaders would come to the bargaining table and sing reagans tune.
this strategy resembled a riverboat gamblers ploy.
it wagered the enormous sum of reagans defense budgets on the hope that the other side would not call washingtons bluff and initiate a new cycle of arms competition.
reagan played his trump card in this risky game in march 1983 when he announced his intention to pursue a high technology missile defense system called the strategic defense initiative sdi popularly known as star wars.
the plan called for orbiting battle stations in space that could re laser beams or other forms of concentrated energy to vaporize intercontinental missiles on liftoff.
reagan described sdi as offering potential salvation from the nuclear nightmare by throwing an astrodome defense shield over american cities.
most scientists considered this an impossible goal.
but the deeper logic of sdi lay in its t with reagans overall soviet strategy.
by pitching the arms contest onto a stratospheric plane of high technology and astronomical expense it would further force the kremlins hand.
relations with the soviets further nose dived in late 1981 when the government of poland needled for over a year by a popular movement of workingpeople orga nized into a massive union called soli reagan renews the cold war hard as nails toward the soviet union in his campaign speeches reagan saw no reason to soften up after he checked in at the white house.
he claimed that the soviets were prepared to commit any crime to lie to cheat in pursuit of their goals of world conquest.
he denounced the soviet union as the focus of evil in the modern world reagan believed in negotiating with the soviets but only from a position of overwhelming strength.
accordingly his strategy for dealing with moscow was simple by enormously expanding u s military capabilities he could threaten the soviets with a fantastically expensive new round of the arms race.
the american economy theoretically could better bear this new nancial burden than could the creaking soviet system.
desperate to avoid economic ruin krem star wars fantasies president reagans strategic defense initiative popularly known as star wars evoked extravagant hopes for an impermeable defensive shield but its daunting physical and engineering requirements also occasioned much ridicule in the scientic community.
reagans foreign policies darity clamped martial law on the troubled country.
reagan saw the heavy st of the kremlin inside this polish iron glove and he imposed economic sanctions on poland and the ussr alike.
dealing with the soviet union was additionally complicated by the inertia and ill health of the aging oligarchs in the kremlin three of whom died between late 1982 and early 1985.
relations grew even more tense when the soviets in september 1983 blasted from the skies a korean passenger airliner that had inexplicably violated soviet airspace.
hundreds of civilians including many americans plummeted to their deaths in the frigid sea of okhotsk.
by the end of 1983 all arms control negotiations with the soviets were broken off.
the deepening chill of the cold war was further felt in 1984 when ussr and soviet bloc athletes boycotted the olympic games in los angeles.
troubles abroad the volatile middle eastern pot continued to boil ominously.
israel badly strained its bonds of friendship with the united states by continuing to allow new settlements to be established in the occupied territory of the jordan rivers west bank see map 40 2.
israel further raised the stakes in the middle east in june 1982 when it invaded neighboring lebanon seeking to suppress once and for all the guerrilla bases from which palestinian ghters harassed beleaguered israel.
the palestinians were bloodily subdued but lebanon already pulverized by years of episodic civil war was plunged into armed chaos.
president reagan was obliged to send american troops to lebanon in 1983 as part of an international peacekeeping force but their presence did not bring peace.
a suicide bomber crashed an explosives laden truck into a united states marine barracks on october 23 1983 kill ing more than two hundred marines.
president reagan soon thereafter withdrew the remaining american troops while miraculously suffering no political damage from this horrifying and humiliating attack.
his mystied democratic opponents began to call him the teon president to whom nothing hurtful could stick.
central america in the united states own backyard also rumbled menacingly.
a leftist revolution had deposed the long time dictator of nicaragua in 1979.
president carter had tried to ignore the hotly anti american rhetoric of the revolutionaries known as sandinistas and to establish good diplomatic relations with them.
but cold warrior reagan took their rhetoric at face value and hurled back at them some hot language of his own.
he accused the sandinistas of turning their country into a forward base for soviet and cuban military penetration of all of central america.
brandishing photographs taken from high ying spy planes administration spokespeople claimed that nicaraguan leftists were shipping weapons to revolutionary forces in tiny el salvador torn by violence since a coup in 1979.
reagan sent military advisers to prop up the pro american government of el salvador.
he also provided covert aid including the cia engineered mining of harbors to the rebel contras opposing the antiamerican government of nicaragua.
reagan exed his military muscles elsewhere in the turbulent caribbean.
in a dramatic display of american might in october 1983 he dispatched a heavy repower invasion force to the island of grenada where a military coup had killed the prime minister and brought marxists to power.
swiftly overrunning the tiny island and ousting the insurgents american troops vividly demonstrated reagans determination to assert the dominance of the united states in the caribbean just as theodore roosevelt had done see map 40 3.
round two for reagan a condent ronald reagan bolstered by a buoyant economy at home and by the popularity of his deant posture abroad met little opposition in his bid for a second white house term in 1984.
his opponent was democrat walter mondale who made history by naming as his vice presidential running mate congresswoman geraldine ferraro of new york.
she was the rst woman ever to appear on a major party presidential ticket.
but even this dramatic gesture could not salvage mondales candidacy which was fatally tainted by his ser vice as vice president in the deeply discredited carter administration.
on election day reagan walked away with 525 electoral votes to mondales 13 winning every where except in mondales home state of minnesota and the district of columbia.
reagan also overwhelmed mondale in the popular vote 52 609 797 to 36 450 613.
shrinking the federal government and reducing taxes had been the main objectives of reagans rst term foreign policy issues dominated the news in his second term.
the president soon found himself contending for the worlds attention with a charismatic new soviet leader mikhail gorbachev installed as t u r k ey n se a ate sy r i a tehran tel aviv amman baghdad i r aq u s arms sales 1980s during iran iraq war iraq invades kuwait 1990 second u s iraq war 2003 e r nil re bahrain riyadh india ian gu lf qatar karachi s tra dubayy it of hormuz abu dhabi muscat united arab emirates partner in u s efforts to eradicate al qaeda 2001 a 30e rs doha sa u d i a r a b i a se s u da n pe manama d aswan dam pa k i sta n quetta u s and allies launch first u s iraq war 1991 kuwait k u wa i t cancer kandahar basra l i bya tropic o f islamabad herat 30n j o r da n cairo egy p t u s arms sales 1955 1978 20 8 billion shah overthrown 1979 american hostages taken 1979 1981 iran fallujah israel 30n tikrit damascus l e ba n o n a f g h a n i sta n kirkuk us r nea mazar e sharif kabul ind rra cyprus sea crete.
ite sr ed t u r k m e n i sta n r hr p m tigris eu u s troops 1958 1983 1984 20e ian g r e ec e china soviet occupation 1979 1989 u s aid to rebels 1980s international and northern alliance forces defeat taliban 2001 sp armenia azerbaijan ankara athens ca georgia 40n mecca jewish state after un partition of palestine 1947 oil embargo 1973 source of 17 of u s oil imports in 1975 largest buyer of u s arms 1978 20n oman arabian sea israel after war of 1948 1949 area controlled by israel after six day war 1967 40e israeli occupied area after yom kippur war 1973 mediterranean sea yemen 70e 50e aden sy r i a haifa gulf golan heights sea of galilee tel aviv israel jerusalem gaza west bank port said 60e mukalla damascus jordan r by egyptian israeli agreements of 1975 and 1979 israel withdrew from the sinai in 1982.
in 1981 israel annexed the golan heights.
through negotiations between israel and the plo jericho and the gaza strip were placed under palestinian self rule and israeli troops were withdrawn in 1994.
in 1994 israel and jordan signed an agreement opening their borders and normalizing their relations.
sana l e ba n o n beirut amman de of a n socotra yemen i n d i a n o c e a n 10n 32e ethiopia dead sea j o r da n u s troops assist in relief of famine 1992 1993 u s troops withdrawn 1994 members of the organization of petroleum exporting countries opec oil fields so m a l i a suez canal egy p t suez fo fs ue z sharm el sheikh 32e mogadishu elath red sea 500 km.
0 equator sa u d i arabia n 28e 36e map 40 2 the middle east a combination of political instability and precious petroleum resources has made the region from egypt to afghanistan an arc of crisis o f a qa b a g ul arab israeli conflict sinai peninsula g ul f nile r.
cairo interactive map reagan and the russians chairman of the soviet communist party in march 1985.
gorbachev was personable energetic imaginative and committed to radical reforms in the soviet union.
he announced two policies with remarkable even revolutionary implications.
glasnost or openness aimed to ventilate the secretive repressive stuffiness of soviet society by introducing free speech and a mea sure of political liberty.
perestroika or restructuring was intended to revive the moribund soviet economy by adopting many of the free market practices such as the prot motive and an end to subsidized prices of the capitalist west.
both glasnost and perestroika required that the soviet union shrink the size of its enormous military machine and redirect its energies to the dismal civilian economy.
that requirement in turn necessitated an end to the cold war.
gorbachev accordingly made warm overtures to the west including an announcement in april 1985 that the soviet union would cease to deploy intermediate range nuclear forces inf tar geted at western europe pending an agreement on their complete elimination.
he pushed this goal when he met with ronald reagan at the rst of four summit meetings in geneva in november 1985.
a second summit meeting in reykjavik iceland in october 1986 broke down when a furious reagan stormed out convinced that gorbachev had come to end plans for the beloved sdi.
but at a third summit in washington d c in december 1987 the two leaders at last signed the intermediate range nuclear forces inf treaty banning all of these missiles from europe.
reagan and gorbachev capped their new friendship in may 1988 at a nal summit in moscow.
there reagan who had entered ofce condemning the evil empire of soviet communism warmly praised gorbachev.
reagan the consummate cold warrior had been exible and savvy enough to seize a historic opportunity to join with the soviet chief to bring the cold war to a kind of conclusion.
for this history would give both leaders high marks.
map 40 3 central america and the caribbean this region so important to the united states throughout its history remained a hotbed of unrest through the last years of the cold war and beyond.
100w united states 90w 80w u s maintains prison for suspected terrorists despite international protests 2003.
ida or fl of h a m s a nafta links u s canada and mexico tropic of cancer in free trade zone 1994.
u s intervenes to save mexican peso 1995 its cuba guantnamo yucatn peninsula staging area for anti sandinista rebel army contras organized and financed by u s belize 1981 radical leftist government overthrown by u s intervention oct 1983.
venezuela panama st vincent and the grenadines 1979 trinidad and tobago 1962 flow of drugs to u s poses chronic problems.
guyana 1966 major economic expansion 1980s 1990s.
civilian rule restored 1985.
reformer luis da silva elected president 2002.
colombia panama canal treaties 1978.
u s invades panama to capture gen manuel noriega dec 1989.
st lucia 1979 barbados 1966 populist hugo chvez elected president 1988 survives coup 2002 threatens oil boycott against u s 2007.
u s territory achieved 1974 u s finances guerrilla army fighting leftist sandinista government 1982 1988.
anti sandinista coalition wins 1990 election.
1962 year independence grenada 10n costa rica 400 km.
1962 panama canal pac i f ic oc ean guadeloupe fr.
dominica 1978 martinique fr.
jamaica curaao neth.
el salvador st kitts and nevis 1983 antigua and barbuda 1981 caribbean sea nicaragua haiti honduras ongoing guerrilla activity and widespread poverty.
right wing government and opposition leaders sign peace treaty 1992.
puerto rico gr.
u s dominican republic virgin is.
u s mexico guatemala n military coup 1991.
u s invasion restores president aristide 1994.
aristide overthrown 2004 u s u n.
peacekeeping forces intervene.
ba stra 20n interactive map at l a n t i c o c e a n gulf of mexico migration of thousands of cubans to u s 1980.
castro resignation foreshadows change 2008.
70w brazil 60w chapter 40 the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 east meets west president reagan greets soviet leader mikhail gorbachev at a summit meeting in moscow in may 1988.
reagan made other decisive moves in foreign policy.
his administration provided strong backing in february 1986 for corazon aquinos ouster of dictator ferdinand marcos in the philippines.
reagan also ordered a lightning air raid against libya in 1986 in retaliation for alleged libyan sponsorship of terrorist attacks including a bomb blast in a west berlin discotheque that killed a u s ser viceman.
the iran contra imbroglio two foreign policy problems seemed insoluble to reagan the continuing captivity of a number of american hostages seized by muslim extremist groups in bleeding battered lebanon and the continuing grip on power of the left wing sandinista government in nicaragua.
the president repeatedly requested that congress provide military aid to the contra rebels ghting against the sandinista regime.
congress repeatedly refused and the administration grew increasingly frustrated even obsessed in its search for a means to help the contras.
unknown to the american public some washington ofcials saw a possible linkage between the two thorny problems of the middle eastern hostages and the central american sandinistas.
in 1985 american diplomats secretly arranged arms sales to iran which was mired in a devastating territorial war with neighboring iraq.
in return the iranians helped obtain the release of at least one american hostage held by middle eastern terrorists.
meanwhile the money iran paid for the american weapons was diverted to the contras in nicaragua.
these actions brazenly violated a congressional ban on military aid to the nicaraguan rebels not to mention reagans repeated vow that he would never negotiate with terrorists.
washington also continued to support iraqi dictator saddam hussein to whom it sold weapons used against iran.
news of these secret dealings broke in november 1986 and ignited a restorm of controversy.
president reagan claimed he was innocent of wrongdoing and ignorant of his subordinates activities.
reviving a refrain from the watergate era the public clamored to know what the president knew and when he knew it although reagan was never found to have lied outright a congressional committee condemned the secrecy deception and disdain for the law displayed by administration ofcials and concluded that if the president did not know what his national security advisers were doing he should have the iran contra scandal contra rebel troops head for battle these rebels were long seasoned and battle scarred veterans of nicaraguas civil war by the time this photograph was taken in 1987.
the iran contra affair cast a dark shadow over the reagan record on foreign policy tending to obscure the presidents outstanding achievement in establishing a new relationship with the soviets.
out of the several iran contra investigations a picture emerged of reagan as a lazy perhaps even senile president who napped through meetings and paid little or no attention to the details of policy.
reagans critics pounced on this portrait as proof that the movie starturned politician was a mental lightweight who had merely acted his way through the role of the presidency without really understanding the script.
but despite these damaging revelations reagan remained among the most popular and beloved presidents in modern american history.
on march 4 1987 president ronald reagan somewhat confusingly tried to explain his role or lack of role in the arms for hostages deal with iran a few months ago i told the american people i did not trade arms for hostages.
my heart and my best intentions still tell me that is true but the facts and the evidence tell me it is not.
reagans economic legacy ronald reagan had taken ofce vowing to invigorate the american economy by rolling back government regulations lowering taxes and balancing the budget.
he did ease many regulatory rules and he pushed major tax reform bills through congress in 1981 and 1986.
but a balanced budget remained grotesquely out of reach.
supply side economic theory had promised that lower taxes would actually increase government revenue because they would stimulate the economy as a whole.
but in fact the combination of tax reduction and huge increases in military spending opened a vast revenue hole of 200 billion annual decits.
in his eight years in ofce president reagan added nearly 2 trillion to the national debt more than all of his predecessors combined including those who had fought protracted global wars see figure 40 1.
the staggering decits of the reagan years assuredly constituted a great economic failure.
and because so much of the reagan era debt was nanced by foreign lenders especially the japa nese the decits virtually guaranteed that future generations of americans would either have to work harder than their parents lower their standard of living or both to pay their foreign creditors when the bills came due.
chapter 40 the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 billions of dollars 9 000 8 500 8 000 7 500 7 000 6 500 6 000 5 500 5 000 g w bush elected 2001 september 11th attack 4 000 clinton elected 1 000 reagan elected 1 500 vietnam war 2 000 depression 2 500 korean war breaks world war ii breaks 3 000 japan surrenders 3 500 invasion of iraq 4 500 figure 40 1 the national debt 1930 2006 world war ii provided the rst major boost to the national debt.
but it was the policies of the reagan and george h w bush administrations 1981 1993 that explosively expanded the debt to the 4 trillion level.
by the 1990s 14 percent of federal revenues went to interest payments on the debt.
the budget surpluses created by the booming economy of the second clinton administration 1997 2001 raised the prospect that the debt might be paid off.
but the combination of the george w bush tax cuts and increased military spending sent the debt soaring again after 2001.
sources historical statistics of the united states and statistical abstract of the united states relevant years ofce of management and budget mid session review budget of the u s government fiscal year 2008 but if the decits represented an economic failure they also constituted strangely enough a kind of political triumph.
among the paramount goals of reagans political life was his ambition to slow the growth of government and especially to block or even repeal the social programs launched in the era of lyndon johnsons great society.
by appearing to make new social spending both practically and politically impossible for the foreseeable future the decits served exactly that purpose.
they achieved in short reagans highest political objective the containment of the welfare state.
ronald reagan thus ensured the long term perpetuation of his dearest political values to a degree that few presidents have managed to achieve.
for better or worse the consequences of reaganomics would be large and durable.
yet another legacy of the 1980s was a sharp reversal of a long term trend toward a more equitable distribution of income and an increasing squeeze on the middle class.
in the early 1990s median household income in 1993 dollars actually declined from about 33 500 in 1989 to about 31 000 in 1993 see figure 40 2.
whether that disturbing trend should be attributed to reagans policies or to more deeply running economic currents remained controversial.
religion and politics 51 7 49 5 47 6 46 7 46 2 46 6 48 7 49 8 50 4 21 0 22 1 22 2 highest 5 44 1 18 5 16 5 4 2 3 8 1980 1990 3 7 3 6 3 4 lowest 20 percent 1980 1990 middle 60 percent the religious right religion pervaded american politics in the 1980s.
especially conspicuous was a coalition of conser vative evangelical christians known as the religious right.
in 1979 the reverend jerry falwell an evangelical minister from lynchburg virginia founded a political orga ni zation called the moral majority.
falwell preached with great success against sexual permissiveness abortion feminism and the spread of gay rights.
in its rst two years the moral majority registered between 2 million and 3 million voters.
using radio direct mail marketing and cable tv televangelists reached huge audiences in the 1980s collected millions of dollars and became aggressive political advocates of conser vative causes.
members of the religious right were sometimes called movement conser vatives a term that recalls the left wing protest movements of the 1960s.
in many ways the religious right of the 1980s was a reection of or answer to sixties radicalism.
feminists in the 1960s declared that the personal was political the religious right did the same.
what had in the past been personal matters gender roles homosexuality and prayer became the organizing ground for a powerful political movement.
like advocates of multiculturalism and af rmative action the religious right practiced a form of identity politics but rather than de ning themselves as latino voters or gay voters they declared themselves christian or pro life voters.
1980 1990 highest 20 percent figure 40 2 share of income received by families by quintile 1980 2005 since 1980 the incomes of the lowest 20 percent and the middle 60 percent have been shrinking while the incomes of the highest 20 percent and particularly the top 5 percent have climbed steadily.
source statistical abstract of the united states 2008.
the new right also mimicked the new left in some of its tactics.
if the left had consciousness raising sessions the right had prayer meetings.
adherents articulated their positions in a language of rights and entitlements as in the right to life or anti abortion movement.
they even mirrored the tactics of civil the moral majority 1981 television evangelist and religious leader the reverend jerry falwell mobilized his national moral majority organization in support of ronald reagans presidential campaign in 1980 and a conservative social agenda.
chapter 40 the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 disobedience.
protesters in the 1960s blocked entrances to draft ofces protesters in the 1980s blocked entrances to abortion clinics.
several leaders of the religious right fell from grace in the latter part of the decade.
one tearfully admitted to repeated trysts with prostitutes.
another went to prison following revelations of his own nancial and sexual misconduct.
but such scandals would not shake the faith of americas conser vative christians or diminish the new political clout of activist evangelical religionists.
conservatism in the courts if the budget was reagans chief weapon in the war against the welfare state the courts became his principal instrument in the cultural wars demanded by the religious right.
by the time he left ofce reagan had appointed a near majority of all sitting judges.
equally important he had named three conser vativeminded justices to the u s supreme court.
they included sandra day oconnor a brilliant public spirited arizona judge.
when she was sworn in on september 25 1981 she became the rst woman to ascend to the high bench in the courts nearly two hundred year history.
reaganism repudiated two great icons of the liberal political culture af rmative action and abortion.
the court showed its newly conser vative colors in 1984 when it decreed in a case involving memphis reghters that union rules about job seniority could outweigh af rmative action concerns in guiding promotion policies in the citys re department.
in two cases in 1989 wards cove packing v antonia and martin v wilks the court made it more difcult to prove that an employer practiced racial discrimination in hiring and made it easier for white males to argue that they were the victims of reverse discrimination by employers who followed af rmative action practices.
congress passed legislation in 1991 that partially reversed the effects of those decisions.
the contentious issue of abortion also reached the court in 1989.
in the case of roe v wade in 1973 the supreme court had prohibited states from making laws that interfered with a womans right to an abortion during the early months of pregnancy.
for nearly two decades that decision had been the bedrock principle on which pro choice advocates built their case for abortion rights.
it had also provoked bitter criticism from roman catholics and various right to life the justice is a lady 1981 herblock hails sandra day oconnors appointment to the supreme court.
groups who wanted a virtually absolute ban on all abortions.
in webster v reproductive health services the court in july 1989 did not entirely overturn roe but it seriously compromised roes protection of abortion rights.
by approving a missouri law that imposed certain restrictions on abortion the court signaled that it was inviting the states to legislate in an area in which roe had previously forbidden them to legislate.
the court renewed that invitation in planned parenthood v casey in 1992 when it ruled that states could restrict access to abortion as long as they did not place an undue burden on the woman.
using this standard the court held that pennsylvania could not compel a wife to notify her husband about an abortion but could require a minor child to notify parents as well as other restrictions.
right to life advocates were at rst delighted by the webster decision.
but the courts ruling also galva reagan s legacy speaking to the national association of evangelicals president ronald reagan said the following about abortion more than a decade ago a supreme court decision roe v wade 1973 literally wiped off the books of fty states statutes protecting the rights of unborn children.
abortion on demand now takes the lives of up to 1 million unborn children a year.
human life legislation ending this tragedy will some day pass the congress and you and i must never rest until it does.
unless and until it can be proven that the unborn child is not a living entity then its right to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness must be protected.
nized pro choice orga ni zations into a new militancy.
bruising divisive battles loomed as state legislatures across the land confronted abortion.
this painful cultural con ict over the unborn was also part of the reagan eras bequest to the future.
referendum on reaganism in 1988 republicans lost control of the senate in the off year elections of november 1986.
hopes rose among democrats that the reagan revolution might be showing signs of political vulnerability at last.
the newly democratic majority in the senate exed its political muscles in 1987 when it rejected an ultraconservative nominee for the supreme court.
democrats also relished the prospect of making political hay out of both the iran contra affair and disquieting signs of economic trouble.
the double mountain of decits the federal budget decit and the international trade decit continued to grow ominously.
falling oil prices blighted the economy of the southwest slashing real estate values and undermining hundreds of savings and loan s l institutions.
the damage to the s ls was so massive that a federal rescue operation was eventually estimated to carry a price tag of well over 500 billion.
meanwhile many american banks found themselves holding nearworthless loans they had unwisely foisted upon third world countries especially in latin america.
in 1984 it took federal assistance to save continental illinois bank from a catastrophic failure.
more banks and savings institutions were folding than at any time since the great depression of the 1930s.
a wave of mergers acquisitions and leveraged buyouts washed over wall street leaving many brokers and traders megarich and many companies saddled with megadebt.
a cold spasm of fear struck the money markets on black monday october 19 1987 when the leading stock market index plunged 508 points the largest one day decline in history to that point.
this crash said newsweek magazine heralded the nal collapse of the money culture.
the death knell of the 1980s but as mark twain famously commented about his own obituary this announcement proved premature.
hoping to cash in on these ethical and economic anxieties a pack of democrats dubbed the seven dwarfs by derisive republicans chased after their partys 1988 presidential nomination.
the handsome and charismatic democratic front runner former colorado senator gary hart was forced to drop out of the race in may 1987 after charges of sexual misconduct.
african american candidate jesse jackson a rousing speechmaker who hoped to forge a rainbow coalition of minorities and the disadvantaged campaigned energetically.
but the democratic nomination in the end went to the coolly cerebral governor of massachusetts michael dukakis.
republicans nominated reagans vice president george h w bush who ran largely on the reagan record of tax cuts strong defense policies toughness on crime opposition to abortion and a long running if hardly robust economic expansion.
dukakis made little headway exploiting the ethical and economic sore spots and came across to television hollywood director oliver stones b.
1946 lm wall street both romanticized and vilied the business culture of the 1980s.
the character of gordon gekko inspired by real life corporate raider ivan boesky captured the spirit of the times ladies and gentlemen greed is good.
greed works greed is right.
greed for life money love knowledge has marked the upward surge of mankind and greed mark my words will save the malfunctioning corporation called the u s a chapter 40 the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 viewers as almost supernaturally devoid of emotion.
on election day the voters gave him just 41 016 429 votes to 47 946 422 for bush.
the electoral college count was 111 to 426.
george h w bush and the end of the cold war george herbert walker bush was born with a silver ladle in his mouth.
his father had served as a u s senator from connecticut and young george had enjoyed a rst rate education at yale.
after ser vice in world war ii he had amassed a modest fortune of his own in the oil business in texas.
his deepest commitment however was to public ser vice he left the business world to serve briey as a congressman and then held various posts in several republican administrations including emissary to china ambassador to the united nations director of the central intelligence agency and vice president.
he capped this long political career when he was inaugurated president in january 1989 promising to work for a kinder gentler america in the rst months of the bush administration the communist world commanded the planets fascinated attention.
everywhere in the communist bloc it seemed the season of democracy had arrived.
in china hundreds of thousands of prodemocracy demonstrators thronged through beijings tiananmen square in the spring of 1989.
they proudly ourished a thirty foot high goddess of democracy tiananmen square beijing china june 1989 the chinese communist state mobilized all its forces against students demonstrating for a more democratic china.
george herbert walker bush b.
1924 campaigning october 1988 bush soundly defeated democratic candidate michael dukakis in the november 1988 election.
modeled on the statue of liberty as a symbol of their aspirations.
but in june of that year chinas aging and autocratic rulers brutally crushed the prodemocracy movement.
tanks rolled over the crowds and machinegunners killed hundreds of protesters.
world opinion the ussr dissolves fallen idol romanians toppled this statue of vladimir lenin in 1990 symbolically marking the collapse of the marxian dream that had agitated the world for more than a century.
roundly condemned the bloody suppression of the prodemocracy demonstrators.
president bush joined in the criticism.
yet despite angry demands in congress for punitive restrictions on trade with china the president insisted on maintaining normal relations with beijing.
stunning changes also shook eastern europe.
long oppressed by puppet regimes propped up by soviet guns the region was revolutionized in just a few startling months in 1989.
the solidarity movement in poland led the way when it toppled polands communist government in august.
with dizzying speed communist regimes collapsed in hungary czechoslovakia east germany and even hyperrepressive romania.
in december 1989 jubilant germans danced atop the hated berlin wall symbol of the division of germany and all of europe into two armed and hostile camps.
the wall itself soon came down heralding the imminent end of the forty ve year long cold war.
chunks of the walls concrete became instant collectors items gray souvenirs of a grim episode in europes history.
with the approval of the victorious allied powers of world war ii the two germanys divided since 1945 were at last reunited in october 1990.
most startling of all were the changes that rolled over the heartland of world communism the soviet union itself.
mikhail gorbachevs policies of glasnost and perestroika had set in motion a groundswell that surged out of his control.
old guard hard liners in a last gasp effort to preserve the tottering communist system attempted to dislodge gorbachev with a military coup in august 1991.
with the support of boris yeltsin president of the russian republic one of the several republics that composed the union of soviet socialist republics or ussr gorbachev foiled the plotters.
but his days were numbered.
in december 1991 gorbachev resigned as soviet president.
he had become a leader without a country as the soviet union dissolved into its component parts some fteen republics loosely confederated in the commonwealth of independent states cis with russia the most powerful state and yeltsin the dominant leader.
to varying degrees all the new governments in the cis repudiated communism and embraced democratic reforms and a free market economy see map 40 4.
these developments astonished the experts who had long preached that the steely vise grip of communist rule never could be peacefully broken.
yet suddenly and almost miraculously the totalitarian tonnage of communist oppression had been rendered politically weightless.
most spectacularly the demise of the soviet union wrote a de nitive nish to the cold war era.
more than four decades of nail biting tension between two nuclear superpowers the soviet union and the united states evaporated when the ussr dismantled itself.
with the soviet union swept into the 20w 0 n 20e 40e communist regimes overthrown since 1989 arctic circle sweden soviet union dissolved in 1991 norway at l a n t i c ocean ireland denmark united kingdom neth.
ug rt po czech rep italy spain belarus austria slovakia hungary u k r ai ne albania bulgaria black se a tunisia georgia gr eec e chechnya u zb ek i st an china t u r k meni st an azerbaijan slovenia croatia syr i a ad ri at ic serbia se nato airwar against serbia to protect kosovo 1994 a montenegro afghanistan i r an sau d i ar ab i a egypt kuwait 500 km.
ia rs sea f y r.
macedonia jordan pe kosovo iraq israel red u s troops join nato peacekeeping forces dec 1995 pakistan n cyprus lebanon bosniaherzegovina kyrgyzstan tajikistan armenia turkey sea malta a ian se sp n aral sea ca nea kazakhstan chechnya declares independence 1991 russia attacks 1994 romania algeria gorbachev in power 1985 1991 moscow coup fails boris yeltsin declared president of russia 1990 czechoslovakia broke into czech republic and slovakia in 1993 moldova mediterra russia moscow berlin 80e largest and most influential of the former soviet republics after 1991 latvia lithuania poland switz.
france al n russia germany belg.
60e estonia elections 1989 berlin wall opened nov 1989 german reunification 1990 yugoslavia dissolved in civil war 1991 1992 f i nl and north sea n 500 mi.
map 40 4 the end of the cold war changed the map of europe dustbin of history and communism all but extinct bush spoke hopefully of a new world order where democracy would reign and diplomacy would supersede weaponry.
some observers even saw in these developments the end of history in the sense that democracy victorious in its two century long struggle against foes on the left and right had no ideological battles left to ght.
exultant americans joked that the ussr had become the uss were but the disintegration of the soviet union was no laughing matter.
rankling questions remained.
for example who would honor armscontrol agreements with the united states.
which of the successor states of the former soviet union would take command of the formidable soviet nuclear arsenal.
a partial answer was provided in early 1993 when president bush in one of his last ofcial acts signed the start ii accord with russian president boris yeltsin committing both powers to reduce their long range nuclear arsenals by two thirds within ten years.
gu lf interactive map in his state of the union address on january 31 1990 president george h w bush b.
1924 declared the events of the year just ended the revolution of 89 have been a chain reaction changes so striking that it marks the beginning of a new era in the worlds affairs.
just six months later speaking at stanford university soviet president mikhail gorbachev b.
1931 said the cold war is now behind us.
let us not wrangle over who won it.
it is in the common interest of our two countries and nations not to ght this trend toward cooperation but rather to promote it.
the end of the cold war the agony of yugoslavia 1992 these bosnian refugees from the town of jajce illustrate the plight of millions of yugoslavians as their country slid into vicious interethnic battles in the wake of the cold wars conclusion.
throughout the former soviet empire waves of nationalistic fervor and long suppressed ethnic and racial hatreds rolled across the vast land as communisms roots were wrenched out.
a particularly nasty con ict erupted in the russian caucasus in 1991 when the chechnyan minority tried to declare their independence from russia prompting president yeltsin to send in russian troops.
ethnic warfare ared in other disintegrating communist countries as well notably in misery drenched yugoslavia racked by vicious ethnic cleansing campaigns against various minorities.
the end of the cold war also proved a mixed blessing for the united states.
for nearly half a century the containment of soviet communism had been the paramount goal of u s foreign policy.
indeed the cold war era had been the only lengthy period in american history when the united states had consistently pursued an internationalist foreign policy.
with the soviet threat now canceled would the united states revert to its traditional isolationism.
what principles would guide american diplomacy now that anticommunism had lost its relevance.
the soviet american rivalry with its demands for high levels of military preparedness had also deeply shaped and even invigorated the u s economy.
huge economic sectors such as aerospace were heavily sustained by military contracts.
the economic cost of beating swords into plowshares became painfully apparent in 1991 when the pentagon announced the closing of thirty four military bases and canceled a 52 billion order for a navy attack plane.
more closings and cancellations followed.
communities that had been drenched with pentagon dollars now nearly dried up especially in hard hit southern california where scores of defense plants shut their doors and unemployment soared.
the problems of weaning the u s economy from its decades of dependence on defense spending tempered the euphoria of americans as they welcomed the cold wars long awaited nale.
elsewhere in the world democracy marched triumphantly forward.
the white regime in south africa took a giant step toward liberating that troubled land from its racist past when in 1990 it freed african leader nelson mandela who had served twenty seven years in prison for conspiring to overthrow the government.
four years later mandela was elected south africas president.
free elections in nicaragua in february 1990 removed the leftist sandinistas from power.
two years later peace came at last to war ravaged el salvador.
the persian gulf crisis sadly the end of the cold war did not mean the end of all wars.
president bush exed the united states chapter 40 the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 still intimidating military muscles in tiny panama in december 1989 when he sent airborne troops to capture dictator and drug lord manuel noriega.
still more ominous events in the summer of 1990 severely tested bushs dream of a democratic and peaceful new world order.
on august 2 saddam hussein the brutal and ambitious ruler of iraq sent his armies to overrun kuwait a tiny oil rich desert sheikdom on iraqs southern frontier.
oil fueled saddams aggression.
financially exhausted by its eight year war with iran which had ended in a stalemate in 1988 iraq needed kuwaits oil to pay its huge war bills.
saddams larger design was ironsted control over the entire persian gulf region.
with his hand thus rmly clutching the worlds economic jugular vein he dreamed of dictating the terms of oil supplies to the industrial nations and perhaps of totally extinguishing the arabs enemy israel.
ironically the united states and its allies had helped supply saddam with the tools of aggression.
he was widely known to be a thug and assassin who intimidated his underlings by showing them the bodies of his executed adversaries hanging on meat hooks.
but in the 1980s american enmity for islamicfundamentalist iran was intense and saddam was at war with iran.
assuming that the enemy of my enemy is my friend american policymakers helped build saddams military machine into a formidable force.
on august 2 1990 saddams army roared into kuwait.
the speed and audacity of the invasion was stunning but the world responded just as swiftly.
the united nations security council unanimously condemned the invasion on august 3 and demanded the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of iraqs troops.
when an economic embargo failed to squeeze the iraqis into compliance by november the security council delivered an ultimatum to saddam to leave kuwait by january 15 1991 or u n forces would use all necessary means to expel his troops.
for perhaps the rst time in the post world war ii era the u n seemed to be ful lling its founders dreams that it could preserve international order by putting guns where its mouth was.
it also put them where the worlds critical oil supply was.
in a logistical operation of astonishing complexity the united states spearheaded a massive international military deployment on the sandy arabian peninsula.
as the january 15 deadline approached some 539 000 u s soldiers sailors and pilots many of them women and all of them members of the new post vietnam all volunteer american military swarmed into the persian gulf region.
they were joined by nearly 270 000 troops pilots and sailors from twenty eight other countries in the coalition opposed to iraq.
when all diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis failed the u s congress voted regretfully on january 12 to approve the use of force.
on january 16 the time bomb of war ticked off its last beats.
the united states and its u n allies unleashed a hellish air attack against iraq.
for thirty seven days warplanes pummeled targets in occupied kuwait and in iraq itself in an awesome display of high technology precision targeting modern warfare.
iraq responded to this pounding by launching several dozen scud short range ballistic missiles against military and civilian targets in saudi arabia and israel.
these missile attacks claimed several lives but did no signicant military damage.
yet if iraq made but a feeble military response to the air campaign the allied commander the beefy and blunt american general norman stormin norman schwarzkopf took nothing for granted.
saddam who had threatened to wage the mother of all battles had the capacity to inict awful damage.
iraq had stockpiled tons of chemical and biological weapons including poison gas and the means to spread epidemics of anthrax.
saddams tactics also included ecological warfare as he released a gigantic oil slick into the persian gulf to forestall amphibious assault and ignited hundreds of oil well res whose smoky plumes shrouded the ground from aerial view.
faced with these horrifying tactics schwarzkopfs strategy was starkly simple soften the iraqis with relentless bombing then suffocate them on the ground with a tidal wave rush of troops and armor.
on february 23 the dreaded and long awaited land war began.
dubbed operation desert storm it lasted only four days the hundred hour war see map 40 5.
with lightning speed the u n forces penetrated deep into iraq outanking the occupying forces in kuwait and blocking the enemys ability either to retreat or to reinforce.
allied casualties were amazingly light whereas much of iraqs remaining ghting force was quickly destroyed or captured.
on february 27 saddam accepted a cease re and kuwait was liberated.
most americans cheered the wars rapid and enormously successful conclusion.
many people echoed president bushs sentiments when he declared by god weve kicked the vietnam syndrome once and for all but when the smoke cleared saddam hussein had survived to menace the world another day.
america and its allies had agreed to the liberation of ku operation desert storm the highway of death the allied coalition wreaked gruesome destruction on iraqi forces eeing back to iraq after their defeat in kuwait in 1991 wait but bush fearing that a full assault on baghdad would cost many lives and much public support stopped well short of overthrowing the tyrant saddam.
the perpetually troubled middle east knew scarcely less trouble after desert storm had ceased to thunder and the united states for better or worse found itself even more deeply ensnared in the regions web of mortal hatreds and intractable con icts.
map 40 5 operation desert storm the ground war february 23 27 1991 30e 40e 50e soviet u n i o n baku yerevan tu r key tigris i r an i r aq basra nile ku wa i t kuwait city tabuk hafar al batin pe jubail dhahran se a riyadh rs ian gul f bah r ai n q atar abu doha dhabi 300 km.
o f ho uz d allied central command medina khafji king khalid military city rm re sa u d i a r a b ia 60e n baghdad aqaba si n ai egy p t egy p t primary scud missile target t damascus suez is r ael canal jor dan r cairo allied naval forces tehran l e banon beirut haifa tel aviv west ban k amman ga z a str i p jerusalem 30n main allied air base ate ai ean sea allied advances in ground war feb 24 28 1991 str iterran r syr ia c y p r us mosul major oil field.
med nicosia kurdish refugees flee iraq toward turkey and iran.
sr n cyprus euphr kurdish region ea pian s ankara incirlih allied troop build up aug 1990 feb.
1991 cas 40n interactive map gul u n it ed ar ab em i r at es f of oman muscat chapter 40 the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 bush on the home front george h w bush partly redeemed his pledge to work for a kinder gentler america when he signed the americans with disabilities act ada in 1990 a landmark law prohibiting discrimination against the 43 million u s citizens with physical or mental disabilities.
the president also signed a major water projects bill in 1992 that fundamentally reformed the distribution of subsidized federal water in the west.
the bill put the interests of the environment ahead of agriculture especially in cal i fornias heavily irrigated central valley and made much more water available to the wests thirsty cities.
the new president continued to aggravate the explosive social issues that had so divided americans throughout the 1980s especially the nettlesome questions of af rmative action and abortion.
in 1990 bushs department of education challenged the legality of college scholarships targeted for racial minorities.
bush repeatedly threatened to veto civil rights legislation that would make it easier for employees to prove discrimination in hiring and promotion practices.
he grudgingly accepted a watered down civil rights bill in 1991.
most provocatively in 1991 bush nominated for the supreme court the conser vative african american jurist clarence thomas a stern critic of af rmative action.
thomass nomination was loudly opposed by read my nose when president bush reneged on his 1988 campaign promise of no new taxes he inicted mortal political damage on his reelection campaign in 1992 liberal groups including orga nized labor the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp and the national organization for women now.
reecting irreconcilable divisions over af rmative action and abortion the senate judiciary committee concluded its hearings on the nomination with a divided 7 7 vote and forwarded the matter to the full senate without a recommendation.
then just days before the senate was scheduled to vote in early october 1991 a press leak revealed that anita hill a law professor at the university of oklahoma had accused thomas of sexual harassment.
the senate judiciary committee was forced to reopen its hearings.
for days a prurient american public sat glued to their television sets as hill graphically detailed her charges of sexual improprieties and thomas angrily responded.
in the end by a 52 48 vote the senate con rmed thomas as the second african american ever to sit on the supreme bench thurgood marshall was the rst.
while many americans hailed hill as a heroine for focusing the nations at tention on issues of sexual harassment thomas maintained that hills widely publicized unproved allegations amounted to a high tech lynching for uppity blacks who in any way deign to think for themselves to do for themselves the furor over thomass con rmation suggested that the social issues that had helped produce three republican presidential victories in the 1980s were losing some of their electoral appeal.
many women en economic troubles raged by the all male judiciary committees behavior in the thomas hearings grew increasingly critical of the presidents uncompromising stand on abortion.
a gender gap opened between the two political parties as pro choice women grew increasingly cool toward the strong anti abortion stand of the republicans.
still more damaging to president bushs political health was the economy which sputtered and stalled almost from the outset of his administration.
by 1992 the unemployment rate exceeded 7 percent.
it approached 10 percent in the key state of cal i fornia rav aged by defense cutbacks.
the federal budget decit continued to mushroom cancerously topping 250 billion in each of bushs years as president.
in a desperate attempt to stop the hemorrhage of red ink bush agreed in 1990 to a budget increase that included 133 billion in new taxes.
bushs 1990 tax and budget package added up to a political catastrophe.
in his 1988 presidential campaign bush had belligerently declared read my lips no new taxes now he had agrantly broken that campaign promise.
chronology reagan defeats carter for presidency iran releases american hostages reaganomics spending and tax cuts passed solidarity movement in poland oconnor appointed to supreme court rst woman justice fourth reagan gorbachev summit meeting in moscow bush defeats dukakis for presidency chinese government suppresses prodemocracy demonstrators in tiananmen square webster v reproductive health services eastern european countries oust communist governments berlin wall torn down 1981 united states aids anti leftist forces in central america recession hits u s economy israel invades lebanon reagan announces sdi plan star wars u s marines killed in beirut lebanon u s invasion of grenada iraq invades kuwait east and west germany unite americans with disabilities act ada persian gulf war thomas appointed to supreme court gorbachev survives coup attempt resigns as soviet president soviet union dissolves republics form commonwealth of independent states twenty seventh amendment prohibiting congressional pay raises from taking effect until an election seats a new session of congress ratied planned parenthood v casey reagan defeats mondale for presidency soviet union boycotts summer olympics in los angeles gorbachev comes to power in soviet union announces glasnost and perestroika first reagan gorbachev summit meeting in geneva reagan administration backs aquino in philippines iran contra affair revealed second reagan gorbachev summit meeting in reykjavik iceland senate rejects supreme court nomination of robert bork u s naval escorts begin in persian gulf stock market plunges 508 points third reagan gorbachev summit meeting in washington d c inf treaty signed chapter 40 the resurgence of conservatism 1980 1992 key terms proposition 13 1034 boll weevils 1035 supply side economics 1035 reaganomics 1035 strategic defense initiative sdi 1036 sandinistas 1037 contras 1037 glasnost 1039 perestroika 1039 intermediate range nuclear forces inf treaty 1039 people to know iran contra affair 1041 moral majority 1043 black monday 1045 commonwealth of independent states cis 1047 operation desert storm 1050 americans with disabilities act ada 1052 ronald reagan margaret thatcher mikhail gorbachev saddam hussein jerry falwell sandra day oconnor george h w bush boris yeltsin nelson mandela manuel noriega norman stormin norman schwarzkopf clarence thomas where did modern conservatism come from.
r onald reagans election surprised many historians.
reecting a liberal political outlook that is common among academic scholars they were long accustomed to understanding american history as an inexorable almost evolutionary unfolding of liberal principles including the quests for economic equality social justice and active government.
that point of view animated the enormously popular writings of the so called progressive historians such as charles and mary beard earlier in the century see varying viewpoints the populists radicals or reactionaries on p 744.
for the beards conser vatives were the rich privileged elites bent on preserving their wealth and power and determined to keep government impotent but doomed in the end to give way to the forces of liberal democracy.
even the new left revisionists of the 1960s while critical of the celebratory tone of their progressive forebears were convinced that the deepest currents of american history owed leftward.
but whether they were liberal or revisionist most scholars writing in the rst three post world war ii decades dismissed conservatism as an obsolete political creed.
the revisionists were much more interested in decrying liberalisms deciencies than in analyzing conservatisms strengths.
liberals and revision ists alike abandoned the beards image of powerful conser vative elites and offered instead a contemptuous portrait of conser vatives as fringe wackos paranoid mccarthyites or racist demagogues who in the words of the liberal critic lionel trilling trafcked only in irritable mental gestures which seem to resemble ideas such an outlook is conspicuous in books such as daniel bells the radical right 1963 and richard hofstadters the paranoid style in american politics 1965.
yet what owed out of the turbulent decade of the 1960s was not a strengthened liberalism but a revived conservatism.
ronald reagans huge political success compelled a thorough reexamination of the tradition of american conservatism and the sources of its modern resurgence.
historians such as leo ribuffo and alan brinkley have argued that characters once dismissed as irrational crackpots or colorful irrelevancies including religious fundamentalists and depression era gures like huey long and father charles coughlin articulated values deeply rooted and widely shared in american culture.
those conser vative spokespersons whatever their peculiarities offered a vision of free individuals minimal government and autonomous local communities that harked back to many to learn more of the themes of civic republicanism in the era of young nationhood.
but modern conservatism however deep its roots is also a product of the recent historical past.
as scholars like thomas sugrue and thomas edsall have shown the economic stagnation that set in af ter 1970 made many americans insecure about their futures and receptive to new political doctrines.
at the same time as the commentator kevin phillips has stressed social issues with little or no apparent economic content became increasingly prom inent as movements for sexual liberation legal abortion and womens rights sharply challenged traditional beliefs.
perhaps most important the success of the civil rights movement thrust the perpet ually agonizing question of race relations to the very center of american political life.
finally the failure of government policies in vietnam runaway ination in the 1970s and the disillusioning watergate episode cast doubt on the legitimacy the efcacy and even the morality of big government many modern conser vatives including the pun dit george will stress the deep historical roots of american conservatism.
in their view as will once put it it took sixteen years to count the ballots from the 1964 goldwater versus johnson election and goldwater won after all.
but that argument is surely overstated.
goldwater ran against the legacy of the new deal and was overwhelmingly defeated.
reagan ran against the consequences of the great society and won decisively.
many conser vatives in short apparently acknowledge the legitimacy of the new deal and the stake that many middle class americans feel they have in its programs of social security home mortgage subsidies farm price supports and similar policies.
but they reject the philosophy of the great society with its more focused attack on urban poverty and its vigorous support of af rmative action.
modern conservatism springs less from a repudiation of government per se and more from a disapproval of the particular priorities and strategies of the great society.
the different historical fates of the new deal and the great society suggest the key to the rise of modern conservatism.
to learn more robert collins transforming america politics and culture during the reagan years 2007 barbara ehrenreich the worst years of our lives irreverent notes from a decade of greed 1990 irving kristol reections of a neoconservative 1983 walter lafeber inevitable revolutions 2nd ed 1993 william martin with god on our side the rise of the religious right in america 1996 richard l pacelle jr the transformation of the supreme courts agenda from the new deal to the reagan administration 1991 kevin phillips the politics of rich and poor wealth and the american electorate in the reagan aftermath 1990 paul c roberts the supply side revolution 1984 john w sloan the reagan effect economics and presidential leadership 1999 david a stockman the triumph of politics why the reagan revolution failed 1986 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 there is nothing wrong with america that cannot be cured with what is right in america.
t he collapse of the soviet union and the democratization of its client regimes in eastern europe ended the four decade old cold war and left the united states the worlds sole remaining superpower.
americans welcomed these changes but seemed unsure how to exercise their unprecedented economic and military might in this new international framework.
the culture wars that had started in the 1960s fed ferociously partisan political squabbles that distracted the nation from the urgent task of clearly de ning its role in the dawning age of globalization.
in 2000 george w bush won a bitterly contested presidential election that left the nation more rancorously divided than ever until the spectacular terrorist attacks on september 11 2001 called forth at least temporarily a resurgent sense of national unity.
bush responded to the 9 11 attacks by invading the terrorist haven of afghanistan.
amidst roiling controversy over his claims that iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction wmd and had ties to terrorists bush proceeded to invade iraq as well.
after the failure to nd wmd and over four thousand american battle deaths in the prolonged iraq war a war weary country nostalgic for the prosperity and peace of the 1990s made history by electing barack obama.
bill clinton the first baby boomer president as the last decade of the twentieth century opened the slumbering economy the widening gender gap and the rising anti incumbent spirit spelled opportunity for democrats frozen out of the white house for all but four years since 1968.
in a bruising round of primary elections governor william jefferson bill clinton this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website clinton elected of arkansas weathered blistering accusations of womanizing and draft evasion to emerge as his partys standard bearer.
breaking with the tradition of a balanced ticket he selected a fellow forty something southern white male protestant moderate senator albert gore of tennessee as his vice presidential running mate.
clinton claimed to be a new democrat chastened by the partys long exile in the political wilderness.
with other centrist democrats he had formed the democratic leadership council to point the party away from its traditional antibusiness dovish champion ofthe underdog orientation and toward progrowth strong defense and anticrime policies.
clinton campaigned especially vigorously on promises to stimulate the economy reform the welfare system and overhaul the nations health care apparatus which had grown into a scandalously expensive contraption that failed to provide medical coverage to nearly 40 million americans.
trying to wring one more win out of the social issues that had underwritten two reagan and one bush presidential victories the republican convention in houston in august 1992 emphasized family values and as expected nominated george bush and vice president j danforth quayle for a second term.
but bushs listless campaign and his penchant for spaghetti sentences set him sharply apart from his youthful rival the super energetic and phenomenally articulate clinton.
bush claimed credit for ending the cold war and trumpeted his leadership role in the persian gulf war.
but pocketbook problems as the economy dipped into recession swayed more voters than pride in past foreign policy.
the purchasing power of the average workers paycheck had actually declined during bushs presidency.
at clintons campaign headquarters a simple sign reminded staffers of his principal campaign theme its the economy stupid reecting pervasive economic unease and the virulence of the throw thebums out national mood nearly 20 percent of voters cast their ballots for independent presidential candidate h ross perot a bantamweight jug eared texas billionaire who harped incessantly on the problem of the federal decit and made a boast of the fact that he had never held any public ofce.
perots colorful presence probably accounted for the record turnout on election day when some 100 million voters 55 percent of those eligible went to the polls.
the nal tally gave clinton 44 909 889 popular votes and 370 votes in the electoral college.
he was the rst baby boomer to ascend to the white presidential campaign debate 1992 george bush ross perot and bill clinton squared off at the university of richmond virginia on october 16 1992.
the telegenic clinton handily dominated the televised debates especially in the talk show format used on this occasion.
house a distinction reecting the electoral pro le of the population 70 percent of whom had been born after world war ii.
bush polled some 39 104 545 popular votes and 168 electoral votes.
perot won no electoral votes but did gather 19 742 267 popular votes the strongest showing for an independent or third party candidate since theodore roosevelt ran on the bull moose ticket in 1912 see map 41 1.
democrats also racked up clear majorities in both houses of congress which seated near record numbers of new members including thirty nine african americans nineteen hispanic americans seven asian americans one native american and forty eight women.
carol moseleybraun of illinois became the rst african american woman elected to the u s senate where she joined ve other women in the largest female contingent in the upper chamber to that point.
clinton also seized the.
chapter 42 the american people face a new century especially in genetics and computer applications presented americans with stunning opportunities as well as wrenching ethical choices.
ecological dangers made the responsible stewardship of a fragile planet more urgent than ever.
inequality and prejudice continued to challenge americans to close the gap between their most hallowed values and the stark realities of modern life.
and the terrorist attacks of september 11 2001 violently heralded a new era of fear and anxiety.
but men and women make history only within the framework bequeathed to them by earlier generations.
for better or worse they march forward along times path bearing the burdens of the past.
knowing when they have come to a truly new turn in the road when they can lay part of their burden down and when they cannot or should not all this constitutes the sort of wisdom that only historical study can engender.
economic revolutions when the twentieth century opened united states steel corporation was the agship business of americas booming industrial revolution.
a generation later general motors annually producing millions of automobiles became the characteristic american corporation signaling the historic shift to a mass consumer outsourcing jobs to india sophisticated computer technology has allowed developing countries like india to attract western employers seeking lower labor costs.
indias educated and englishspeaking work force has made it particularly suitable for international call centers and computer programming.
economy that began in the 1920s and owered fully in the 1950s.
following world war ii the rise of international business machines ibm symbolized yet another momentous transformation to the fast paced information age when the storing organizing and processing of data became an industry in its own right.
the pace of the information age soon accelerated.
by centurys end the rapid emergence of microsoft corporation and the phenomenal growth of the internet heralded an explosive communications revolution.
americans now rocketed down the information superhighway toward the uncharted terrain of an electronic global village where traditional geographic social and political boundaries could be vaulted with the tap of a keypad.
the communications revolution was full of both promise and peril.
in the blink of an eye ordinary cit izens could gain access to information once available only to privileged elites with vast libraries or expert staffs at their disposal.
businesspeople instantaneously girdled the planet with transactions of prodigious scope and serpentine complexity.
japa nese bankers might sell wheat contracts in chicago and simultaneously direct the prots to buying oil shipments from the persian gulf offered by a broker in amsterdam.
by the late 1990s a dot com explosion of new commercial ventures quickly expanded the mar the economy and technology index 5 000 4 500 4 000 3 500 3 000 2 500 2 000 1 500 1 000 ket and the stock market stakes for entrepreneurs leading the way in making the internet a twenty rstcentury electronic mall town square library and entertainment center rolled into one.
but the very speed and efciency of the new communications tools threatened to wipe out entire occupational categories.
postal carriers travel agents store clerks bank tellers stockbrokers and all kinds of other workers whose business it was to mediate between product and client might nd themselves roadkill on the information superhighway.
white collar jobs in nancial ser vices and high tech engineering once thought securely anchored in places like chicago los angeles and new york could now be outsourced to countries such as ireland and india where employees could help keep a companys global circuits ring twenty four hours a day.
the high tech economy also proved to be as prone to boom and bust as the old smokestack economy.
in the spring of 2000 the stock market began its most precipitous slide since the second world war.
by the time the markets bottomed out in 2003 they had lost 6 trillion in value see figure 42 1.
the boom of the late 1990s turned out to be as one observer put it the dot con investors had scooped up shares in edgling rms that proved unable to turn a prot and stock prices imploded accordingly once the bubble burst.
millions of americans watched aghast as their pension plans shrank by a third or more.
recent retir figure 42 1 the rise and fall of the nasdaq composite index 1994 2004 in march 2000 the nasdaq composite index replete with technology stocks peaked at its alltime closing high of 5 048 before losing over 75 percent of its market value in the next three years.
the same index had opened in february 1971 with a base valuation of 100 points.
source msn money.
ees scrambled back into the job market.
the economic turbulence of the rst years of the century stood as a sober reminder that even as the american economy generated extraordinary wealth and innovation by global standards it was scarcely immune to the ageold vagaries of risk error scandal and the business cycle.
increasingly scientic research was the motor that propelled the economy and new scientic knowledge raised new moral dilemmas and provoked new political arguments.
when scientists rst unlocked the secrets of molecular genetic structure in the 1950s the road lay open to breeding new strains of high yield pest and weather resistant crops to curing hereditary diseases and also unfortunately to unleashing genetic mutations that might threaten the fragile balance of the wondrous biosphere in which humankind was delicately suspended.
by the dawn of the new century scientists stood at the threshold of a revolution in biological engineering.
the human genome project established the dna sequencing of the thirty thousand human genes pointing the way to radical new medical therapies and to mouthwatering prots for bioengineering rms.
startling breakthroughs in the cloning of animals raised thorny questions about the legitimacy of applying cloning technology to human reproduction.
research into human stem cells held out the promise of cures for af ictions like parkinsons disease and alzheimers.
but the bush administration chapter 42 the american people face a new century shared the concern of certain religious groups that harvesting stem cells involved the destruction of human life in embryonic form.
bush therefore limited government funding for stem cell research as americans continued to struggle with the ethical implications of their vast new technological powers.
other unprecedented ethical questions clamored for resolution.
what principles should govern the allocation of human organs for lifesaving transplants.
was it wise in the rst place to spend money on such costly procedures rather than devote societys resources to improved sanitation maternal and infant care and nutritional and health education.
how if at all should society regulate the increasingly lengthy and often painful process of dying.
see makers of america scientists and engineers pp.
afuence and inequality americans were still an afuent people at the beginning of the twenty rst century.
median household income declined somewhat in the early 1990s but reached 48 200 in 2006.
yet even those americans with incomes below the governments ofcial poverty level de ned in 2007 as 20 650 for a family of four enjoyed a standard of living higher than that of twothirds of the rest of humankind.
americans were no longer the worlds wealthiest people as they had been in the quarter century after world war ii.
citizens of several other countries enjoyed higher average per capita incomes and many nations boasted more equitable distributions of wealth see map 42 1.
in an unsettling reversal of long term trends in american society during the last two decades of the twentieth century the rich got much richer while the poor got an ever shrinking share of the pie.
the richest 20 percent of americans in 2006 raked in over half the nations income while the poorest 20 percent received a little over 3 percent see table 42 1.
the gap between rich and poor began to widen in the 1980s and widened further thereafter.
that trend was evident in many industrial societies but it was most pronounced in the united states.
between 1968 and 2006 the share of the nations income that owed to the top 20 percent of its households swelled from 40 percent to 50 5 percent.
even more striking in the same period the top 5 percent of income earners saw their share of the national income grow from about 15 percent to a remarkable 22 3 percent.
the welfare reform bill of 1996 restricting access to social ser vices and requiring able bodied welfare recipients to nd work weakened the nancial footing of many impoverished families still further.
widening inequality could be mea sured in other ways as well.
in the 1970s chief executives typically two nations.
while decaying neighborhoods and legions of the homeless blighted american cities in the early twenty rst century afuent americans lived the good life in booming suburbs and in the more suburbanized cities of the sunbelt such as this development of million dollar homes around a country club in las vegas nevada.
widening inequality table 42 1 widening income inequality share of aggregate income lowest fth second fth third fth fourth fth highest fth top 5 4 2 10 2 16 8 24 7 44 1 16 5 3 8 9 6 15 9 24 0 46 6 18 5 3 6 8 9 14 8 23 0 49 8 22 1 3 4 8 6 14 6 23 0 50 4 22 2 during the last two decades of the twentieth century the top fth of the countrys households made signicant gains in income while everyone else lost ground.
source statistical abstract of the united states 2008 earned forty one times as much as the average worker in their corporations by the early 2000s they earned 245 times as much.
in 2006 47 million people had no medical insurance.
at the same time some 36 5 mil lion people 12 3 percent of all americans 8 2 percent of whites 24 3 percent of african americans 20 6 percent of latinos and 10 3 percent of asians remained mired in poverty a depressing indictment of the inequities aficting an afuent and allegedly egalitarian republic.
what caused the widening income gap.
some critics pointed to the tax and scal policies of the reagan and both bush father and son presidencies which favored the wealthy see table 42 2.
but deeperrunning historical currents probably played a more powerful role as suggested by the similar experiences of other industrialized societies.
among the most conspicuous causes were intensifying global economic competition the shrinkage in high paying manufacturing jobs for semiskilled and unskilled workers the greater economic rewards commanded by educated workers in high tech industries the decline of unions the growth of part time and temporary work the rising tide of relatively low skill immigrants and the increasing tendency of educated men and women to denmark ireland norway united kingdom 1 406 billion canada 677 billion netherlands sweden finland germany 1 874 billion belgium russia poland france 1 303 billion united states 10 171 billion czech rep hungary switzer austria land greece spain portugal 578 billion mexico 618 billion italy 1 091 billion algeria turkey i i r ra i an s q r a s e aa l ur da i b egypt i a pakistan japan 4 245 billion taiwan bangladesh india 478 billion thailand south africa venezuela colombia rep korea china 1 159 billion malaysia singapore philippines indonesia brazil 503 billion peru australia chile per capita income over 20 000 argentina one square represents 20 billion in gdp 10 000 19 999 2 000 9 999 under 2 000 map 42 1 global distribution of wealth new zealand the top fifty countries are named the gdp of the top twelve is listed.
interactive map makers of america scientists and the great africanengineers american migration s ubatomic particles and space bound satellites do not respect political boundaries.
disease carrying viruses spread across the globe.
radio waves and internet communications reach every corner of planet earth.
at rst glance science technology and medicine appear to be quintessentially international phenomena.
scientists often pride themselves on the universal validity of scientic knowledge and the transnational character of scientic networks.
in a world marked by political divisions science evidently knows no bounds.
but a closer look reveals that national context does inuence the character of scientic enterprise.
american scientists have repeatedly made signicant contributions to the life of the nation.
they in turn have been shaped by its unique historical circumstances especially americas intensifying concerns about national security in the twentieth century.
once marginal players in global intellectual life american scientists now stand at the forefront of scientic advancement.
in many ways the rise of american science has kept pace with the arrival of the united states as a world power.
nowhere was this trend more evident than in the story of big science the unusual demands of americas national security state during world war ii and the cold war required vast scientic investments.
the result was big science or multidisciplinary research enterprises of unparalleled size scope and cost.
big science and big technology meant big bucks big machines and big teams of scientists and engineers.
the close link between government and science was not new precedents stretched as far back as the founding of the national academy of sciences during the civil war.
but the depression era tennessee valley authority tva and the wartime manhattan project ushered in ventures of colossal scale and ambition.
as the head of the tva wrote in 1944 there is almost nothing however fantastic that given competent orga ni zation a team of engineers scientists and administrators can not do today cold war competition with the soviets translated into huge government investments in physics chemistry and aerospace.
the equation was simple national security depended on technological superiority which entailed costly facilities for scientic research and ambitious efforts to recruit and train scientists.
in the 1950s defense projects employed two thirds of launching apollo 11 nasa ight directors monitor the launch of the apollo 11 lunar landing mission from the manned spacecraft center in houston texas in july 1969 the nations scientists and engineers.
laboratories reactors accelerators and observatories proliferated.
after the soviets launched the worlds rst articial satellite sputnik i in 1957 the international space race became americas top scientic priority.
to land astronauts on the moon the national aeronautics and space administration nasa spent a whopping 25 4 billion over eleven years on project apollo.
another massive aerospace mission president reagans controversial strategic defense initiative or star wars consumed somewhere between 32 billion and 71 billion between 1984 and 1994.
in americas burgeoning research universities the federal government found willing partners in the promotion of the scientic enterprise.
university employed scientists largely paid by government grants concentrated on basic research accounting for over half of the estimated 50 billion spent on basic science in 2002.
meanwhile private industry spent additional billions on applied research and product development.
for consumers of air bags silicon chips and other high tech gadgets these investments yielded rich rewards as innovative technologies dramatically improved the quality of life.
over the course of the twentieth century american corporations spearheaded a global revolution in communications and information technology.
american telephone and telegraph at t and radio corporation of america rca attended the birth of telephones radio and television.
apple international business machines ibm and microsoft introduced personal computers.
government and industry scientists together invented the internet.
twentieth century advances in medical science and technology have also revolutionized american lives.
thanks to new drugs devices and methods of treatment the average life expectancy in the united states leapt from 47 3 years in 1900 to 77 0 years in 2000.
in the rst half of the twentieth century physicians discovered hormones and vitamins introduced penicillin and other antibiotics and experimented with insulin therapy for diabetes and radiation therapy for cancer.
more recently cutting edge medical science has nurtured in vitro fertilization developed respirators articial hearts and other medical devices and attacked though with limited success the aids epidemic.
much of the optimism for future medical breakthroughs centers on the 3 billion human genome project which completed its mapping and sequencing of all the genetic material in the human body in 2003.
deemed the holy grail of genomics research the project promised countless benets including new diagnoses for genetic defects innovative therapies and untold commercial applications.
coordinated by the department of energy and the national institutes of health the project involved thousands of scientists in universities and laboratories across the nation and around the globe.
to achieve such innovation big science typically demands complex teams of scientists engineers and technicians.
when traditional channels of recruitment a scientist working in her lab this medical school professor researching pancreatic regeneration was part of the surge of women pursuing scientic careers particularly in the biological sciences.
by 2004 as many women as men enrolled in medical schools and minority enrollment climbed as well.
in that year 7 percent of entering medical students were latino and 6 5 percent were african american.
percent female black latino foreign born figure 42 2 demographic prole of women minorities and the foreign born in nonacademic science and engineering occupations 1980 2000 source science and engineering indicators 2002 statistics seind02 c3 g03 13 htm.
came up short scientic institutions increasingly recruited foreigners women and minorities see figure 42 2.
immigrants and exiles played key roles in the development of the atomic bomb and cold war weaponry.
long relegated to ju nior positions as assistants and technicians women and minorities have recently made signicant gains in the white mans world of science.
in 2001 women represented 26 percent of employed doctoral scientists and engineers in the united states the foreign born 24 percent and minorities 21 percent.
despite these stunning achievements current evidence suggests that the united states might be losing its preeminence in science.
after dominating the intellectual world from the 1960s through the 1990s american scientists are now winning fewer prizes and patents and publishing fewer scientic papers than their peers in europe and asia.
experts predict that current schoolage americans will not be able to meet the rising demand for scientic ex per tise.
moreover fewer foreigners will arrive to ll the gap as international competition for their labor heats up in places like japan china and india.
for the united states to retain preeminence in science in the twenty rst century it must continue to welcome all talent to the eld.
that means attracting both foreign born scientists and young american students whose brainpower has long helped make the nation a scientic power.
chapter 42 the american people face a new century table 42 2 who pays federal income taxes.
share of u s income tax by income percentile income group base income shown as of 2006 top 1 above 328 049 top 5 above 137 056 top 10 above 99 112 top 25 above 60 041 top 50 above 30 122 bottom 50 below 30 122 28 7 47 4 59 1 79 5 95 2 4 8 36 9 57 1 68 2 84 9 96 7 3 3 because the united states has long had a progressive income tax system in which tax obligations are distributed according to ability to pay widening income inequality was reected in a redistribution of tax burdens.
in the booming 1990s the rich did indeed get richer but they also paid an increasing fraction of the total federal tax take.
these gures help explain why tax cuts benet the wealthy more than middle income earners and the poor.
country united states united kingdom france germany china japan india russia percentage figure 42 3 women in the work force globally source internal revenue service data tax foundation taxfoundation org news show 250 html marry one another and both work creating households with very high incomes.
educational opportunities also had a way of perpetuating inequality starting with the underfunding of many schools in poor urban areas and the soaring cost of higher education.
a 2004 study revealed that at the 146 most selective colleges 74 percent of the students came from families with incomes in the top 25 percent compared to 3 percent of the students from the bottom income quartile.
the feminist revolution all americans were caught up in the great economic changes of the late twentieth century but no group was more profoundly affected than women.
when the century opened women made up about 20 percent of all workers.
over the next ve decades they increased their presence in the labor force at a fairly steady rate except for a temporary spurt during world war ii.
then beginning in the 1950s womens entry into the workplace accelerated dramatically.
by the 1990s nearly half of all workers were women and the majority of working age women held jobs outside the home.
most astonishing was the upsurge in employment among mothers.
in 1950 nearly 90 percent of mothers with children under the age of six did not work for pay.
but half a century later a majority of women with chil dren as young as one year old were wage earners see table 42 3.
women now brought home the bacon and then cooked it too.
by 2004 american women participated in the work force in higher numbers than in almost all industrialized countries except russia and china see figure 42 3.
beginning in the 1960s many all male strongholds including yale princeton west point and even belatedly southern military academies like the citadel and virginia military institute opened their doors to women.
by the twenty rst century women were piloting airliners orbiting the earth governing states and cities and writing supreme court decisions.
table 42 3 percentage of working married women with children husband present 1950 2005 year total no children percentage under 18 23 8 30 5 40 8 50 1 60 6 60 2 30 3 34 7 42 2 46 0 53 2 53 6 children 6 17 only children under 6 28 3 39 0 49 2 61 7 76 0 75 0 source statistical abstract of the united states relevant years.
11 9 18 6 30 3 45 1 61 7 59 8 women and families a new world for women by the beginning of the twenty rst century revolutionary changes in the economy and in social values had opened new career possibilities to women even while they still performed their traditional duties as mothers and homemakers.
commander kathleen mcgrath of the frigate uss jarrett bottom left was the rst woman to take a warship to sea in 2000 and drew gilpin faust bottom right became the rst woman to serve as president of harvard university in 2007.
women athletes came into their own in the wake of the feminist revolution.
venus and serena williams top right enthralled the tennis world as individual champions and as a doubles team beginning in the late 1990s.
yet despite these gains many feminists remained frustrated.
women continued to receive lower wages less than 81 cents on the dollar in 2006 compared with men doing the same full time work.
they also tended to concentrate in a few low prestige low paying occupations the pink collar ghetto.
although they made up more than half the population women in 2006 accounted for just 32 percent of lawyers and judges up from 5 percent in 1970 and 32 percent of physicians up from 10 percent in 1970.
overt sexual discrimination explained some of this occupational segregation but most of it seemed attributable to the greater burdens of parenthood on women than on men.
women were far more likely than men to interrupt their careers to bear and raise children and even to choose less demanding career paths to allow for ful lling those traditional roles.
discrimination and a focus on children also helped account for the persistence of a gender gap in voting behavior.
women continued to vote in greater numbers than men for chapter 42 the american people face a new century democratic candidates who were often perceived as being more willing to favor government support for health and child care education and job equality as well as being more vigilant to protect abortion rights.
as the revolution in womens status rolled on in the 2000s mens lives changed as well.
some employers provided paternity leave in addition to maternity leave in recognition of the shared obligations of the two worker household.
more men assumed traditional female responsibilities such as cooking laundry and child care.
recognizing the new realities of the modern american household congress passed a family leave bill in 1993 mandating job protection for working fathers as well as mothers who needed to take time off from work for family related reasons.
new families and old the traditional nuclear family once prized as the foundation of society and the nursery of the republic suffered heavy blows in modern america.
by the 1990s one out of every two marriages ended in divorce.
seven times more children were affected by divorce than at the beginning of the twentieth century.
kids who the modern family tree high divorce rates and the increasing number of blended families in modern american society could make for confusing family trees commuted between separated parents were commonplace.
the old ideal of a family with two parents only one of whom worked was now a virtually useless way to picture the typical american household.
traditional families were not only falling apart at an alarming rate but were also increasingly slow to form in the rst place.
the proportion of adults living alone tripled in the four decades after 1950 and by the 1990s nearly one third of women aged twenty ve to twenty nine had never married.
in the 1960s 5 percent of all births were to unmarried women but three decades later one out of four white babies one out of three latino babies and two out of three african american babies were born to single mothers.
every fourth child in america was growing up in a household that lacked two parents.
the collapse of the traditional family contributed heavily to the pauperization of many women and children as single parents usually mothers struggled to keep their households economically aoat.
single parenthood outstripped race and ethnicity as the most telling predictor of poverty in america.
child rearing the familys foremost function was being increasingly assigned to parent substitutes at day care centers or schools or to television the mod the elderly and social security ern ages electronic baby sitter estimates were that the average child by age sixteen had watched up to fteen thousand hours of tv more time than was spent in the classroom.
parental anxieties multiplied with the advent of the internet an electronic cornucopia where youngsters could surf through poetry and problem sets as well as pornography.
but if the traditional family was increasingly rare the family itself remained a bedrock of american society in the early twenty rst century as viable families now assumed a variety of forms.
children in households led by a single parent stepparent or grandparent as well as children with gay or lesbian parents encountered a degree of acceptance that would have been unimaginable a generation earlier.
even the notion of gay marriage which emerged as a major public controversy when the massachusetts supreme court ruled it legal in 2003 signaled that the idea of marriage retained its luster.
teenage pregnancy a key source of single parenthood was also on the decline after the mid 1990s.
even divorce rates appeared to ebb a bit with 4 divorces per thousand people in 2007 down from 5 3 per thousand in 1981.
the family was not evaporating but evolving into multiple forms.
the aging of america old age was more and more likely to be a lengthy experience for americans who were living longer than ever before.
a person born at the dawn of the century could expect to survive less than fty years whereas someone born in 2000 could anticipate a life span of seventy seven years.
the gures were slightly lower for nonwhites reecting differences in living standards especially diet and health care.
the census of 1950 recorded that women for the rst time made up a majority of americans thanks largely to greater female longevity.
miraculous medical advances lengthened and strengthened lives.
noteworthy were the development of antibiotics after 1940 and dr jonas salks discovery in 1953 of a vaccine against a dreaded crippler polio.
longer lives spelled more older people.
one american in eight was over sixty ve years of age in 2005 and projections were that one of every ve people would be in the sunset years by 2050 as the median age rose toward forty.
this aging of the population raised a host of political social and economic questions.
elderly people formed a potent electoral bloc that aggressively lobbied for government favors and senior power living longer and living healthier older americans coalesced into one of americas most politically powerful interest groups in the early twentyrst century.
achieved real gains for senior citizens.
the share of gnp spent on health care for people over sixty ve more than doubled in the three decades after the enactment of medicare in 1965.
this growth in medical payments for the old far outstripped the growth of educational expenditures for the young with corresponding consequences for the social and economic status of both populations.
as late as the 1960s nearly a quarter of americans over the age of sixty ve lived in poverty three decades later only about one in ten did.
the gures for young people moved in the reverse direction whereas 15 percent of children were living in poverty in the 1970s nearly 17 percent were poor in 2002.
these triumphs for senior citizens also brought scal strains especially on the social security system established in 1935 to provide income for retired workers.
before social security began most workers continued to toil after age sixty ve.
by centurys end only a small minority did about 15 percent of men chapter 42 the american people face a new century and 8 percent of women and a majority of the elderly population relied primarily on social security checks for their living expenses.
contrary to popular mythology social security payments to retirees did not represent reimbursement for contributions that the elderly had made during their working lives.
in fact the payments of current workers into the social security system funded the benets to the current generation of retirees.
by the time the new century opened those billions of dollars 1 400 1 300 1 200 1 100 1 000 1930 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 2000 05 figure 42 4 government expenditures for social welfare 1930 2005 social welfare includes unemployment and old age insurance health care and veterans benets.
the skyrocketing costs from the mid 1960s onward reect new commitments made through great society programs and the increasing size and political clout of the elderly population who were the main beneciaries of expensive programs like medicare.
the steep rise after 1970 is also explained by the galloping ination of the 1970s.
sources statistical abstract of the united states 2003 ofce of management and budget 2005 and 2006 budget fy2005 tables html.
benets had risen so high and the ratio of active workers to retirees had dropped so low that drastic adjustments were necessary.
the problem intensied as elders found that health care costs especially prescription drugs and long term nursing care were rising at a far faster clip than their retirement benets were designed to cover.
at the beginning of the new century as the huge wave of post world war ii baby boomers approached retirement age it seemed that the unfunded liability the difference between what the government had promised to pay to the elderly and the taxes it expected to take in might rise above 7 trillion a sum that threatened to bankrupt the republic unless drastic reforms were adopted.
yet because of the electoral power of older americans social security and medicare reform remained the third rail of american politics which politicians touched only at their peril see figure 42 4.
pressures mounted nonetheless to cut benets persuade older americans to work longer or take even more drastic action.
in 2005 freshly reelected president george w bush made social security reform the centerpiece of his domestic agenda and proposed partially privatizing the system.
bushs plan would have given younger workers the option to invest some of their payroll taxes in individual retirement funds.
but the electoral power of older americans and the countrys ultimate loyalty to a public social safety net brought the bush plan to a stunningly quick halt that spring.
plans to reshape the social security system lay dormant for the rest of the bush years even as some analysts claimed that payments to the nonworking elderly threatened to soak up fully half of the working populations income by about 2040.
the new immigration newcomers continued to ow into modern america.
they washed ashore in waves that numbered nearly 1 million persons per year from the 1980s into the early twenty rst century the largest inow of immigrants in americas experience.
in striking contrast to the historic pattern of immigration europe contributed far fewer people than did asia and latin america see figure 42 5.
and unlike their predecessors many of the new immigrants settled not only in traditional ethnic enclaves in cities and towns but also in the sprawling suburbs of places like los angeles dallas and atlanta where many of the new jobs were to be found.
immigration and assimilation in thousands 4 000 1961 1970 3 500 1971 1980 1981 1990 3 000 1991 2000 2001 2006 2 500 2 000 1 500 1 000 europe asia africa mexico caribbean central america south america figure 42 5 recent legal immigration by area of origin 1961 2006 source yearbook of immigration statistics 2002 and 2006 department of homeland security.
what prompted this new migration to america.
the truth is that the newest immigrants came for many of the same reasons as the old.
they typically left countries where populations were growing rapidly and where agricultural and industrial revolutions were shaking people loose from old habits of life conditions almost identical to those in nineteenthcentury europe.
and they came to america as previous immigrants had done in search of jobs and economic opportunity.
some came with skills and even professional degrees from india or taiwan or the former soviet union and they found their way into middle class jobs.
but most came with fewer skills and less education seeking work as janitors nannies farm laborers lawn cutters or restaurant workers.
the southwest from texas to cal i fornia felt the immigrant impact especially sharply as mexican migrants by far the largest contingent of modern immigrants concentrated heavily in that region.
by the turn of the century latinos made up nearly one third of the population in texas arizona and cal i fornia and 40 percent in new mexico amounting to a demo graphic reconquista of the lands lost by mexico in the war of 1846 1848.
see makers of america the latinos pp.
the size and geographic concentration of the latino population in the southwest had few precedents in the history of american immigration.
most previous groups had been so thinly scattered across the land that they had little choice but to learn eng lish and make their way in the larger american society however much they might have longed to preserve their native language and customs.
but it seemed possible that mexican americans might succeed in creating a truly bicultural zone in the booming southwestern states especially since their mother culture lay accessible just next door.
some old stock americans worried about the capacity of the modern united states to absorb these new immigrants.
the immigration reform and control act of 1986 attempted to choke off illegal entry by penalizing employers of undocumented aliens and by granting amnesty to many of those already here.
chapter 42 the american people face a new century changing colors a second grade bilingual class recites the pledge of allegiance in both spanish and english in austin texas.
by the end of the twentyrst century americans who will be able to trace their ancestry directly to europe might well be a minority in the united states.
yet the fact was that foreign born people accounted for only about 12 1 percent of the american population in 2005 a far smaller proportion than the historical high point of nearly 15 percent recorded in the census of 1910 but evidence nonetheless that american society continued to welcome and need newcomers.
somewhat inconsistently critics charged both that immigrants robbed citizens of jobs and that they dumped themselves on the welfare rolls at the taxpayers expense.
but studies showed that immigrants took jobs scorned by americans and that they paid more dollars in federal taxes withholding and social security taxes as well as excise taxes than they claimed for welfare payments.
the story was different at the state level where expenditures for immigrant education and health care often exceeded the net tax contribution of the immigrants themselves.
yet the infusion of young immigrants and their offspring was just what the country needed when faced with the challenges of an aging population.
a more urgent worry was that unscrupulous employers might take cruel advantage of alien workers who often had scant knowledge of their legal rights.
debates over immigration were complicated by the problem of illegal immigrants.
the intensity mounted in 2006 when xenophobic pundits and politicians fanned the old ames of anxiety that millions of undocumented workers were usurping american tax dollars and privileges.
immigrant sympathizers argued that unlawful aliens had to be legalized so that they could receive the same protections as other workers.
amid this chaos president george w bush and a bi partisan group of legislators proposed a law to establish a guest worker program for undocumented workers and create a path to citizenship albeit after paying a ne.
anti immigrant forces condemned the plan as amnesty business interests protested that it put too great a burden on employers to verify the right to work.
and immigrant rights advocates claimed that it would create second class citizens in the end the compromise bill pleased no one and fell into the dustbin.
but the debates legacy was large.
the anti immigrant venom spewed by many republican politicians undercut hopes that the gop might continue to attract latino voters as it had in the 2004 presidential election when many of them embraced the partys conser vative positions on social values.
beyond the melting pot thanks both to continued immigration and to their own high birthrate latinos were becoming an increasingly important minority.
the united states by 2006 was home to about 44 million of them.
they included some 26 million chicanos or mexican americans mostly in the southwest as well as 3 million puerto ricans chiey in the northeast and more than 1 million cubans in florida where it was jokingly a multicultural society the oldest americans members of the cheyenne river sioux tribe celebrate the opening of the smithsonian institutions national museum of the american indian in washington d c 2004 said that miami had become the most anglo city in latin america.
flexing their political muscles latinos elected mayors of miami denver san antonio and los angeles.
after years of struggle the united farm workers organizing committee ufwoc headed by the softspoken and charismatic csar chvez succeeded in improving working conditions for the mostly chicano stoop laborers who followed the cycle of planting and harvesting across the american west.
latino inuence seemed likely to grow as suggested by the increasing presence of spanish language ballots and television broadcasts.
latinos newly condent and orga nized became the nations largest ethnic minority outnumbering even african americans in 2003.
indeed by the early twenty rst century the chicano population of americas largest state cal i fornia led the anglo population making the state a patchwork of minorities with no single ethnic majority.
in 2003 most newborns in cal i fornia were latino a powerful harbinger of the states demographic future.
asian americans also made great strides.
by the 1980s they were americas fastest growing minority and their numbers reached nearly 12 million by 2002.
once feared and hated as the yellow peril and consigned to the most menial and degrading jobs citi zens of asian ancestry were now counted among the most prosperous americans.
indians the original americans numbered some 2 4 million in the 2000 census.
half of them had left their reservations to live in cities.
meanwhile unemployment and alcoholism had blighted reservation life.
many tribes took advantage of their special legal status as independent nations to open bingo halls and gambling casinos for the general public on reservation lands but the cycle of discrimination and poverty proved hard to break.
cities and suburbs americas alabaster cities of song and story grew more sooty and less safe in the closing decades of the twentieth century.
crime was the great scourge of urban life.
the rate of violent crimes committed in cities reached an all time high in the drug infested 1980s and then leveled off in the early 1990s.
the number of violent crimes even began to decline substantially in many areas after 1995.
nevertheless murders robberies and rapes remained shockingly common not only in cities but also in suburbs and rural areas.
america imprisoned a larger fraction of its citizens than makers of america theafricanthe great latinos american migration t oday mexican food is handed through fast food drive up windows in all fty states spanishlanguage broadcasts ll the airwaves and the latino community has its own telephone book the spanish yellow pages.
latinos send representatives to congress and mayors to city hall record hit songs paint murals and teach history.
latinos among the fastest growing segments of the u s population include puerto ricans frequent voyagers between their native island and northeastern cities cubans many of them refugees from the communist dictatorship of fidel castro concentrated in miami and southern florida and central americans eeing the ravages of civil war in nicaragua and el salvador.
but the most populous group of latinos derives from mexico see figure 42 6.
the rst signicant numbers of mexicans began heading for el norte the north around 1910 when the upheavals of the mexican revolution stirred and shufed the mexican population into more or less constant ux.
their northward passage was briey interrupted during the great depression when thousands of mexican nationals were deported.
but immigration resumed during demonstrating for immigrant rights los angeles 2007 latinos march in downtown los angeles in support of legalizing undocumented parents who have children born in the united states.
u s law gives the right of citizenship to anyone born on american soil jus soli but not necessarily to the parents of that child.
world war ii and since then a steady ow of legal immigrants has passed through border checkpoints joined by countless millions of their undocumented countrymen and countrywomen stealing across the frontier on moonless nights.
for the most part these mexicans came to work in the elds following the ripening crops northward to canada through the summer and autumn months.
in winter many headed back to mexico but some gathered instead in the cities of the southwest el paso los angeles houston and san bernardino.
there they found regular work even if lack of skills and racial discrimination often con ned them to manual labor.
city jobs might pay less than farm labor but the work was steady and offered the prospect of a stable home.
houses may have been shabby in the barrios but these mexican neighborhoods provided a sense of togetherness a place to raise a family and the chance to join a mutual aid society.
such societies or mutualistas sponsored baseball leagues helped the sick and disabled and defended their members against discrimination.
puerto rican 9 6 3 4 million cuban 3 5 1 2 million central or south american and other latino 28 4 10 1 million mexican 58 5 20 6 million figure 42 6 sources of latino population in the united states 2000 source statistical abstract of the united states 2003.
mexican american farmworkers pitting apricots in fruit groves near los angeles 1924 mexican immigrants lived so close to the border that their native country acted like a powerful magnet drawing them back time and time again.
mexicans frequently returned to see relatives or visit the homes of their youth and relatively few became u s citizens.
indeed in many mexican american communities it was a badge of dishonor to apply for u s citizenship.
the mexican government likewise inuenced by the proximity of the two countries intervened in the daily lives of its nationals in america sometimes dis couraging them from becoming citizens of their adopted country.
as anglo reformers attempted to americanize the immigrants in the 1910s and 1920s the mexican consulate in los angeles launched a mex icanization program.
the consulate sponsored pa rades on cinco de mayo fifth of may celebrating mexicos defeat of a french army at the battle of puebla in 1862 and opened special spanish language schools for children.
since world war ii the american born generation has carried on the ght for political representation economic opportunity and cultural preservation.
fresh arrivals from mexico and from the other latin american nations daily swell latino communities across america.
the census of 2000 revealed that latinos are now the largest minority group in the united states surpassing african americans.
as the united states moves through the twenty rst century it is taking on a pronounced spanish accent and increasingly latinos are making themselves a force to be reckoned with in american politics.
young latina activists in east boston 2004 latinos have become increasingly inuential voters courted by democratic and republican candidates alike.
chapter 42 the american people face a new century percent suburbs central cities 74 8 77 5 80 3 69 0 63 3 56 1 47 8 30 9 44 6 figure 42 7 percent of total population living in metropolitan areas and in their central cities and suburbs 1910 2000 34 0 44 8 46 2 50 0 23 3 15 3 9 2 7 1 u s census bureau decennial census of population 1910 to 2000 compiled in demographic trends in the 20th century no.
28 4 13 8 37 6 21 2 24 8 30 8 32 5 32 8 32 3 31 4 30 0 31 3 30 3 al most any other country in the world and some desperate citizens resorted to armed vigilante tactics to protect themselves.
the migration from cities to the suburbs was so swift and massive that by the mid 1990s a majority of americans were suburban dwellers see figure 42 7.
jobs too became suburbanized.
the nations rather brief urban age lasted little more than seven decades after 1920 and with its passing many observers saw a new fragmentation and isolation in american life.
some afuent suburban neighborhoods walled themselves off behind elaborate security systems in gated communities making it harder perhaps to sustain a sense of a larger and inclusive national community.
by the rst decade of the twenty rst century the suburban rings around big cities such as new york chicago houston and washington d c were becoming more racially and ethnically diverse though individual schools and towns were often homogeneous.
suburbs grew fastest in the west and southwest.
in the outer orbits of los angeles san diego las vegas and phoenix builders of roads water mains and schools could barely keep up with the new towns sprouting across the hardscrabble landscapes.
newcomers came not only from nearby cities but from other regions of the united states as well.
a momentous shift of the american population was under way as inhabitants from the northeast and the rustbelt midwest moved southward and westward to job opportunities and the sun.
the great plains where 60 percent of all counties were losing population as the twentieth century ended faced the sharpest decline hollowing out the traditional american heartland.
by the early twenty rst century the great plains contained fewer people than the los angeles basin despite being ve times the size of the entire state of cal i fornia.
some major cities exhibited signs of renewal.
commercial redevelopment gained ground in cities such as new york boston chicago san francisco and even the classic city without a center los angeles.
wellto do residents reclaimed once fashionable neighborhoods and sent real estate values soaring.
but these latter day urban homesteaders struggled to make their cities genuine centers of residential integration.
cities stubbornly remained as divided by wealth and race as the suburban social landscape surrounding them.
minority america racial and ethnic tensions also exacerbated the problems of american cities.
these stresses were especially evident in los angeles which like new york a cen frustrations for african americans tury earlier was a magnet for minorities especially immigrants from asia and latin america.
when in 1992 a mostly white jury exonerated white los angeles police ofcers who had been videotaped ferociously beating a black suspect the minority neighborhoods of south central los angeles erupted in rage.
arson and looting laid waste entire city blocks and scores of people were killed.
in a sobering demonstration of the complexity of modern american racial rivalries many black rioters vented their anger at the white police and the judicial system by attacking asian shopkeepers who in turn formed armed patrols to protect their property.
a decade later many a burnedout lot remained abandoned and weed choked in neighborhoods still plagued by gang violence and the demoralizing effects of grinding poverty.
the los angeles riots vividly testied to black skepticism about the american system of justice.
just three years later again in los angeles the televised spectacle of former football star o j simpsons murder trial fed white disillusionment with the state of race relations.
after months of testimony that seemed to point to simpsons guilt the jury acquitted him presumably because certain los angeles police ofcers involved in the case had been shown to harbor racist sentiments.
in a later civil trial another jury unanimously found simpson liable for the wrongful deaths of his former wife and another victim.
the reaction to the simpson verdicts revealed the yawning chasm that separated white and black america as most whites continued to believe simpson guilty while a majority of african americans told pollsters that the original not guilty verdict was justied.
similarly complaints by african americans that they had been unlawfully kept from the polls during the 2000 presidential election in florida reected the conviction of many blacks that they were still facing a jim crow south of systematic racial disfranchisement.
american cities have always held an astonishing variety of ethnic and racial groups but by the late twentieth century minorities made up a majority of the population of many american cities as whites ed to the suburbs.
in 2002 52 percent of all blacks lived in central cities within metropolitan areas compared with only 21 percent of whites.
the most desperate black ghettos housing a hapless underclass in the inner core of the old industrial cities were especially problematic.
successful blacks who had beneted from the civil rights revolution of the 1950s and 1960s followed whites to the suburbs leaving a residue of the poorest poor in the old ghettos.
without a middle class to sustain community institutions like schools and small businesses the inner cities plagued by unemployment and drug addiction seemed bereft of leadership cohesion resources and hope.
single women headed about 45 percent of black families in 2002 more than three times the rate for whites.
many african american women husbandless and jobless necessarily depended on welfare to feed still fighting to vote an african american father and daughter participate in a rally in downtown miami several weeks after the november 2000 election to demand a recount of dismissed presidential election ballots.
many florida blacks complained that election ofcials had disproportionately disqualied their votes and unfairly turned them away from the polls resurrecting the kind of obstacles that long had kept blacks from voting in the south.
chapter 42 the american people face a new century their children.
as social scientists increasingly emphasized the importance of the home environment for success in school it became clear that many fatherless impoverished african american children seemed consigned to suffer from educational handicaps that were difcult to overcome.
some segments of the african american community did prosper in the wake of the civil rights gains of the 1950s and 1960s although they still had a long hill to climb before reaching full equality.
by 2006 43 percent of all black families compared to 61 percent of all white families had incomes of at least 50 000 qualifying them barely as middle class.
blacks continued to make headway in political life.
the number of black elected ofcials had risen above the nine thousand mark including more than three dozen members of congress and the mayors of several large cities.
voting tallies demonstrated that successful black politicians were moving beyond isolated racial constituencies and into the political mainstream by appealing to a wide variety of voters.
in 1989 virginians only 15 percent of whom were black chose l douglas wilder as the rst african american elected to serve as a state governor.
in 1994 voters in illinois made carol moseley braun the rst african american woman elected to the u s senate.
in 2001 president george w bush appointed colin powell and condoleezza rice to top cabinet level posts in his administration as secretary of state and national security adviser respectively.
rice succeeded powell as secretary of state in the second bush administration.
and in the 2008 election senator barack obama whose father was kenyan mounted the most successful campaign for president of any black american to date.
record turnouts gave him a decisive victory.
by the early twenty rst century blacks had also dramatically advanced into higher education though the educational gap between blacks and whites stubbornly persisted.
in 2006 12 6 percent of blacks over age twenty ve had a bachelors degree compared to 18 6 percent of whites or 20 2 percent of non hispanic whites.
the political assault against af rmative action in cal i fornia and elsewhere in the 1990s only compounded the obstacles to advanced training for many young african americans.
but defenders of af rmative action chalked up a major victory in 2003 when the supreme court in a key case involving the university of michigan af rmed that achieving racial diversity on college campuses was a legitimate means to secure a more equitable society.
the court preserved af rmative action in university admissions as long as schools avoided using quotas point systems or other mechanistic ways of diversifying their student bodies though it remained uneasy about letting such programs endure indenitely.
justice sandra day oconnor said we expect that 25 years from now the use of racial preferences will no longer be necessary e pluribus plures controversial issues of color and culture also pervaded the realm of ideas in the late twentieth century.
echoing early twentieth century cultural pluralists like horace kallen and randolph bourne many intellectuals after 1970 embraced the creed of multiculturalism the new mantra stressed the need to preserve and promote rather than squash a variety of distinct ethnic and racial cultures in the united states.
the nations classrooms became battlegrounds for the debate over americas commitment to pluralism.
multiculturalists attacked the traditional curriculum as eurocentric and advocated greater focus on the achievements of african americans latinos asian americans and native americans.
in response critics charged that too much stress on ethnic difference would come at the expense of national cohesion and an appreciation of common american values.
the census bureau further enlivened the debate when in 2000 it allowed respondents to identify themselves with more than one of the six standard racial categories black white latino american indian asian and native hawaiian or other pacic islander.
signifying a mounting revolution in attitudes toward race nearly 7 million americans chose to describe them in 1990 the african american intellectual shelby steele b.
1946 declared in his provocative book the content of our character what is needed now is a new spirit of pragmatism in racial matters where blacks are seen simply as american citizens who deserve complete fairness and in some cases developmental assistance but in no case special entitlements based on color.
we need deracinated social policies that attack poverty rather than black poverty and that instill those values that make for self reliance.
literary currents selves as biracial or multiracial.
as recently as the 1960s interracial marriage was still illegal in sixteen states.
but by the early twenty rst century many americans including such celebrities as golfer tiger woods actress rosario dawson and senator barack obama were proclaiming their mixed heritage as a point of pride.
the life of the mind despite the mind sapping chatter of the boob tube americans in the early twenty rst century read more listened to more music and were better educated than ever before.
colleges awarded some 2 5 million degrees annually and more than one person in ve in the twenty ve to thirty four year old age group boasted a college bachelors degree in 2006.
nearly one in three had an associates degree.
this expanding mass of educated people lifted the economy to more advanced levels while creating consumers of high culture each year americans made millions of visits to museums and patronized thousands of opera companies and symphony orchestras as well as countless popular music groups.
what americans read said much about the state of american society in the new century.
among the most striking development in american letters was the rise of authors from ethnic groups now coming into their own.
african american authors and artists also increasingly made their mark.
playwright august wilson retold the history of black americans in the twentieth century with special emphasis on the psychic costs of the northward migration fences 1985 joe turners come and gone 1988 jitney 1998.
alice walker gave ctional voice to the experiences of black women in her hugely popular the color purple 1982.
toni morrison wove a bewitching portrait of maternal affection in beloved 1987 and in 1993 became the rst african american woman to win the nobel prize for literature.
edward p jones inventively rendered the life of a slaveowning black family in his pulitzer prize winning the known world 2003.
native americans too achieved literary recognition.
kiowa author n scott momaday won a pulitzer prize for his portrayal of indian life in house made of dawn 1968.
james welch wrote movingly about his blackfoot ancestors in fools crow 1986.
asian american authors also ourished among them playwright david hwang novelist amy tan and essayist maxine hong kingston whose woman warrior 1976 and china men 1980 imaginatively reconstructed the obscure lives of the earliest chinese immigrants.
in mona in the promised land 1996 gish pulitzer prize winning authors edward p jones left and jhumpa lahiri chapter 42 the american people face a new century jen guided her readers into the poignant comedy of suburban family relationships that was not uncommon for second generation asian americans.
jhumpa lahiris interpreter of maladies 1999 explored the sometimes painful relationship between immigrant indian parents and their american born children.
latino writers made their mark as well.
sandra cisneros drew on her own life as a mexican american child to evoke latino life in working class chicago in the house on mango street 1984.
women writers and womens themes forged to the ctional forefront as the feminist movement advanced.
jane smiley modeled her touching narrative of a midwestern farm family a thousand acres 1991 on shakespeares king lear and followed up with a hilarious spoof of university life in moo 1995.
e annie proulx won widespread acclaim with her comical yet tender portrayal of a struggling family in the shipping news 1993 as well as with her moving tale of homoerotic love between two cowboys in brokeback mountain 1997.
the rising interest in feminist and african american themes revived the popularity of a 1930s writer zora neale hurston especially her naturalistic novel their eyes were watching god rst published in 1937.
new york became the art capital of the world after world war ii as well heeled americans supported a in her touching novel the joy luck club amy tan b.
1952 explored the complex dilemmas of growing up as a chinese american a girl is like a young tree my mother said.
you must stand tall and listen to your mother standing next to you.
that is the only way to grow strong and straight.
but if you bend to listen to other people you will grow crooked and weak.
over the years i learned to choose from the best opinions.
chinese people had chinese opinions.
american people had american opinions.
and in almost every case the american version was much better.
it was only later that i discovered there was a serious aw with the american version.
there were too many choices so it was easy to get confused and pick the wrong thing.
large number of painters and sculptors.
the open and tradition free american environment seemed especially congenial to the experimental mood of much modern art.
jackson pollock pioneered abstract expressionism in the 1940s and 1950s inging paint on huge ats stretched on his studio oor.
realistic representation went out the window as artists like pollock and willem de kooning strove to create action paintings that expressed the painters individuality and made the viewer a creative participant in dening the paintings meaning.
pop artists in the 1960s notably andy warhol canonized on canvas everyday items of consumer culture such as soup cans.
claes oldenburg tried to stun viewers into a new visual awareness with unfamiliar versions of familiar objects such as giant plastic sculptures of pillow soft telephones.
on the stage playwright david mamet analyzed the barbarity of american capitalism in plays like glengarry glen ross and american buffalo in which he crafted a kind of poetry from the sludge of american slang.
eve ensler took a feminist commitment into new territory that blended comic intimacy and searing social commentary with her vagina monologues.
the aids epidemic inspired tony kushners sensationally inventive angels in america a broad ranging commentary alternately hilarious and touching about the condition of american life at the twentieth centurys end.
cuban american nilo cruz won a pulitzer prize in 2003 for anna in the tropics his evocative play about immigrant cigar makers in 1930 tampa.
film the most characteristic american art form continued to ourish especially as a wave of younger lmmakers like george lucas steven spielberg spike lee quentin tarantino and the coen brothers as well as the innovative documentary artist ken burns made their inuence felt.
architecture also beneted from the building boom of the postwar era.
old master frank lloyd wright produced strikingly original designs as in the roundwalled guggenheim museum in new york.
louis kahn employed stark geometric forms and basic building materials like brick and concrete to make beautiful simple buildings.
eero saarinen the son of a finnish immigrant contributed a number of imaginative structures including two yale university residential colleges that evoked the at mosphere of an italian hill town.
chinese born i m pei designed numerous graceful buildings on several college campuses as well as the john f kennedy library in boston.
postmodernists such as robert venturi and michael graves inspired by the decorative details of earlier historical artistic achievements mecha mural by student artists directed by sergio ocadiz 1974 people have scribbled on walls since time immemorial but in the 1960s and 1970s mural painting emerged as a new form of american folk art.
drab buildings and bare fences often in minority inner city neighborhoods were turned into huge canvases.
this mural incorporates many mexican american and mexican themes including the united farm workers bird symbol and a skeleton a frequent motif in mexican art.
styles rejected the spare functionalism that had dominated modern architecture for much of the century.
the ight from stark modernism took fanciful forms in frank gehrys use of luminous undulating sheets of metallic skin in the widely hailed guggenheim museum in bilbao spain and the walt disney concert hall in los angeles.
the new media by the early twenty rst century the internet had dramatically transformed daily life for most americans.
first created by the government for cold war intelligence sharing the world wide web spread like wild re through american homes schools and ofces during the mid 1990s.
the percentage of households with internet access skyrocketed from 18 percent in 1997 to over 70 percent in 2007.
in rapidly increasing numbers americans turned to the internet to communicate shop and even work.
the dot com explosion drove the tremendous economic boom of the late 1990s.
dot com refers to the uniform resource locater or url suf x used for commercial web sites.
even as the dot com bubble began to deate the internet demonstrated its staying power.
many online start up companies failed but those that survived often became giants in retail information gathering google and even nance e trade.
the internet reshaped the traditional corporate world as well.
by the end of the 1990s almost every business group or organization from used car dealers to sports teams to college arts groups had its own web site.
ful lling the promises of its early boosters the internet seemed to have a democratizing effect spreading power and information among more and more chapter 42 the american people face a new century americans.
young people in particular ocked to social networking sites like myspace and facebook to make connections often with people in foreign countries.
youtube allowed everyday users to post home videos online for the whole world to see.
and millions of people around the globe started a media revolution with their weblogs or blogs bloggers lent their voices to issues from foreign policy to college life offering their beliefs and opinions without fear and often without research.
as the blogosphere grew it posed a major challenge to the traditional media that had shaped americans understanding of the news for hundreds of years.
supporters argued that this new media added fresh voices and new per spectives but opponents questioned bloggers ex pertise and accused them of spreading misinformation.
blogs were not the only threat the internet posed to the mainstream media americans became ever less willing to read the morning paper or watch the evening network news shows when they could access a welter of information on their computer screens.
cable news had challenged the old system since the 1980s but the spread of the internet made the twentyfour hour news cycle a reality.
consumer demand pushed daily newspapers to offer their reporting online often for free.
subscription rates plummeted and ad sales the engine that drives print journalism fell off markedly.
as with railroads and the telegraph in the nineteenth century and radio and television in the twentieth century computers and the internet drove major readjustments in modern american economic social and cultural life.
the american prospect the internet democratizing or fragmenting.
time magazine named the users of the world wide web myspace facebook youtube and other internet attractions its person of the year in 2006 in recognition of the expanding ability to communicate with peers throughout the world.
critics worried however that the decline of older integrative institutions like city newspapers and national network television would leave americans with fewer forms of communication that united diverse populations.
the american spirit pulsed with vitality in the early twenty rst century but grave problems continued to plague the republic.
women still fell short of rst class economic citizenship and american society groped for ways to adapt the traditional family to the new realities of womens work outside the home.
a generation after the civil rights triumphs of the 1960s full equality remained an elusive dream for countless americans of color.
powerful foreign competitors challenged americas premier economic status.
as job opportunities shrank in some of the nations regions and expanded in others as jobs shifted to cheaper labor markets abroad and as giant corporations like enron and worldcom collapsed through corporate scandal many americans began to fear their economy as a treacherous landscape even as it offered some of them astounding prosperity.
the alarmingly unequal distribution of wealth and income threatened to turn america into a society of haves and have nots mocking the ideals of democracy and breeding seething resentments along the economic frontier that divided rich from poor.
environmental worries clouded the countrys future.
coal red electrical generating plants helped form acid rain and probably contributed to the greenhouse effect an ominous warming in the planets temperature.
the unsolved problem of radioactive waste disposal hampered the development of nuclear power plants.
the planet was being drained of oil and disastrous accidents like the grounding and subsequent oil spill of the giant tanker exxon valdez in 1989 future challenges in alaskas pristine prince william sound demonstrated the ecological risks of oil exploration and transpor tation at sea.
by the early twenty rst century the once lonely cries for alternative fuel sources had given way to mainstream public fascination with solar power and windmills methane fuel electric hybrid cars and the pursuit of an affordable hydrogen fuel cell.
energy conservation remained another crucial but elusive strategy much heralded at the politicians rostrum but too rarely embodied in public policy as witnessed in the bush administrations rejection of the kyoto treaty on global warming in 2001.
a sudden spike in crude oil prices beginning in the spring of 2008 due to exploding demand in developing countries such as india and china instability in the middle east and oil futures speculation nally galvanized public ofcials automakers and consumers to pursue alternative sources of energy for the sake of their own economic survival if not the planets.
as the human family grew at an alarming rate on a shrinking globe new challenges still faced america and its historical beliefs.
the task of cleansing the earth of its abundant pollutants including nuclear weapons was one urgent mission confronting the american people in the new century.
another was seeking ways to resolve the ethnic and cultural con icts that erupted with renewed virulence around the globe in the wake of the cold wars end.
at the same time new opportunities beckoned in outer space and on inner city streets at the artists easel and in the concert hall at the inventors bench and in the scientists laboratory and in the unending quest for social justice individual ful llment and international peace.
the terrorist attack on america on september 11 2001 posed yet another challenge to the united states.
shielded for over two centuries against assaults on its soil it would now have to preserve its security in a world made smaller by global communication and transportation without altering its fundamental democratic values and way of life.
the great danger posed by terrorism was not that al qaeda or other foreign groups would seize control of the country or any portion of its territory.
it was rather that in ghting terrorism americans would so compromise their freedoms at home and so isolate the country internationally that it would lose touch with its own guiding principles.
wars in afghanistan and iraq made these difculties clear.
the challenge was to enhance national security without eroding democratic liberties to protect the countrys borders without preventing the arrival of desirable immigrants and to use military force wisely without undermining americas standing in the world.
in facing those challenges the worlds oldest republic had an extraordinary tradition of resilience and resourcefulness to draw on.
born as a revolutionary force in a world of conservatism the united states stood in the twenty rst century as a conser vative force in a world of revolution.
it had long held aloft the banner of liberal democracy in a world racked by revolutions of the right and left including fascism nazism and communism.
yet through it all much that was truly revolutionary also remained a part of americas liberal democratic heritage as its people pioneered in revolutions against colonialism racism sexism ignorance and poverty.
the dream of making the world safe for democracy articulated nearly a century earlier by woodrow wilson at the end of the first world war gained a new poignancy after september 11 when americans expressed a yearning for greater equality opportunity and democracy in the middle east all in the hope of diminishing the root causes of international terrorism.
the capacity to nurture progress abroad however depended on the ability of americans to improve their own country and to do so in the midst of new threats to their own security.
as wilson wrote in 1893 long before he became president democratic institutions are never done they are like living tissue always a making.
it is a strenuous thing this of living the life of a free people to learn more nancy altman the battle for social security from fdrs vision to bushs gamble 2005 william chafe the paradox of change american women in the 20th century 1991 david dent in search of black america discovering the african american dream 2000 barbara ehrenreich nickel and dimed on not getting by in america 2001 bill ong hing dening america through immigration policy 2004 paul krugman the great unraveling losing our way in the new century 2003 katherine newman a different shade of gray midlife and beyond in the inner city 2003 george sanchez becoming mexican american 1989 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at.
chapter 37 the eisenhower era 1952 1960 an early computer ca.
1950 just a few decades later technological improvements would bring the computing power of this bulky behemoth to the users desktop.
aerospace industries also grew fantastically in the 1950s thanks both to eisenhowers aggressive buildup of the strategic air command and to a robustly expanding passenger airline business as well as to connections between military and civilian aircraft production.
in 1957 the seattle based boeing company brought out the rst large passenger jet the 707 its design owed much to the previous development of sacs long range strategic bomber the b 52.
two years later boeing delivered the rst presidential jet a specially modied 707 to its rst user dwight d eisenhower.
air force one dazzled him with its speed and comfort.
the nature of the work force was also changing.
a quiet revolution was marked in 1956 when white collar workers for the rst time outnumbered blue collar workers signaling the passage from an industrial to a postindustrial or ser vice based economy.
keeping pace with that fundamental transformation orga nized labor withered along with the smokestack industries that had been its sustenance.
union membership as a percentage of the labor force peaked at about 35 percent in 1954 and then went into steady decline see p 843.
some observers concluded that the union movement had played out its historic role of empowering workers and ensuring economic justice and that unions would eventually disappear altogether in the postindustrial era.
the surge in white collar employment opened special opportunities for women see table 37 1.
when world war ii ended many women including those who had worked in war plants returned to highly conventional female roles as wives and mothers the remarkably prolic mothers of the huge baby boom generation.
a cult of domesticity emerged in popular culture to celebrate those eternal feminine functions.
when 1950s television programs like ozzie and har table 37 1 occupational distribution of workingwomen 1900 2000 total white collar workers clerical workers manual workers farmworkers service workers 17 8 4 0 27 8 18 9 35 5 38 8 18 7 23 8 13 5 23 9 44 9 21 5 21 6 4 0 29 4 52 5 28 7 18 0 1 8 21 9 65 6 30 5 14 8 1 0 18 1 73 0 36 7 8 7 0 3 18 0 major categories percentage of all women workers in each category calculated at fourteen and older until 1970 and then sixteen and older.
includes clerical sales professional and technical workers managers and ofcials.
includes domestic servants.
sources historical statistics of the united states and statistical abstract of the united states relevant years.
a changing economy percentage of women age 16 and over in the labor force since 1900 1920 1930 1970 1980 00 05 figure 37 1 women in the labor force 1900 2005 sources historical statistics of the united states and statistical abstract of the united states relevant years.
riet or leave it to beaver depicted idyllic suburban families with a working husband two children and a wife who did not work outside the home they did so without irony much of white middle class america really did live that way.
but as the 1950s progressed another quiet revolution was gaining momentum that was destined to transform womens roles and even the character of the american family.
of some 40 million new jobs created in the three decades after 1950 more than 30 million were in clerical and ser vice work.
women lled the huge majority of these new positions.
they were the principal employment beneciaries of the postwar era creating an extensive pink collar ghetto of occupations that came to be dominated by women see figure 37 1.
exploding employment opportunities for women in the 1950s unleashed a groundswell of social and psychological shocks that mounted to tidal wave proportions in the decades that followed.
from one perspective womens surge into the workplace was nothing new only a return to the days when the united states was an agricultural nation and men and women alike toiled on the family farm.
but the urban age was not the agricultural age and womens new dual role as both workers and homemakers raised urgent questions about family life and traditional de nitions of gender differences.
feminist betty friedan gave focus and fuel to womens feelings in 1963 when she published the feminine mystique a runaway best seller and a classic of feminist protest literature that launched the modern womens movement.
friedan spoke in rousing accents to millions of able educated women who applauded her indictment of the sti ing boredom of suburban the booming service sector services displaced manufacturing as the most dynamic area of the economy in the post world war ii era and women made up a majority of new workers in the nations ofces and classrooms and on sales oors and hospital wards.
chapter 37 the eisenhower era 1952 1960 the original golden arches 1955 maurice and richard mcdonald replaced their original drive in hamburger stand in san bernardino california with this double arched design in 1953.
mcdonalds soon became one of the largest franchised restaurant chains in the world and a global symbol of american consumerism.
consumer culture in the fifties the 1950s witnessed a huge expansion of the middle class and the blossoming of a consumer culture.
diners club introduced the plastic credit card in 1949 just one year after the rst fast food style mcdonalds hamburger stand opened in san bernardino cal ifornia.
in 1955 disneyland opened its doors in anaheim cal i fornia.
easy credit high volume fast food production and new forms of leisure marked an emerging afuent lifestyle that soon moved beyond americas borders.
manufacturers retailers and advertisers spread american style consumer capitalism throughout much of the noncommunist world.
crucial to the development of that lifestyle was the rapid rise of the new technology of television.
only 6 tv stations were broadcasting in 1946 a decade later 442 stations were operating.
tv sets were rich peoples novelties in the 1940s but 7 million sets were sold in 1951.
by 1960 virtually every american home had one in a stunning display of the speed with which new technologies can pervade and transform modern societies see figure 37 2.
attendance at movies sank as the entertainment industry changed its focus from the silver screen to the picture tube.
by the mid 1950s advertisers annually spent 10 billion to hawk their wares on television while critics fumed that the wildly popular new mass medium was degrading the publics aesthetic social moral political and educational standards.
to the question why is television called a medium pundits replied because its never rare or well done percentage housewifery.
many of those women were already working for wages but they were also struggling against the guilt and frustration of leading an unfeminine life as de ned by the postwar cult of domesticity year figure 37 2 households with television sets 1946 2009 a nation of consumers the king with his eshy face pouting lips and antic sexually suggestive gyrations elvis presley became the high priest of rock n roll in the 1950s to the chagrin of parents everywhere.
bloated by fame fortune and drugs he died in 1977 at the age of forty two.
even religion capitalized on the powerful new electronic pulpit.
televangelists like the baptist billy graham the pentecostal holiness preacher oral roberts and the roman catholic fulton j sheen took to the airwaves to spread the christian gospel.
television also catalyzed the commercialization of professional sports as viewing audiences that once numbered in the stadium capacity thousands could now be counted in the couch potato millions.
sports also reected the shift in population toward the west and south.
in 1958 baseballs new york giants moved to san francisco and the brooklyn dodgers abandoned flatbush for los angeles.
those moves touched off a new westward and southward movement of sports franchises.
shifting population and spreading afuence led eventually to substantial expansion of the major baseball leagues and the principal football and basketball leagues as well.
popular music was dramatically transformed in the fties.
the chief revolutionary was elvis presley a white singer born in 1935 in tupelo mississippi.
fusing black rhythm and blues with white bluegrass and country styles elvis created a new musical idiom known forever after as rock n roll.
rock was crossover music carrying its heavy beat and driv ing rhythms across the cultural divide that separated black and white musical traditions.
listening and dancing to rock n roll became a rite of passage for millions of young people around the world from japan to working class liverpool eng land where elviss music inspired teenagers john lennon and paul mccartney to form a band that would become the beatles.
traditionalists were repelled by presley and they found much more to upset them in the afuent fties.
movie star marilyn monroe with her ingenuous smile and mandolin curved hips helped to popularize and commercialize new standards of sensuous sexuality.
so did playboy magazine whose rst issue monroe graced in 1953.
as the decade closed americans were well on their way to becoming free spending consumers of mass produced standardized products which were advertised on the electronic medium of television and often sold for their alleged sexual allure.
many critics lamented the implications of this new consumerist lifestyle.
harvard sociologist david riesman portrayed the postwar generation as a pack of conformists in the lonely crowd 1950 as did william h whyte jr in the organization man.
novelist sloan wilson explored a similar theme in the man in the gray flannel suit 1955.
harvard economist john kenneth galbraith questioned the relation between private wealth and the public good in a series of books beginning with the afuent society 1958.
the postwar explosion of prosperity galbraith claimed had chapter 37 the eisenhower era 1952 1960 produced a troublesome combination of private opulence amid public squalor.
americans had televisions in their homes but garbage in their streets.
they ate rich food but breathed foul air.
but galbraiths call for social spending to match private purchasing fell on mostly deaf ears in the giddily afuent 1950s.
the advent of eisenhower democratic prospects in the presidential election of 1952 were blighted by the military deadlock in korea trumans clash with macarthur war bred ination and whiffs of scandal from the white house.
dispirited democrats nominated a reluctant adlai e stevenson the eloquent and idealistic governor of illinois.
republicans enthusiastically chose war hero general dwight d eisenhower on the rst ballot.
ikes running mate was cal i fornia senator richard m nixon who had gained notoriety as a relentless red hunter.
eisenhower was already the most popular american of his time as i like ike buttons every where testied.
striking a grandfatherly nonpartisan pose eisenhower left the rough campaigning to nixon who relished bare knuckle political combat.
the vicepresidential candidate lambasted his opponents with charges that they had cultivated corruption caved in on korea and coddled communists.
he particularly blasted the cerebral stevenson as adlai the appeaser with a ph d.
from secretary of state dean achesons college of cowardly communist containment nixon himself faltered late in the campaign amid accusations that he had accepted illegal donations.
responding with a self pitying live address on television nixon denied the charges and solemnly declared that the only campaign gift he had ever received was the family cocker spaniel checkers.
the shameless and mawkish checkers speech saved nixons spot on the ticket and spotlighted a fundamental change in american politics.
television was now a formidable political tool that much more than radio allowed candidates to bypass traditional party machinery and speak directly to voters.
soon even eisenhower was reluctantly appearing in short tightly scripted televised spots that foreshadowed the future of political advertising.
devoid of substance they vastly oversimplied complicated economic and social issues.
they amounted as one critic observed to selling the president like toothpaste and given televisions origins in entertainment the republicans choice 1952 nominee eisenhower and his vice presidential running mate nixon greet the delegates.
and advertising political messages would be increasingly tuned to the standards of show business and commercialism.
the outcome of the presidential election of 1952 was never really in doubt.
given an extra prod by eisenhowers last minute pledge to go personally to korea to end the war the voters overwhelmingly declared for ike.
he garnered 33 936 234 votes to stevensons 27 314 992 ringing up 442 electoral votes to 89 for his opponent see map 37 1.
ike also managed to pull enough republican legislators into ofce on his military coattails to gain gop control of the new congress by a hairbreadth.
true to his campaign pledge president elect eisenhower undertook a ying three day visit to korea in december 1952.
but even a glamorous ike could not immediately budge the peace negotiations off dead center.
seven long months later after eisenhower had hinted that he might use atomic weapons an armistice was nally signed.
subsequent inquiries suggested that ikes hints were so artfully veiled that the chinese ike as president wa mt or id nv ca nd wy ut az mn sd ia ne co wi ks ok nm tx il mi in mo la oh ky ms al wv va nc tn ar me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 16 ri pa nj ct 4 16 8 ga de md map 37 1 presidential election of 1952 with electoral vote by state a democrat quipped that if the voters liked the republicans the way they liked ike the two party system would be in bad shape fortunately for democrats eisenhower scored a personal not a party victory.
republicans won minuscule majorities in congress which disappeared in the congressional elections two years later.
interactive map sc fl candidate party electoral vote popular vote eisenhower republican 83 33 936 234 55 1 17 27 314 992 44 4 stevenson democrat never understood them.
they agreed to end the war for reasons of their own especially its burdensome nancial costs.
the brutal and futile ghting had lasted three years.
about fty four thousand americans lay dead korean war scene a grief stricken american soldier whose buddy has been killed is being comforted while a medical corpsman lls out casualty tags.
joined by perhaps more than a million chinese north koreans and south koreans.
tens of billions of american dollars had been poured down the asian sinkhole.
yet this terrible toll in blood and trea sure bought only a return to the conditions of 1950 korea remained divided at the thirty eighth parallel communist in the north western looking in the south.
americans took what little comfort they could from the fact that communism had been contained and that the bloodletting had been limited to something less than full scale global war.
the shooting had ended but the cold war still remained frigidly frozen.
as a military commander eisenhower had cultivated a leadership style that self consciously projected an image of sincerity fairness and optimism.
he had been widely perceived during world war ii as an unmilitary general and in the white house he similarly struck the pose of an unpolitical president serenely above the petty partisan fray.
he also shrewdly knew that his greatest asset was his enjoyment of the affection and respect of our citizenry as he conded to his diary in 1949.
ike thus seemed ideally suited to soothe the anxieties of troubled americans much as a distinguished and well loved grandfather brings stability to his family.
he played this role well as he presided over a decade of shaky peace and shining prosperity.
yet critics charged that he unwisely hoarded the asset of his chapter 37 the eisenhower era 1952 1960 the democratic administration.
ohios senator john bricker reportedly said joe youre a dirty s o b but there are times when youve got to have an s o b.
around and this is one of them mccarthys rhetoric grew bolder and his accusations spread more wildly after the republican victory in 1952.
mccarthy saw the red hand of moscow everywhere.
the democrats he charged bent to whispered pleas from the lips of traitors incredibly he even denounced general george marshall former army chief of staff and ex secretary of state as part of a conspiracy so immense and an infamy so black as to dwarf any previous venture in the history of man mccarthy and what became known as mccarthyism ourished in the seething cold war at mosphere of suspicion and fear.
the senator was neither the rst nor the most effective red hunter but he was surely the most ruthless and he did the most damage to american traditions of fair play and free speech.
the careers of countless ofcials writers and actors were ruined after low blow joe had named them often unfairly as communists or communist sympathizers.
politicians trembled in the face of such on a popular president ike exuded grandfatherly graciousness and goodwill.
immense popularity rather than spend it for a good cause especially civil rights and that he cared more for social harmony than for social justice.
the rise and fall of joseph mccarthy one of the rst problems eisenhower faced was the swelling popularity and swaggering power of an obstreperous anticommunist crusader wisconsin republican senator joseph r mccarthy.
elected to the senate on the basis of a trumped up war hero record mccarthy had crashed into the limelight in february 1950 when he accused secretary of state dean acheson of knowingly employing 205 communist party members.
pressed to reveal the names mccarthy later conceded that there were only 57 genuine communists and in the end failed to root out even one.
some of mccarthys republican colleagues nevertheless realized the partisan usefulness of this kind of attack on senator mccarthy extinguishes the torch of liberty while preaching patriotism mccarthy irresponsibly menaced american traditions of civil liberties.
the scourge of mccarthyism in a moment of high drama during the armymccarthy hearings attorney joseph welch 1890 1960 reproached mccarthy in front of a huge national television audience for threatening to slander a young lawyer on welchs staff holism.
but mccarthyism has passed into the eng lish language as a label for the dangerous forces of unfairness and fear that a democratic society can unleash only at its peril.
desegregating american society until this moment senator i think i never really gauged your cruelty or your recklessness.
little did i dream you could be so cruel as to do an injury to that lad.
if it were in my power to forgive you for your reckless cruelty i would do so.
i like to think that i am a gentleman but your forgiveness will have to come from someone other than me.
have you no decency sir at long last.
have you left no sense of decency.
slaughts especially when opinion polls showed that a majority of the american people approved of mccarthys crusade.
eisenhower privately loathed mccarthy but publicly tried to stay out of his way saying i will not get in the gutter with that guy trying to appease the brash demagogue from wisconsin eisenhower allowed him in effect to control personnel policy at the state department.
one baleful result was severe damage to the morale and effectiveness of the professional foreign ser vice.
in particular mccarthyite purges deprived the government of a number of asian specialists who might have counseled a wiser course in vietnam in the fateful decade that followed.
mccarthys extreme antics also damaged americas international reputation for fair and open democracy at a moment when it was important to keep western europe on the united states side in an intensifying cold war.
mccarthy nally bent the bow too far when he attacked the u s army.
the embattled military men fought back in thirty ve days of televised hearings in the spring of 1954.
the political power of the new broadcast medium was again demonstrated by the army mccarthy hearings as up to 20 million americans at a time watched in fascination while a boorish surly mccarthy publicly cut his own throat by parading his essential meanness and irresponsibility.
a few months later the senate formally condemned him for conduct unbecoming a member three years later unwept and unsung mccarthy died of chronic alco america counted some 15 million black citizens in 1950 two thirds of whom still made their homes in the south.
there they lived bound by the iron folkways of a segregated society.
a rigid set of antiquated rules known as jim crow laws governed all aspects of their existence from the schoolroom to the restroom.
every day of their lives southern blacks dealt with a bizarre array of separate social arrangements that kept them insulated from whites economically inferior and politically powerless.
blacks in the south not only attended segregated schools but were compelled to use separate public toilets drinking fountains restaurants and waiting rooms.
trains and buses had whites only and colored only seating.
only about 20 percent of eligible southern blacks were registered to vote and fewer than 5 percent were registered in some deep south states like mississippi and alabama.
as late as 1960 white southern sensibilities about segregation were so tender that television networks blotted out black speakers at the national political conventions for fear of offending southern stations.
where the law proved insufcient to enforce this regime vigilante violence did the job.
six black war a black woman described the day in day out humiliations of life in a jim crow south you could not go to a white restaurant you sat in a special place at the movie house and lord knows you sat in the back of the bus.
it didnt make any difference if you were rich or poor if you were black you were nothing.
you might have a hundred dollars in your pocket but if you went to the store you would wait at the side until all the clerks got through with all the white folks no matter if they didnt have change for a dollar.
then the clerk would nally look at you and say oh did you want something.
i didnt see you there chapter 37 the eisenhower era 1952 1960 the face of segregation these women in the segregated south of the 1950s were compelled to enter the movie theater through the colored entrance once inside they were restricted to a separate seating section usually in the rear of the theater.
veterans claiming the rights for which they had fought overseas were murdered in the summer of 1946.
a mississippi mob lynched black fourteen year old emmett till in 1955 for allegedly leering at a white woman.
it is small wonder that a black clergyman declared that every where i go in the south the negro is forced to choose between his hide and his soul segregation tarnished americas international image much as mccarthyism did.
after the war african american entertainers like paul robeson and josephine baker toured widely in europe and latin america informing audiences about the horrors of jim crow and raising doubts about americas reputation as the beacon of freedom against soviet communism.
in response the state department conscated robesons passport but it had to nd other ways to silence baker who had assumed french citizenship.
intellectuals poured on criticism as well.
swedish scholar gunnar myrdal published his landmark book an american dilemma exposing the scandalous contradiction between the american creed allegiance to the values of progress liberty equality and humanitarianism and the nations shameful treatment of black citizens.
international pressure combined with grassroots and legal activism to propel some racial progress in the north after world war ii.
in a growing number of northern cities and states african americans battled for and won equal access to public accommodations like restaurants hotels theaters and beaches.
jackie robinson cracked baseballs color barrier when the brooklyn dodgers signed him in 1947.
the national association for the advancement of colored people naacp pushed the supreme court in 1950 to rule in sweatt v painter that separate professional schools for blacks failed to meet the test of equality.
the national conscience was slowly awakening from its centurieslong slumber but black suffering still continued especially in the south.
increasingly however african americans refused to suffer in silence see makers of america the great african american migration pp.
on a chilly day in december 1955 rosa parks a college educated black seamstress made history in montgomery alabama.
she boarded a bus took a seat in the whites only section and refused to give it up.
her arrest for joseph e lowery b.
1923 a methodist minister and civil rights activist in mobile alabama reected on the powerful message of the 1955 montgomery bus boycott for blacks you see what the bus thing did was simply more than withholding patronage from the bus it was restoring a sense of dignity to the patrons as best expressed by an oft quoted black woman in montgomery who said since ive been walking my feet are tired but my souls rested.
p rior to the bus boycotts the determination of our freedom rested with the courts.
with the bus boycott we determined it.
the court could say what it liked we werent gon ride in the back of the bus.
the civil rights struggle violating the citys jim crow statutes sparked a yearlong black boycott of city buses and served notice throughout the south that blacks would no longer submit meekly to the absurdities and indignities of segregation.
the montgomery bus boycott also catapulted to prominence a young pastor at montgomerys dexter avenue baptist church the reverend martin luther king jr.
barely twenty seven years old king seemed an unlikely champion of the downtrodden and disfranchised.
raised in a prosperous black family in atlanta and educated partly in the north he had for most of his life been sheltered from the grossest cruelties of segregation.
but his oratorical skill his passionate devotion to biblical and constitutional conceptions of justice and his devotion to the nonviolent principles of indias mohandas gandhi were destined to thrust him to the forefront of the black revolution that would soon pulse across the south and the rest of the nation.
seeds of the civil rights revolution when president harry truman heard about the lynching of black war veterans in 1946 he exclaimed my god.
i had no idea it was as terrible as that the horried truman responded by commissioning a report titled to secure these rights following the reports recommendations truman in 1948 ended segregation in federal civil ser vice and ordered equality of treatment and opportunity in the armed forces.
yet congress stubbornly resisted passing civil rights legislation and trumans successor dwight eisenhower showed no real interest in racial issues.
it was the supreme court that assumed political leadership in the civil rights struggle.
chief justice earl warren former governor of cal ifornia shocked traditionalists with his active judicial intervention in previously taboo social issues.
publicly snubbed and privately scorned by president eisenhower warren courageously led the court to address urgent issues that congress and the president preferred to avoid as impeach earl warren signs blossomed along the nations highways.
the unanimous decision of the warren court in brown v board of education of topeka kansas in may 1954 was epochal.
in a forceful opinion the learned justices ruled that segregation in the public schools was inherently unequal and thus unconstitutional.
the uncompromising sweep of the decision startled conser vatives like an exploding time bomb for it reversed the courts earlier declaration of 1896 in plessy v ferguson see p 547 that separate but equal facilities were allowable under the constitution.
that doctrine was now dead.
desegregation the justices insisted must go ahead with all deliberate speed the border states generally made reasonable efforts to comply with this ruling but in the deep south diehards orga nized massive resistance against the courts annulment of the sacred principle of separate but equal more than a hundred southern congressional representatives and senators signed the declaration of constitutional principles in 1956 pledging their unyielding resistance to desegregation.
several states diverted public funds to hastily created private schools for there the integration order was more difcult to apply.
throughout the south white citizens councils sometimes with re and hemp thwarted attempts to make integration a reality.
ten years after the courts momentous ruling fewer than 2 percent of the eligible blacks in the deep south were sitting in classrooms with whites.
president eisenhower remained reluctant to promote integration.
he shied away from employing his vast popularity and the prestige of his ofce to educate white americans about the need for racial justice.
his personal attitudes may have helped to restrain him.
he had grown up in an all white town spent his career in a segregated army and advised against integration of the armed forces in 1948.
he complained that the supreme courts decision in brown v board of education had upset the customs and convictions of at least two generations of americans and he steadfastly refused to issue a public statement endorsing the courts conclusions.
i do not believe he explained that prejudices even palpably unjustiable prejudices will succumb to compulsion but in september 1957 ike was forced to act.
orval faubus the governor of arkansas mobilized the national guard to prevent nine black students from enrolling in little rocks central high school.
confronted with a direct challenge to federal authority eisenhower sent troops to escort the children to their classes.
in the same year congress passed the rst civil rights act since reconstruction days.
eisenhower characteristically reassured a southern senator that the legislation represented the mildest civil rights bill possible it set up a permanent civil rights commission makers of america the the great great african africanamerican american migration migration t he great social upheavals of world war ii continued to transform america well after the guns had fallen silent in 1945.
among the groups most affected by the war were african americans.
predominantly a rural southern people before 1940 african americans were propelled by the war into the cities of the north and west and by 1970 a majority lived outside the states of the old confederacy.
the results of that massive demographic shift were momentous for african americans and for all of american society.
so many black southerners took to the roads during world war ii that local ofcials lost track of their numbers.
black workers on the move crowded into boardinghouses camped out in cars and clustered in the juke joints of roadside america en route to their new lives.
southern cotton elds and tobacco plantations had historically yielded slender sustenance to african american farmers most of whom struggled to make ends meet as tenants or sharecroppers.
the great depression dealt black southerners yet another blow for when new deal farm programs paid growers to leave their land fallow many landlords simply pocketed the the migration of the negro by jacob lawrence 1940 1941 artist jacob lawrence depicted the migration of southern blacks to the north during and after world war ii in a series of paintings.
the rst panel of the series bears the description during the world war there was a great migration north by southern negroes money and evicted their tenants white as well as black from their now idle elds.
as the depression deepened dispossessed former tenants and sharecroppers toiled as seasonal farmworkers or languished without jobs without shelter and without hope.
the spanking new munitions plants and bustling shipyards of wartime america at rst offered little solace to african americans particularly in the south.
in 1940 and 1941 the labor hungry war machine soaked up unemployed white workers but commonly denied jobs to blacks.
when the army constructed a training camp near petersburg virginia it imported white carpenters from all parts of the united states rather than employ the hundreds of skilled black carpenters who lived nearby.
fed up with such injustices many african americans headed for shipyards factories foundries and elds on the pacic coast or north of the mason dixon line where their willing hands found more work awaiting them.
angered by the racism that was depriving their people of a fair share of jobs black leaders cajoled president roosevelt into issuing an executive order in june 1941 declaring that there shall be no discrim the home front though often confronted by prejudice and discrimination many african american migrants from the rural south found their rst industrial jobs in wartime defense plants during world war ii.
ination in the employment of workers in defense industries or government because of race creed color or national origin roosevelts action was a tenuous hesitant step.
yet in its way executive order 8802 amounted to a second emancipation proclamation as the federal government for the rst time since reconstruction had committed itself to ensuring justice for african americans.
the entire nation was now forced to face the evil of racism as bloody wartime riots in detroit new york philadelphia and other cities tragically demonstrated.
but for the rst time large numbers of blacks secured a foothold in the industrial economy and they were not about to give it up.
by wars end the great wartime exodus had scattered hundreds of thousands of african americans to new regions and new ways of life a second black diaspora comparable in its scale and consequence to the original black dispersal out of africa.
in the postwar decades blacks continued to pour out of the south in search of economic opportunity and political freedom.
in western and northern cities blacks now com detroit race riot 1943 from a streetcar.
a black passenger is dragged peted for housing and jobs and they also voted many of them for the rst time in their lives.
as early as 1945 naacp leader walter white concluded that the war immeasurably magnied the negros awareness of the disparity between the american profession and practice of democracy after the war he predicted african americans would be convinced that whatever betterment of their lot is achieved must come largely from their own efforts the wartime migration thus set the stage for the success of the civil rights movement that began to stir in the late 1940s and the 1950s.
with their new political base outside the old south and with new support from the democratic party african americans eventually forced an end to the hated segregationist practices that had kept them from enjoying full rights as citizens.
chapter 37 the eisenhower era 1952 1960 integration at little rock 1957 while white mobs jeered at the rst black students entering central high school federal troops with bayonets xed enforced the law.
to investigate violations of civil rights and authorized federal injunctions to protect voting rights.
blacks meanwhile continued to take the civil rights movement into their own hands.
martin luther king jr formed the southern christian leadership conference sclc in 1957.
it aimed to mobilize the vast power of the black churches on behalf of black rights.
this was an exceptionally shrewd strategy because the churches were the largest and best organized black institutions that had been allowed to ourish in a segregated society.
more spontaneous was the sit in movement launched on february 1 1960 by four black college freshmen in greensboro north carolina.
without a martin luther king jr and his wife coretta arrested.
king and his wife were arrested for the rst time in montgomery alabama in 1955 while organizing the bus boycott.
undertaking operation wetback detailed plan or institutional support they demanded ser vice at a whites only woolworths lunch counter.
observing that fellows like you make our race look bad the black waitress refused to serve them.
but they kept their seats and returned the next day with nineteen classmates.
the following day eighty ve students joined in by the end of the week a thousand.
the sitin movement rolled swiftly across the south swelling into a wave of wade ins lie ins and pray ins to compel equal treatment in restaurants transportation employment housing and voter registration.
in april 1960 southern black students formed the student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc pronounced snick to give more focus and force to these efforts.
young and impassioned sncc members would eventually lose patience with the more stately tactics of the sclc and the even more deliberate legalisms of the naacp.
eisenhower republicanism at home the balding sixty two year old general eisenhower had entered the white house in 1953 pledging his administration to a philosophy of dynamic conservatism in all those things which deal with people be liberal be human he advised.
but when it came to peoples money or their economy or their form of government be conser vative this balanced middleof the road course harmonized with the depressiondaunted and war weary mood of the times.
some critics called eisenhowers presidency a case of the bland leading the bland above all eisenhower strove to balance the federal budget and guard the republic from what he called creeping socialism the former supreme allied commander put the brakes on trumans enormous military buildup though defense spending still soaked up some 10 percent of the gnp.
true to his smallgovernment philosophy eisenhower supported the transfer of control over offshore oil elds from the federal government to the states.
ike also tried to curb the tva see p 839 by encouraging a private power company to build a generating plant to compete with the massive public utility spawned by the new deal.
eisenhowers secretary of health education and welfare condemned the free distribution of the salk antipolio vaccine as socialized medicine eisenhower responded to the mexican governments worries that illegal mexican immigration to the united states would undercut the bracero program operation wetback thousands of illegal mexican immigrants were forcibly repatriated to mexico in the federal governments 1954 roundup operation which was promoted in part by the mexican government.
the man in this photograph is being pulled across the border by a mexican ofcial while an american spectator tries to pull him back into the united states.
of legally imported farmworkers inaugurated during world war ii see p 881.
in a massive roundup of il legal immigrants dubbed operation wetback in reference to the migrants watery route across the rio grande as many as 1 million mexicans were apprehended and returned to mexico in 1954.
in yet another of the rude and arbitrary reversals that long have af icted the governments relations with native americans eisenhower also sought to cancel the tribal preservation policies of the indian new deal in place since 1934 see p 838.
he proposed to terminate the tribes as legal entities and to revert to the assimilationist goals of the dawes severalty act of 1887 see p 639.
most indians resisted termination and the policy was abandoned in 1961.
eisenhower obviously could not unscramble all the eggs that had been fried by new dealers and fair dealers for twenty long years.
he pragmatically accepted chapter 37 the eisenhower era 1952 1960 and thereby legitimated many new dealish programs stitching them permanently into the fabric of american society.
as he told his brother should any political party attempt to abolish social security unemployment insurance and eliminate labor and farm programs you would not hear of that party again in our political history in some ways eisenhower even did the new deal one better.
in a public works project that dwarfed any thing the new dealers had ever dreamed of ike backed the federal highway act of 1956 a 27 billion plan to build forty two thousand miles of sleek fast motorways.
the former general believed that such roads were essential to national defense allowing u s troops to mobilize anywhere in the country in the event of a soviet invasion.
beyond being a defense strategy laying down these modern multilane roads created countless construction jobs and speeded the suburbanization of america.
the highway act offered juicy benets to the trucking automobile oil and travel industries while at the same time robbing the railroads especially passenger trains of business.
the act also exacerbated problems of air quality and energy consumption and had especially disastrous consequences for cities whose once vibrant downtowns withered away while shopping malls and other sites of leisure and consumption ourished in the far ung suburbs.
a new look in foreign policy the 1952 republican platform called for a new look in foreign policy.
it condemned mere containment of communism as negative futile and immoral incoming secretary of state john foster dulles promised not drive in movie theater utah 1958 going to the movies became one more thing americans could do in their cars in the 1950s.
here moviegoers watch charlton heston as moses in the academy award winning motion picture the ten commandments.
it was the last lm made by famed director cecil b demille.
the doctrine of massive retaliation merely to stem the red tide but to roll back its gains and liberate captive peoples at the same time the new administration promised to balance the budget by cutting military spending.
how were these two contradictory goals to be reached.
dulles answered with a policy of boldness in early 1954.
eisenhower would relegate the army and the navy to the backseat and build up an aireet of superbombers called the strategic air command or sac equipped with city attening nuclear bombs.
these fearsome weapons would in ict massive retaliation on the soviets or the chinese if they got out of hand.
the advantages of this new policy were thought to be its paralyzing nuclear impact and its cheaper price tag when compared with conventional forces more bang for the buck at the same time eisenhower sought a thaw in the cold war through negotiations with the new soviet leaders who came to power after dictator joseph stalins death in 1953.
in the end the touted new look proved illusory.
a new soviet premier the burly apparatchik nikita khrushchev rudely rejected ikes call in 1955 for an open skies mutual inspection program over both the soviet union and the united states.
in 1956 the hungarians rose up against their soviet masters and felt badly betrayed when the united states turned a deaf ear to their desperate appeals for aid.
the brutally crushed hungarian uprising revealed the sobering truth that americas mighty nuclear sledgehammer was too heavy a weapon to wield in such a relatively minor crisis.
the rigid futility of the massive retaliation doctrine was thus starkly exposed.
to his dismay eisenhower also discovered that the aerial and atomic hardware necessary for massive retaliation was staggeringly expensive.
the vietnam nightmare hungarian uprising october 26 1956 soviet tanks rolled through the streets of budapest to crush an anticommunist uprising against the soviets who had controlled hungary since world war ii.
this demonstration of brute force against a grassroots democratic movement turned many communist sympathizers in the west denitively against the soviet union.
western europe thanks to the marshall plan and nato seemed reasonably secure by the early 1950s but southeast asia was a different can of worms.
in vietnam and elsewhere nationalist movements had sought for years to throw off the yoke of french colonial rule.
the legendary vietnamese leader goateed ho chi minh had tried to appeal personally to woodrow wilson in paris as early as 1919 to support selfdetermination for the peoples of southeast asia.
franklin roosevelt had likewise inspired hope among asian nationalists.
but cold war events dampened the dreams of anticolonial asian peoples.
their leaders including ho chi minh became increasingly communist while the united states became increasingly anticommunist.
by 1954 american taxpayers were nancing nearly 80 percent of the costs of a bottomless french colonial war in indochina.
the united states share amounted to about 1 billion a year.
despite this massive aid french forces continued to crumble under pressure from ho chi minhs nationalist guerrilla forces called the viet minh.
in march 1954 a key french garrison was trapped hopelessly in the fortress of dien bien phu in the northwestern corner of vietnam.
the new policy of boldness was now chapter 37 the eisenhower era 1952 1960 500 1 000 km.
40n north korea south korea undertook certain social reforms.
change came at a snails pace but american aid continued as communist guerrillas heated up their campaign against diem.
the americans had evidently backed a losing horse but could see no easy way to call off their bet.
japan shanghai peoples republic of china cold war crises in europe and the middle east india okinawa burma tropic of cancer taiwan hong kong nationalist china gr.
20n hanoi laos north vietnam seventeenth parallel thailand indochina cambodia south vietnam saigon south china sea pac i f ic ocean philippines n m a l aya gr.
singapore gr.
100e indonesia borneo 120e map 37 2 east and southeast asia 1955 1956 interactive map put to the test.
secretary dulles vice president nixon and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff favored intervention with american bombers to help bail out the beleaguered french.
but eisenhower wary about another war in asia so soon after korea and correctly fearing british nonsupport held back.
the battle of dien bien phu proved a victory for the nationalists and a multination conference in geneva roughly halved vietnam at the seventeenth parallel see map 37 2.
the victorious ho chi minh in the north consented to this arrangement on the assurance that vietnam wide elections would be held within two years.
in the south a pro western government under ngo dinh diem was soon entrenched at saigon.
the vietnamese never held the promised elections primarily because the communists seemed certain to win and vietnam remained a dangerously divided country.
the united states did not sign the geneva accords though eisenhower promised economic and military aid to the autocratic diem regime provided that it the united states had initially backed the french in indochina in part to win french approval of a plan to rearm west germany.
despite french fears the germans were nally welcomed into the nato fold in 1955 with an expected contribution of half a million troops.
in the same year the eastern european countries and the soviets signed the warsaw pact creating a red military counterweight to the newly bolstered nato forces in the west.
despite these hardening military lines the cold war seemed to be thawing a bit in 1955.
in may the soviets rather surprisingly agreed to end their occupation of austria.
a summit conference in geneva in july produced little progress on the burning issues but it bred a conciliatory spirit of geneva that caused a modest blush of optimism to pass over the face of the western world.
hopes rose further the following year when soviet communist party boss khrushchev publicly denounced the bloody excesses of joseph stalin the dictator dead since 1953.
violent events late in 1956 ended the post geneva lull.
when the liberty loving hungarians struck for their freedom they were ruthlessly overpowered by soviet tanks while the western world looked on in horror.
fears of soviet penetration into the oil rich middle east further heightened cold war tensions.
the government of iran supposedly inuenced by the kremlin began to resist the power of the gigantic western companies that controlled iranian petroleum.
in response the american central intelligence agency cia helped to engineer a coup in 1953 that installed the youthful shah of iran mohammed reza pahlevi as a kind of dictator.
though successful in the short run in securing iranian oil for the west the american intervention left a bitter legacy of resentment among many iranians.
more than two decades later they took their revenge on the shah and his american al lies see pp.
the suez crisis proved far messier than the swift stroke in iran.
president nasser of egypt an ardent problems in the middle east egyptian president gamal abdel nasser 1954 shown here greeting exuberant supporters after his election as the rst president of the new egyptian republic nasser was long a thorn in the esh of american and european policymakers anxious to protect the precious oil resources of the middle east.
nassarism his version of pan arabism won a great following in the arab world during the 1950s and 1960s.
arab nationalist was seeking funds to build an immense dam on the upper nile for urgently needed irrigation and power.
america and britain tentatively offered nancial help but when nasser began to irt openly with the communist camp secretary of state dulles dramatically withdrew the dam offer.
nasser promptly regained face by nationalizing the suez canal owned chiey by british and french stockholders.
nassers action placed a razors edge at the jugular vein of western europes oil supply.
americas jittery french and british allies deliberately keeping washington in the dark and coordinating their blow with one from israel staged a joint assault on egypt late in october 1956.
for a breathless week the world teetered on the edge of the abyss.
the french and british however had made a fatal miscalculation that the united states would supply them with oil while their middle eastern supplies were disrupted as an oil rich uncle sam had done in the two world wars.
but to their unpleasant surprise a furious president eisenhower resolved to let them boil in their own oil and refused to release emergency supplies.
the oilless allies resentfully withdrew their troops and for the rst time in history a united nations police force was sent to maintain order.
the suez crisis also marked the last time in history that the united states could brandish its oil weapon as recently as 1940 the united states had produced two thirds of the worlds oil while a scant 5 percent of the global supply owed from the middle east.
but by 1948 the united states had become a net oil importer.
its days as an oil power clearly were numbered as the economic and strategic importance of the middle east oil region grew dramatically.
the u s president and congress proclaimed the eisenhower doctrine in 1957 pledging u s military and economic aid to middle eastern nations threatened by communist aggression.
the real threat to u s interests in the middle east however was not com munism but nationalism as nassers wild popularity among the masses of all arab countries demonstrated.
the poor sandy sheikdoms increasingly resolved to reap for themselves the lions share of the enormous oil wealth that western companies pumped out of the scorching middle eastern deserts.
in a portentous move saudi arabia kuwait iraq and iran joined with venezuela in 1960 to form the organization of petroleum exporting countries opec.
in the next two decades opecs stranglehold on the western economies would tighten to a degree that even nasser could not have imagined.
chapter 37 the eisenhower era 1952 1960 round two for ike the election of 1956 was a replay of the 1952 contest with president eisenhower pitted once more against adlai stevenson.
the democrats were hard pressed to nd issues with which to attack the genial general in a time of prosperity and peace and the voters made it clear that they still liked ike.
eisenhower piled up an enormous majority of 35 590 472 popular votes to stevensons 26 022 752 in the electoral college the count was even more unbalanced at 457 for republicans to 73 for democrats.
eisenhower made deeper inroads into the traditional bastion of democratic strength the once solid south than he had in 1952.
louisiana went republican for the rst time since 1876 during reconstruction days.
but the generals coattails were the helicopter era 1957 president eisenhower was routinely criticized by liberals as in this herblock cartoon in the washington post for his apparent indifference to many seething social problems of the day.
his failure to employ his vast prestige on behalf of civil rights was especially conspicuous.
not so stiff or broad as in 1952.
he failed to win for his party either house of congress the rst time since zachary taylors election in 1848 that a winning president had headed such a losing ticket.
in fragile health eisenhower began his second term as a part time president.
critics charged that he kept his hands on his golf clubs y rod and shotgun more often than on the levers of power.
but in his last years in ofce ike rallied himself to do less golng and more governing.
a key area in which the president bestirred himself was labor legislation.
congressional investigations produced scandalous revelations of gangsterism fraud and brass knuckles tactics in many american unions especially the teamsters.
the af of l cio born of a merger of the two giants in 1955 expelled the teamsters in 1957 for choosing leaders like two sted james r jimmy hoffa.
convicted of jury tampering hoffa served part of his sentence before disappearing without a trace evidently the victim of gangsters he had crossed.
to counter such corruption eisenhower persuaded congress to pass the landrum grif n act in 1959.
the act was designed to bring labor leaders to book for nancial shenanigans and bullying tactics but it also expanded some of the antilabor strictures of the earlier taft hartley act see p 910.
soviet scientists astounded the world on october 4 1957 by lofting into orbit around the globe a beep beeping baby moon sputnik i weighing 184 pounds.
a month later they topped their own ace by sending aloft a larger satellite sputnik ii weighing 1 120 pounds and carrying a dog.
this amazing breakthrough rattled american selfcondence.
it cast doubts on americas vaunted scientic superiority and raised some sobering military questions.
if the soviets could re heavy objects into outer space they certainly could reach america with intercontinental ballistic missiles icbms.
rocket fever swept the nation.
eisenhower established the national aeronautics and space administration nasa and directed billions of dollars to missile development.
after humiliating and well advertised failures notably the vanguard missile which blew up on national television just a few feet above the ground in 1957 in february 1958 the united states managed to put into orbit a grapefruit sized satellite weighing 2 5 pounds.
by the end of the decade several satellites had been launched and the united states had successfully tested its own icbms.
the sputnik success led to a critical comparison of the american educational system which was already competing with the soviets under re as too easygoing with that of the soviet union.
a strong move now developed in the united states to replace frills with solid subjects to substitute square roots for square dancing.
congress rejected demands for federal scholarships but late in 1958 the national defense and education act ndea authorized 887 million in loans to needy college students and in grants for the improvement of teaching the sciences and languages.
the continuing cold war the fantastic race toward nuclear annihilation continued unabated.
humanity minded scientists urged that nuclear tests be stopped before the at mosphere became so polluted as to produce generations of deformed mutants.
the soviets after completing an intensive series of exceptionally dirty tests proclaimed a suspension in march 1958 and urged the western world to follow.
beginning in october 1958 washington did halt both underground and atmospheric testing.
but attempts to regularize such suspensions by proper inspection sank on the reef of mutual mistrust.
thermonuclear suicide seemed nearer in july 1958 when both egyptian and communist plottings threatened to engulf western oriented lebanon.
after its president had called for aid under the eisenhower doctrine the united states boldly landed several thousand troops and helped restore order without taking a single life.
the burly khrushchev seeking new propaganda laurels was eager to meet with eisenhower and pave the way for a summit conference with western leaders.
despite grave misgivings as to any tangible results the president invited him to america in 1959.
arriving in new york khrushchev appeared before the u n general assembly and dramatically resurrected the ancient soviet proposal of complete disarmament.
but he offered no practical means of achieving this end.
a result of this tour was a meeting at camp david the presidential retreat in maryland.
khrushchev emerged saying that his ultimatum for the evacuation of berlin would be extended inde nitely.
the relieved world gave prayerful but premature thanks for the spirit of camp david the camp david spirit quickly evaporated when the follow up paris summit conference scheduled for may 1960 turned out to be an incredible asco.
both moscow and washington had taken a rm stand on the whats so funny.
1960 premier khrushchev gloats over ikes spying discomture.
burning berlin issue and neither could risk backing down publicly.
then on the eve of the conference an american u 2 spy plane was shot down deep in the heart of russia.
after bungling bureaucratic denials in washington honest ike took the unprecedented step of assuming personal responsibility.
khrushchev stormed into paris lling the air with invective and the conference collapsed before it could get off the ground.
the concord of camp david was replaced with the grapes of wrath.
cubas castroism spells communism latin americans bitterly resented uncle sams lavishing of billions of dollars on europe while doling out only millions to its poor relations to the south.
they also chafed at washingtons continuing habit of intervening in latin american affairs as in a cia directed coup that ousted a leftist government in guatemala in chapter 37 the eisenhower era 1952 1960 1954.
on the other hand washington continued to support even decorate bloody dictators who claimed to be combating communists.
most ominous of all was the communist beachhead in cuba.
ironsted dictator fulgencio batista in power since the 1930s had encouraged huge investments of american capital and washington in turn had given him some support.
but early in 1959 blackbearded fidel castro engineered a revolution that ousted batista.
castro then denounced the yankee imperialists and began to expropriate valuable american properties in pursuing a land distribution program.
washington nally losing patience released cuba from imperialistic slavery by cutting off the heavy u s imports of cuban sugar.
castro retaliated with further wholesale conscations of yankee property and in effect made his left wing dictatorship an economic and military satellite of moscow to the kremlins delighted surprise.
an exodus of anti castro cubans headed for the united states especially florida.
nearly 1 million arrived between 1960 and 2000.
washington broke diplomatic relations with castros government early in 1961 and imposed a strict embargo on trade with cuba.
strengthened by the helmsburton act in 1996 the embargo has remained in place even since castros departure from power in 2008.
americans talked seriously of invoking the monroe doctrine before the soviets set up a communist base only ninety miles from their shores.
khrushchev angrily proclaimed that the monroe doctrine was dead and indicated that he would shower missiles upon the united states if it attacked his new friend castro.
was patrician henry cabot lodge jr of massachusetts grandson of woodrow wilsons arch foe.
by contrast the democratic race for the presidential nomination started as a free for all.
john f kennedy a youthful dark haired millionaire senator from massachusetts won impressive victories in the primaries.
he then scored a rst ballot triumph in los angeles over his closest rival senator lyndon b johnson the senate majority leader from texas.
a disappointed south was not completely appeased when johnson accepted second place on the ticket in an eleventh hour marriage of convenience.
kennedys challenging acceptance speech called upon the american people for sacrices to achieve their potential greatness which he hailed as the new frontier.
bigotry inevitably showed its snarling face.
senator kennedy was a roman catholic the rst to be nominated since al smiths ill starred campaign in 1928.
kennedy challenges nixon for the presidency republicans approached the presidential campaign of 1960 with vice president nixon as their heir apparent.
to many he was a gifted party leader to others a ruthless opportunist.
the old nixon had been a no holds barred campaigner adept at skewering democrats and left wingers.
the new nixon was represented as a mature seasoned statesman.
he had gained particular notice in a nger pointing kitchen debate with khrushchev in moscow in 1959 where nixon extolled the virtues of american consumerism over soviet economic planning.
the next year he handily won the republican nomination.
his running mate john f kennedy campaigning for the presidency 1960 at right is his wife jacqueline kennedy.
the kennedy nixon contest wa mt or id nv ca nd wy co nm wi ia ne ut az mn sd ks ok r 7 i 1 tx il mi la oh in mo ar me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 16 ri pa nj ct 4 16 8 wv ky nc tn al ms i 6 d 5 va ga de md sc fl ak hi candidate party electoral vote popular vote kennedy democrat 56 50 34 266 731 49 7 nixon republican 40 75 34 108 157 49 5 byrd independent 2 75 501 643 0 7 smear artists revived the ancient charges about the popes controlling the white house.
kennedy pointed to his fourteen years of ser vice in congress denied that he would be swayed by rome and asked if some 40 million catholic americans were to be condemned to second class citizenship from birth.
kennedys catholicism aroused misgivings in the protestant bible belt south which was ordinarily democratic.
i fear catholicism more than i fear communism declaimed one baptist minister in north candidate john f kennedy 1917 1963 in a speech to a houston group of protestant ministers september 12 1960 declared i believe in an america where the separation of church and state is absolute where no catholic prelate would tell the president should he be a catholic how to act and no protestant minister would tell his parishioners for whom to vote.
and where no man is denied public ofce because his religion differs from the president who might appoint him or the people who might elect him.
map 37 3 presidential election of 1960 with electoral vote by state kennedy owed his hairbreadth triumph to his victories in twenty six of the forty largest cities and to lyndon johnsons strenuous campaigning in the south where kennedys catholicism may have been a hotter issue than his stand on civil rights.
interactive map carolina.
but the religious issue largely canceled itself out.
if many southern democrats stayed away from the polls because of kennedys catholicism northern democrats in unusually large numbers supported kennedy because of the bitter attacks on their catholic faith.
kennedy charged that the soviets with their nuclear bombs and circling sputniks had gained on america in prestige and power.
nixon retorted that the nations prestige had not slipped although kennedy was causing it to do so by his unpatriotic talk.
television may well have tipped the scales.
nixon agreed to meet kennedy in four so called debates.
the contestants crossed words in millions of living rooms before audiences estimated at 60 million or more.
nobody won the debates.
but kennedy at least held his own and did not suffer by comparison with the more experienced nixon.
the debates once again demonstrated the importance of image over substance in the television age.
many viewers found kennedys glamour and vitality far more appealing than nixons tired and pallid appearance.
kennedy squeezed through by the rather comfortable margin of 303 electoral votes to 219 but with the breathtakingly close popular margin of only 118 574 votes out of over 68 million cast see map 37 3.
he was the rst roman catholic and the youngest person to date to be elected president.
like franklin roosevelt kennedy ran well in the large industrial centers where he had strong support from workers catholics and african americans.
he had solicitously telephoned the pregnant coretta king whose husband martin luther king jr was then imprisoned in georgia for a sit in.
although losing a few seats the democrats also swept both houses of congress by wide margins.
six democratic electors in alabama all eight unpledged democratic electors in mississippi and one republican elector in oklahoma voted for senator harry f byrd who ran as an independent.
chapter 37 the eisenhower era 1952 1960 an old general fades away president eisenhower continued to enjoy extraordinary popularity to the nal curtain.
despite democratic jibes about eight years of golng and goong of putting and puttering eisenhower was universally admired and respected for his dignity decency sincerity goodwill and moderation.
pessimists had predicted that eisenhower would be a seriously crippled lame duck during his second term owing to the barrier against reelection erected by the twenty second amendment ratied in 1951.
see the appendix.
in truth he displayed more vigor more political know how and more aggressive leadership during his last two years as president than ever before.
for an unprecedented six years from 1955 to 1961 congress remained in democratic hands yet eisenhower exerted unusual control over the legislative branch.
he wielded the veto 169 times and only twice was his nay overridden by the required twothirds vote.
america was fabulously prosperous in the eisenhower years despite pockets of poverty and unemployment recurrent recessions and perennial farm problems.
to the north the vast st lawrence waterway project constructed jointly with canada and completed in 1959 had turned the cities of the great lakes into bustling ocean seaports.
old glory could now proudly display fty stars.
alaska attained statehood in 1959 as did hawaii.
alaska though gigantic was thinly populated and noncontiguous but these objections were overcome in a democratic congress that expected alaska to vote democratic.
hawaii had ample population largely of asian descent advanced democratic institutions and more acreage than the mainland states of rhode island delaware or connecticut.
as the rst noncontiguous states to join the union alaska and hawaii helped turn americas face toward the pacic and east asia.
though a crusading general eisenhower as president mounted no moral crusade for civil rights.
this was perhaps his greatest failing.
yet he was no bigot and he had done far more than grin away problems and tread water.
as a republican president he had further woven the reforms of the democratic new deal and fair deal into the fabric of national life.
as a former general he had exercised wise restraint in his use of military power and had soberly guided foreign policy away from countless threats to peace.
the old soldier left ofce crestfallen at his failure to end the after campaigning with promises to reduce the defense budget president dwight eisenhower 1890 1969 presided over unprecedented increases in military spending.
in his farewell address on january 17 1961 he sagely but ironically warned against the menace his own policies had nurtured this conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large arms industry is new in the american experience.
in the councils of government we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted inuence whether sought or unsought by the military industrial complex.
arms race with the soviets.
yet he had ended one war and avoided all others.
as the decades lengthened appreciation of him grew.
the life of the mind in postwar america americas afuence in the heady post world war ii decades was matched by a mother lode of literary gems.
in ction writing some of the prewar realists continued to ply their trade notably ernest hemingway in the old man and the sea 1952.
a nobel laureate in 1954 hemingway was dead by his own duck gun in 1961.
john steinbeck another prewar writer who persisted in graphic portrayals of american society such as east of eden 1952 and travels with charley 1962 received the nobel prize for literature in 1962 the seventh american to be so honored.
curiously world war ii did not inspire the same kind of literary outpouring that world war i had.
searing realism the trademark style of war writers in the 1920s characterized the earliest novels that portrayed soldierly life in world war ii such as norman mailers the naked and the dead 1948 and james joness from here to eternity 1951.
james gould cozzens delivered what is often considered the nest american war novel in guard of honor 1948 the story of a colonel on a florida army base struggling with how to balance the claims of black ofcers for racial equality with his duty to keep the base operating smoothly in wartime.
but as time passed realistic writ the shopping mall as new town square 1960 n this photograph democratic presidential candidate john f kennedy is shown campaigning at the bergen mall in paramus new jersey in 1960.
the bergen mall opened in 1957 at a time when similar shopping centers were popping up in suburbanizing metropolitan areas all over the united states.
real estate developers watched americans ee cities for suburbs and they followed the money locating shopping centers strategically at new highway intersections or along the busiest thoroughfares.
as suburbanites increasingly found branches of their favorite department and chain stores closer to home during the 1950s and 1960s they found it less and less necessary to go downtown.
shopping centers for their part went out of their way to sell themselves as modern style downtowns worthy of being the public core of new suburban communities even though legally they were privately owned space.
they provided the full range of shops and ser vices once found in city centers including restaurants post i ofces laundromats banks and even chapels.
they offered entertainment from movie theaters and skating rinks to free open air concerts carnivals and exhibitions.
they made auditoriums available for community meetings.
and they attracted public events like kennedy on the stump.
just four years earlier a regional shopping center would have been a rare campaign stop for a presidential candidate.
look closely at this photograph.
what kind of audience greeted candidate kennedy at the bergen mall.
how different might the crowd have looked in a more socially diverse urban center like manhattan or in nearby newark the largest city in new jersey at the time.
what did it mean for sites of consumption such as privately owned shopping centers to take on the roles and responsibilities previously associated with urban streets squares and parks.
how might current struggles of downtown merchants against big box chain stores like wal mart be related to this history.
chapter 37 the eisenhower era 1952 1960 ernest hemingway 1899 1961 celebrated both for his writing and his colorful swashbuckling lifestyle hemingway poses here with a dead leopard in 1953 ing fell from favor.
authors tended increasingly to write about the war in fantastic and even psychedelic prose.
joseph hellers catch 22 1961 dealt with the improbable antics and anguish of american airmen in the wartime mediterranean.
a savage satire it made readers hurt when they laughed.
the supercharged imagination of kurt vonnegut jr poured forth works of puzzling complexity in sometimes impenetrably inventive prose including the dark comedy war tale slaughterhouse five 1969.
the dilemmas created by the new mobility and afuence of american life were explored by pennsylvania born john updike in books like rabbit run 1960 and couples 1968 and by massachusetts bred john cheever in the wapshot chronicle 1957 and the wapshot scandal 1964.
louis auchincloss wrote elegantly about upper class new yorkers.
gore vidal penned a series of intriguing historical novels as well as several impish and always iconoclastic works in cluding myra breckinridge 1968 about a reincarnated transsexual.
together these writers constituted the rear guard of an older wasp white angle saxon protestant elite that had long dominated american writing.
poetry also owered in the postwar era though poets were often highly critical even deeply despairing about the character of american life.
older poets were still active including cantankerous ezra pound jailed after the war in a u s army detention center near pisa italy for alleged collaboration with the fascists.
connecticut insurance executive wallace stevens and new jersey pediatrician william carlos williams continued after 1945 to pursue second careers as prolic poets of world class stature.
but younger poets were coming to the fore during the postwar period.
pacic northwesterner theodore roethke wrote lyrically about the land until his death by drowning in puget sound in 1963.
robert lowell descended from a long line of patrician new eng landers sought to apply the wisdom of the puritan past to the perplexing present in allegorical poems like for the union dead 1964.
troubled sylvia plath crafted the moving verses of ariel published posthumously in 1966 and a disturbing novel the bell jar 1963 but her career was cut short when she took her own life in 1963.
anne sexton produced brooding autobiographical poems until her death by apparent suicide in 1974.
another brilliant poet of the period john berryman ended it all in 1972 by leaping from a minneapolis bridge onto the frozen bank of the mississippi river.
writing poetry seemed to be a dangerous pursuit in modern america.
the life of the poet it was said began in sadness and ended in madness.
playwrights were also active.
tennessee williams wrote a series of searing dramas about psychological mists struggling to hold themselves together amid the disintegrating forces of modern life.
noteworthy were a streetcar named desire 1947 and cat on a hot tin roof 1955.
arthur miller brought to the stage searching probes of american values notably death of a salesman 1949 and the crucible 1953 which treated the salem witch trials as a dark parable warning against the dangers of mccarthyism.
lorraine hansberry offered an affecting portrait of african american life in a raisin in the sun 1959.
in the 1960s edward albee exposed the rapacious underside of middleclass life in whos afraid of virginia woolf.
books by black authors also made the best seller lists beginning with richard wrights chilling portrait of a black chicago killer in native son 1940.
ralph ellison depicted the african americans searing quest postwar american literature death of a salesman first performed in 1949 arthur millers play probed the psychic costs of failure in a society that held out the promise of success to all.
the play especially resonated with audiences in the booming 1950s and quickly took its place as an american classic.
this scene from the original broadway production shows arthur kennedy as biff loman left confronting his father willy played by lee j cobb seated while his brother happy portrayed by cameron mitchell looks on.
not shown here is willys compassionate wife linda brilliantly acted by mildred dunnock.
for personal identity in invisible man 1952 a haunting novel narrated by a nameless black person who nds that none of his supposed supporters white philanthropists black nationalists and communist party members can see him as a real man.
james baldwin won plaudits as a novelist and essayist particularly for his sensitive reections on the racial question in the fire next time 1963.
black nationalist leroi jones who changed his name to imamu amiri baraka crafted powerful plays like dutchman 1964.
the south boasted a literary renaissance led by veteran mississippi author william faulkner who was a nobel recipient in 1950.
fellow mississippians walker percy and eudora welty grasped the falling torch from the failing faulkner who died in 1962.
tennessean robert penn warren immortalized louisiana politico huey long in all the kings men 1946.
flannery oconnor wrote perceptively of her native georgia and virginian william styron confronted the harsh history of his home state in a controversial ctional representation of an 1831 slave rebellion the confessions of nat turner 1967.
especially bountiful was the harvest of books by jewish novelists.
some critics quipped that a knowledge of yiddish was becoming necessary to understand much of the dialogue presented in modern american novels.
j d salinger painted an unforgettable portrait of a sensitive upper class anglo saxon adolescent in the catcher in the rye 1951 but other jewish writers found their favorite subject matter in the experience of lower and middle class jewish immigrants.
bernard malamud rendered a touching portrait of a family of new york jewish storekeepers in the assistant 1957.
malamud also explored the mythic qualities of the culture of baseball in the natural 1952.
philip roth wrote comically about young new jersey suburbanites in goodbye columbus 1959 and penned an uproarious account of a sexually obsessed middleaged new yorker in portnoys complaint 1969.
chicagoan saul bellow contributed masterful sketches of jewish urban and literary life in landmark books like the adventures of augie march 1953 and herzog 1962.
bellow became the eighth american nobel laureate for literature in 1977.
isaac bashevis singer immigrated to america from poland in the 1930s and continued to write in yiddish.
he won the nobel prize for literature in 1978.
e l doctorow employed old testament themes in his ctional account of atomic spies julius and ethel rosenberg the book of daniel 1971 and later he imaginatively recast other modern historical materials in books like ragtime 1975 worlds fair 1985 and billy bathgate 1989.
chapter 37 the eisenhower era 1952 1960 chronology eisenhower defeats stevenson for presidency ellison publishes invisible man cia engineered coup installs shah of iran joseph stalin dies french defeated at dien bien phu in vietnam army mccarthy hearings brown v board of education southeast asia treaty organization seato formed nasser becomes prime minister of egypt cia sponsored coup in guatemala montgomery bus boycott by blacks begins emergence of martin luther king jr geneva summit meeting on vietnam soviet union withdraws troops from austria warsaw pact signed af of l merges with cio tennessee williamss cat on a hot tin roof rst performed little rock school desegregation crisis civil rights act passed southern christian leadership conference sclc formed eisenhower doctrine soviet union launches sputnik satellites u s troops sent to lebanon ndea authorizes loans and grants for science and language education galbraith publishes the afuent society 1958 berlin crisis castro seizes power in cuba landrum grif n act alaska and hawaii attain statehood sit in movement for civil rights begins u 2 incident sabotages paris summit opec formed kennedy defeats nixon for presidency soviets crush hungarian revolt suez crisis eisenhower defeats stevenson for presidency mills publishes the power elite key terms the feminine mystique 945 rock n roll 947 checkers speech 948 mccarthyism 950 army mccarthy hearings 951 jim crow 951 montgomery bus boycott 953 brown v board of education of topeka kansas 953 student nonviolent coordinating committee sncc 957 people to know operation wetback 957 federal highway act of 1956 958 policy of boldness 959 hungarian uprising 959 dien bien phu battle of 960 suez crisis 960 organization of petroleum exporting countries opec 961 sputnik 962 kitchen debate 964 dwight d ike eisenhower richard m nixon betty friedan elvis presley joseph mccarthy rosa parks martin luther king jr earl warren john foster dulles nikita khrushchev ho chi minh gamal abdel nasser fidel castro john f kennedy lyndon b johnson to learn more to learn more glenn altschuler all shook up how rock n roll changed america 2003 stephen ambrose eisenhower the president 1984 lizabeth cohen a consumers republic the politics of mass consumption in postwar america 2003 mary dudziak cold war civil rights 2000 john egerton speak now against the day the generation before the civil rights movement in the south 1994 tom engelhardt the end of victory culture 1995 melvyn lefer for the soul of mankind the united states the soviet union and the cold war 2007 elaine may homeward bound american families in the cold war era 1988 thomas sugrue origins of the urban crisis race and inequality in postwar detroit 1992 theodore white making of the president 1960 1961 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the stormy sixties 1960 1968 let the word go forth from this time and place to friend and foe alike that the torch has been passed to a new generation of americans.
john f kennedy inaugural 1961 c omplacent and comfortable as the 1950s closed americans elected in 1960 a young vigorous president who pledged to get the country moving again neither the nation nor the new president had any inkling as the new decade opened just how actionpacked it would be both at home and abroad.
the 1960s would bring a sexual revolution a civil rights revolution the emergence of a youth culture a devastating war in vietnam and the beginnings at least of a feminist revolution.
by the end of the stormy sixties many americans would yearn nostalgically for the comparative calm of the fties.
kennedys new frontier spirit hatless and topcoatless in the twenty two degree chill john f kennedy delivered a stirring inaugural address on january 20 1961.
tall elegantly handsome speaking crisply and with staccato nger jabs at the air kennedy personied the glamour and vitality of the new administration.
the youngest president ever elected he assembled one of the youngest cabinets including his thirty ve year old brother robert f kennedy as attorney general.
bobby the president quipped would nd some legal experience useful when he began to practice law.
the new attorney general set out among other reforms to recast the priorities of the fbi.
the bureau deployed nearly a thousand agents on internal security work but targeted only a dozen against orga nized crime and gave virtually no attention to civil rights violations.
robert kennedys efforts were stoutly resisted by j edgar hoover who had served as fbi director longer than the new attorney general had been alive.
business whiz robert s mcnamara left the presidency of the ford motor company to take over the defense department.
along with other youthful talented advisers these appointees made up an inner circle of the best and the brightest men around the president.
from the outset kennedy inspired high expectations especially among the young.
his challenge of a new frontier quickened patriotic pulses.
he brought this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website kennedy takes charge richard goodwin b.
1931 a young peace corps staffer eloquently summed up the buoyantly optimistic mood of the early 1960s for a moment it seemed as if the entire country the whole spinning globe rested malleable and receptive in our benecent hands.
a warm heart to the cold war when he proposed the peace corps an army of idealistic and mostly youthful volunteers to bring american skills to underdeveloped countries.
he summoned citizens to ser vice with his clarion call to ask not what your country can do for you ask what you can do for your country himself harvard educated kennedy and his ivy league lieutenants heavily from harvard radiated condence in their abilities.
the presidents personal grace and wit won him the deep affection of many of his fellow citizens.
a journalist called kennedy the most seductive man ive ever met.
he exuded a sense of vibrant life and humor that seemed naturally to bubble up out of him in an unprecedented gesture he invited white maned poet robert frost to speak at his inaugural ceremonies.
the old yankee versier shrewdly took stock of the situation.
youre something of irish and i suppose something of harvard he told kennedy and advised him to be more irish than harvard.
the new frontier at home kennedy came into ofce with fragile democratic majorities in congress.
southern democrats threatened to team up with republicans and ax new frontier proposals such as medical assistance for the aged and increased federal aid to education.
kennedy won a rst round in his campaign for a more cooperative congress when he forced an expansion of the all important house rules committee dominated by conser vatives who could have bottled up his entire legislative program.
despite this victory the new frontier did not expand swiftly.
key medical and education bills remained stalled in congress.
another vexing problem was the economy.
kennedy had campaigned on the theme of revitalizing the economy after the recessions of the eisenhower years.
his administration helped negotiate a noninationary wage agreement in the steel industry in early 1962.
the assumption was that the companies for their part would keep the lid on prices.
but almost immediately steel management announced signicant price president john f kennedy and his wife jacqueline bouvier kennedy shown here leaving the white house to attend a series of inaugural balls in january 1961 the young and vibrant rst couple brought beauty style and grace to the presidency.
