 556  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 Of course, the West was not empty land waiting to be developed. Others had been there long before the American migration. But the Indian and ­Hispanic inhabitants of the region soon found themselves swept aside by American settlers, all facilitated by U.S. presidents and congressmen who encouraged the nation’s continental expansion. Westward expansion was especially important to southerners, many of whom wanted cheap new lands to plant using slave labor. In addition, southerners had long enjoyed disproportionate political power because of the provision in the U.S. Constitution that counted slaves as part of the population in determining the number of congressional seats for each state. Thirteen of the first sixteen presidents were from the South, and most congressional leadership positions were held by southerners. But southern political influence began dwindling as the industrializing Midwest and Northeast grew and increased their representation in Congress. Southerners wanted new western states to boost ­pro-​­southern representation and ensure that slavery was never threatened. As a Mississippi senator said, “I would spread the blessings of slavery . . . to the uttermost ends of the earth.” Such motives made the addition of new western territory especially controversial. Would the territory be slave or free?

Moving West
 During the ­mid–​­nineteenth century, America remained a nation in motion. In 1845, New York newspaper editor and D ­ emocratic-​­party propagandist John L. O’Sullivan gave a catchy name to the nation’s aggressive expansion. “Our manifest destiny,” he wrote, “is to overspread and to possess the whole of the continent which Providence has given us for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions . . . [and for the] great experiment of liberty.” O’Sullivan spoke for many Americans who saw no reason not to take control of all of North America: “Yes, more, more, more! . . . until our national destiny is fulfilled.” The concept of “manifest destiny” assumed that the United States had a ­God-​­given mission to extend its Christian republic and capitalist civilization from the Atlantic to the ­Pacific—​­and beyond. It also took for granted the superiority of American ideals and institutions, including the opportunity to bring liberty and prosperity to native peoples. This widely embraced notion of manifest (“­self-​­evident”) destiny offered a moral justification for territorial expansion and the expansion of slavery. But God was not driving American expansion; Americans were. However idealized, manifest destiny for many Americans was in essence a cluster of flimsy rationalizations and racist attitudes justifying the conquest of weaker peoples.

Moving West  557


 the western frontier

 Most western pioneers during the second quarter of the nineteenth century were A ­ merican-​­born whites from the Upper South and the Midwest. Only a few free African Americans joined in the migration. What spurred the massive migration westward was the continuing population explosion in the United States and the desire for land and wealth. Although some people traveled by sea to the Pacific coast, most went overland. Between 1841 and 1867, some 350,000 men, women, and children made the difficult trek to California or Oregon, while hundreds of thousands of others settled in such areas as Colorado, Texas, and Arkansas.

WAGON TRAILS WEST

D


Sacram e nto
River


San Diego


NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

 IL

Nauvoo
KANSAS TERRITORY
Independence St. Louis Bent’s Fort Westport Tipton 
Taos


Raton
Pass


Santa Fe


B


 MS

 LA

 e and Gr

San
Antonio




 AR

Sab
 ine

 TX

San Jacinto
River


 MEXICO



 ve r

 er Riv

Rio




Ri


UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

Oregon Trail
Mormon Trail
California Trail
Oxbow Route
Santa Fe Trail
Continental Divide


 MO

Fort Atkinson


 r ive sR zo ra

PA C I F I C OCEAN

 o ad er

 iv

South Platte
River


UTAH TERRITORY

 s

Los Angeles


Fort
Fort Bridger Laramie


Salt Lake City


 WI

 IA

 sa

A


Santa Barbara


North
Platte
River


 n ka Ar

 VA

 CALIFORNIA

Great
Salt
Lake


Mis
 si

 er

 NE

Monterey


 r

S
I N
T A
U N
M O


A


Lake
Tahoe


 Sutter’s Fort

 ve

 NEBRASKA

 South TERRITORY Pass

300 Miles


GULF OF MEXICO

300 Kilometers


 What did settlers migrating west of the Mississippi River hope to find? What were the perils of the Overland Trails? WWN64 ■ Describe the experience of a typical settler traveling on the Overland Trails. ■ ■

Figure M13_1
 1st proof

Lake Michigan


 ke

 SIERR

San
Francisco


Ri


Ri


Mississipp
 i R iver

Fort
Boise


 sto ne llow Ye

Superior
 ke La

R
 ipp i ss

S na


OREGON TERRITORY

Co
 lo Ri r v

WILLAMETTE VALLEY

 M is souri River

 r

WASHINGTON TERRITORY

Fort


Astoria
Vancouver
Fort
Portland
Walla Walla
Oregon City


 CANADA

TA SO Y NE R MIN ITO RR TE ED NIZ GA RY O OR UN ERRIT T

Y
C K
R O


Columbia
River


 ve

VANCOUVER ISLAND

 558  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 Most of the pioneers who made their way west on the Overland Trails traveled in family groups. By 1845, some 5,000 people were making the s­ ix-​ ­month journey annually. The discovery of gold in California in 1848 brought some 30,000 pioneers along the Oregon Trail in 1849. By 1850, the peak year of travel along the trail, the annual count had risen to 55,000.

 plains indians

 More than 325,000 Indians inhabited the Southwest, the Great Plains, California, and the Pacific Northwest in 1840, when the great migration of white settlers into the region began. The Native Americans were divided into more than 200 nations, each with its own language, religion, c­ ultural practices, and system of governance. Plains Indians included the Arapaho, Blackfoot, Cheyenne, Kiowa, and Sioux. Some were primarily farmers; others were nomadic, following buffalo herds across the prairie grasslands. In the arid Southwest region that today includes Arizona, New Mexico, and southern Utah, the peaceful Pueblo n ­ ations—​­Acoma, Hopi, Laguna, Taos, Zia, ­Zuni—​­were sophisticated farmers who lived in adobe villages along rivers that irrigated their crops of corn, beans, and squash. Their rivals were the Apache and the Navajo, warlike hunters who roamed the countryside in small bands and preyed upon the Pueblos. They, in turn, were periodically harassed

 Buffalo Hunt, Chasing Back (1860s) This painting by George Catlin shows a hunter outrunning a buffalo.

Moving West  559


 by their powerful enemies, the Comanche. Many Indian nations were hostile to each other, resulting in frequent wars and raids. To the north in the Great Basin, Paiutes and Gosiutes struggled to survive in the harsh, arid region of what is today Nevada, Utah, and eastern California. They traveled in family groups and subsisted on berries, pine nuts, insects, and rodents. Along the California coast, Indians lived in small villages. They gathered wild plants and acorns and were experts at fishing. The Native Americans in the Pacific N ­ orthwest—​­the Nisqually, Spokane, Yakama, Chinook, Klamath, and Nez Perce (Pierced Nose)—enjoyed the most abundant natural resources and the most temperate climate. The ocean and rivers provided whales, seals, salmon, and crabs, and lush inland forests harbored game, berries, and nuts. Majestic forests of fir, redwood, and cedar offered wood for cooking and shelter. All these Indian societies eventually felt the unrelenting pressure of white expansion and conquest, and the influx of white settlers and hunters posed a direct threat to the Indians’ cultural survival. When federal officials could not coerce, cajole, or confuse Indian leaders into selling the title to their tribal lands, fighting ensued. And, after the discovery of gold in California in early 1848, the tidal wave of white expansion flowed all the way to the west coast, violently engulfing Native Americans and Mexicans in its wake.

 mexico and the spanish west

 As American settlers trespassed across Indian lands, they also encountered ­Spanish-​­speaking peoples. Many whites were as prejudiced toward Hispanics as they were toward Indians. Senator Lewis Cass from Michigan, who would be the Democratic candidate for president in 1848, expressed the common bias among white expansionists: “We do not want the people of Mexico, either as citizens or as subjects. All we want is their . . . territory.” The ­centuries-​­old Spanish efforts at colonization in the northernmost provinces of Mexico had been less successful in Arizona and Texas than in New Mexico and Florida. The Yuma and Apaches in Arizona and the Comanches and Apaches in Texas thwarted Spanish efforts to establish Catholic missions. By 1790, the Hispanic population in Texas numbered only 2,510, while in New Mexico it exceeded 20,000. In 1807, French forces led by Napoléon had occupied Spain and imprisoned the king, creating confusion throughout Spain’s colonial possessions in the Western Hemisphere, including Mexico. Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla, a creole priest (born in Mexico of European ancestry), took advantage of the fluid situation to convince Indians and Hispanics to revolt against Spanish rule in ­Mexico. But the poorly organized uprising failed miserably.

 560  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 In 1820, Mexican creoles again tried to liberate themselves from Spanish authority. Facing a growing revolt, the last Spanish officials withdrew in 1821, and Mexico became an independent nation. However, the infant republic struggled to develop a stable government and an effective economy. Americans eagerly took advantage of Mexico’s instability, especially in its sparsely populated northern ­provinces—​­areas that included ­present-day Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, Nevada, California, and portions of Colorado, Oklahoma, Kansas, and Wyoming. American fur traders streamed into New Mexico and Arizona, developing a profitable trade in beaver pelts along the Santa Fe Trail to St. Louis. During the 1830s and 1840s, thousands of “¡Viva El Cura Hidalgo!” This Americans made the arduous journey patriotic image celebrating Mexican in wagons on the Santa Fe Trail from independence shows Father Miguel Hidalgo in an oval medallion. Missouri to New Mexico. The trek was not for the fainthearted. In 1847 alone, marauding Indians killed f­orty-​­seven Americans, destroyed 330 wagons, and stole 6,500 horses, cattle, and oxen along the trail.

 the overland trails

 During the early nineteenth century, the Far Northwest consisted of the Nebraska, Washington, and Oregon Territories. The Oregon Country included what became the states of Oregon, Idaho, and Washington, parts of Montana and Wyoming, and the Canadian province of British Columbia. It was an unsettled region claimed by both Great Britain and the United States. By the Convention of 1818, the two nations agreed to “joint occupation” of the Oregon Country, each drawn there initially by the profitable trade in fur pelts. During the 1820s and 1830s, the fur trade inspired a reckless breed of “mountain men” to abandon civilization and embrace a primitive existence in the wilderness. The rugged trappers were the first whites to find their way around the Rocky Mountains, and they pioneered the trails that settlers would

Moving West  561


 Fur Traders Descending the Missouri (1845) Originally titled “­French-​­Trader, ­Half-​ ­Breed Son,” this oil painting depicts a white settler sailing down the river with his ­ half–​­Native American ­son—​­not an uncommon sight in western America.

 travel as they flooded the Oregon Country and headed across the border into California.

 the great migration Word of Oregon’s fertile soil, plentiful rainfall, and magnificent forests gradually spread eastward. By 1840, a trickle of ­emigrants—​­farmers, missionaries, teachers, fur traders, and s­ hopkeepers—​ ­was flowing along the Oregon Trail, a 2,000-mile footpath that formed the great highway west connecting the Missouri River near St. Louis with Oregon. Soon, “Oregon fever” swept the nation. To an Ohio woman, “going to the Far West seemed like the entrance to a new world, one of freedom, happiness, and prosperity.” Some pioneers desperately sought to escape debts, or dull lives, or bad marriages. “We had nothing to lose,” wrote one woman, “and we might gain a fortune.” For whatever reason, tens of thousands of Americans began pulling up stakes and moving their families west. In 1841 and 1842, the first sizable wagon trains made the long trip across half the continent, and in 1843 the movement became a mass migration. One pioneer said that the wagon trains, sometimes six miles long, were like mobile communities. “Everybody was supposed to rise at daylight, and while the women were preparing breakfast, the men rounded up the cattle, took down the tents, yoked the oxen to the wagons, and made everything ready to start.” The ­Oregon-​­bound wagon trains followed the trail west from Independence, Missouri, then along the winding North Platte River into what is now

 562  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 Wyoming, through South Pass down to Fort Bridger (abode of the celebrated mountain man Jim Bridger), then down the meandering Snake River through what is now Idaho to the ­salmon-​­filled Columbia River. From there, they moved through the Cascade Mountains to their goal: Oregon’s fertile Willamette Valley.

 life on the trail

 Traveling in “prairie schooners,” sturdy ­canvas-​ ­covered wagons pulled by teams of tramping oxen, sunburned settlers bumped and jostled their way across the rugged trails, mountains, and plains blackened by vast herds of buffaloes. Indians rarely attacked the wagon trains; they allowed most settlers to pass through their tribal lands unmolested. Many wagon trains received generous aid from Indians who served as guides, advisers, or traders. The Indians, one female pioneer noted, “proved better than represented.” To be sure, as the number of pioneers increased dramatically during the 1850s, disputes with Indians over land and water increased, but never to the degree portrayed in novels, films, and television shows. Still, the long journey west, usually five to six months, was extraordinarily difficult, an exodus of grinding hardship during broiling summers, fierce thunderstorms, and bitterly cold winters reliable for their heavy snows. Wagons broke down, oxen died, and diseases like cholera and dysentery took their toll on pioneers. “The cowards never started,” a popular saying went, “and the weak died on the way.”

 women pioneers

 The diary of Amelia Knight, who set out for Oregon in 1853 with her husband and seven children, reveals the mortal threats along the trail: “Chatfield quite sick with scarlet fever. A calf took sick and died before breakfast. Lost one of our oxen; he dropped dead in the yoke. I could hardly help shedding tears. Yesterday my eighth child was born.” Cholera claimed many lives because of tainted water and contaminated food. On average, there was one grave every eighty yards along the trail. Each step “of the slow, plodding cattle,” wrote a woman emigrant, “carried us farther and farther from civilization into a desolate, barbarous country.” Initially, the western pioneers adopted the same division of labor used back East. Women cooked, washed, sewed, and monitored the children, while men drove the wagons, tended the horses and cattle, and did the heavy labor. But the unique demands of the western trails soon dissolved such neat distinctions. Women found themselves gathering buffalo dung for fuel, driving wagons, working to dislodge wagons mired in mud, helping to construct makeshift bridges, pitching tents, or participating in a variety of other “unladylike” tasks. Elizabeth Smith described a typical daily routine along the trail when she wrote in her diary: “Men making rafts. Women cooking and washing. Chil-

Moving West  563


 Gathering buffalo chips Women on the Overland Trails not only cooked and washed and took care of their children but also gathered dried buffalo dung to use as fuel as their wagons crossed the treeless plains.

 dren crying.” Another noted that “we have no time for sociability. From the time we get up in the morning, until we are on the road, it’s hurry scurry.” Southerner Lavinia Porter said that the trip along the California Trail was so difficult that it was still “a source of wonder to me how we [women] were able to endure it.” Men on the plains, she observed, were not willing “to wait upon women as they were in more civilized communities.” Through her hardships, she became convinced that the American woman was “endowed with the courage of her brave pioneer ancestors, and no matter what the environment she can adapt herself to all situations, even the perilous trip across the western half of this great continent.” The hard labor of the trail understandably provoked tensions within families and powerful yearnings for home. Divorces soared in the West. Many a tired pioneer could identify with the following comment in a girl’s journal: “Poor Ma said only this morning, ‘Oh, I wish we had never started.’ She looks so sorrowful and dejected.” Another woman wondered “what had possessed my husband, anyway, that he should have thought of bringing us away out through this God forsaken country.” Some of the emigrants turned back, but most continued on. “Oh dear,” an Iowa woman confided in her journal, “I do so want to get there. It is now

 564  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 almost four months since we have slept in a house.” Once in Oregon or California, the emigrants set about establishing stable communities. Noted one settler: “Friday, October 27. Arrived at Oregon City at the falls of the Willamette River. Saturday, October 28. Went to work.” Pioneers in Oregon found themselves initially living in a “primitive state” requiring backbreaking work to create ­self-​­sustaining homesteads. Mirroring their duties on the Overland trails, women who settled in Oregon did much of the same hard physical labor as men, day and night. “I am a very old woman,” reported ­twenty-​­nine-​­year-​­old Sarah Everett. “My face is thin, sunken, and wrinkled, my hands bony, withered, and hard.” Another Oregon pioneer warned that a “woman that cannot endure almost as much as a horse has no business here.” Many pioneer families were devastated by the struggle of scratching out new lives in the West. The Malick family, for example, left Illinois in 1848 and started a farm in the Oregon Territory. George Malick, the father, died soon thereafter, as did three of the older children. “We are all well,” widow Abigail Malick wrote in 1855 to relatives back in Illinois. “All that are left of us.”

 the settlement of california California was also a powerful magnet for settlers and adventurers. It had first felt the influence of European culture in 1769, when Spain grew concerned about Russian seal traders moving south along the Pacific coast from Alaska. To thwart Russian intentions, Spain sent a naval expedition to settle the region. The Spanish discovered San Francisco Bay and constructed presidios (military garrisons) at San Diego and Monterey. Even more important, Franciscan friars, led by Junípero Serra, established a Catholic mission at San Diego. Over the next fifty years, Franciscans built twenty more missions, spaced a day’s journey apart along the coast from San Diego northward to San Francisco. The ­mission-​­centered culture created by the Hispanic settlers who migrated to California from Mexico was quite different from those in Texas and New Mexico, where the original missions were converted into secular communities, and the property was divided among the Indians. In California, however, the missions were much larger, more influential, and longer lasting. By the nineteenth century, Spanish Catholic missionaries, aided by Spanish soldiers, controlled most of the Indians living along the California coast. The friars (priests) enticed the Indians into “missions” by offering gifts or impressing them with their “magical” religious rituals. Once inside the missions, the Indians were baptized as Catholics, taught Spanish, and stripped of their cultural heritage.

Moving West  565


 catholic missions

 The California Catholic missions served as churches, villages, fortresses, homes, schools, shops, farms, and outposts of Spanish rule. The missions also quickly became agricultural enterprises, producing crops, livestock, clothing, and household goods, both for profit and to supply the neighboring presidios. Indians provided most of the labor. The Franciscans viewed forced Indian labor as both a practical necessity and a morally enriching responsibility essential to transforming unproductive Indians into industrious Christians. A mission’s daily routine began at dawn with the ringing of a bell, which summoned the community to prayer. Work began an hour later and did not end until an hour before sunset. Most Indian men worked in the fields. Some were trained in special skills, such as masonry, carpentry, or leatherwork. Women handled domestic chores, but during harvest season, everyone was expected to help in the fields. Instead of wages, the Indians received clothing, food, housing, and religious instruction. The Franciscans used force to control their captive laborers. Rebellious Indians were whipped or imprisoned, and mission Indians died at an alarming rate. One Franciscan friar reported that “of every four Indian children born, three die in their first or second year, while those who survive do not reach the age of t­ wenty-​­five.” Infectious disease was the primary threat, but the grueling labor regimen took a high toll as well. The Native American population along the California coast declined from 72,000 in 1769 to 18,000 by 1821. Saving souls cost many lives. With Mexican independence in 1821, the Spanish missions slowly disintegrated and fell into disuse. By the time the first Americans began to trickle into California, they found a vast, beautiful province with only a small, scattered population of 6,000 Mexicans ruled by a few dominant caballeros or ­rancheros—“gentlemen” who owned the largest ranches in the province, much like the planters who lorded over the Lower South. Hispanic Californians, called Californios, took comfort that Mexico City, the capital, was too far away to exercise effective control over them. Between 1821, when Mexico gained its independence, and 1841, ­Spanish-​­speaking Californians, as well as many recent American arrivals, staged ten revolts against Mexican governors. Among the white immigrants in California in the m ­ id–​­nineteenth century was John A. Sutter, a Swiss settler who had founded a colony of European emigrants. At the junction of the Sacramento and American Rivers (later the site of the city of Sacramento), Sutter built an enormous fort with walls eighteen feet tall to protect the settlers and their shops.

 566  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 New Helvetia (Americans called it Sutter’s Fort), completed in 1843, stood at the end of what became the California Trail, which forked southward off the Oregon Trail and crossed the Sierra Nevada, a soaring mountain range running north/south along eastern California. By the start of 1846 there were perhaps 800 Americans in California, along with approximately 10,000 C ­ alifornios. The Americans learned to speak Spanish, often embraced ­Catholicism, won Mexican citizenship and spouses, and participated in local politics.

 the donner party

 The most tragic story of the efforts to get to California using the Overland Trails involved the party headed by George Donner, a prosperous s­ixty-​­two-​­year-​­old farmer from Illinois who in some respects epitomized the restless mobility of ­nineteenth-​­century Americans. Born in North Carolina, he had moved first to Kentucky, then Indiana, and eventually Illinois. Now, he was determined to relocate to California. In m ­ id-​­April 1846, Donner led his family and a train of s­eventy-​­four other settlers and ­twenty-​­three wagons to the Oregon Trail. Early on, Donner’s wife reported that the Indians were friendly and the prairie “beautiful beyond description.” Her outlook was optimistic: “Indeed, if I do not experience something far worse than I have yet done, I shall say that the trouble all is in getting started.” But “the trouble” soon appeared, for the Donner Party made several fatal mistakes: starting too late in the year, overloading their wagons, and taking a foolish shortcut to California across the Wasatch Mountains in the Utah Territory. They had inadequate food, water, clothing, and experience for the journey ahead. In the Wasatch Range, the Donner Party got lost taking a supposed “shortcut” and was forced to backtrack, losing three precious weeks in the process. An early September snow further slowed their progress. They eventually found their way across the Wasatch Mountains and into the desert leading to the Great Salt Lake, but crossing the parched desert exacted a terrible toll. They lost more than 100 oxen and were forced to abandon several wagons and their precious supplies. Most important, they had lost valuable time as winter weather began to set in. When the Donner Party reached Truckee Pass in eastern California, the last mountain barrier before the Sacramento Valley, a ­two-​­week-​­long blizzard trapped them in two separate camps. By December, the pioneers, half of them children, were marooned with only enough food to last through the end of the month. Seventeen of the strongest members, calling themselves the “Forlorn Hope,” decided to cross the pass on their own, but they were trapped by more snow. Two of them turned back; eight more died of exposure and starvation.

Moving West  567


 Just before he died, Billy Graves urged his daughters to eat his body. The daughters were appalled at first, but soon saw no other choice. When two more died, they, too, were eaten. Only seven lived to reach the Sacramento Valley. Back at the main camps, the survivors had slaughtered and eaten the last of the livestock, then boiled hides and bones. They had also killed two Indian guides and eaten them. When a rescue party finally reached them two months later, they discovered a grisly scene. Thirteen people had died, and cannibalism had become commonplace; one pioneer had noted casually in his diary, “Mrs. Murphy said here yesterday that she thought she would commence on Milt and eat him.” As the rescuers led the ­forty-​­seven survivors over the pass, George Donner, so weakened and distressed that he was unable to walk, stayed behind to die. His wife chose to remain with him.

 the pathfinder: john frémont

 Despite the hardships and dangers of the overland crossing, the Far West proved an irresistible attraction for hundreds of thousands of pioneers. The most enthusiastic champion of American settlement in Mexican California and the Far West was John Charles Frémont, an impetuous junior army officer who during the 1840s became America’s most famous celebrity and a notorious troublemaker. Born out of wedlock in Savannah, Georgia, and raised in the South, Frémont developed a robust love of the outdoors. In 1838, after attending the College of Charleston, he was commissioned a second lieutenant in the U.S. Topographical Corps, an organization whose mission was to explore and map new western territories. Frémont soon excelled at surveying, mapmaking, and woodcraft while becoming versed in geology, botany, ornithology, and zoology. In 1841, Frémont courted and married seventeen-​­year-​­old Jessie B ­ enton, the feisty daughter of Thomas Hart Benton, the powerful Missouri s­ enator. Once Benton’s anger at his daughter subsided, he became Frémont’s foremost booster and helped arrange the “The Pathfinder” John Charles Frémont explorations that would bring Frémont became a national hero as a result of his fame as the nation’s leading scientific explorations in the Far West. e­ xplorer-​­adventurer.

 568  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 In 1842, the fearless Frémont, who believed he was a man of destiny, set out from ­present-​­day Kansas City with two dozen soldiers to map the eastern half of the Oregon Trail. They spent five months collecting plant and animal specimens and drawing maps in uncharted territory. With his wife’s considerable help, Frémont published in newspapers across the nation excerpts from a ­rip-​­roaring account of his explorations titled A Report on an Exploration of the Country Lying between the Missouri River and the Rocky Mountains on the Line of the Kansas and Great Platte Rivers. In describing the Great Plains, the Frémonts wrote that the “Indians and buffalo were the poetry and life of the prairie, and our camp was full of exhilaration.” The popular stories of Frémont’s adventures made him an instant national celebrity and earned him the nickname, “the Pathfinder.” After reading about the expedition, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, the nation’s most popular poet, announced that “Frémont has touched my imagination. What a wild life, and what a fresh kind of existence! But ah, the discomforts!” The success of Frémont’s first western explorations quickly led to another expedition, this time intended to map the second and more difficult half of the Oregon Trail from the South Pass, a 20-mile gap in the Rocky Mountains in ­present-​­day Wyoming. The expedition would then go down the Snake River to the Columbia River and into Oregon, eventually making its way south through the Sierra Nevada to Sutter’s Fort near what would become Sacramento, California, before heading back. Frémont’s group was the first to cross the ­snow-​­and i­ce-​­covered Sierra Nevada in the winter, a spectacular feat. His report of his expedition and the maps it generated spurred massive migrations to Utah, Oregon, and California throughout the 1840s, including the trek of the Mormons from Illinois to Salt Lake City, Utah. Rarely one to follow orders, keep promises, or admit mistakes, the impulsive, ­iron-​­willed Frémont surprised his superior officers when he launched a “military” expedition on his own. In August 1845, Frémont, now a captain, and ­sixty-​­two heavily armed soldiers, sailors, scientists, hunters, and frontiersmen, headed west from St. Louis on another mysterious expedition. In December, Frémont’s adventurers swept down the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada and headed southward through the Central Valley of ­Mexican-​ ­controlled California. Frémont told Mexican authorities that his mission was strictly scientific and that his men were civilians. In Monterey, in January 1846, Frémont received secret instructions from President James K. Polk indicating that the United States intended to take control of California from Mexico. Frémont was ordered to encourage a “spontaneous” uprising among the Americans living there.

Moving West  569


 Suspicious Mexican officials ordered Frémont to leave the province. He did so, leading his explorers into Oregon, attacking Indian villages along the way. But the Americans soon returned. To cover his efforts to spark a revolution among the ­English-​­speaking Californians, most of whom were Americans, Frémont officially submitted his resignation from the army so that he thereafter would be acting as a private citizen rather than as a member of the U.S. government. Then Frémont and his band of soldiers and “rough, ­leather-​­jacketed frontiersmen” began stirring unrest. On June 14, 1846, American settlers captured Sonoma in northern California and proclaimed the Republic of California. They hoisted a linen flag featuring a grizzly bear and star, a version of which would later become the California state flag. On June 25, Frémont and his band marched into Sonoma. All of California was in American control when news arrived there of the outbreak of the ­Mexican-​­American War.

 american settlements in texas

 The American passion for new western land focused largely on Texas, the closest of all the ­northern

 American pioneers This 1850 photograph captures some of the many pioneers who headed west for brighter futures.

 570  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 Mexican borderlands, and an area of rich soil, lush prairie grass, plentiful timber, abundant wildlife, and numerous creeks and rivers. During the 1820s, the United States had twice offered to buy Texas, but the Mexican government refused to sell. Mexicans were frightened and infuriated by the idea of Yankees acquiring their “sacred soil”—but that is what happened. The leading promoter of American settlement in the coastal plain of Texas was Stephen Fuller Austin, a visionary land developer (empresario) who convinced the Mexican government that he could recruit 300 American families to settle between the Colorado and Brazos Rivers along the Gulf coast of Texas and create a “buffer” on the northern frontier between the feared Comanche Indians and the Mexican settlements to the south. Americans eagerly settled in Austin’s Anglo “colony” in east Texas. They each received 177 free acres and had access to thousands of acres of common pasture for ranching (Austin received 65,000 acres for his efforts). Most of the Anglos were ranchers or farmers drawn to the fertile, inexpensive lands in the river valleys. A few of the settlers were wealthy planters who brought large numbers of slaves with them at a time when Mexico was prohibiting the importation of slaves. An American reported that eastern Texas was “literally alive with all kinds of game. We have only to go out a few miles into a swamp . . . to find as many wild cattle as one could wish.” There were as many buffalo in the area as cattle. By 1830, coastal Texas had far more Americans living there than Hispanics (Tejanos) or I­ ndians—​­about 20,000 white settlers (called Anglos, or Texians), and 1,000 enslaved blacks, brought to grow and harvest cotton. By 1835, there were 35,000 Texians, 3,000 African American slaves, and a booming cotton economy. So many people in the Carolinas, Georgia, Alabama, Tennessee, and Missouri had migrated to Texas that the phrase “Gone to Texas”—or its initials, “GTT,” were often carved into the doors of cabins left behind. The flood of Americans into Texas led to numerous clashes with Indians as well as Mexican officials, who began having second thoughts about their “tolerated guests.” A Mexican congressman issued an accurate warning in 1830: “Mexicans! Watch closely, for you know all too well the ­Anglo-​­Saxon greed for territory. We have generously granted land to these Nordics; they have made their homes with us, but their hearts are with their native land. We are continually in civil wars and revolutions; we are weak, and know i­t—​­and they know it also. They may conspire with the United States to take Texas from us. From this time, be on your guard!”

 the texas war for independence

 Mexican officials were so worried about the behavior and intentions of Americans living in Texas that

Moving West  571


 in April 1830 they suddenly outlawed further immigration from the United States. But Americans, who viewed the Mexicans, their army, and their fractured and incompetent government with contempt, kept coming. By 1835, the Texians and their enslaved blacks outnumbered the Tejanos (­Spanish-​­speaking Texans) ten to one. In a letter to his cousin in 1835, Stephen Austin left no doubt about his plans: “It is very evident that Texas should be effectually, and fully, ­Americanized—​­that ­is—​­settled by a population that will harmonize with their neighbors on the East, in language, political principles, common origin, sympathy, and even interest. Texas must be a slave country. It is no longer a matter of doubt.” A changing political situation in Mexico aggravated the growing tensions. In 1834, General Antonio López de Santa Anna, the Mexican president, suspended the national congress and became a dictator, calling himself the “Napoleon of the West.” Texans feared that Santa Anna planned to free “our slaves and to make slaves of us.” When Santa Anna imprisoned Austin in 1834, Texans decided that the Mexican ruler had to go. Upon his release from jail eighteen months later, Austin called for Texans to revolt: “War is our only resource. There is no other remedy. We must defend our rights, ourselves, and our country by force of arms.” He urged that Texas become fully American, promote slavery, and join the United States. In the fall of 1835, Texans followed Austin’s lead and rebelled against Santa Anna’s “despotism.” An infuriated Santa Anna ordered all Americans expelled, all Texans disarmed, and all rebels arrested and executed as “pirates.” As sporadic fighting erupted, hundreds of armed volunteers from southern states rushed to assist the 30,000 Texians and Tejanos fighting for their independence against a Mexican nation of 7 million people. “The sword is drawn!” Austin proclaimed.

 the alamo

 At San Antonio, the provincial capital in southern Texas, General Santa Anna’s 3,000-man army assaulted a group of fewer than 200 Texians, Tejanos, and members of the Texas volunteer army holed up in an abandoned Catholic mission called the Alamo. The outnumbered and outgunned Texas rebels were led by three colorful adventurers with checkered pasts: James “Jim” Bowie, William Barret Travis, and David Crockett. They symbolized the role of Texas as a haven for people wanting second chances. The ­sandy-​­haired Bowie, born in Kentucky but raised in Louisiana, had become a ruthless slave trader and deceitful land speculator. However, he was most famous for the “bowie knife” he used to wound and kill men in n ­ umerous

 572  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 fights. Bowie claimed he had never started a fight nor lost one. And he was hard to bring down. In his most famous brawl, he was shot twice, stabbed, and impaled by a sword before he killed his opponent with his knife. Bowie wore out his welcome in Louisiana and migrated to Texas in 1828, settled near San Antonio, and came to own about a million acres of Texas land. He married a prominent Mexican woman, became a Mexican citizen, and learned Spanish, but a cholera epidemic killed his wife and two children, as well as his ­in-​­laws. Upon learning of the Texas Revolution, Bowie joined the volunteer army and fought in several battles before arriving in San Antonio in January 1836. Bowie, often “roaring drunk,” commanded the Texas volunteers in the Alamo while William Travis, a ­hot-​­tempered, ­twenty-​­six-​­year-​­old lawyer and teacher, led the Texian “regular army” soldiers. Travis had come to Texas by way of Alabama, where he had left behind a failed marriage, a pregnant wife, a t­ wo-​­year-​ ­old son, considerable debts, and, rumors claimed, a man he had killed. Travis pledged that he would redeem his life by doing something great and honorable in ­Texas—​­or die trying. His determination to face an honorable death led him to refuse orders to retreat from the Alamo. The most famous American at the Alamo was David Crockett, the Tennessee frontiersman, sharpshooter, bear hunter, and storyteller who had fought under Andrew Jackson and served in Congress as an ­anti-​­Jackson Whig. In his last speech before Congress after being defeated for reelection, Crockett, who was not called “Davy” until long after his death, told his colleagues that he “was done with politics for the present, and that they might go to hell, and I would go to Texas.” He told his son and daughter that he planned to make “a fortune for myself and family” in Texas. Soon after arriving in Texas with his trusty rifle “Old Betsy,” Crockett, the “Lion of the West,” was told he would receive 4,000 acres of land for his service as a fighter. He then was assigned to join the garrison at the Alamo. Full of bounce and brag, the ­forty-​­nine-​­year-​­old Crockett was thoroughly expert at killing. As he once told his men, “Pierce the heart of the enemy as you would a feller that spit in your face, knocked down your wife, burnt up your houses, and called your dog a skunk!” What Crockett, Travis, and Bowie shared with the other defenders of the Alamo was a commitment to liberty in the face of Santa Anna’s growing despotism. In late February 1836, Santa Anna demanded that the Alamo’s defenders surrender. By then, Bowie had fallen seriously ill, was bedridden, and had turned over his command to Travis, who answered the Mexican ultimatum with cannon fire. He then sent urgent appeals to Texian towns for supplies and more men, while promising that “I shall never surrender or retreat . . . victory or death!”

Moving West  573


 The Alamo David Crockett, pictured fighting with his rifle over his head, joined the legendary effort to defend the Alamo against the Mexican army’s repeated assaults.

 Help did not come, however, and Santa Anna launched a series of assaults against the outnumbered defenders. For twelve days, the Mexicans were thrown back and suffered heavy losses. The ferocious fighting at the Alamo turned the rebellion into a war for Texan independence. On March 2, 1836, delegates from all ­fifty-​­nine Texas towns, most of them American immigrants, met at the tiny village of ­Washington-on-the-Brazos, some 150 miles northeast of San Antonio. There they signed a declaration of independence and drafted a constitution for the new Republic of Texas. The delegates then named Sam Houston as the commander of their disorganized but growing “army.” Four days later, the defenders of the Alamo were awakened at four o’clock in the morning by the sound of Mexican bugles playing the dreaded “Degüello” (“No Mercy to the Defenders”). Colonel Travis shouted: “The Mexicans are upon ­us—​­give ’em Hell!” The climactic Battle of the Alamo was fought in the predawn dark. Wave after wave of Santa Anna’s men attacked. They were twice forced back, but on the third try they broke through the battered north wall. Travis was killed by a bullet between the eyes. Some of the Texans took the fight outside the Alamo with tomahawks, knives, rifle butts, and fists, but in the end, virtually all of them were killed or wounded.

 574  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 Seven Alamo defenders, perhaps including Crockett, survived and were captured. Santa Anna ordered them hacked to death with swords. A Mexican officer wrote that the captives “died without complaining and without humiliating themselves before their torturers.” By dawn, the battle was over. The only survivors were a handful of women and children, and Joe, Travis’s slave. It was a costly victory, however, as more than 600 Mexicans died. The Battle of the Alamo also provided a rallying cry for vengeful Texians. While Santa Anna proclaimed a “glorious victory” and ordered the bodies of the revolutionaries burned, his aide wrote ominously in his diary, “One more such ‘glorious victory’ and we are finished.”

 goliad

 Two weeks later, at the Battle of Coleto, a Mexican force again defeated a smaller Texian army, many of them recently arrived volunteers from southern states. The Mexicans marched the 465 captured Texians to a fort in the nearby town of Goliad. Despite pleas from his own men to show mercy, Santa Anna ordered the captives killed as “pirates and outlaws.” On Palm Sunday, March 27, 1836, more than 300 Texians were marched out of Goliad and murdered. The massacres at the Alamo and Goliad fueled a burning desire for revenge among the Texians.

 sam houston

 The fate of the Texas Revolution was now in the hands of the already legendary Sam Houston, a hulking, rowdy, ­larger-​­than-​­life frontier statesman born in Virginia to ­Scots-​­Irish immigrants. At age fourteen, after his father died, Houston had moved with his mother and siblings to eastern Tennessee. Two years later, he ran away from home and lived among the Cherokees, earning the nickname “The Raven.” Like David Crockett, Houston had served under General Andrew Jackson during the War of 1812, where he was grievously wounded at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend. Thereafter, he returned to Tennessee and soon became a federal Indian agent, an attorney, a U.S. congressman, commanding general of the Tennessee militia, and, at the ripe age of thirty, governor. Unlike his friend David Crockett, however, Houston adored Andrew Jackson and became his devoted disciple and surrogate son, leading many people to speculate that he might become the next president. Like Jackson, however, Houston was at heart an oddball ruffian: he had an untamed yet gallant personality and violent temper cloaked in a charming brashness. A friend called him a “magnificent barbarian.” He drank. He gambled. He chased women. And he brawled.

Moving West  575


 After learning that William Stanbery, an a­ nti-​­Jackson Ohio congressman, had questioned his integrity, Congressman Houston assaulted him with a hickory cane on a Washington, D.C., street. Stanbery pulled a pistol, pushed it into Houston’s stomach, and pulled the trigger, only to have it misfire. Houston then beat him about the head before ending the fight with a swift kick between Stanbery’s thighs. Stanbery filed charges, and the Speaker of the House ordered Houston arrested and put on trial in Congress. Found guilty of assault, he was reprimanded and fined. Controversy dogged Houston thereafter. In 1829, he suddenly resigned the governorship of Tennessee because Eliza Allen, his beautiful, aristocratic, and much younger wife, had left him soon after their wedding and returned to her father’s plantation near Nashville. Houston never revealed the cause of the dispute (“sudden calamities”), but Eliza’s family did its best to destroy his reputation, accusing him of “dishonoring” her. He, in turn, kept silent because, he explained to President Jackson, doing so reinforced his “notion of honor.” If his character could not stand the “shock” of ­mean-​­spirited gossip, he said, then “let me lose it.” For years, wild rumors circulated about what had happened on Houston’s wedding night. Some claimed that Eliza had discovered to her horror that Houston had sustained a “dreadful injury” (true, a wound in the groin from an Indian arrowhead) in the Creek War that had left him scarred and impotent (a falsehood). Others reported that his bride had confessed she was in love with someone else and had only married him to please her family. Whatever the cause, Houston later wrote that his ugly public divorce threw him into an “agony of despair” over his “private afflictions” that ruined his political career and exiled him from Nashville society. Jackson wrote Houston a consoling letter: “Oh, what a reverse of fortune” his friend had experienced. “Oh, how unstable are human affairs.” Having shouldered the blame for the mysterious scandal, the disconsolate Houston was now an outcast. He decided that suicide was his only option. As he was preparing to kill himself, however, an eagle suddenly swooped down and then soared upward into the sunset. Then and there, Houston later wrote, “I knew that a great destiny waited for me in the West.” In 1829, Houston boarded a steamboat and headed west to Cairo, Illinois. He then traveled on a flatboat down the Mississippi, then up the Arkansas River to Little Rock, where he bought a horse and made his way several hundred miles to the Arkansas Territory along the Oklahoma border. There he rejoined the Cherokee, adopted their clothing, customs, and language, changed his name, married a Cherokee woman, and was formally “adopted”

 576  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

Sam Houston Houston was
 commander in chief of the forces fighting for Texas’s independence.

 by the ­Cherokee Nation. As he recalled, he “felt like a weary wanderer returned at last to his father’s house.” Houston proved adept at helping rival Indian ­tribes—​­Cherokee, Creek, Osage, and ­Choctaws—​­negotiate differences among themselves and with the federal government. He also grew addicted to alcohol; the Cherokees called him “Big Drunk.” In December 1832, Houston moved to Texas at Jackson’s behest. Two months later, he sent a secret report to the president, indicating that Texas was ripe for revolt from unstable Mexico, which was then embroiled in a civil war. Houston joined the rebellion against Mexico, and his fearlessness was a quality sorely needed by the Texians.

 the battle of san jacinto

 After learning of the massacre at the Alamo, Houston led his outnumbered troops on a long strategic retreat to buy time while hoping that Santa Anna’s pursuing army would make a mistake. On April 21, 1836, the cocky Mexican general walked into Houston’s trap, when his army of 900 whooping fighters caught the 1,600 Mexicans napping near the San Jacinto River, about t­ wenty-​­five miles southeast of the modern city of Houston. The Texians and Tejanos charged, yelling “Remember the Alamo.” They overwhelmed the p ­ anic-​­stricken Mexicans, most of whom were sleeping. General Santa Anna left his army leaderless that afternoon while he retreated to his tent, accompanied, some said, by a mistress. The battle lasted only eighteen minutes, but Houston’s troops spent the next two hours slaughtering fleeing Mexican soldiers. It was, said a Texian, a “frightful sight to behold.” Some 630 Mexicans were killed and 700 captured. The Texians lost only nine men. Santa Anna escaped but was captured the next day. He bought his freedom by signing a treaty recognizing the independence of the Republic of Texas, with the Rio Grande as its southern boundary with Mexico. The Texas Revolution had been accomplished in seven weeks.

 the lone star republic

 In 1836, the Lone Star Republic, as Texians called their new nation, legalized slavery, banned free blacks, elected Sam Houston as its first president, and voted overwhelmingly for annexation to

Moving West  577


 the United States. No one expected the Republic of Texas, with only 40,000 people, to remain independent for long. But statehood for Texas soon became embroiled in the explosive sectional dispute over slavery. John C. Calhoun told the Senate in 1836 that “there were powerful reasons why Texas should be part of this Union. The southern states, owning a slave population, were deeply interested in preventing that country from having the power to annoy them.” ­Anti-​­slavery northerners disagreed. In 1837, the Vermont state legislature “solemnly protested” against the admission “of any state whose constitution tolerates domestic slavery.” The American president at the time was Houston’s old friend and former commander, Andrew Jackson, who eagerly wanted Texas to join the Union. “Old Hickory,” however, decided it was better to wait a few years. He knew that adding Texas as a slave state would ignite an explosive quarrel between North and South that would fracture the Democratic party and endanger the election of New Yorker Martin Van Buren, his handpicked successor. Worse, any effort to add Texas to the Union would likely mean a war with Mexico, which refused to recognize Texan independence. So Jackson delayed official recognition of the Republic of Texas until his last day in office, early in 1837. Van Buren, Jackson’s successor, did as predicted: he avoided all talk of Texas annexation during his single term as president.

 whigs and democrats

 When William Henry Harrison succeeded Martin Van Buren as president in 1841, he was the oldest man (68) and the first Whig to win the office. The Whigs, who now controlled both houses of Congress, had first emerged in opposition to Andrew Jackson and continued to promote strong federal government support for industrial development and economic growth: high tariffs to deter imports and federal funding for roads, bridges, and canals. Yet Harrison was elected primarily on his prominence as a military hero. He had avoided taking public stances on controversial issues. In the end, it mattered little, as Harrison served the shortest term of any president. On April 4, 1841, exactly one month after his inauguration, he died of pneumonia, and Vice President John Tyler became president. The surprising turn of events pleased former president Andrew Jackson. “A kind and overruling providence had interfered,” he wrote a friend, “to prolong our glorious Union and happy republican system which General Harrison and his cabinet was [sic] preparing to destroy under the dictation of that profligate demagogue, Henry Clay.” Another former president, John Quincy Adams, had the opposite reaction. He dismissed Tyler, the new president, as “a political sectarian, of the s­ lave-​­driving, Virginian, Jeffersonian school” of politics, whose talents were barely “above mediocrity.”

 578  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 Henry Clay hoped to dominate the ­mild-​­mannered new president. Tyler “dares not resist,” the imperious Clay threatened, or “I will drive him before me.” Tyler, however, was not willing to be dominated. After an argument in the White House over a proposed new national bank, he told Clay go back down Pennsylvania Avenue to the Capitol and perform his duties in Congress. “So help me God, I shall do mine at this end of it as I shall think proper.”

 john tyler

 The tall, thin, s­ lave-​­owning Virginian was a political maverick and the youngest president to date—­fifty-​­one, but he had lots of political experience, having served as a state legislator, governor, congressman, and senator. He also fathered fifteen children, the most of any president. Perhaps most important, he was a man of stubborn independence and considerable charm. A political acquaintance said Tyler was “approachable, courteous, always willing to do a kindly action, or to speak a kindly word.” Originally a Democrat who had endorsed the Jeffersonian commitment to states’ rights, strict construction of the Constitution, and opposition to national banks, Tyler had broken with the party and joined the Whigs over President Jackson’s “condemnation” of South Carolina’s attempt to nullify federal laws. Tyler believed that South Carolina had a constitutional right to secede from the nation. Yet he never truly embraced the Whigs. As president, Tyler opposed everything associated with Henry Clay’s m ­ uch-​­celebrated program of economic nationalism (the American System) that called for high tariffs, a national bank, and internal improvements. When Congress met in a special session in 1841, Clay introduced a series of controversial resolutions. He called for the repeal of the Independent Treasury Act and the creation of another Bank of the United States, proposed to revive the distribution program whereby the money generated by federal land sales was given to the states, and urged that tariffs be raised on imported goods to hamper foreign competitors. Clay might have avoided a nasty dispute with Tyler over financial issues had he been more tactful. But for once, driven by his compulsive quest to be president, Clay, the Great Compromiser, lost his instinct for compromise. Although Tyler agreed to the repeal of the Independent Treasury Act and signed a higher tariff bill, he vetoed Clay’s pet project: the new national bank. An incensed Clay responded by calling Tyler a traitor who had disgraced his party. He claimed that the president was left “solitary and alone, shivering by the pitiless storm” against his veto. The dispute was so heated that scuffles and fistfights between Whigs and Democrats broke out in Congress. Clay then convinced Tyler’s entire cabinet to resign, with the exception of Secretary of State Daniel Webster. A ­three-​­year-​­long war between Clay and Tyler had begun.

Moving West  579


 Tyler replaced the defectors in his cabinet with a­ nti-​­Jackson Democrats who, like him, had become Whigs. The Whigs then expelled Tyler from the party, calling him “His Accidency,” and the “Executive Ass.” Sixty Whig ­members of Congress signed a statement denouncing Tyler and declaring him no longer their representative. Some even talked of impeachment. An exasperated Tyler confided to a friend his frustration: “Did you ever expect to see your old friend under trial for ‘high crimes and misdemeanors’?” By 1842, Tyler had become a president without a party, shunned by both Whigs and Democrats. The political turmoil coincided with the ongoing economic depression that had begun in the late 1830s. Bank failures mounted, businesses shut down, and unemployment soared. Yet Tyler refused to let either the sputtering economy or an international crisis with Great Britain deter him from annexing more territory into the United States.

 tensions with britain In late 1841, slaves being transported from Virginia to Louisiana on the American ship Creole revolted and took charge of the ship. They sailed into Nassau, in the Bahamas, where British authorities set 128 of them free. (Great Britain had abolished slavery throughout its empire in 1834.) It was the most successful slave revolt in American history. Southerners were infuriated, and the incident mushroomed into an international crisis. Secretary of State Daniel Webster demanded that the slaves be returned as American property, but the British refused. Rather than risk a war that the United States might lose, Tyler and Webster acquiesced to the British refusal to return the slaves. This only made southern slaveholders more furious. James Henry Hammond, the South Carolina planter, lashed out at the Tyler administration: “With such a stupid imbecile as Tyler at the head of affairs and such an unprincipled and cowardly Sec. of State as Webster, we should fare badly for a time. They are bent on peace.” At this point, the British government decided to send Alexander Baring, Lord Ashburton, head of a major bank, to meet with Secretary of State Webster, who viewed good relations with Britain as essential for the America economy. The meetings concluded with the signing of the ­Webster-​­Ashburton Treaty (1842), which provided for joint naval patrols off Africa to police the outlawed slave trade. The treaty also resolved a l­ong-​­standing dispute over the northeastern U.S. boundary with British Canada. But it did nothing about returning the freed slaves. The dispute was not settled until 1853, when England paid $110,000 to the owners of the freed slaves. the “extension of our empire”: texas

From the
 moment he became president, John Tyler had his eyes fixed on annexing the

 580  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 Austin, Texas, in 1840 A view of the capital of the ­newly formed ​­ Republic of Texas—the city’s population at the time numbered less than a thousand.

 Republic of Texas into the United States. His wife Julia later said that Texas was “the great object of his ambition” to secure his place in history. In Tyler’s first address to Congress, he pledged to do so, explaining that there was nothing to fear from “the extension of our Empire.” Tyler’s efforts to recruit senators to approve an annexation treaty exhilarated Texas leaders who had long been frustrated that their Lone Star Republic had not yet been welcomed into the United States. Sam Houston threatened to expand the Republic of Texas to the Pacific. But with little money, a rising government debt, and continuing tensions with Mexico, this was mostly talk. The Lone Star Republic had no i­nfrastructure—​­no banks, no schools, no industries. It remained largely a frontier community. Houston decided that the rickety Republic of Texas had only two choices: annexation to the United States or closer economic ties to Great Britain, which extended formal diplomatic recognition to the republic and began buying cotton from Texas planters. Meanwhile, thousands more Americans poured into Texas, enticed by the republic’s offer of 1,280 acres of land to each white family. The population more than tripled between 1836 and 1845, from 40,000 to 150,000, and the enslaved black population grew even faster than the white population.

 a tragic cruise On February 28, 1844, President Tyler and a group ­ ropeller-​­driven steam of 300 dignitaries boarded the U.S.S. Princeton, a new p warship, for an excursion on the Potomac River. As sailors fired the ship’s huge

Moving West  581


 ­ fteen-​­foot-long cannons, one of them, “the Peacemaker,” exploded, killing fi eight people, including the secretary of state, the secretary of the navy, and a New York state legislator. More than a dozen others were seriously wounded. President Tyler, who was below deck at the time of the accident, rushed to see what had happened: “A more ­heart-​­rending scene scarcely ever occurred,” he wrote. “What a loss I have sustained. . . .” After the funerals for the accident victims, Tyler seized the opportunity created by the tragic accident to reorganize his entire cabinet by naming southern Democrats to key positions. He appointed John C. Calhoun secretary of state, primarily because he wanted the prominent South Carolinian to complete the annexation of Texas. On April 12, 1844, Calhoun signed a treaty of annexation with the Republic of Texas, and Tyler submitted it to the Senate for approval. Texas would become an American territory in exchange for the United States assuming all of its debts. Tyler explained that the addition of Texas would “add to national greatness and wealth” and would “strengthen rather than weaken the Union.” Calhoun, however, unwittingly undermined the annexation treaty by writing the British ambassador what he thought was a confidential letter in which he declared that blacks were inferior to whites and better off enslaved than free. Slavery, Calhoun insisted, was “essential to the peace, safety, and prosperity” of the South. Adding Texas, he concluded, was necessary to keep the South in the Union. On June 8, 1844, outraged northerners in the Senate voted down Calhoun’s annexation treaty 35 to 16.

 the election of 1844 Thereafter, leaders in both political parties hoped to keep the divisive Texas issue out of the 1844 presidential campaign. Whig Henry Clay and Democrat Martin Van Buren, the leading candidates for each party’s nomination, agreed that adding Texas to the Union would be a mistake. For his part, Tyler, having alienated both parties, initially announced that he would run for reelection as an independent, using the campaign slogan, “Tyler and Texas.” Within a few weeks, however, he realized he had little support and dropped out of the race, giving his endorsement to Polk. Van Buren’s southern supporters, including former president Andrew Jackson, abandoned him because he opposed the annexation of Texas. They instead nominated James Knox Polk, former Speaker of the House and former governor of Tennessee. Like Tyler, Polk was an enthusiastic expansionist who wanted to make the United States a transcontinental global power. Unlike Tyler, Polk was a loyal Democrat who hated Whigs. On the ninth ballot, he became the first “dark horse” (unexpected) candidate to win a m ­ ajor-​­party

 582  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

THE ELECTION OF 1844

 NH 6 VT 6

OREGON COUNTRY

UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

IOWA TERR.

WI TERR.

MO
Disputed area 
REPUBLIC OF TEXAS

AR LA

 IL

 NY

MI IN

 OH

 KY 12 TN 13 MS AL

PA VA

ME MA 12 RI 4 CT 6 NJ 7 DE 3 MD 8

NC SC GA

FLORIDA TERRITORY

Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


James Knox Polk (Democrat)




1,337,000


Henry Clay (Whig)




1,299,000


 Why was the annexation of Texas such a divisive issue? Why was Polk’s platform especially appealing to southerners and westerners? WWN64 ■ How did Polk carry New York, and why was winning that state so decisive? ■ ■

Figure M13_2
 1st proof

 nomination. The Democrats’ platform called for the annexation of Texas and declared that the United States had a “clear and unquestionable claim” to all of the Oregon Country. The 1844 presidential election proved to be one of the most significant in history. By promoting southern and western expansionism, the Democrats offered a winning strategy, one so popular it forced Clay, the Whig candidate, to alter his position on Texas at the last minute; he now claimed that he had “no personal objection to the annexation” if it could be achieved “without dishonor, without war, with the common consent of the Union, and upon just and fair terms.” Clay’s waffling on Texas shifted more a­ nti-​­slavery votes to the new Liberty party (the ­anti-​­slavery party formed in 1840), which increased its count in the presidential election from about 7,000 in 1840 to more than 62,000 in 1844. In

Moving West  583


 the western counties of New York, the Liberty party drew enough votes away from Clay and the Whigs to give the crucial state to Polk. Had Clay carried New York, he would have won the election by 7 electoral votes. Instead, Polk won a narrow national plurality of 38,000 popular votes (the first president since John Quincy Adams to win without a majority) but a clear majority of the electoral college, 170 to 105. Julia Tyler, the president’s wife, was overjoyed with the outcome: “Hurrah for Polk! What will become of Henry Clay and of the downfall of our Whig friends?” A devastated Clay had lost his third and last presidential election. He could not understand how he lost to Polk, whom he considered a “­third-​­rate” politician lacking leadership abilities.

 james k. polk

 Yet James K. Polk had been surprising people his whole career. Born near Charlotte, North Carolina, the oldest of ten children, he graduated first in his class at the University of North Carolina, then moved to Tennessee, where he became a successful lawyer and planter, entered politics, and served fourteen years in Congress (four as Speaker of the House) and two years as governor. At age ­forty-​­nine, Polk was America’s youngest president up to that time. Short, thin, and humorless, he was called “Young Hickory” because of his admiration for Andrew Jackson. And like Jackson, he believed that any efforts by the federal government to promote economic growth necessarily helped some people and regions and hurt others. He was thus opposed to tariffs, a national bank, and federally funded roads. Polk’s greatest virtue was his relentless work ethic. “I am the hardest w ­ orking man in this country,” he declared. True to his word, he often worked from dawn to midnight and rarely took a vacation. Such unrelenting intensity eventually wore him out, however. Polk would die in 1849, at ­fifty-​­three years old, just three months after leaving office.

 the state of texas

 Texas, the hottest political potato, had been added as a new state just before Polk was sworn in as president. In his final months in office, President John Tyler had taken an unusual step by asking Congress to annex Texas by joint resolution, which required only a simple majority in each house rather than the t­ wo-​­thirds Senate vote needed to ratify a treaty of annexation. The resolution narrowly passed, with most Whigs opposed. On March 1, 1845, in his final presidential action, Tyler signed the resolution admitting Texas to the Union as the ­twenty-​­eighth state, and fifteenth slave state, on December 29, 1845. Six weeks later, on February 16, 1846, the Lone Star flag of the Republic of Texas was lowered, and the flag of the United States was raised over the largest state in the nation.

 584  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 At the time, Texas had a population of 100,000 whites and 38,000 enslaved blacks. By 1850, the ­population—​­both white and ­black—​­had soared by almost 50 percent. (The census then did not include Native Americans.) By 1860, Texas had 600,000 people, most of them from southern states focused on growing cotton.

 polk’s goals Perhaps because he pledged to serve only one term, Polk was a president in a hurry. He focused on four major objectives, all of which he accomplished. He managed to (1) reduce tariffs on imports; (2) reestablish the Independent Treasury (“We need no national banks!”); (3) settle the Oregon boundary dispute with Britain; and (4) acquire California from Mexico. His top priority was territorial expansion. He wanted to add Oregon, California, and New Mexico to the Union to fill out the continent. In keeping with l­ong-​­standing Democratic beliefs, Polk wanted lower tariffs to allow more foreign goods to compete in the American marketplace, and thereby help drive consumer prices down. Congress agreed by approving the Walker Tariff of 1846, named after Robert J. Walker, the secretary of the Treasury. In the same year, Polk persuaded Congress to restore the Independent Treasury Act that Martin Van Buren had signed into law in 1840 and the

 Tariff of 1846 This political cartoon illustrates the public ­outcry—​­represented by a Quaker woman ready to whip P ­ olk—​­against the Tariff of 1846, one of the lowest in the nation’s history.

 The ­Mexican-­A merican War  585

 ­ hig-​­dominated Congress had repealed the next year. The act established W Independent Treasury deposit offices to receive all federal government funds. The system was intended to replace the Second Bank of the United States, which Jackson had “killed,” so as to offset the chaotic growth of unregulated state banks whose reckless lending practices had helped cause the depression of the late 1830s. The new Independent Treasury entrusted the federal government, rather than state banks, with the exclusive management of government funds and required that all disbursements be made in gold or silver, or paper currency backed by gold or silver. Polk also twice vetoed ­Whig-​­passed bills for federally funded infrastructure projects. His efforts to reverse Whig economic policies satisfied the slaveholding South but angered northerners, who wanted higher tariffs to protect their industries from British competition, and westerners, who wanted federally financed roads and harbors.

 oregon Meanwhile, the dispute with Great Britain over the Oregon Country boundary heated up as expansionists insisted that Polk take the whole region rather than split it with the British. Polk was willing to go to the brink of war to achieve his goals. “If we do have war,” the president blustered, “it will not be our fault.” Fortunately, neither Polk nor the British were willing to risk war. On June 15, 1846, James Buchanan, Polk’s secretary of state, signed what was called the ­Buchanan-​­Pakenham Treaty, which extended the border between the United States and British Canada westward to the Pacific coast along the 49th parallel. Once the treaty was approved by both nations, the New York Herald announced that “Now, we can thrash Mexico into decency at our leisure.”

 The ­M exican-​­A merican War The settlement of the Oregon Country boundary dispute allowed the United States to turn its attention southward. On March 6, 1845, two days after James Polk took office, the Mexican government broke off relations with the United States to protest the annexation of Texas. Polk was willing to wage war against Mexico to acquire California and New Mexico, but he did not want Americans to fire the first shot. Nor did Polk want a war that might produce a military hero who would become a Whig candidate for the presidency. Senator Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri, a powerful Democrat, disclosed that Polk “wanted a small war, just large enough to require a treaty for peace, and not large enough to create military reputations” that might pose a political challenge after the war.

 586  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

THE OREGON DISPUTE, 1818–1846

54°40'








200 Miles


200 Kilometers


O
R
E


BRITISH POSSESSIONS

G
N


V
OU NC

O


 VA

49˚


Continental
Divide


ER N LA IS

Buchana
 n-Pakenham Treaty Lin e, 1846

D


C
Disputed
Area


M


U


R
Y


 Onís Line,

T


Snake River


Adams-


UNITED STATES

N


Columbia River


42˚




 MEXICO ■

 ouri Rive r iss

O


PACIFIC OCEAN

Treaty Line of 1818


Great Salt Lake


 Why were the Americans and the British involved in a dispute over the

WWN64
Oregon Country? Figure M13_3 ■ What were the terms of the ­Buchanan-​­Pakenham Treaty? 1st■proof Why were both the Americans and the British eager to settle the disagreement over the vast Oregon territory? 
 So Polk ordered several thousand U.S. troops under General Zachary Taylor to take up positions around Corpus Christi, near the Rio Grande. The U.S. troops were knowingly in disputed territory, and Mexico viewed the arrival of U.S. troops along the Rio Grande as an act of war. On the evening of May 9, 1845, Polk learned that Mexican troops had attacked U.S. soldiers north of the Rio Grande. Eleven Americans were killed, five wounded, and the remainder taken prisoner. “Hostilities may now be considered as commenced,” Taylor reported.

 The ­Mexican-­A merican War  587

 Polk’s scheme to provoke an attack had worked. To avoid the risk that Congress would vote down a declaration of war, Polk simply declared that the Mexicans had started a war that now needed to be funded. Mexico, he reported, “has invaded our territory, and shed American blood upon the American soil.” Congress quickly authorized the recruitment of 50,000 soldiers. Some congressmen, however, were skeptical of Polk’s explanation. Whig Garret Davis of Kentucky asserted that the Rio Grande was a part of Mexico, not Texas: “It is our own President who began this war.” Even Democrats were concerned about the president’s account of what had happened. A New York senator, John Dix, said he would not be “surprised if the next accounts should show that there is no Mexican invasion of our soil.” The war, he later added, “was begun in fraud . . . and I think will end in disgrace.” President Polk steadfastly denied that the war against Mexico had anything to do with the expansion of slavery. He argued instead that his efforts to extend America’s boundaries to the Pacific were intended to replace sectional tensions with national unity. For Polk, the notion of manifest destiny was a means of promoting national unity. After all, he stressed, slavery could not flourish in places like New Mexico and California because cotton could not be grown there because of the climate. With the outbreak of fighting, most Americans accepted the president’s account of what happened along the ­Mexico-​­Texas border and rushed to support the military. “let us go to war,” screamed a New York newspaper. Another headline blared: “mexico or death!” The New York j­ournalist-​­poet Walt Whitman got caught up in the war fever, urging those enlisting in the army to show the world that “America knows how to crush, as well as how to expand!” The South was especially excited over the war because of the possibility of acquiring more territory. So many southerners (“wild, reckless young fellows”) rushed to volunteer that thousands had to be turned away. Eventually, 112,000 whites served in the war (blacks were banned). In Tennessee, there were so many volunteers that it became “difficult even to purchase a place in the ranks.” Among the warriors were young army officers who would later distinguish themselves as opposing leaders in the Civil War: Pierre Beauregard, Braxton Bragg, Ulysses S. Grant, Joseph Hooker, Thomas Jackson, James Longstreet, Robert E. Lee, George McClellan, George Meade, William T. Sherman, and George Thomas.

 opposition to the war

 In New England and among northern abolitionists, there was much less enthusiasm for “Mr. Polk’s War.” Congressman John Quincy Adams called it “a most unrighteous war” designed to extend slavery into new territories. Many other New Englanders involved with the growing

 588  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 a­bolitionist movement denounced the war as an unjustified act of aggression designed to satisfy ­pro-​­slavery southerners eager for more cotton territory. William Lloyd Garrison, the fiery Boston abolitionist, charged that the war was one of “aggression, of invasion, of conquest.” A few miles away, in Concord, Henry David Thoreau spent a night in jail rather than pay taxes that might help fund the war. Thoreau’s mentor, Ralph Waldo Emerson, predicted that the “United States will conquer Mexico, but it will be as the man who swallows arsenic, which brings him down in turn. Mexico will poison us.” Most northern Whigs, including a young Illinois congressman named Abraham Lincoln, opposed Zachary Taylor Like Andrew Jackson, the M ­ exican-​­American War, arguing Taylor was a popular war hero whose that Polk had maneuvered the Meximilitary exploits paved the way to the cans into attacking. The United States, presidency. they insisted, had no reason to place its army in the disputed border region between Texas and Mexico. In what came to be called “Spot Resolutions,” Lincoln repeatedly asked the president to locate the precise “spot” where the American troops were fired upon, implying that they may have illegally crossed into Mexican territory. Whig leader Henry Clay called the war “unnatural” and “lamentable,” expressing concern that the nation was “becoming a warlike and conquering power,” while Daniel Webster charged that the war’s disputed origins were “unconstitutional.” (Both Clay and Webster would lose sons in the war).

 preparing for battle

 The United States was again ill p ­ repared for a major war. At the outset, the regular army numbered barely more than 7,000, in contrast to the Mexican force of 32,000. Before the war ended, the U.S. military had grown to almost 79,000 troops, many of whom were frontier toughs who lacked uniforms, equipment, and discipline. Repeatedly, these soldiers engaged in plunder, rape, and murder. Yet they outfought the larger Mexican forces, which had their own problems with training, discipline, morale, supplies, and munitions.

 The ­Mexican-­A merican War  589

 The ­Mexican-​­American War would last two years, from March 1846 to April 1848, and would be fought on four fronts: southern Texas/northern Mexico, central Mexico, New Mexico, and California. Early in the fighting, the U.S. Army scored two victories north of the Rio Grande, at Palo Alto (May 8) and Resaca de la Palma (May 9). On May 18, Taylor’s army crossed the Rio Grande and occupied Matamoros. These quick victories brought Taylor, a Whig, instant popularity, and Polk agreed to public demand that Taylor be made overall commander. It was an excellent choice, since Taylor, “Old Rough and Ready,” had spent t­ hirty-​­eight years in the army and had earned the respect and affection of his men.

 the annexation of california

 President Polk’s foremost objective through the war was not the defeat of Mexico but the acquisition of California. Not only did the Mexican province along the Pacific have wonderful harbors (San Francisco, Monterey, and San Diego), but the president also feared that Great Britain or France would take control of California if the United States did not. Polk had sent secret instructions to Commodore John D. Sloat, commander of the Pacific naval squadron, telling him that if war erupted with Mexico, he was to use his warships to gain control “of the port of San Francisco, and blockade or occupy such other ports as your force may permit.” In May 1846, Sloat, having heard of the outbreak of hostilities along the Rio Grande, set sail for California. In early July, U.S. sailors and troops went ashore in San Francisco, took down the flag of the Republic of California, raised the American flag, and claimed California as part of the United States. Soon thereafter, Sloat turned his command over to Commodore Robert F. Stockton, who sailed south to capture San Diego and Los Angeles. By m ­ id-​ ­August, Mexican resistance had evaporated. At the same time, another American military expedition headed for California. On August 18, General Stephen Kearny’s army captured Santa Fe, the capital of New Mexico, then moved on to join Stockton’s forces. They took control of Los Angeles on January 10, 1847, and the remaining Mexican forces ­surrendered three days later. Stockton and Kearny then quarreled over who was in command, since each had similar orders to conquer and govern California. In the meantime, the unpredictable John C. Frémont arrived from Sonoma with 400 newly recruited troops and claimed that Stockton was in charge. Stockton responded by naming Frémont governor of California, and the ­power-​­hungry Frémont immediately set about giving orders, making proclamations, and appointing officials. This left Kearny in a bind; President Polk had ordered him to be the governor, but Frémont defied his orders.

 590  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 Two months later, in June, 1847, General Kearny had seen enough. He had Governor Frémont arrested, charged him with insubordination and mutiny, and transported him across the country for a c­ ourt-​­martial. In Washington, D.C., Kearny was hailed as a hero while the jailed Frémont awaited the military trial. In the most celebrated trial since that of Vice President Aaron Burr in 1807, Frémont was found guilty of mutiny and insubordination and dismissed from the army. President Polk, however, quickly reversed the sentence in light of Frémont’s “meritorious and valuable services.” He urged Frémont to remain in the army and “resume the sword,” but “the Pathfinder” was so enraged at the court ruling that he resigned his commission and settled in California, where he would become the state’s first U.S. senator.

 war in northern mexico

Both California and New Mexico
 had been taken from Mexican control before General Zachary Taylor fought his first major battle in northern Mexico. In September 1846, Taylor’s army assaulted the fortified city of Monterrey, which surrendered after a fi ­ ve-​­day siege. Then, General Antonio López de Santa Anna, who had been forced out of power in 1845, sent word to Polk from his exile in Cuba that he would end the war if he were allowed to return. Polk assured the exiled Mexican leader that the U.S. government would pay well for any territory taken from Mexico. In August 1846, on Polk’s orders, Santa Anna was permitted to return to Mexico. But the crafty Santa Anna had lied. Soon he was again president of Mexico and in command of the Mexican army. As it turned out, however, he was much more talented at raising armies than leading them in battle. In October 1846, Santa Anna invited the outnumbered Americans to surrender. Taylor responded, “Tell him to go to hell.” That launched the h ­ ard-​­fought Battle of Buena Vista (February 22–23, 1847), in northern Mexico. Both sides claimed victory, but the Mexicans suffered five times as many casualties as the Americans. Thereafter, the Mexicans continued to lose battles, but they refused to accept Polk’s terms for surrender. “The United States may triumph,” said a Mexican newspaper, “but its prize, like that of the vulture, will lie in a lake of blood.” Frustrated by Taylor’s inability to win a decisive victory, Polk authorized an assault on Mexico City, the nation’s capital. On March 9, 1847, a large American force led by Winfield Scott, the ­general-​­in-​­chief of the U.S. Army, landed on the beaches south of Veracruz. It was considered to be the strongest fortress in North America, with three forts guarding the approaches to the port city. The American assault on Veracruz was the largest amphibious operation ever attempted by U.S. military forces and was carried out without loss. The news of the American victory made General Scott a national hero. Veracruz surrendered on March 29. The American troops then rested, accumulating

 The ­Mexican-­A merican War  591

MAJOR CAMPAIGNS OF THE M
­ EXICAN-​­AMERICAN WAR 
Las Vegas


Red Rive


Disputed by
U.S. and
Mexico


Rive r
G ila


Kearny, 1846


 ver

Matamoros




Buena Vista


 r

 t,

U.


84 7


L
.B
 OC

O hi




S. BLOCK

 AD

Veracruz
Puebla Cerro Gordo


K


■


 AD

 tt, Sc o

GULF OF MEXICO

Santa Anna,


Mexico City
Chapultepec


U. S


 U.S. forces Mexican forces Battle site Line set by Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, 1848

New Orleans


Corpus Christi
Resaca de la Palma


Palo Alto
Monterrey Taylor,


Tampico Sc
 ot San Luis Potosí Pánuco Rive

200 Miles


0 100 200 Kilometers


 MS

San Jacinto
San Antonio


Ri


Saltillo


 LA

River






 TEXAS

 s e Nuece and Gr er R iv R i o

, 18




 Mazatlán

 AR

 r

The Alamo


 han Donip

 at, Slo

PACIFIC OCEAN

 TN

River


Sab
 ine

El Paso Pecos


Chihuahua


 as

OR Y

 Mis s i ssippi Riv er

Co
 l or

RI T

 o

 MO

 s an



San Diego


Taos
Santa Fe


St. Louis


Ar k


,
 ton

Santa Barbara
Los Angeles


 IL

Fort
Leavenworth
 Bent’s Fort rny, 1845 Kea y n r a

R
 TE

Stock


 o ad

 iv R

 r Plat Rive te



MEXICAN CESSION

Monterey


 er

 Sutter’s Fort

1845–


Ke


 on

 t,

 WI i s sou ri

 r

 m

San Sonoma
Francisco


M


Rive


Fr
é


D
ZE NI GA OR UN

 Frémo 1846 nt,

OREGON COUNTRY

E


 Why did John C. Frémont and his troops initially settle in the Salinas

 Valley before marching north, only to turn around and march south to San WWN64 FigureFrancisco? M13_4 1st ■proof How did Polk’s fear of Zachary Taylor’s popularity undermine the Americans’ military strategy?

 supplies and awaiting reinforcements to replace the many volunteers whose enlistments had run out and were eager to go home. In August, General Scott’s formidable invasion force set out on the route taken by Cortés and his Spanish troops in their assault on the Aztec Empire more than 300 years earlier, marching toward the heavily defended Mexican capital, 200 miles away. In England, the Duke of Wellington, who had defeated

E


 592  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 Fall of Mexico City General Winfield Scott formally enters Mexico City upon its capture by American soldiers on September 14, 1847.

 Napoléon at the Battle of Waterloo more than thirty years before, predicted that “Scott is l­ ost—​­he cannot capture the city, and he cannot fall back upon his base.” Yet the English hero could not have been more wrong. After four brilliantly orchestrated battles in which they overwhelmed the Mexican defenders, U.S. forces arrived at the gates of Mexico City in early September 1847. The Duke of Wellington now changed his tune, calling General Scott the world’s “greatest living soldier.” Ulysses S. Grant also applauded his commander, pointing out that with only half as many troops as the Mexicans, Scott had “won every battle, he captured the capital, and conquered the government.”

 the saint patrick’s battalion General Scott’s triumphant assault on Mexico City was not without problems, however. Since the start of the war, some 7,000 soldiers had deserted, the highest of any foreign war. Several hundred of them, mostly poor Catholic Irish and German immigrants who had recently arrived in New York City, crossed over to form the Saint Patrick’s Battalion in the Mexican army, which included many foreign fighters. Why the American soldiers, called San Patricios in Spanish, chose to switch sides remains in dispute, but several factors were at work: many of the Catholic defectors resented the abuse (“harsh and cruel handling”) they received from native U.S. Protestant officers and the atrocities they saw ­committed

 The ­Mexican-­A merican War  593

 against Catholic Americans. Some were also attracted by the higher wages, land grants, and promises of citizenship provided by the Mexican government, which claimed that it was the victim of America’s “barbarous aggression.” The Mexican army circulated leaflets to American soldiers which urged the ­foreign-​­born to switch sides and fight for their shared “sacred imperiled religion. If you are Catholic, the same as we, if you follow the doctrines of Our Savior, why are you murdering your brethren? Why are you antagonistic to those who defend their country and your own God?” Whatever their motives, the San Patricios fought tenaciously against the Americans. During one of the battles for Mexico City, the Americans captured ­seventy-​­two defectors fighting in the St. Patrick’s Battalion. They were quickly tried, and most of them were sentenced to death. Although military law at the time called for traitors to be shot by a firing squad, General Scott ordered that about fifty of the deserters be hanged. The others were whipped and branded with a “D” on each cheek. At dawn on September 13, 1847, ­twenty-​­nine of the captured San Patricios, their hands and feet bound, were taken in wooden carts to stand in the hot sun under a gallows in sight of Chapultepec, the last Mexican fortress protecting Mexico City. There they were forced to watch the battle unfold over four hours. When the American troops finally scaled the walls of the fortress and raised the U.S. flag, the San Patricios were all hanged simultaneously.

 St. Patrick’s Battalion The men of St. Patrick’s Battalion continue to be celebrated in Mexico as martyrs, with numerous cities, schools, and streets bearing the name San Patricio.

 594  CHAPTER 13  Western Expansion 1830–1848

 Just before the mass executions, the army surgeon reported to Colonel William Harney, an officer infamous for his brutality, that one of the San Patricios, Francis O’Connor, had lost both legs in the fighting. The doctor asked what should be done with the man. Harney yelled: “Bring the damned son of a bitch out! My order was to hang 30, and by God I’ll do it.” The Mexican ­government, which erected a monument in honor of the San Patricios, described the executions as “improper in a civilized age, and [ironic] for a people who aspire to the title of illustrious and humane.”

 the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo

 After the fall of Mexico City, Santa Anna resigned from office and fled the country. The Mexican government was left in turmoil. Peace talks began on January 2, 1848, at the village of Guadalupe Hidalgo, just outside the capital, but dragged on for weeks, in part because different people claimed to be in charge of the Mexican government. When the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo was signed on February 2, a humiliated Mexican government was forced to agree that the border with Texas would be the Rio Grande and to transfer control of all or parts of the future states of California, New Mexico, Nevada, Utah, Arizona, Wyoming, and Colorado. This represented over half of the entire nation of Mexico. With the addition of territory in southern Arizona and New Mexico through the Gadsden Purchase of 1853, these annexations rounded out the continental United States, doubled its size, and provided routes for eventual transcontinental rail lines. In return for what Polk called “an immense empire” that encompassed more than half a million square miles, the United States agreed to pay $15 million. The Senate ratified the treaty on March 10, 1848. By the end of July, the last remaining U.S. soldiers had left Mexico.

 the war’s legacies

 The ­Mexican-​­American War was America’s first major military intervention outside the United States and the first time that U.S. military forces had conquered and occupied another country. More than 13,000 Americans died, 11,550 of them from disease, especially measles and dysentery. The war remains the deadliest in American history in terms of the percentage of soldiers lost. Out of every 1,000 soldiers in Mexico, some 110 died. The next highest death rate would be in the Civil War, with 65 dead out of every 1,000 participants. The victory also helped end America’s prolonged economic depression. As the years passed, however, the ­Mexican-​­American War was increasingly seen as a shameful war of conquest directed by a president bent on territorial expansion for the sake of slavery. Ulysses S. Grant later called it “one of

 The ­Mexican-­A merican War  595

 the most unjust wars ever waged by a stronger against a weaker nation.” He wrote his wife that she would not believe how many Mexican civilians had been “murdered” by American soldiers. The “number would startle you.” Even General Zachary Taylor called it an “unnecessary and senseless” war. News of the victory over Mexico, however, thrilled American expansionists. The editor John O’Sullivan, who had coined the term manifest destiny, shouted, “More, More, More! Why not take all of Mexico?” Treasury secretary Robert Walker was equally giddy about the addition of California and the Oregon Country. “Asia has suddenly become our neighbor, . . . inviting our steamships upon the trade of a commerce greater than all of Europe combined.” The acquisition of the northern Mexican provinces made the United States a transcontinental nation and required a dramatic expansion of the federal government. In 1849, Congress created the Department of the Interior to supervise the distribution of land, the creation of new territories and states, and the “protection” of the Indians and their reservations. Americans now had their long coveted western empire. But what were they to do with it? President Polk had naively assumed that the expansion of American territory to the Pacific would strengthen “the bonds of Union.” He was wrong. No sooner was Texas annexed and gold was discovered in California than a violent debate erupted over the extension of slavery into the territories acquired from Mexico. That debate would enflame sectional rivalries that would nearly destroy the Union.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 Westward Migration In the 1830s Americans came to believe in “manifest destiny”—that the West was divinely ordained to be part of the United States. Although populated by Indians and Hispanics, the West was portrayed as an empty land. But a population explosion and the lure of cheap, fertile land prompted Americans to move along the Overland Trails, enduring great physical hardships, toward Oregon (Oregon fever) and California. Traders and trappers were the first Americans to move into California during the 1830s. The discovery of gold there in 1848 brought a flood of people from all over the world. Many southerners also moved to the Mexican province of Texas to grow cotton, taking their slaves with them. The Mexican government opposed slavery, however, and in 1830 forbade further immigration. Texians rebelled, winning their independence from Mexico in the Texas Revolution, but statehood would not come for another decade because political leaders were determined to avoid war with Mexico over the territory and the issue of adding another slave state to the Union.

•


 ­Mexican-​­American War When the United States finally annexed Texas in 1845, Mexico was furious. The newly elected U.S. president, James K. Polk, sought to acquire California and New Mexico as well, but negotiations soon failed. When Mexican troops crossed the Rio Grande, Polk urged Congress to declare war. American forces eventually won, despite high casualties. In 1848, in the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, Mexico ceded California and New Mexico to the United States and gave up claims to land north of the Rio Grande. The vast acquisition did not strengthen the Union, however. Instead it ignited a fierce dispute over the role of slavery in the new territories.

Chronology
 Mexico gains independence from Spain Americans are defeated at the Alamo John Tyler becomes president Americans and British agree to the W ­ ebster-​­Ashburton Treaty United States annexes Texas 1846	­Mexican-​­American War begins Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ends the ­Mexican-​­American War With the Gadsden Purchase, the United States acquires an additional 30,000 square miles from Mexico





Key Terms


 manifest destiny p. 556

Texas Revolution (1835–1836) p. 574


 Oregon fever p. 561

Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848)
 p. 593

Overland Trails p. 558


IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




The Gathering
Storm
1848–1860


 “Bleeding Kansas” (1856) This engraving depicts the sack of Lawrence, Kansas, in May 1856 by p ­ ro-​­slavery “border ruffians.” The violence sparked by these ­slave-​­holding Missourians proved to be a foreboding sign of the destruction that would engulf the nation in the coming decade.

A


 t midcentury, political storm clouds were forming over the fate of slavery. The United States was a powerful nation, but, as Henry Clay said, it was an “unhappy country” torn by the “uproar, confusion, and menace” caused by the deepening agony over slavery. Without intending to, the United States had developed two quite different societies, one in the North and the other in the South, and the two sections increasingly disagreed over the nation’s future. In 1833, Andrew Jackson had predicted that southerners “intend to blow up a storm on the slave question.” He added that ­pro-​­slavery firebrands like John C. Calhoun “would do any act to destroy this union and form a southern confederacy bounded, north, by the Potomac River.” By 1848, Jackson’s prediction seemed close to reality. At midcentury the sectional tensions over slavery generated constant political conflict. The Compromise of 1850 provided a short-term resolution of some of the issues dividing North and South, but new controversies such as the fate of slavery in the Kansas Territory, the creation of the anti-slavery Republican party, and the growing militancy of abolitionists led more and more people to decide that the United States could not continue to be a nation “half slave and half free,” as Abraham Lincoln insisted. The result was first the secession of eleven southern states and then a bloody civil war to force them back into the Union. In the process, the volatile issue of slavery was resolved by ending the “peculiar institution.”

Slavery in the Territories
 the wilmot proviso

 On August 8, 1846, soon after the M ­ exican-​ ­ merican War erupted, David Wilmot, an obscure Democratic congressman A from Pennsylvania, delivered a speech to the House of Representatives in which he endorsed the annexation of Texas as a slave state. But if any new territory should be acquired as a result of the war with Mexico, he declared, “God

 focus questions 1. How did the federal government try to resolve the issue of slavery in the western territories during the 1850s?

 2. What appealed to northern voters about the Republican party? How did this lead to Abraham Lincoln’s victory in the 1860 presidential contest?

 3. Why did seven southern states secede from the Union shortly after Lincoln’s election in 1860?



