 1030  CHAPTER 23  A Clash of Cultures 1920–1929

 During the twenties, the new and unusual clashed openly with the conventional and the commonplace. Modernists and traditionalists waged cultural warfare with one another, one group looking to the future for inspiration and the other looking to the past for guidance. Terrorist attacks increased, as did labor and racial violence. In 1920, a h ­ orse-​­drawn wagon loaded with dynamite exploded at the corner of Wall and Broad streets in New York City, killing ­thirty-​­eight people and wounding hundreds. That the bombers were never found fueled public concern that the United States was on the brink of chaos and revolution. The scope and pace of societal changes were bewildering, as the emergence of national radio networks, talking motion pictures, mass ownership of automobiles, and national chain stores, combined with the soaring popularity of spectator sports and the rise of mass marketing and advertising, transformed America into the world’s leading consumer society. The culture of mass consumption fueled the explosive growth of ­middle-​­class urban life while assaulting traditional virtues such as frugality, prudence, and religiosity. In the political arena, reactionaries and rebels battled for control. The brutal fight between Woodrow Wilson and the R ­ epublican-​­led Senate over the Treaty of Versailles, coupled with the administration’s crackdown on dissenters and socialists, had weakened an already fragmented and disillusioned progressivism. As reformer Amos Pinchot bitterly observed, President Wilson had “put his enemies in office and his friends in jail.” By 1920, many progressives had grown skeptical of any politician claiming to be a reformer or an idealist. Social reformer Jane Addams sighed that the 1920s were “a period of political and social sag.” The desire to restore traditional values and social stability led voters to elect Republican Warren G. Harding president in 1920. He promised to return America to “normalcy.” Both major parties still included progressive wings, but they were shrinking. The demand for honest, efficient government and public services remained strong; the impulse for social reform, however, shifted into a drive for moral righteousness and social conformity. By 1920, many veteran progressives had withdrawn from public life. Mainstream Americans were also shocked by new, “modernist” forms of artistic expression and sexual liberation. Mabel Dodge Luhan, a leading promoter of modern art and literature, said that the generation of young literary and artistic rebels that emerged during and after the war was determined to overthrow “the old order of things.” In sum, postwar life in America and Europe was fraught with turbulent changes, contradictory impulses, superficial frivolity, and seething tensions. As the French painter Paul Gauguin acknowledged, the upheavals of cultural

A “New Era” of Consumption  1031


 modernism and the chaotic aftermath of the war produced “an epoch of confusion,” a riotous clash of irreverent new ideas with traditional manners and morals.

The Nation in 1920
 The 1920 census reported that 106 million people lived in the United States, a third of the number today. America’s population was remarkably young. Over half the people were under the age of ­twenty-​­five. The average life expectancy was just ­fifty-​­six years for men and ­fifty-​­eight for women. American society remained overwhelmingly ­white—​­90 percent ­(persons of Hispanic origin were considered to be white). African Americans were 9 ­percent, and Native Americans and Asian Americans made up most of the rest. Almost half of the white population were either immigrants or the c­ hildren of immigrants, the highest percentage since the late eighteenth century. For the first time in American history, over half of the population lived in “cities,” meaning towns and cities with more than 2,500 residents. Towns with less than 3,000 residents could hardly be called urban. But some 16 million Americans lived in the ten largest cities. American society was relentlessly becoming more urban and less rural. The South remained the most rural and poorest region of the nation. Only about half of the farmers in the former Confederate states owned their land. ­Three-​­quarters of farmers in the rest of the nation owned their lands. The others were either tenants who rented lands or sharecroppers who gave the landowner a share of the crop in exchange for access to land. Most sharecroppers, especially black sharecroppers, were grimly poor, in large part because the entire agricultural sector struggled with low crop prices during the twenties. And most tenants and sharecroppers were in the South.

A “New Era” of Consumption
 America experienced so many dramatic changes during the twenties that people referred to it as a “New Era.” The robust U.S. economy became the envy of the world. Following the brief postwar recession in 1920–1921, economic growth soared to record levels. Jobs were plentiful, and average income rose throughout the decade. The nation’s total wealth almost doubled between 1920 and 1930, while wage workers enjoyed ­record-​­breaking increases in average income. By 1929, the United States enjoyed the highest standard of living in the world.

 1032  CHAPTER 23  A Clash of Cultures 1920–1929

 Construction led the way. The war had caused people to postpone building offices, plants, homes, and apartments. By 1921, however, a building boom was underway that would last the rest of the decade. At the same time, the remarkable growth of the automotive industry created an immediate need for roads and highways. New construction and new cars stimulated other industries such as lumber, steel, concrete, rubber, gasoline, and furniture. Technology also played a key role in the prosperity of the twenties. Manufacturing grew more mechanized and efficient. Powerful new machines (electric motors, steam turbines, dump trucks, tractors, bulldozers, steam shovels) and ­more-​­efficient ways of operating farms, factories, plants, mines, and mills generated dramatic increases in production. In 1920, the nation’s factories produced 5,000 electric refrigerators; in 1929, almost a million.

A
Growing Consumer Culture  In the late nineteenth century, the U.S. economy had been driven by commercial agriculture and ­large-​­scale industrial ­production—​­the building of railroads and bridges, the manufacturing of steel, and the construction of housing and businesses in cities. During the twenties, the dominant aspect of the economy involved an explosion of new consumer goods. The success of mass production made mass consumption more important than ever. A 1920 newspaper editorial insisted that, with the war over, the American’s “first importance to his country is no longer that of citizen but that of consumer.” To keep factory production humming required converting ­once-​­frugal people into enthusiastic shoppers. “People may ruin themselves by saving instead of spending,” warned one economist. During the Great War, the government had urged Americans to work long hours, conserve resources, and do without. After the war, a new consumer culture encouraged carefree spending. “During the war,” a journalist noted in 1920, “we accustomed ourselves to doing without, to buying carefully, to using economically. But with the close of the war came reaction. A veritable orgy of extravagant buying is going on. Reckless spending takes the place of saving, waste replaces conservation.” To keep people buying, businesses developed new ways for consumers to finance purchases over time (“layaway”) rather than have to pay cash up front (“Buy Now, Pay Later”). As paying with cash and staying out of debt came to be seen as needlessly “­old-​­fashioned” practices, consumer debt almost tripled during the twenties. By 1929, almost 60 percent of American purchases were made on the installment plan. During the New Era, advertising, first developed in the late nineteenth century, grew into a huge enterprise. President Calvin Coolidge declared that

A “New Era” of Consumption  1033


 advertising had become “the most potent influence in adopting and changing the habits and modes of life, affecting what we eat, what we wear, and the work and play of the whole nation.”

 A modern home This 1925 Westinghouse advertisement urges homemakers to buy its “Cozy Glow, Jr.” heater and “­Sol-​­Luk Luminaire” lamp, among other new electrical appliances that would “do anything for you in return.”

 1034  CHAPTER 23  A Clash of Cultures 1920–1929

 The visibility of ads helped shape how people behaved and how they defined the pursuit of happiness. Zelda Sayre Fitzgerald, the writer and wife of the wildly popular novelist F. Scott Fitzgerald, recalled that “we grew up founding our dreams on the infinite promises of American advertising.” New weekday radio programs popular with m ­ iddle-​­class housewives, for example, were often sponsored by national companies advertising laundry detergent and hand ­soap—​­hence the term “soap operas.” Because women purchased ­two-​­thirds of consumer goods, advertisers targeted them. An ad in Photoplay magazine appealed to the “woman of the house” because “she buys most of the things which go to make the home happy, healthful, and beautiful. Through her slim, safe fingers goes most of the family money.” The consumer culture generated bewildering changes in everyday life. The huge jump in the use of electricity was a revolutionary new force. In 1920, only 35 percent of homes had electricity; by 1930, the number was 68 percent. Similar increases occurred in the number of households with indoor plumbing, washing machines, and automobiles. Moderately priced creature comforts and conveniences such as flush toilets, electric irons and fans, handheld cameras, wristwatches, cigarette lighters, vacuum cleaners, and linoleum floors, became more widely available, especially among the urban middle class. As always, the poor, with little discretionary income, remained on the margins of the consumer culture.

The Rise of Mass Culture
 The powerful consumer culture helped create a marketplace of retail stores and national brands (Kellogg’s Corn Flakes, General Electric toasters, etc.) in which local and regional businesses were increasingly squeezed out by giant department stores and national “chain” stores. By the 1920s, Woolworth’s, for example, had 1,500 stores scattered across the country; Walgreen’s had 525. Such national retailers bought goods in such large quantities that they were able to get discounted prices that they passed on to consumers. Mass advertising and marketing campaigns promoting national products increasingly led to a mass culture: more and more Americans now saw the same advertisements and bought the same products at the same stores. They also read the same magazines, listened to the same radio programs, drove the same cars, adored the same sports stars and celebrities, and watched the same movies.

 ­movie-​­made america

 In 1896, a New York audience viewed the first ­moving-​­picture show. By 1924, there were 20,000 theaters showing 700

A “New Era” of Consumption  1035


 new “silent” films a year, and the movie business had become the nation’s chief form of mass entertainment. Hollywood, California, became the international center of movie production, grinding out cowboy Westerns, crime dramas, murder mysteries, and the timeless comedies of Mack Sennett’s Keystone Company, where a raft of slapstick comedians, most notably London-​ ­born Charlie Chaplin, a comic genius, perfected their art, transforming it into a form of social criticism. Movie attendance during the 1920s averaged 80 million people a week, more than half the national population, and attendance surged even more after 1927 with the appearance of “talk- Charlie Chaplin An ­English-​­born actor ies,” movies with sound. In 1930, some who rose to international fame as the 115 million people attended weekly “Tramp,” pictured above in the 1921 movies out of a total population of silent film The Kid. 123 million (many people went more than once). Americans spent ten times as much on movies as they did on tickets to baseball and football games. But movies did much more than entertain. They helped expand the consumer culture by feeding the desires of moviegoers, setting standards and tastes in fashion, music, dancing, and hairstyles. They also helped stimulate the sexual revolution. One boy admitted that it was the movies that taught him how “to kiss a girl on her ears, neck, and cheeks, as well as on the mouth.” A social researcher concluded that movies made young Americans in the twenties more “­sex-​­wise, ­sex-​­excited, and ­sex-​­absorbed” than previous generations.

 radio

 Radio broadcasting enjoyed even more spectacular growth. In 1920, station WWJ in Detroit began transmitting news bulletins, and KDKA in Pittsburgh began broadcasting regularly scheduled programs. The first radio commercial aired in New York in 1922. By the end of that year, there were 508 stations. In 1926, the National Broadcasting Company (NBC), a subsidiary of the Radio Corporation of America (RCA), began linking its stations into a national network; the Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS) entered the field the next year.

 1036  CHAPTER 23  A Clash of Cultures 1920–1929

 In 1920, some 41 million radios were manufactured in the United States. The widespread ownership of radios changed the patterns of everyday life. At night after dinner, families gathered around the radio to listen to live music, political speeches, news broadcasts, weather forecasts, baseball and football games, boxing matches, comedy shows, and worship services. One ad claimed that the radio “is your theater, your college, your newspaper, your library.” Calvin Coolidge was the first president to address the nation by radio, and his monthly talks paved the way for Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s influential “fireside chats” during the thirties. Radio transformed jazz music into a national craze. Big band leaders Paul Whiteman, Guy Lombardo, Duke Ellington, Glenn Miller, and Tommy and Jimmy Dorsey regularly performed live over the radio. Country western music also developed a national following as a result of radio broadcasts. In 1925 a Nashville, Tennessee station, WSM, began offering a weekly variety show, The Grand Ole Opry, which featured an array of country music stars.

 flying machines

 Advances in transportation were as significant as the impact of commercial radio and movies on popular culture. In 1903, Wilbur and Orville Wright, owners of a bicycle shop in Dayton, Ohio, had built and flown the first “flying machine” over the beach at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. The development of airplanes advanced slowly until the outbreak of war in 1914, when Europeans began using the airplane as a military weapon. When the United States entered the war, it had no combat planes; American pilots flew British or French warplanes. An American aircraft industry arose during the war but collapsed in the postwar demobilization. Under the Kelly Act of 1925, however, the federal government began to subsidize the industry through airmail contracts. The Air Commerce Act of 1926 provided federal funds for the advancement of air transportation and navigation, including the construction of airports. The aviation industry received a huge psychological boost in 1927 when t­ wenty-​­six-​­year-​­old Charles A. Lindbergh Jr., a St. Louis–​­based mail pilot, made the first solo transatlantic flight, traveling from New York City to Paris in t­hirty-​­three and a half hours through severe storms and dense fog. When Lindbergh, known as the “Lone Eagle,” landed in France, 100,000 people greeted him with thunderous cheers. The New York City parade celebrating his accomplishment surpassed the celebration of the end of the Great War. (When Lindbergh met Britain’s King George V soon after his long flight, the monarch asked him, “How did you pee?” “In paper cups,” the pilot answered.) Five years after Lindbergh’s famous flight, New York City celebrated another

A “New Era” of Consumption  1037


 Amelia Earhart The pioneering aviator would tragically disappear in her 1937 attempt to fly around the world.

 pioneering aviator—Amelia Earhart, a former stunt pilot at air shows who became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic.

 the car culture

 By far the most significant economic and social development of the early twentieth century was the widespread ownership of automobiles. In 1924, when asked about the changes transforming American life, a resident of Muncie, Indiana replied: “I can tell you what’s happening in just four letters: ­A-​­U-​­T-​­O.” A neighbor in Muncie said he would “go without food before I’ll see us give up the car.” The first motorcar (“horseless carriage”) had been manufactured for sale in 1895, but the founding of the Ford Motor Company in 1903 had revolutionized the infant industry. The first cars were handmade, expensive, and designed for the wealthy. Henry Ford changed all that by building “a car for the multitude.” During the twenties, he became the godfather of mass production. He vowed “to democratize the automobile. When I’m through, everybody will be able to afford one, and about everyone will have one.” Ford’s Model T, the celebrated “Tin Lizzie,” cheap and rugged, “built to last forever,” came out in 1908 at a price of $850 (about $22,000 today). By 1924, as a result of Ford’s ­ever-​­more efficient production techniques, the same car sold for $290 (less than $4,000

 1038  CHAPTER 23  A Clash of Cultures 1920–1929

 Ford Motor Company’s Highland Park plant, 1913 Gravity slides and chain conveyors contributed to the mass production of automobiles.

 today). The Model T changed little from year to year, and it came in only one color: black. Other automakers followed Ford’s mass production/­low-​­priced model. In 1920, there were more than 8 million registered vehicles; in 1929, there were more than 23 million. The automobile revolution was in part propelled by the discovery of vast oil fields in Texas, Oklahoma, Wyoming, and California. By 1920, the United States produced ­two-​­thirds of the world’s oil and gasoline. The automobile industry also became the leading example of modern ­mass-​­production techniques. Ford’s Highland Park plant outside Detroit used a moving conveyor system that pulled the chassis down an assembly line of sequential work stations. Each worker performed a single task, such as installing a fender or a wheel, as the c­ ar-​­in-​­process moved down the line. Through this technique, a new car could be pieced together in ­ninety-​­three minutes. Such efficiency enabled Ford to lower the price of his cars, thereby increasing the number of people who could afford them. His high profits helped him pay his workers the highest wages in the industry. Although Ford was a notorious ­taskmaster—​­he prohibited his workers from talking, sitting, smoking, or singing while on the ­job—​­his methods worked. During the twenties, the United States built ten times more automobiles than all of Europe combined. Just as the railroad helped transform the pace and scale of life in the second half of the nineteenth century, the automobile changed social life during the twentieth century. Americans literally developed a love affair with cars. In the words of one male driver, young people viewed the car as “an incredible engine

A “New Era” of Consumption  1039


 of escape” from parental control and a safe place to “take a girl and hold hands, neck, pet, or . . . ​go the limit.” Cars and networks of new roads enabled people to live farther away from their workplaces, thus encouraging suburban sprawl. Cars also helped fuel the economic boom of the 1920s by creating tens of thousands of new jobs and a huge demand for steel, glass, rubber, leather, oil, and gasoline. The car culture stimulated road construction, sparked a real estate boom in Florida and California, and dotted the landscape with gasoline stations, traffic lights, billboards, and motor hotels (“motels”). By 1929, the federal government was constructing 10,000 miles of paved highways each year.

 spectator sports

 During the 1920s, automobile ownership and rising incomes changed the way people spent their leisure time. Americans fell in love with spectator sports; people in cities could drive into the countryside, visit friends and relatives, and go to ballparks, stadiums, or boxing rinks to see baseball or football games and prizefights. Baseball, created in the 1870s, had become the “national pastime” by the 1920s. Its popularity fed on superstars. With ­larger-​­than-​­life heroes such as New York Yankee legends George Herman “Babe” Ruth Jr. and Henry Louis “Lou” Gehrig, baseball teams attracted intense loyalties and huge crowds. Ruth may well have been the most famous athlete of all time. In 1920, more than a million spectators attended Ruth’s games. Two years later, the Yankees built a new stadium, dubbing it the “House That Ruth Built,” and went on to win World Series championships in 1923, 1927, and 1928. More than 20 million people attended professional games in 1927, the year that Ruth, the “Sultan of Swat,” set a record by hitting sixty home runs. Because baseball remained a segregated sport in the 1920s, ­so-​ ­called Negro Leagues were organized for African Americans. Football, especially at the college level, also attracted huge crowds. It, too, benefited from outsized heroes such as running back Harold Edward “Red” Grange of the University of Illinois, the first athlete to appear on the cover of Time magazine. In a game against the University of Michigan, the “Galloping Ghost” scored a touchdown the first four times he carried the ball. After Illinois won, students carried Grange on their shoulders for two miles across the campus. When he signed a contract with the Chicago Bears in 1926, he s­ ingle-​ ­handedly made professional football competitive with baseball as a spectator sport. What Ruth and Grange were to their sports, William Harrison “Jack” Dempsey was to boxing. In 1919, he won the world heavyweight title from Jess Willard, a giant of a man weighing three hundred pounds and standing

 1040  CHAPTER 23  A Clash of Cultures 1920–1929

 Babe Ruth This star pitcher and outfielder won the hearts of Americans, first with the Boston Red Sox, then the New York Yankees, and, finally, the Boston Braves. Here, he autographs bats and balls for soldiers at training camp.

 six and a half feet tall. Dempsey knocked him down seven times in the first round. Willard, his face bruised and bloodied, gave up in the fourth round, and Dempsey thereafter became a dominant force in boxing. Like Babe Ruth, the brawling Dempsey was especially popular with ­working-​­class men, for he too had been born poor. In 1927, when James Joseph “Gene” Tunney defeated Dempsey, more than 100,000 people attended, including a thousand reporters, ten state governors, and numerous Hollywood celebrities. Some 60 million people listened to the fight over the radio.

The “Jazz Age”
 While the masses of Americans devoted their free time to spectator sports, radio programs, and movies, many young people, especially college students, focused their energies on social and cultural rebellion. F. Scott Fitzgerald, a boyishly handsome Princeton University dropout, was labeled “the voice of his generation” after his first novel, This Side of Paradise (1920), became a best

The “Jazz Age”  1041


 seller with its colorful account of rowdy student life at Princeton. Fitzgerald fastened upon the “Jazz Age” as a label for the spirit of rebelliousness and spontaneity he observed among many young Americans.

The Birth of Jazz
 Fitzgerald’s Jazz Age label referred to the popularity of jazz music, a dynamic blend of several musical traditions. It had first emerged as ­piano-​­based “ragtime” at the end of the nineteenth century. Thereafter, African American musicians such as Jelly Roll Morton, Duke Ellington, Louis Armstrong, and Bessie Smith (the “Empress of the Blues”) combined the energies of ragtime with the emotions of the blues to create jazz, originally an African American slang term meaning sexual intercourse. With its improvisations, variations, and sensual spontaneity, jazz appealed to people of all ethnicities and ages because it was all about pleasure and immediacy, letting go and enjoying the freedom of the moment. Louis Armstrong, an inspired trumpeter with a uniquely froggy voice, was the Pied Piper of jazz, an inventive and freewheeling performer who reshaped the American music scene. Born in a New Orleans shack in 1900, the grandson of slaves, he was abandoned by his father and raised by his prostitute mother, who was fifteen when he was born. As a youth, he saw the mean and ugly side of America. “I seen everythin’ from a child comin’ up,” he said once. “Nothin’ happen I ain’t never seen before.” Then he found music, using his natural genius to explore the fertile possibilities of jazz. As a teen, he sneaked into music halls to watch Joe “King” Oliver and other early jazz innovators. In 1922, Armstrong moved to Chicago, where he delighted audiences with his passionate trumpet performances and ­open-​ ­hearted personality. Throughout the twenties, Armstrong and his band crisscrossed the United States, spreading the gospel of jazz. The culture of jazz quickly spread from its origins in New Orleans, Kansas City, Memphis, and St. Louis to the African American neighborhoods of Harlem in New York City and Chicago’s South Side. Large dance halls accommodated the demand for jazz music and the new dances it inspired, like the Charleston and the Black Bottom. Affluent whites flocked to the dance halls as well as to “black” nightclubs and “jazz joints.” During the 1920s, people commonly spoke of jazzing something up” (invigorating it) or “jazzing around” (acting youthfully and energetically). Many Americans, however, were not fans of jazz or the sexually suggestive dances it inspired. Dr. Francis E. Clark, a Christian moralist, denounced “indecent dance” as “an offense against womanly purity.” Princeton professor

 1042  CHAPTER 23  A Clash of Cultures 1920–1929

 Henry van Dyke dismissed jazz as “merely an irritation of the nerves of hearing, a sensual teasing of the strings of physical passion.” Such criticism, however, failed to stem the popularity of jazz, which swept across Europe as well as America. Europeans, including modernist painters Henri Matisse and Pablo Picasso, grew infatuated with the inventive energies of jazz music.

A
Sexual Revolution?  What most shocked ­old-​­timers during the Jazz Age was a defiant sexual revolution among young people, especially those on college campuses. “None of the Victorian ­mothers—​­and most of the mothers were V ­ ictorian—​­had any idea how casually their daughters were accustomed to being kissed,” wrote F. Scott Fitzgerald in This Side of Paradise (1920). During the twenties, Americans learned about the hidden world of “flaming youth” (the title of a popular novel): wild “petting parties,” free love, speakeasies, “joyriding,” and s­kinny-​­dipping. A promotional poster for the 1923 silent film Flaming Youth asked: “How Far Can a Girl Go?” Other ads

 Duke Ellington and his band Jazz emerged in the 1920s as a uniquely American expression of the modernist spirit. African American artists bent musical conventions to give freer rein to improvisation and sensuality.

The “Jazz Age”  1043


 claimed the movie appealed especially to “neckers, petters, white kisses, red kisses, p ­ leasure-​­mad daughters, [and] s­ ensation-​­craving mothers.”

 the impact of sigmund freud The increasingly frank treat­

 ment of sex resulted in part from the influence of Sigmund Freud, the Austrian founder of modern psychoanalysis. Freud, trained as a physician, insisted that the human mind was mysteriously “conflicted” by often unconscious efforts to repress powerful irrational impulses and sexual desires (“libido”). In 1899, Freud had published The Interpretation of Dreams, a pathbreaking book that stressed the crucial role of the subconscious in shaping behavior and moods. He also highlighted the Sigmund Freud Founder of modern significance of dreams as providing psychoanalysis, in 1926. the “royal road to the unconscious,” for dreams revealed “repressed” sexual yearnings, many of which resulted from early childhood experiences. Women and men, Freud argued, are endowed with equal sexual energy, and human behavior is driven by a variety of intense sexual desires and efforts to release ­pent-​­up aggression. These natural human conflicts cause unhappiness because people desire more pleasures than they can attain. It did not take long for Freud’s ideas to penetrate society at large. Books, movies, and plays included frequent references to Freud’s ideas, and some of the decade’s most popular m ­ agazines—​­True Confessions, Telling Tales, and True ­Story—​­focused on romance and sex. Likewise, the most popular female movie ­stars—​­Madge Bellamy, Clara Bow, and Joan C ­ rawford—​­projected images of sensual freedom, energy, and independence. Advertisements for new movies reinforced the ­self-​­indulgent images of the Jazz Age: “brilliant men, beautiful jazz babies, champagne baths, midnight revels, petting parties in the purple dawn, all ending in one terrific climax that makes you gasp.” Traditionalists were shocked by the behavior of rebellious young women. “One hears it said,” lamented a Baptist magazine, “that the girls

 1044  CHAPTER 23  A Clash of Cultures 1920–1929

 are actually tempting the boys more than the boys do the girls, by their dress and conversation.” Psychoanalysis, whose purpose is to explain activities in the mind, soon became the world’s most c­ elebrated—​­and ­controversial—​­technique for helping troubled people come to grips with the demons haunting them by using “talk therapy,” getting patients to tell the story of their lives and inner frustrations and repressed fears and urges. By 1916, there were some 500 psychoanalysts in New York City alone. Freud’s emphasis on unruly sexual desires swirling about in the subconscious fascinated some people and scared others. For many young Americans, Freud seemed to provide scientific justification for rebelling against social conventions and indulging in sex. Some oversimplified his theories by claiming that sexual pleasure was essential for emotional health, that all forms of sexual activity were good, and that all inhibitions about sex were bad.

 margaret sanger and birth control

 Perhaps the most controversial women’s issue of the Jazz Age was birth control. ­Christians—​ ­both Protestants and ­Catholics—​­opposed it as a violation of God’s law. Other crusaders saw it differently. Margaret Sanger, a New York nurse and midwife in the ­working-​­class tenements of Manhattan, saw many young mothers struggling to provide for their growing families. Born in 1883, one of eleven children born to Irish immigrants, she herself had experienced the poverty often faced by large immigrant families. “Our childhood,” she remembered, “was one of longing for things that were always denied.” As a nurse and midwife, Sanger witnessed at firsthand the consequences of unwanted pregnancies, tragic miscarriages, and amateur abortions. To her, the problems had an obvious solution: birth control, a term she and friends coined in 1914. In 1912, Sanger began to distribute b ­ irth-​­control information to ­working-​­class women and resolved to spend the rest of her life helping women gain control of their bodies. To do so, she began publishing a magazine called Woman Rebel in which she promoted woman’s suffrage, workers’ rights, and contraception to frighten the “capitalist class.” In 1916, she was arrested and charged with disseminating obscenity through the mail, but months later the case was dropped. She then opened the nation’s first ­birth-​­control clinic, in Brooklyn. In 1921, Sanger organized the American Birth Control League, which in 1942 changed its name to Planned Parenthood. The Birth Control League distributed information to doctors, social workers, women’s clubs, and the scientific community, as well as to thousands of women. In the 1920s, however, Sanger alienated supporters of birth control by endorsing sterilization

The “Jazz Age”  1045


 for the mentally incompetent and for people with certain hereditary conditions. Birth control, she stressed, was “the most constructive and necessary of the means to racial health.” Although Sanger did not succeed in legalizing the distribution of contraceptives and contraceptive information through the mail, she had laid the foundation for such efforts. In 1936 a federal court ruled that physicians could prescribe ­contraceptives—​­a vital step in Sanger’s efforts to realize her slogan, “Every child a wanted child.”

 the “new women”

New
 clothing fashions reflected the rebellion against traditional female roles in an especially powerful way. The emancipated “new women” of the twenties The “new woman” of the 1920s Two seized the right to vote while eagerly risk-taking flappers dance atop the Hotel Sherman in Chicago, 1926. discarding the confining wardrobe of their mothers’ g­ eneration—​­pinched-​­in corsets, layers of petticoats, and fl ­ oor-​­length dresses. In 1919, skirts were typically six inches above the ground; by 1927, they were at the knee. The Utah legislature in 1921 debated a bill that would have jailed women wearing “skirts higher than three inches above the ankle.” The shortest skirts were worn by the ­so-​­called flappers, ­pleasure-​­seeking young women w ­ ho—​­in defiance of proper prewar ­standards—​­drove automobiles, “bobbed” their hair (cut it short, requiring the invention of the “bobby pin”), and wore minimal underclothing, gauzy fabrics, sheer stockings, dangling necklaces, and plenty of makeup, especially rouge and lipstick. They often joined young men in smoking cigarettes, drinking, gambling, and dancing to jazz music. Flappers attracted so much attention in part because they were both defiantly independent and desperately seductive. After interacting with flappers in New York City, British novelist Elinor Glynn asked: “Has the American girl no innate ­modesty—​­no ­sub-​­conscious ­self-​­respect, no reserve, no dignity?” The flappers wanted more out of life than marriage and motherhood. Their carefree version of feminism was ­fun-​­loving, defiant, ­self-​­indulgent, and often

 1046  CHAPTER 23  A Clash of Cultures 1920–1929

 s­ elf-​­destructive. F. Scott Fitzgerald claimed that his rebellious wife, Zelda, was the “First American Flapper.” The wayward daughter of a strict Alabama judge, Zelda was wild to the point of exhaustion. Stimulated by alcohol, she loved doing “crazy things”: dancing in New York City fountains and stripping off her clothes in the middle of Grand Central Station. The craziness of such flappers shocked and scared observers. A Catholic priest in Brooklyn complained that the feminism of the 1920s had provoked a “pandemonium of powder, a riot of rouge, and a moral anarchy of dress.”

 not so new women

Most
 women in the 1920s were not flappers, however. Lillian Symes, a longtime activist, stressed that her “generation The beautiful and the damned In an outfit typical of flappers, Zelda of feminists” had little in common Fitzgerald poses with her husband, with the “­spike-​­heeled, ­over-​­rouged author F. Scott Fitzgerald, on the Riviera flapper of today. We grew up before in 1926. the postwar disillusionment engulfed the youth of the land.” Although more ­middle-​­class women attended college in the 1920s than ever before, a higher percentage of them married soon after graduation than had been the case in the nineteenth century. The conservative political mood helped to steer women who had worked for the war effort back into their traditional roles as homemakers, and college curricula began to shift accordingly. At Vassar College, an ­all-​­women’s school outside of New York City, students took courses such as “Husband and Wife,” “Motherhood,” and “The Family as an Economic Unit.” At the same time, fewer ­college-​­educated women pursued careers: the proportion of physicians who were women fell during the twenties from 6 to 4 percent, and similar reductions occurred among dentists, architects, and chemists. A student at ­all-​ ­female Smith College in Massachusetts expressed frustration “that a woman must choose between a home and her work, when a man may have both. There must be a way out, and it is the problem of our generation to find the way.”

The “Jazz Age”  1047


 As before, most women who worked outside the home labored in unskilled, ­low-​­paying jobs. Only 4 percent of working women in the 1920s were salaried professionals. Some women moved into new vocations created by the growing consumer culture, such as accounting assistants and ­department-​­store clerks. The number of beauty shops soared from 5,000 in 1920 to 40,000 in 1930, creating jobs for hair stylists, manicurists, and cosmeticians. But the majority of women were still either ­full-​­time wives and mothers or household servants. Fortunately, the growing availability of electricity and electrical ­appliances—​­vacuum cleaners, toasters, stoves, refrigerators, washing machines, ­irons—​­made housework easier. Likewise, “supermarkets” offered ­year-​­round access to fruits, vegetables, and meats, which greatly reduced the traditional tasks of food p ­ reparation—​­canning, baking bread, and plucking chickens. African American and Latino women faced the greatest challenges. As a New York City newspaper observed, they were forced to do “work which white women will not do.” Women of color usually worked as maids, laundresses, or seamstresses, or on farms.

 the color line

 In addition to sexism, racism also continued to limit the freedom of women during the twenties. For example, in 1919, an interracial couple from Ayer, Massachusetts, Mabel Puffer, a wealthy college graduate, and Arthur Hazzard, a handyman and leader within the local black community, decided to get married in Concord, New Hampshire. They checked into separate rooms in a hotel, then met in the lobby and walked three blocks to the courthouse to apply for a marriage license, only to be told that there was a ­five-​ ­day waiting period. So they waited and made preparations for the wedding. The mayor of Concord agreed to perform the service, and Hazzard’s siblings and mother made plans to attend. When news of the interracial couple strolling the streets of Concord reached the Boston newspapers, the first story’s headline, in the Boston Traveller, read: “Will Marry Negro in ‘Perfect Union’: Rich Ayer Society Woman Determined to Wed Servant Although Hometown Is Aflame with Protest.” The news had outraged many residents of Ayer. The next day, the Boston Evening Globe ran the now provocative story on its front page. The headline was sensational: “Hope to Prevent White Woman Wedding Negro: Two Friends of Mabel E. Puffer Have Gone to Concord, N.H.” Suddenly, the mayor of Concord reversed himself and announced he could not perform the wedding. The betrothed couple, after being turned down several times, finally found a minister willing to marry them. The night before the wedding was to occur, the Ayer police chief arrived, arrested Hazzard on a charge of “enticement,” and took Puffer into custody because she had been

 1048  CHAPTER 23  A Clash of Cultures 1920–1929

 deemed “insane.” In reporting the story, the Concord newspaper concluded that the community “gazed after their departing dust with no regrets.” The nation that Woodrow Wilson had led into World War I to “make the world safe for democracy” remained an unsafe place for those bold enough to cross the color line.

African American Life
 The most significant development in African American life during the early twentieth century was the Great Migration northward from the South. The mass movement of blacks began at the start of the twentieth century but accelerated in 1915–1916, when rapidly expanding war industries in the northern states needed new workers. It continued throughout the twenties, as poor blacks boarded trains with ­one-​­way tickets, bound for the “promised land” up North. Between 1920 and 1930, almost a million African Americans, mostly sharecroppers, joined the exodus from the South. Many landed in New York City, Chicago, Detroit, Cleveland, Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, and other large cities. The Great Migration continued in fits and starts throughout the twentieth century, producing dramatic social, economic, and political changes. In 1900, only 740,000 African Americans lived outside the South, just 8 percent of the nation’s black population. By 1970, more than 10.6 million African Americans lived outside the South, 47 percent of the nation’s total. The African Americans making up the Great Migration were lured by what writer Richard Wright called the “warmth of other suns”—better living conditions and ­better-​­paying jobs. In the North, for the most part, they were able to speak more freely and were treated more equally than in the South, and educational opportunities for children were much better. Collectively, blacks gained more political leverage by settling in populous states like New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Illinois, with many electoral votes. The political effects of the Great Migration were evident in 1928 when a Chicago Republican, Oscar De Priest, became the first black elected to Congress since Reconstruction and the first ever from a northern district. The Great Migration was fraught with challenges, however. For the black migrants, the difficult decision to leave their native South ended one set of troubles only to begin another. “Never in history,” said Richard Wright, “has a more utterly unprepared folk wanted to go to the city.” The refugees arriving in northern cities from the Jim Crow South were strangers in a strange land, where they were not always welcomed. In densely populated northern cities, black newcomers sometimes clashed with local ethnic groups, especially Irish and Italians who feared that the newcomers would take their jobs. Many

The “Jazz Age”  1049


 The Migration of the Negro, Panel no. 1 In Jacob Lawrence’s series of paintings, African Americans leave the South behind for the northern industries of cities like New York, Chicago, and St. Louis.

 southern blacks, ignorant of city ways, were taken advantage of by white landlords, realtors, and bankers, forced into substandard and segregated housing, and paid lower wages than whites. But northern discrimination still paled beside the ferocious injustices faced by African Americans in the segregated South. “If all of their dream does not come true,” a black newspaper in Chicago stressed, “enough will come to pass to justify their actions.” The ­Missouri-​­born black poet Langston Hughes spoke for many when he wrote that he was “fed up With Jim Crow laws, / People who are cruel And afraid, /Who lynch and run, / Who are scared of me And me of them.” Over time, the transplanted African Americans forged new lives in a strange new land, building new churches, new communities, new families, even new cultures while reconstructing new identities.

 the naacp

 The mass migration of southern blacks northward helped spur the creation of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), founded in 1910 by black activists and white progressives. Black NAACP members came mainly from the Niagara movement, a group formed in 1905 to fight racial discrimination nationwide. W. E. B. Du Bois became the organization’s director of publicity and research and the ­editor of its journal, Crisis.

 1050  CHAPTER 23  A Clash of Cultures 1920–1929

 Politically, the NAACP focused on legal action to bring the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments back to life. One early victory came with Guinn v. United States (1915), in which the Supreme Court struck down Oklahoma’s efforts to deprive African Americans of the vote. In Buchanan v. Worley (1917), the Court invalidated a residential segregation ordinance in Louisville, Kentucky. In 1919, the NAACP launched a national campaign against lynching, then a ­still-​­common form of vigilante racist violence. An ­anti-​­lynching bill to make mob murder a federal crime passed the House in 1922 but was defeated by southerners in the Senate.

 the harlem renaissance

 So many blacks converged in New York City during the twenties that they inspired the Harlem ­Renaissance, the nation’s first black literary and artistic movement. It started in the ­fast-​ ­growing African American community of Harlem in northern Manhattan. In 1890, one in seventy people in Manhattan had been African American; by 1930, it was one in nine. The “great, dark city” of Harlem, in poet Langston Hughes’s phrase, contained more blacks per square mile than any other urban neighborhood in the nation. Such rapid population growth generated a sense of common identity, growing power, and distinctive ­self-​­expression that transformed Harlem into the cultural capital of African American life. Writer James Weldon Johnson described a “Black Manhattan” as a “typically Negro” community of 175,000 in that it featured “movement, color, gaiety, singing, dancing, boisterous laughter, and loud talk.” Dotted with lively taverns, lounges, supper clubs, dance halls, and saloons (“speakeasies”) that hosted writers and painters talking about literature and art while listening to jazz and drinking illegal booze, Harlem became what journalists called the “Nightclub Capital of the World.” Alain Locke, the first black Rhodes Scholar, announced that the Harlem Renaissance was led by a ­self-​­confident “new Negro” who no longer felt subservient to white culture. Hughes explained that the Harlem writers and artists were at last ready “to express our individual d ­ ark-​­skinned selves without fear or shame. If white people are pleased, we are glad. If they are not, it doesn’t matter. We know we are beautiful. And ugly too.” In poetry and prose, Harlem Renaissance writers celebrated African American culture, including jazz and the blues. As Hughes wrote, “I am a ­Negro—​ ­and beautiful. . . . ​The night is beautiful. So [are] the faces of my people.” But while Hughes loved Africa and its cultural heritage, his outlook emphatically “was not Africa. I was [shaped by] Chicago and Kansas City and Broadway and Harlem.”

The “Jazz Age”  1051


 Women, both black and white, were active in the Harlem Renaissance. In January 1925, a ­thirty-​­four-​­year-​­old African American woman named Zora Neale Hurston arrived in Harlem from Eatonville, an ­all-​­black community in rural central Florida. Born in Alabama in 1891, she was an aspiring writer and inventive storyteller in search of the “New Negro Movement.” With only $1.50 in her purse, “no job, no friends and a lot of hope,” she became the first African American to enroll at Barnard College, the woman’s college of Columbia University on the edge of Into Bondage This painting by Aaron Douglas Harlem, where she majored in cultural exemplifies how black artists in the Harlem Renaissance used their African roots and anthropology. collective history as artistic inspiration. A brassy, flamboyant woman, Hurston had mastered the art of survival by learning to reinvent herself as the need arose. Motherless at nine, a runaway at fourteen, she became a calculating opportunist blessed with remarkable willpower. The spirited Hurston said she came to Harlem to immerse herself in the “clang and clamor” of city life, in a continuing effort to “jump at the sun,” to stretch her ambitions well beyond her resources. Within a few months, Hurston was behaving, in her words, as the queen of the Harlem Renaissance, writing short stories and plays about the “Negro furthest down” on the social scale while positioning herself at the center of the community’s raucous social life. (“How can any deny themselves the pleasure of my company! It’s beyond me.”) She reveled in the black pride and cultural confidence enlivening Harlem. Her outspokenness invited controversy, as when she claimed that she “did not belong to the sobbing school of Negrohood who hold that nature somehow has given them a lowdown dirty deal and whose feelings are all hurt about it.” Hurston went on to become a leading anthropologist, folklorist, and novelist, expert at describing the ways in which African Americans in the Lower South forged cohesive communities in the face of white bigotry and violence. The Harlem Renaissance also celebrated the distinctive contributions of poor African Americans to American culture. Hurston spoke out on behalf of those who “having nothing, still refused to be humble.” So did many other members of the Harlem Renaissance. Writer James Weldon Johnson coined

 1052  CHAPTER 23  A Clash of Cultures 1920–1929

 the term “Aframerican” to designate Americans with African ancestry and to emphasize that blacks were no longer divided by their heritage; they were proud to be Americans who happened to have an African ancestry. Aframericans, he insisted, were “conscious collaborators” in the creation of American society and culture. The black sculptor Augusta Savage agreed. She explained that African Americans for three centuries had shared the “same cultural background, the same system, the same standard of beauty as white Americans. . . . ​It is impossible to go back to primitive [African] art for our models.” By 1930, Harlem Renaissance writAugusta Savage The sculptor, shown ers had produced dozens of novels with her statue Realization (1938), found and volumes of poetry; several Broadsuccess in America and abroad, despite way plays; and a flood of short stories, experiencing racial prejudice along the way. essays, and films. A people capable of producing such great art and literature, Johnson declared, should never again be “looked upon as inferior.”

 garveyism

 The celebration of black culture found much different expression in what came to be called Negro nationalism, which promoted black separatism from mainstream American life. Its leading spokesman was Marcus Garvey, who claimed to speak for all 400 million blacks worldwide. In 1916, Garvey brought to Harlem the headquarters of the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA), which he had started in his native Jamaica two years before. Garvey insisted that blacks had nothing in common with whites. In passionate speeches and in editorials in the UNIA’s popular newspaper, the Negro World, Garvey urged African Americans to remove themselves from the surrounding white culture and to cultivate black solidarity and “black power.” The UNIA quickly became the largest black political organization in the nation. By 1923, Garvey, who often wore gaudy military uniforms and f­ eather-​ ­plumed hats, claimed the UNIA had as many as 4 million members served by

The Modernist Revolt  1053


 800 offices. His goal was to build an ­all-​ ­black empire in Africa. To that end, he began calling himself the “Provisional President of Africa,” raising funds to send Americans to Africa, and expelling any UNIA member who married a white. Garvey’s message of black nationalism and racial solidarity appealed especially to poor blacks in northern cities, but he also had supporters across the rural South. Garveyism, however, appalled some black leaders, especially those leading the NAACP. W. E. B. Du Bois labeled Garvey “the most dangerous enemy of the Negro race. . . . ​He is either a lunatic or a traitor.” An African American newspaper pledged to help “drive Garvey and Garveyism in all its sinister viciousness from the American Marcus Garvey The ­Jamaican-​ soil.” ­born founder of the Universal Negro Garvey’s eccentric crusade col- Improvement Association and leading lapsed in 1923 when he was convicted spokesman for “Negro nationalism” in the 1920s. of fraud for overselling shares of stock in a steamship corporation, the Black Star Line, which he founded to transport American blacks to Africa. Sentenced to a ­five-​­year prison term, he was pardoned in 1927 by President Calvin Coolidge on the condition that he be deported to Jamaica, where he received a hero’s welcome. Garvey died in obscurity in 1940, but the memory of his movement kept alive an undercurrent that would reemerge in the 1960s under the slogan “black power.”

The Modernist Revolt
 The dramatic changes in society and the economy during the twenties were spurred by transformations in science and the arts during the p ­ revious two decades. Since the e­ ighteenth-​­century Enlightenment, conventional ­wisdom had held that the universe was governed by basic underlying laws of time

 1054  CHAPTER 23  A Clash of Cultures 1920–1929

 and energy, light and motion. This rational world of order and c­ertainty ­disintegrated in the early twentieth century, thanks to the discoveries of E ­ uropean physicists.

Albert Einstein
 During a century remarkable for its scientific discoveries and technological advances, one genius stands out: Albert Einstein, a scientific rebel with an unrivaled imagination. Many of his greatest discoveries emerged not from research but from his remarkable ability to picture in his mind the strange effects of natural forces, from the infinitesimally small to the infinitely large. In 1905, Einstein, a t­ wenty-​­six-​­year-​­old ­German-​­born physicist working in Switzerland, published several research papers that changed science forever while at times defying common sense. The first paper, which would earn him the Nobel Prize in 1921, revealed that light was not simply a wave of continuous energy but a stream of tiny particles, called quanta (now called photons). This breakthrough would provide the theoretical basis for quantum physics and new electronic technologies such as television, laser beams, and semiconductors used to make computers. In his second research paper, Einstein confirmed the existence of molecules and atoms by showing how their random collisions explained the jerky motions of tiny particles in water. Einstein’s third paper introduced the special theory of relativity, which argues that no matter how fast one is moving toward or away from a source of light, the speed of that light beam will appear the same, a constant 186,000 miles per second. But space and time will appear relative to the speed of light. So if a train were traveling at the speed of light, time would slow down from the perspective of an observer, and the train itself would Albert Einstein One of the most get shorter and heavier. influential scientists of the twentieth In 1916, Einstein unveiled his general century, Einstein was awarded a Nobel theory of relativity, which maintained that Prize in 1921. the fundamental concepts of space, time,

The Modernist Revolt  1055


 matter, and energy are not distinct, independent things with stable d ­ imensions, as Sir Isaac Newton had assumed in the eighteenth century, but that they are ­interacting elements constantly changing one another. As a beam of light travels through ­space-​­time, gravity causes it to curve. Likewise, the hands of a clock traveling at high speeds move more slowly than those of a stationary clock. Nothing is fixed or absolute in Einstein’s bewildering universe; everything is relative to the location and motion of the observer and the distorting effects of gravity, which warp space and time. Things are big or little, long or short, slow or fast, light or heavy only by comparison to something else. Einstein also explained that all matter is a special form of energy, and that a very small amount of material could yield enormous energy if its atomic structure were disrupted. By showing that much more was going on in the universe than had long been assumed, Einstein’s discoveries revolutionized the way scientists perceived the natural world. A British newspaper said the general theory of relativity was “one of the most momentous . . . ​pronouncements of human thought.” In 1919, after astronomers had spent three years testing Einstein’s theories, the New York Times announced: “Einstein’s Theory Triumphs.” Einstein was so influential in deciphering the forces of the cosmos that his ideas became impossible to i­gnore—​­and almost as difficult to explain. Many of his complex discoveries entered popular culture as people oversimplified his theory of relativity by claiming that there were no absolute standards; all was “relative.” During the twenties, the idea of “relativity” emerged in popular discussions of topics such as sexuality, the arts, and politics; there was less faith in absolutes. Notions of relativity shaped many of the intellectual, cultural, and social currents of the twentieth century.

Modernist Art and Literature
 The scientific breakthroughs associated with Sigmund Freud, Albert Einstein, and other scientists helped to inspire a “modernist” cultural revolution. Modernism as a recognizable movement appeared first in the capitals of Europe (London, Paris, Berlin, and Vienna) in the 1890s. By the second decade of the twentieth century, it had spread to the United States, especially New York City and Chicago. Put most simply, modernism was the widespread awareness that new ideas and ways of doing things were making a sharp break with tradition. The modernist point of view arose out of recognition that new technologies, modes of transportation and communication, and scientific discoveries were transforming the nature of everyday life as well as the way people “saw” the world. The horrors of the Great War served to accelerate and expand the appeal of ­modernism—​­and helped explain why modernists cared little for established

 1056  CHAPTER 23  A Clash of Cultures 1920–1929

 standards of good taste or for history. To be “modern” was to break free of tradition, take chances, violate artistic rules and moral restrictions, and behave in deliberately shocking ways. “Art,” said a modernist painter, “is meant to disturb.” As an experimental cultural movement, modernism was loosely based on three unsettling assumptions: (1) God did not exist; (2) “reality” was not rational, orderly, or obvious; and, in the aftermath of the Great War, (3) social progress could no longer be taken for granted. In the arts, these modernist premises challenged writers, artists, musicians, and architects to risk poverty and humiliation by rudely rebelling against good taste, ­old-​­fashioned morals, and ­old-​­time religion. Modernists were artistic revolutionaries who delighted in the madness of the unexpected and refused to be conventional. In its simplest sense, modernism was a disrespectful war of new values against old ones. Experimental poet Ezra Pound provided the slogan for the modernist movement: “Make It New!” Much about modernism provoked, perplexed, and upset people. Until the twentieth century, most writers and artists had taken for granted an accessible “real” world that could be readily observed, scientifically explained, and accurately represented in words or paint or even music. The modernists, however, applied Einstein’s ideas about relativity to a world in which “reality” no longer had an objective or recognizable basis. They agreed wholeheartedly with Freud that reality, in fact, was an intensely inward and subjective e­ xperience—​ ­something deeply personal and even unrecognizable by others, something to be imagined and expressed by one’s innermost being rather than observed and reproduced. Walter Pach, an early American champion of modern art, explained that modernism resulted from the discovery of “the role played by the unconscious in our lives.”

 the armory show

 The crusade to bring E ­ uropean-​­inspired modernism to the United States reached a climax in the Armory Show of 1913, the most scandalous event in the history of American art. Mabel Dodge, one of the organizers, wrote to Gertrude Stein that the exhibition would cause “a riot and revolution and things will never be the same afterwards.” To house the 1,200 modernist works collected from more than 300 painters and sculptors in America and Europe, the two dozen young painters who organized the show leased the vast 69th Regiment Armory in New York City. The Armory Show, officially known as the International Exhibition of Modern Art, opened on February 17, 1913. It created an immediate sensation. For many, modern art became the thing that they loved to hate. Modernism, grumbled a prominent critic, “is nothing else than the total destruction of the

The Modernist Revolt  1057


 Russian Ballet (1916) Jewish American artist Max Weber’s painting is a modernist take on a traditional subject. Splicing the scene of the performance into overlapping planes of jarring colors, this painting exemplifies the impact of psychoanalysis and the theory of relativity on the arts.

 art of painting.” The New York Times warned visitors that they would enter “a stark region of abstractions” at the “lunatic asylum” show that was “hideous to our unaccustomed eyes.” The experimentalist (“­avant-​­garde”) artists whose works were on display (including paintings by Vincent Van Gogh, Paul Gauguin, and Henri Matisse, as well as Cezanne and Picasso) were “in love with science but not with objective reality,” the Times critic complained, and had produced paintings “revolting in their inhumanity.” Former president Theodore Roosevelt dismissed the show as “repellent from every standpoint.” Yet the show also generated excited praise. “A new world has arisen before our eyes,” announced an American art magazine. “To miss modern art,” an art critic stressed, “is to miss one of the few thrills that life holds.” From New York, the show went on to Chicago and Boston, where it aroused similarly strong responses and attracted more huge crowds.

 1058  CHAPTER 23  A Clash of Cultures 1920–1929

 After the Armory Show, modern art became one of the nation’s favorite topics of debate. Many found a new faith in the disturbing powers of art. “America in its newness,” predicted Walt Kuhn, a painter who helped organize the exhibition, “is destined to become the coming center” of modernism. Indeed, the Museum of Modern Art, founded in New York City in 1929, came to house the world’s most celebrated collection of ­avant-​­garde paintings and sculpture.

 pound, eliot, and stein

 The leading American champions of modern art and literature lived not in Chicago or in New York but in England and Europe: I­ daho-​­born Ezra Pound and St. Louis–​­born T. S. Eliot in L ­ ondon, and Californian Gertrude Stein in Paris. Working separately but spreading their influence together, they were ­self-​­conscious revolutionaries deeply concerned with creating strange, new, and often beautifully difficult forms of modernist expression. They found more inspiration and more receptive audiences in Europe than in the United States. As the foreign editor of the ­ Chicago-​­ based Poetry magazine, Pound became the cultural impresario of modernism, the conduit through which many experimental American poets gained publication and exposure. In bitter poems and earnest essays denouncing war and commercialism, he displayed an incessant, uncompromising urgency to transform the literary landscape. An English poet called him a “solitary volcano.” T. S. Eliot claimed that Pound was ­single-​­handedly responsible for the modernist movement in poetry. Pound recruited, edited, published, and reviewed the best among the new generation of modernist writers, improving their writing, bolstering their courage, and propelling their careers. In his own poetry, he expressed the feeling of many that the war had wasted a whole generation of young men who died in defense of a “botched civilization.” One of the young American writers Pound took under his wing was Eliot, who had recently graduated from Harvard. Within a few years, Eliot surpassed Pound to become the leading American modernist. Eliot declared that traditional poetry “was stagnant to a degree difficult for any young poet to imagine.” Eliot’s epic 433-line poem The Waste Land (1922), which Pound edited, became a monument of modernism. It expressed a sense of postwar disillusionment and melancholy that had a powerful effect on other writers. As a poet and critic for the Criterion, which he founded in 1922, Eliot became the arbiter of modernist taste in ­Anglo-​­American literature. Gertrude Stein was the ­self-​­appointed champion of the American modernists who chose to live in Paris. Long regarded as simply the literary eccentric who wrote, “Rose is a rose is a rose is a rose,” Stein was in fact one of the chief promoters of the triumphant subjectivity undergirding modernist expression.

The Modernist Revolt  1059


 She sought to capture in words the equivalent of abstract painting and its ­self-​­conscious revolt against portraying recognizable scenes from “real” life. Stein, who declared that literature that “tells about what happens [in life] is of no interest to anybody,” became famous for hosting a cultural salon in Paris that became a gathering place for American and European modernists.

 the “lost generation”

 Along with the shock of modernism, the arts and literature of the twenties were also greatly influenced by the horrors of the Great War. F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote in This Side of Paradise that the “sad young men” who had fought in Europe to “make the world safe for democracy” had “grown up to find all Gods dead, all wars fought, all faiths in man shaken.” Cynicism had displaced idealism in the wake of the war’s horrific senselessness. As Fitzgerald asserted, “There’s only one lesson to be learned from life anyway. . . . ​That there’s no lesson to be learned from life.” Frederic Henry, a character in Ernest Hemingway’s novel A Farewell to Arms (1929), declares that “abstract words such as glory, honor, courage . . . ​were obscene” in the context of the war’s colossal casualties. Fitzgerald, Hemingway, and other young modernists were labeled the Lost G ­ eneration—​­those who had lost faith in the values and institutions of Western civilization and were frantically looking for new gods to worship. It was Gertrude Stein who in 1921 told Hemingway that he and his friends who had served in the war “are a lost generation.” When Hemingway objected, she held her ground. “You are [lost]. You have no respect for anything. You drink yourselves to death.” In his first novel, The Sun Also Rises (1926), Hemingway used the phrase “lost generation” in the book’s opening quotation. The novel centers on Jake Barnes, a young American journalist castrated by a war injury. His despairing impotence leads him to wander the cafes and nightclubs of postwar Europe with his unhappy friends, who acknowledge that they are all wounded and sterile in their own way: they have lost their innocence, their illusions, and their motivation to do anything with their lives. Fitzgerald, the earliest chronicler of the “lost generation,” blazed up brilliantly and then quickly flickered out, like many of the characters in his novels. His works centered on s­ elf-​­indulgent and s­ elf-​­destructive people who drank and partied too much. A friend and fellow writer called Fitzgerald “our darling, our genius, our fool.” What gave depth to the best of his work was what a character in The Great Gatsby (1925), his finest novel, called “a sense of the fundamental decencies” amid all the surface g­ aiety—​­and a sense of impending doom in a world that had lost its meaning through the disorienting discoveries of modern science and the horrors of world war.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 A “New Era” of Consumption The American economy grew at its fastest rate in history during the 1920s, led by an explosion in mass production and sales of new consumer goods. Innovations in production, advertising, and financing, and a jump in the use of electricity, enabled and encouraged millions of Americans to purchase automobiles, radios, and other electrical appliances. The automobile industry was at the center of these changes, as Ford Motor Company pioneered mass production using moving assembly lines, a highly efficient method that helped make its cars affordable for a majority of Americans. The new consumer culture valued leisure, ­self-​­expression, and ­self-​­indulgence. During the twenties, consumer debt tripled. Innovations in communications (especially the growth in radio ownership), transportation, finance, and advertising also brought about a mass culture, as more and more Americans purchased national ­brand-​­name items from retail chain stores, listened to the same radio shows, watched the same ­movies, and followed the lives and careers of national celebrities and superstars.

•


 The “Jazz Age” Other new social and cultural trends and movements rapidly challenged the traditional order. The carefree fads and attitudes of the 1920s, perhaps best represented by the frantic rhythms of jazz music, led writer F. Scott Fitzgerald to call the decade the Jazz Age. A “new woman” appeared, best represented by ­flappers—​­young women who challenged prewar restrictions with their short hemlines, drinking, smoking, and open discussions of sex. The majority of women, however, remained ­full-​­time housewives and mothers or domestic servants, and fewer young women pursued professional careers. With the Great Migration continuing, African Americans in northern cities felt freer to speak out against racial injustice and express pride in their race. The Harlem Renaissance movement gave voice to African American literature and music. Racial separatism and black nationalism grew popular under the leadership of Marcus Garvey, while other African Americans joined white supporters in the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and supported its efforts to undo racism through education, legislation, and court challenges.

•


 The Modernist Revolt Many American artists and intellectuals were attracted to modernism, a movement that had begun in Europe before the Great War and reflected new developments in science, particularly Albert Einstein’s theory of relativity and Sigmund Freud’s exploration of how the subconscious mind shapes human behavior. To be “modern” meant to break free of tradition, to violate restrictions, to shock the public, and to make one’s works difficult to explain or interpret. Americans were first exposed to modern art in a substantial way with the Armory Show of 1913.



Chronology












 Wright Brothers fly first motorized airplane Ford Motor Company is founded National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) is founded Armory Show introduces Americans to modern art Marcus Garvey brings Universal Negro Improvement Association to New York Prohibition begins F. Scott Fitzgerald’s This Side of Paradise is published Warren G. Harding is elected president Albert Einstein receives Nobel Prize in physics First radio commercial is aired Charles A. Lindbergh Jr. makes first solo transatlantic airplane flight

Key Terms
 consumer culture p. 1032

Harlem Renaissance p. 1050


“Jazz Age” p. 1041


 Negro nationalism p. 1052

 flappers p. 1045

 modernism p. 1055

Great Migration p. 1048


Armory Show p. 1056


National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People
 (NAACP) p. 1049

Lost Generation p. 1059


IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




The Reactionary
Twenties


 Black Tuesday In this photograph, p ­ anic-​­stricken crowds take to Wall Street as news of the plummeting stock market spread on the morning of Tuesday, October 29, 1929. An account of the crash in the New York Times wrote that “the streets were crammed with a mixed crowd—agonized little speculators, . . . ​­sold-​­out traders, . . . ​inquisitive individuals and tourists seeking . . . ​a closer view of the national catastrophe. . . . ​ Where was it going to end?”

T


 he ­self-​­indulgent excesses of the “lost generation” and the frivolities of the Jazz Age made little sense to the vast majority of Americans during the twenties. Most people still led traditional lives; they aggressively defended established values, old certainties, and the comfort of past routines, and they were shocked by the decade’s social turmoil and cultural rebelliousness. They traced the germs of dangerous radicalism to the multiethnic cities teeming with immigrants and foreign ideas such as socialism, communism, and anarchism. The reactionary conservatism of the 1920s fed on the popularity of nativism, the fear of and prejudice against immigrants from countries outside of western Europe, and a militant Protestantism that sought to restore the primacy of traditional Christian morality.

Reactionary Conservatism and
Immigration Restriction
 The United States has opened its borders and ports to more people from more countries than any other nation. But newcomers have never been universally welcomed or embraced. After the end of the Great War, masses of people emigrated from Europe to the United States. Between 1919 and 1924, more than 600,000 people from southern and eastern Europe, most of them Italians, entered the United States, along with 150,000 Poles and 50,000 Russians. At the same time, some 150,000 Mexicans crossed the border; most of them landed in the Southwest and California. In the early 1920s, more than half of the white men and a third of the white women working in mines, mills, and factories

 focus questions 1. How did the reactionary conservatism during the 1920s manifest itself in social life and governmental policies?

 2. To what extent did the policies of the Republican party dominate the federal government during the twenties? In what ways were these policies a rejection of progressivism?

 3. How did Herbert Hoover emerge as the most popular political figure during the twenties?

 4. What were the major causes of the Great Depression? 5. How did the Great Depression impact the American people?



