 988  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

An Uneasy Neutrality
 Woodrow Wilson once declared that he had “a fi ­ rst-​­class mind,” and he was indeed highly intelligent, thoughtful, principled, and courageous. Upon learning of death threats against him, for example, he refused to change his schedule of public appearances. “The country,” he explained, “cannot afford to have a coward for President.” For all of his accomplishments and abilities, however, Wilson had no experience or expertise in international relations before he was elected president. He confessed that “it would be an irony of fate if my administration had to deal chiefly with foreign affairs”—a topic he did not even mention in his 1913 inaugural address. But from the summer of 1914, when war erupted in Europe, Wilson was forced to shift his attention from the New Freedom’s progressive reforms to foreign affairs. Wilson did have strong beliefs and principles about global issues. “Sometimes people call me an idealist,” he once said. “Well, that is the way I know I’m an American.” He saw himself as being directed by God to help create a new world order governed by morality and ideals rather than by selfish national interests. Both Wilson and William Jennings Bryan, his secretary of state, believed that America had a duty to promote democracy and Christianity around the world. “Every nation of the world,” Wilson declared, “needs to be drawn into the tutelage [guidance] of America.”

The Great War
 Woodrow Wilson faced his greatest challenge beginning in the summer of 1914, when a war that few wanted yet no one could stop broke out in Europe. The “dreadful conflict” erupted suddenly, like “lightning out of a clear sky,” a North Carolina congressman said. Wilson admitted that he was shocked by “this incredible European eruption.” Unfortunately, it coincided with a sharp decline in the health of his wife Ellen, who died on August 6. “God has stricken me,” the president wrote a friend, “almost beyond what I can bear.” Wilson would also have trouble bearing the accelerating horrors of the war in Europe. Its scope and destruction shocked everyone. Lasting for more than four years, from 1914 to 1918, it would become known as the Great War because it would involve more nations and cause greater destruction than any previous war: 20 million military and civilian deaths, and 21 million more wounded. The Great War would topple monarchs, destroy empires, create new nations, and set in motion a series of events that would lead to an even greater war in 1939.

An Uneasy Neutrality  989


 causes

 The Great War resulted from complex and ­ long-​­ simmering national rivalries and ethnic conflicts in central Europe. At the core of the tensions was the ­Austro-​­Hungarian Empire, an unstable collection of eleven nationalities that was determined to stop the expansionism of its neighbor and longstanding enemy, Serbia, in the Balkan Peninsula. Serbia had long hoped to create “Yugoslavia,” a nation encompassing all Serbs from throughout the A ­ ustro-​­Hungarian Empire. At the same time, a recklessly militaristic Germany, led by Kaiser (Emperor) Wilhelm II, sought to assert its dominance against its old enemies, the Russian Empire and France, while expanding its navy to challenge the British Empire’s supremacy on the seas.

 fighting erupts

 War erupted after Gavrilo Princip, a ­nineteen-​ y­ ear-​­old Serbian nationalist in Sarajevo (the capital of Austrian Bosnia), shot and killed the heir to the ­Austro-​­Hungarian throne, 50-­year-​­old Archduke Franz Ferdinand, and his pregnant wife Sophie, on June 28, 1914. The killings in Sarajevo set Europe on fire. To avenge the murders, ­Austria-​­Hungary, with Germany’s unconditional approval, sought to bully and humiliate Serbia by demanding a say in its internal affairs. Serbia gave in to virtually all of the demands, but ­Austria-​ ­Hungary declared war anyway. In turn, Russia mobilized its army to defend Serbia, which triggered reactions by a complex set of European military alliances: the Triple Alliance, or Central Powers (Germany, ­Austria-​­Hungary, and Italy), and the Triple Entente, or Allied Powers (France, Great Britain, and Russia). Germany, expecting a limited war and quick victory, declared war on Russia on August 1, 1914, and on France two days later. Germany then invaded neutral Belgium, murdering hundreds of civilians. Events spiraled out of control. The “rape of Belgium” brought Great Britain into the war against Germany on August 4 on the Western Front, the line of fighting in northern France and Belgium. Despite the Triple Alliance, Italy at first declared its neutrality before joining the Allies in return for a promise of territory taken from A ­ ustria-​­Hungary. On the evening of August 4, as five global ­empires—​­Austria-​­Hungary, France, Germany, Great Britain, and ­Russia—​­mobilized for war, the British foreign minister, Sir Edward Grey, expressed the fears of many when he observed that “the lamps are going out all over Europe; we shall not see them lit again in our time.” On the Eastern Front, Russian armies began clashing with German and ­Austro-​­Hungarian forces as well as those of the Turkish (Ottoman) Empire. Within five weeks of the assassination in Sarajevo, a “great war” had consumed

 990  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

THE GREAT WAR IN EUROPE, 1914

 NORWAY

LT I C

GREAT BRITAIN

 DENMARK

 BA

 IRELAND

Memel


NETHERLANDS
London 
Berlin


Dover Strait


Danzig
(Gdansk)


 RUSSIA

 GERMANY

BELGIUM
Paris 
ATLANTIC OCEAN

St. Petersburg


 SEA

 SWEDEN

NORTH SEA

 LUXEMBOURG

Vienna


 SWITZERLAND

 AUSTRIA-HUNGARY

 FRANCE

 MONTENEGRO

PORTUGAL ITALY

S PA I N


ROMANIA SERBIA

BLACK SEA

 BULGARIA

ALBANIA SPANISH MOROCCO

M


E


D


I


NORTH AFRICA

Central Powers (Triple Alliance)
Allied Powers (Triple Entente)
 Neutral countries ■

■
■


T


TURKEY (OTTOMAN EMPIRE)

 GREECE

E


R
R


A


N


E


A


N


S






E


A
500 Miles


500 Kilometers


 How did the European system of military alliances spread conflict across all of Europe? WWN64 How was the Great War different from previous wars? Figure M22_01 How did the war in Europe lead to ethnic tensions in the United States? First proof

 all of Europe. (It would not be called the First World War until the second one came along in 1939.)

An Industrial War
 No one envisioned that a local conflict in the Balkans would develop into a catastrophic war that would reshape the ­twentieth-​­century world. But by its end, in November 1918, more than forty nations had joined the fighting. The Great War was the first industrial war, involving the total mobilization of the economy and civilians as well as warriors. Of the approximately

An Uneasy Neutrality  991


 70 million soldiers and sailors who fought on both sides, more than half were killed, wounded, imprisoned, or unaccounted for. New weapons dramatically changed the nature of warfare. Machine guns, submarines, aerial bombing, poison gas, flame throwers, land mines, mortars, ­long-​­range artillery, and armored tanks produced appalling casualties and widespread destruction, a slaughter on a scale unimaginable to this day. An average of 900 Frenchmen and 1,300 Germans died every day on the Western Front. The early weeks of the war involved ­fast-​­moving assaults as German armies swept across Belgium and northeastern France. The casualties were appalling. On a single day, August 22, 1914, the French army lost 27,000 men.

 trench warfare But the war on the Western Front soon bogged down into hellish trench warfare, in which often inept generals sent masses of brave soldiers (German generals referred to the British army as “lions led by donkeys”) out of waterlogged, zigzagging ­trenches—​­some of them 40 feet deep and swarming with r­ ats—​­that had been dug along the Western Front from the coast of Belgium across northeastern France to the border of Switzerland. On either side, the attackers were usually at a disadvantage as they slogged across muddy acres of devastated “­ no-​­ man’­ s-​­ land” between the opposing

 Trench warfare American troops eat amid the reek of death and threat of enemy fire in a frontline trench in France.

 992  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

 entrenchments, where they encountered c­orpse-​­filled shell holes, webs of barbed wire, and constant gunfire and artillery shelling that left the barren landscape pockmarked with craters and whole forests shattered into nothingness. Along the Western Front, not a blade of grass was left, only ruin and rubble, flooded trenches and thickets of barbed wire. From 1914 to 1918, the opposing armies in northeastern France attacked and counterattacked but gained hardly any ground, while casualties rose into the millions. By the end of 1914, the Germans had captured 19,500 square miles of territory in France and Belgium; by the end of 1915, the Allies had recaptured only 8 of those miles. Words cannot convey the titanic scale of the fighting and its impact on the home front as telegrams arrived telling families that their son would not be returning. By 1918, the Allies (France, Great Britain, Italy, Russia, and the United States, among others), had suffered 5.4 million killed and 7 million wounded. “The War is everything,” a British diarist wrote. “It is noble, filthy, great, petty, degrading, inspiring, ridiculous, glorious, mad, bad, hopeless yet full of hope.” Heroism was entangled with futility as battles were now determined not so much by skillful maneuvers or courageous leadership but by overwhelming firepower, the huge cannons and weighty shells that turned the ritual of close combat into a ­long-​­distance contest of killing machines. Bayonets gave way to bombardments. ­Two-​­thirds of the casualties in the Great War resulted from l­ ong-​­distance artillery barrages. Thousands of soldiers on both sides fell victim to “shell shock,” now known as ­post-​­traumatic stress disorder, as they were bombarded into numbness. Trenches shook, trees tumbled, and the ground trembled under the feet of panicked combatants. The unprecedented firepower ravaged the landscape, obliterated whole villages, and turned farmland and forests into cratered wastelands. The scars of war are still visible 100 years later. Trench warfare gave the Great War its lasting character. Soldiers often ate, slept, lived, and died without leaving their crowded underground homes. A French soldier described life in the trenches as a “physical, almost animal” existence in which “the primitive instincts of the race have full sway: eating, drinking, sleeping, ­fighting—​­everything but loving.” The object in such a war of attrition was not so much to gain ground as to keep inflicting death and destruction on the enemy until its manpower and resources were exhausted. In one assault against the Germans at Ypres in ­Belgium, the British lost 13,000 men in three hours of ­fighting—​­during which time they gained 100 meaningless yards. As the war ground on, nations on

An Uneasy Neutrality  993


 Total ruin German soldiers stand before the French Fort Souville between the Battles of Verdun in September 1916. The constant artillery fire gouged out huge craters and destroyed forests.

 both sides found themselves using up their available men, resources, courage, and cash. Amid the senseless killing in the mucky trenches, the innocence about the true nature of warfare died, too. “Never such innocence again,” wrote the English poet Philip Larkin. An American journalist covering the war in Europe reported that the massive casualties changed the way men looked at war. In earlier conflicts, soldiers were eager to fight and confident they would return unscathed. Now, the new recruits seemed to have “left hope behind” and were confident that they were “going to their death.” By 1915, the great powers were engaged in a global war with no end in sight. In 1917, George Barnes, a British official whose son had been killed in the war, went to speak at a military hospital in London where injured soldiers were being fitted with artificial limbs. At the appointed hour, the men, in wheelchairs and on crutches, all with empty sleeves or pants legs, arrived to hear the speaker. Yet when Barnes was introduced and rose to talk, he found himself ­speechless—​­literally. As the minutes passed in awkward silence, tears rolled down his cheeks. Finally, without having said a word, he simply sat down. What the mutilated soldiers heard was not a ­war-​­glorifying speech but the muted sound of grief. The war’s mindless horrors had come home.

 994  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

Initial American Reactions
 Disbelief in the United States over the bloodbath in Europe mingled with relief that a wide ocean stood between America and the killing fields. President Wilson, an avowed pacifist, maintained that the United States “was too proud to fight” in Europe’s war, “with which we have nothing to do, whose causes cannot touch us.” He repeatedly urged Americans to remain “neutral in thought as well as in action.” Privately, however, Wilson sought to ensure that the United States could provide Great Britain and France as much financial assistance and supplies as possible. That most Americans wanted the nation to stay out of the fighting did not keep them from choosing sides. More than a third of the nation’s citizens were ­first-​­or ­second-​­generation immigrants still loyal to their homelands. Eight million ­German-​­born Americans lived in the United States in 1914, and most of the 4 million ­Irish-​­born Americans detested England, which had ruled the Irish for centuries. For the most part, these groups supported the Central Powers, while other Americans, largely of British origin, supported the Allied Powers.

 supporting the allies

 By the spring of 1915, the Allied Powers’ need for food and supplies had generated an economic windfall for American businesses, bankers, and farmers. Exports to France and Great Britain quadrupled from 1914 to 1916. To finance their ­record-​­breaking purchases of American supplies, the Allies, especially Britain and France, needed loans from U.S. banks and “credits” from the U.S. government that would allow them to pay for their purchases later. Early in the war, Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan, a strict pacifist, took advantage of Wilson’s absence from Washington after the death of his wife to tell J. Pierpont Morgan, the world’s richest banker, that loans to any nations at war were “inconsistent with the true spirit of neutrality.” Upon his return, an angry Wilson reversed Bryan’s policy by removing all restrictions on loans to the warring nations (“belligerents”). American banks and other investors would eventually send more than $2 billion to the Allies before the United States entered the fighting, and only $27 million to Germany. What Bryan feared, and what Wilson did not fully realize, was that as Britain and France borrowed and purchased more from the United States, it became harder for America to remain neutral. Despite the disproportionate financial assistance provided to the Allies, the Wilson administration maintained its official neutrality for thirty months. In particular, Wilson tried valiantly to defend the ­age-​­old principle of “freedom of the

An Uneasy Neutrality  995


 seas.” As a neutral nation, the United States, according to international law, should have been able to continue to trade with all the nations at war. On August 6, 1914, Bryan urged the warring nations to respect the rights of neutral nations to ship goods across the Atlantic. The Central Powers agreed, but the British refused. In November 1914, the British ordered the ships of neutral nations to submit to searches to discover if cargoes were bound for Germany. A few months later, the British announced that they would seize any ships carrying goods to Germany.

 neutral rights and sub­ marine attacks With its war­

 “The Sandwich Man” To illustrate America’s biased brand of neutrality, this political cartoon shows Uncle Sam wearing a sandwich board that advertises the nation’s conflicting desires.

 ships bottled up by a British blockade, the German government announced a “war zone” around the British Isles. All ships in those waters would be attacked by submarines, the Germans warned, and “it may not always be possible to save crews and passengers.” The Germans’ use of submarines, or ­U-​­boats (Unterseeboot in German), violated the ­long-​­established wartime custom of stopping an enemy vessel and allowing the passengers and crew to board lifeboats before sinking it. During 1915, German ­U-​­boats sank 227 British ships in the Atlantic Ocean and the North Sea. The United States called the submarine attacks “an indefensible violation of neutral rights,” and Wilson warned that he would hold Germany to “strict accountability” for the loss of American lives and property. Then, on May 7, 1915, a German submarine sank the Lusitania, an unarmed British luxury liner. Of the 1,198 persons on board who died, 128 were Americans. The sinking of the Lusitania, asserted former president Theodore Roosevelt, was mass murder that called for a declaration of war. Wilson at first urged patience: “There is such a thing as a man being too proud to fight. There is such a thing as a nation being so right that it does not need to convince others by force that it is right.” Critics scolded Wilson for his bloodless response. Roosevelt dismissed it as “unmanly,” called the president a “jackass,” and threatened to “skin him alive

 996  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

 if he doesn’t go to war.” Wilson privately admitted that he had misspoken. The timid language, he said, had “occurred to me while I was speaking, and I let it out. I should have kept it in.” Wilson’s earlier threat of “strict accountability” now required a tough response. On May 13, Secretary of State Bryan demanded that the Germans stop unrestricted submarine warfare, apologize, and pay the families of those killed on the Lusitania. The Germans countered that the ship was armed (which was false) and secretly carried rifles and ammunition (which was true). On June 9, Wilson dismissed the German claims and reiterated that the United States was “contending for nothing less high and sacred than the rights of humanity.” Bryan resigned as secretary of state in protest of Wilson’s p ­ ro-​­British stance. Upon learning of Bryan’s departure, Edith Bolling Galt, soon to be Wilson’s second wife, shouted: “Hurrah! Old Bryan is out!” She called the former secretary of state an “awful Deserter.” The president confided that he, too, viewed Bryan as a “traitor.” He complimented Edith on her vindictiveness: “What a dear partisan you are . . . ​and how you can hate, too!” Bryan’s successor, Robert Lansing, signed the second “Lusitania Note.” Stunned by the global outcry over the Lusitania, the German government told its ­U-​­boat captains to quit attacking passenger vessels. Despite the order, however, a German submarine sank the British liner Arabic, and two Americans on board were killed. The Germans paid a cash penalty to their families and issued what came to be called the Arabic Pledge on September 1, 1915: “Liners will not be sunk by our submarines without warning and without safety of the lives of n ­ on-​­combatants, provided that the liners do not try to escape or offer resistance.” In early 1916, Wilson sent his closest adviser, Colonel Edward M. House, to London, Paris, and Berlin in hopes of stimulating peace talks, but the mission failed. On March 24, 1916, a U ­ -​­boat sank the French passenger ferry Sussex, killing eighty passengers and injuring two Americans. After Wilson threatened to end relations with Germany, its leaders renewed their promise not to sink merchant and passenger ships. The Sussex Pledge implied the virtual abandonment of submarine warfare. Colonel House noted in his diary that Americans were “now beginning to realize that we are on the brink of war and what war means.”

 preparing for war The sinking of U.S. passenger vessels led to efforts to strengthen the army and navy in case the nation was forced into war. On December 1, 1914, a “preparedness” movement, led by Theodore ­Roosevelt and Henry Cabot Lodge, created the National Security League to convince Congress and the president to begin preparing for war.

An Uneasy Neutrality  997


 Wilson, too, believed in preparedness. After the Lusitania sinking, he directed the War and Navy Departments to develop plans for a $1 billion military expansion. His efforts were controversial, however. Many ­Americans—​ p ­ acifists, progressives, and ­non-​­interventionists—​­opposed the “preparedness” effort, seeing it as simply a propaganda campaign to benefit defense industries (“war traffickers”) that made weapons and other military equipment. Despite such opposition, Congress in 1916 passed the National Defense Act, which provided for the expansion of the U.S. Army from 90,000 to 223,000 men over the next five years. While Bryan and others complained that Wilson wanted to “drag this nation into war,” the reverse was actually true. Wilson told an aide that he was determined not to “be rushed into war, no matter if every damned congressman and senator stands up on his hind legs and proclaims me a coward.” Opponents of “preparedness” insisted that the expense of military expansion should rest upon the wealthy munitions makers who they believed were promoting it in order to profit from trade with the Allies. The income tax became their weapon. The Revenue Act of 1916 doubled the income tax rate from 1 to 2 percent, created a 12.5 percent tax on munitions makers, and added a new tax on “excessive” corporate profits. The new taxes were the culmination of the progressive legislation that Wilson approved to strengthen his chances in the upcoming presidential election. Fearing that Theodore Roosevelt would be the Republican presidential candidate challenging Wilson, Colonel House believed that the “Democratic Party must change its historic character and become the progressive party in the future.”

The 1916 Election
 As the 1916 election approached, Theodore Roosevelt hoped to become the Republican nominee. But his decision in 1912 to run as a t­hird-​­party candidate had alienated many powerful Republicans, and his eagerness to enter the European war scared many voters. So instead, the Republicans nominated Supreme Court Justice Charles Evans Hughes, a progressive who had served as governor of New York from 1907 to 1910. The Democrats, staying with Wilson, adopted a platform centered on ­social-​­welfare legislation and prudent military preparedness. The peace theme, refined in the slogan “He kept us out of war,” became the campaign’s rallying cry, although the president now acknowledged that the United States could no longer refuse to play the “great part in the world which was providentially cut out for her. . . . ​We have got to serve the world.” Colonel House was more blunt. He told Secretary of State Robert Lansing that they “could not permit the Allies to go down in defeat, for if they did, we would follow.”

 998  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

 Peace with honor Woodrow Wilson’s neutrality policies proved popular in the 1916 campaign.

 Both Wilson and Hughes were sons of preachers; both were attorneys and former professors; both had been progressive governors; both were known for their integrity. Hughes called for higher tariffs, attacked Wilson for being hostile to Big Business, and implied that Wilson was not neutral enough in responding to the war. Theodore Roosevelt, who was devastated that his party did not nominate him, called the bearded Hughes a “whiskered Wilson.” Wilson, however, proved to be the better ­campaigner—​­barely. By midnight on election night, Wilson went to bed assuming that he had lost. Roosevelt was so sure Hughes had won that he sent him a congratulatory telegram. At 4 a.m., however, the results from California were tallied. Wilson had eked out a victory in that state by only 4,000 votes, and thus had become the first Democrat to win a second consecutive term since Andrew Jackson in 1832. His pledge of “peace, prosperity, and progressivism” won him the western states, Ohio, and the Solid South.

America Goes to War
 After his reelection, Wilson again urged the warring nations to negotiate a peace settlement, but to no avail. On January 31, 1917, desperate German military leaders renewed unrestricted submarine warfare in the Atlantic. All

An Uneasy Neutrality  999


 vessels from the United States headed for Britain, France, or Italy would be sunk without warning. “This was practically ordering the United States off the Atlantic,” said an angry William McAdoo, Wilson’s secretary of the Treasury. The German decision, Colonel House wrote in his journal, left Wilson “sad and depressed,” for the president knew it meant war. For their part, the Germans greatly underestimated the American reaction. The United States, the German military newspaper proclaimed, “not only has no army, it has no artillery, no means of transportation, no airplanes, and lacks all other instruments of modern warfare.” When his advisers warned that German submarines might cause the United States to enter the war, Kaiser Wilhelm scoffed, “I don’t care.”

 the zimmermann telegram On February 3, President Wilson informed Congress that the United States had formally ended diplomatic relations with the German government. Three weeks later, on February 25, Wilson learned that the British had intercepted a message from a German official, Arthur Zimmermann, to the Mexican government, urging the Mexicans to invade the United States. In exchange, Germany would give Mexico “lost territory in Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona.” On March 1, newspapers broke the news of the s­ o-​­called Zimmermann telegram. Infuriated Americans called for war against the Germans, whose attacks on American vessels increased. america enters the war In March 1917, German submarines torpedoed five U.S. ships in the North Atlantic. For Wilson, this was the last straw. On April 2, he called on Congress to declare war against Germany. In one of his greatest speeches, Wilson insisted that “the world must be made safe for democracy.” He warned that waging war in Europe would require mobilizing “all the material resources of the country” and he called for 500,000 men to bolster the armed forces. The United States, he asserted, was entering the war to lead a “great crusade” not simply to defeat Germany but to end wars forever. Congress greeted Wilson’s message with thunderous applause. On April 4, the Senate passed the war resolution by a vote of 82 to 6. The House followed, 373 to 50, and Wilson signed the measure on April 6. Jeanette Rankin of Montana, the first woman elected to the House, was one of the few members who voted against war. “You can no more win a war than you can win an earthquake,” she explained. “I want to stand by my country, but I cannot vote for war.” Wilson had doubts of his own. The president ­feared—​ ­accurately, as it turned o ­ ut—​­that mobilizing the nation for war and stamping out dissent would destroy the ideals and momentum of progressivism: “Every reform we have made will be lost if we go into this war.” Yet he saw no choice.

 1000  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

 America’s long embrace of isolationism was over. The nation had reached a turning point in its relations with the world that would test all of President Wilson’s political and diplomatic ­skills—​­and his stamina.

Mobilizing a Nation
 In April 1917, the U.S. Army remained small, untested, and poorly armed. With only 107,000 men, it was only the seventeenth largest army in the world. Now the Wilson administration needed to recruit, equip, and train an army of millions and transport them across an ocean infested with German submarines. Mobilizing the nation for war led to an unprecedented expansion of federal authority. The government drafted millions of men between the ages of ­twenty-​­one and thirty into the armed services, forced the conversion of industries and farms to wartime needs, took over the railroads, and in many other respects assumed control of national life. Soon after the U.S. declaration of war, President Wilson called for complete economic mobilization and created new federal agencies to coordinate the effort. The War Industries Board (WIB), established in 1917, soon became the most important of all the federal mobilization agencies. Bernard Baruch, a savvy financier, headed the WIB, which had the authority to ration raw materials, construct new factories, and set prices. Wilson appointed Republican Herbert Hoover to head the new Food Administration, whose slogan was “Food will win the war.” Its purpose was to increase agricultural production while reducing civilian food consumpThe immigrant effort This Food tion, since Great Britain and France Administration poster emphasizes that “wheat is . . . ​for the allies,” an important needed massive amounts of American message to immigrants who hailed corn and wheat. Hoover organized a from Central Powers nations such as huge group of volunteers who fanned Germany and Austria. out across the country to urge house-

Mobilizing a Nation  1001


 wives and restaurants to participate in “Wheatless” Mondays, “Meatless” Tuesdays, and “Porkless” Thursdays and Saturdays. Fighting in the Great War would cost the U.S. government $30 billion, which was more than thirty times the entire federal budget in 1917. In addition to raising taxes to finance the war effort, the Wilson administration launched a campaign across the nation to sell “liberty bonds,” government securities in the form of paper certificates that guaranteed the purchaser a fixed rate of return. The government recruited dozens of celebrities to promote bond purchases, arguing that a liberty bond was both a patriotic investment in the nation and a smart investment in one’s own financial future. Even the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts sold bonds, using advertising posters that said “Every Scout to Save a Soldier.” By war’s end, the government had sold over $20 billion in bonds, most of which were purchased by banks and investment houses rather than by individuals.

 a new labor force

 Removing 4 million men from the workforce to serve in the armed forces created an acute labor shortage. To meet it, women were encouraged to take jobs previously held mostly by men. One government poster shouted: “Women! Help America’s Sons Win the War: Learn to Make Munitions.” Another said, “For Every Fighter, a Woman Worker.” Initially, women had supported the war effort mostly in traditional ways. They helped organize ­fund-​­raising drives, donated canned food and ­war-​ ­related materials, volunteered for the Red Cross, and joined the army nurse corps. As the scope of the war widened, however, women were recruited to work on farms, loading docks, and railway crews, as well as in the armaments industry, machine shops, steel and lumber mills, and chemical plants. “At last, after centuries of disabilities and discrimination,” said a speaker at a Women’s Trade Union League meeting in 1917, “women are coming into the labor [force] and festival of life on equal terms with men.” But the changes in female employment were limited and brief. About 1 million women participated in “war work,” but most were young and single and already working outside the home, and most returned to their previous jobs once the war ended. In fact, after the war, m ­ ale-​­dominated unions encouraged women to go back to domestic roles. The Central Federated Union of New York insisted that “the same patriotism which induced women to enter industry during the war should induce them to vacate their positions after the war.” The Great War also generated dramatic changes for many members of minority groups. Hundreds of thousands of African American men enlisted or were drafted into the military, where they were required to serve in racially ­segregated units commanded by white officers, as in the Civil War half a century earlier.

 1002  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

 At the munitions factory Women on both sides played crucial roles in the war effort, from building airplanes to cooking for soldiers overseas. Here, American women use welding torches to build bombs.

 On the home front, northern businesses sent recruiting agents into the southern states, which were still largely rural and agricultural, to find workers for their factories and mills. For the first time, such efforts were directed at African Americans as well as whites. More than 400,000 southern blacks, mostly farmers, joined what came to be known as the Great Migration, a mass movement that would continue through the 1920s and change the political and social chemistry of northern cities such as St. Louis, Chicago, Detroit, New York, and Philadelphia. By 1930 the number of African Americans living in the North was triple that of 1910. Recruiting agents and newspaper editors, both black and white, portrayed the North as the “land of promise” for southern blacks. Northern factory jobs were plentiful and high paying by southern standards, and racism was less obvious and ­violent—​­at least at first. A black migrant from Mississippi wrote home from Chicago in 1917 that he wished he had moved north twenty years earlier. “I just begin to feel like a man [here],” he explained. “It’s a great deal of

Mobilizing a Nation  1003


 pleasure in knowing that you have some privilege. My children are going to the same school with the whites, and I don’t have to be humble to no one.” Many Mexican Americans found similar opportunities to improve their status during the war and after. Some joined the military. David Barkley Hernandez had to drop his last name when he enlisted in San Antonio, Texas, because the local draft board was not accepting Mexicans. In 1918, just two days before the war ended, he died in France while returning from a dan­ gerous mission behind German lines. Hernandez became the first person of Mexican descent in the U.S. Army to win the Congressional Medal of Honor. Even more Latinos pursued economic opportunities created by the war effort. Between 1917 and 1920, some 100,000 Mexicans crossed the border into the United States. The economic expansion caused by the war enabled migrant farmworkers already living in states such as Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California to take better jobs in factories and mills in rapidly growing cities such as Phoenix, Los Angeles, and Houston, where they moved into S­ panish-​ ­speaking neighborhoods called barrios.

 Segregation in the military Most African American enlistees served in support units because whites believed them unfit for combat, despite evidence of black military contributions since the Revolution. Here, soldiers in the 92nd Infantry Division (one of the few “colored” units sent overseas) march in Verdun, France.

 1004  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

 But the newcomers, whether Latinos or blacks, were often resented rather than welcomed. J. Luz Saenz, a Mexican American from Texas, noted in his diary that it took only three days after he was discharged from the army to have whites “throw us out from restaurants and deny us service as human beings.” In 1917 more than forty African Americans and nine whites were killed during a riot in a weapons plant in East St. Louis, Illinois. Two years later, a Chicago race riot left ­twenty-​­three African Americans and fifteen whites dead.

 a loss of civil liberties Once war was declared, Americans often equated anything German with disloyalty. German Americans were publicly harassed and discriminated against. Many Americans quit drinking beer because most breweries were owned by German Americans. Symphonies refused to perform music by Bach and Beethoven, schools canceled German language classes, and grocers renamed sauerkraut “liberty cabbage.” President Wilson had predicted as much. “Once [we] lead this people into war,” he said, “they’ll forget there ever was such a thing as tolerance.” What Wilson did not say was that he himself would lead the effort to suppress civil liberties, for, as he claimed, subversive forces in a nation at war must be “crushed out.” Under the Espionage and Sedition Acts, Congress prohibited any criticism of government leaders and war policies. The Espionage Act of 1917 called for twenty years in prison for anyone who helped the enemy; encouraged insubordination, disloyalty, or refusal of duty in the armed services; or interfered with the war effort in other ways. During the war, 1,055 people were convicted under the Espionage Act. Most were simply critics of the war. Keep out of it In this 1918 war poster, Socialist leader Eugene V. Debs, a milithe K ­ aiser—​­with his famous moustache tant pacifist, was convicted simply for and spiked German ­helmet—​­is depicted opposing the war and was sentenced to as a spider, spinning an invisible web to ten years in prison. He told the court catch the stray words of Allied civilians. he would always criticize wars imposed

The American Role in the War  1005


 by the “master” class: “While there is a lower class, I am in it. While there is a criminal element, I am of it. While there is a soul in prison, I am not free.” The Sedition Act of 1918 broadened the Espionage Act to those who tried to impede the sale of war bonds or promoted cutbacks in production; it even outlawed saying, writing, or printing anything “disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or abusive” about the American form of government, the Constitution, or the army and navy. The Supreme Court endorsed the Espionage and Sedition Acts in two rulings issued just after the war ended. Schenck v. United States (1919) reaffirmed the conviction of Charles T. Schenck, head of the Socialist party, for circulating leaflets opposing the war among members of the armed forces. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote the unanimous court opinion that freedom of speech did not apply to words that represented “a clear and present danger to the safety of the country.” In Abrams v. United States (1919), the Court upheld the conviction of a man who had distributed pamphlets opposing military intervention in Russia to remove the Bolsheviks, who had seized power in 1917.

The American Role in the War
 In 1917, America’s war strategy focused on helping the struggling French and British armies on the Western Front. The Allied leaders stressed that they needed at least a million American troops (called “doughboys”) to defeat the Germans, but it would take months to recruit, equip, and train that many new soldiers. On December 21, 1917, French premier Georges Clemenceau urged the Americans to rush their army, called the American Expeditionary Force, to France. “A terrible blow is imminent,” he told an American journalist about to leave Paris. “Tell your Americans to come quickly.” Clemenceau was referring to the likelihood of a massive German attack, made more probable by the end of the fighting on the Eastern Front following the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia in November 1917.

 the bolshevik revolution

 Among the many casualties of the Great War, none was greater in scale than the destruction of the backward Russian Empire and its monarchy. It was the first nation to crack under the stress and strain of the Great War. On March 15, 1917, bumbling Tsar Nicholas II, having presided over a war that had ruined the Russian economy and the nation’s transportation system, abdicated his throne and turned the nation over to the “provisional government” of a new Russian republic committed to continuing the war.

 1006  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

 The fall of the tsar gave Americans the illusion that all the major Allied powers were now fighting for the ideals of constitutional ­democracy—​­an illusion that was shattered after the Germans in April helped exiled radical Vladimir I­lyich Lenin return to Russia from Switzerland. The Germans hoped that he would cause turmoil in his homeland. He did much more than that. As Lenin observed, power in w ­ ar-​ ­weary Russia was lying in the streets, waiting to be picked up. To do so, he mobilized the Bolsheviks, a group of ruthless Communist revolutionaries who were convinced that they were in the vanguard of the irresistible force of history. During the night of NovemVladimir Lenin Communist ber 6, the Bolsheviks seized power revolutionary who led the Bolsheviks from the provisional government, in overthrowing the Russian monarchy established a dictatorship, and called and ultimately establishing the Soviet Union. for a quick end to the war. Lenin banned political parties and all organized religions (atheism became the official belief), eliminated civil liberties and the free press, and killed or imprisoned opposition leaders, including the tsar and his family. In short, he imposed his totalitarian blueprint of the perfect society on the Russian people. In 1918, Lenin instructed Bolshevik leaders to crack down on peasants who resisted the revolution: “Comrades! Hang (hang without fail, so that people will see) no fewer than one hundred kulaks, rich men, bloodsuckers. Yours, Lenin.” The Bolshevik Revolution triggered a prolonged civil war throughout ­Russia. President Wilson sent 20,000 American soldiers to Siberia to support the ­anti-​­Communist Russian forces, but they were unsuccessful.

 fourteen points

 Woodrow Wilson was determined to ensure that the Great War would be the last world war. In September 1917, he asked C ­ olonel Edward House to organize a group of 150 experts in politics, history, geography, and foreign policy, called the Inquiry, to draft a peace plan, since America, according to Wilson, had no selfish goals; it was simply “one of the champions of the rights of mankind.” Drawing upon their advice, Wilson developed what

The American Role in the War  1007


 would come to be called the Fourteen Points, which he presented to Congress on January 8, 1918, calling it “the only possible program” for peace. The first five of the fourteen points endorsed the open conduct of diplomacy rather than secret treaties, the recognition of neutral nations’ right to continue maritime commerce in time of war (“freedom of the seas”), the removal of international trade barriers, the reduction of armaments, and the transformation of colonial empires. Most of the other points dealt with territorial claims. In redrawing the map of Europe, Wilson demanded that the victors follow the difficult principle of “­self-​­determination,” allowing overlapping nationalities and ethnic groups to develop their own independent nations. Point thirteen called for a new nation for Poland, long dominated by the Russians on the east and the Germans on the west. Point fourteen, the capstone of Wilson’s postwar scheme, called for the creation of a “league” of nations to preserve global peace. When the Fourteen Points were made public, African American leaders asked the president to add a fifteenth point: an end to racial discrimination. Wilson did not respond. Overall, the reaction to the speech was positive. The headline for the New York Times editorial proclaimed: “The President’s Triumph.” As the war ground on, the battling nations grew weary of the costs and shortages of food, clothing, and gasoline. But no diplomatic solution was in sight. In Germany, food and fuel shortages led to growing discontent. Workers went on strike, and servicemen mutinied and deserted. “The Monarchy,” said a German official, “is lurching toward the edge of the abyss.”

 russia surrenders

 Conditions were even worse in Russia. After taking power, Lenin declared that the world would be freed from war only by a global revolution in which capitalism was replaced by communism. To that end, he wanted Russia out of the Great War as soon as possible. On March 3, 1918, Lenin signed a humiliating peace agreement with Germany, the Treaty of ­Brest-​­Litovsk. The treaty forced Russia to transfer vast territories to Germany and Turkey and to recognize the independence of the Ukraine region, thereby depriving Russia of much of its population, coal and wheat production, and heavy industry. In addition, Russia had to pay $46 million to Germany. Lenin was willing to accept such a harsh peace because he needed to concentrate on his internal enemies in the ongoing Russian civil war. With Russia out of the war, the Germans could focus on the Western Front. Erich Ludendorff, the German army commander, said that the ability to move hundreds of thousands of soldiers from the Russian front to France would give him numerical superiority for the first time and enable him to “deal an annihilating blow to the British before American aid can become effective.”

 1008  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

 ­Meuse-​­Argonne Offensive American soldiers of the 23rd Infantry, 2nd Division, fire machine guns at the Germans from what was left of the Argonne Forest in France.

 americans on the western front On March 21, the Germans began the first of several offensives in France and Belgium designed to win the war before the American soldiers arrived in force. By May, the German armies had advanced within fifty miles of Paris, and the British Fifth Army was destroyed. The massive German offensive nearly defeated the Allies. In early April, however, the Germans suddenly lost their momentum. On April 5, the German commander called a halt because so many soldiers were exhausted and demoralized, convinced, as one officer admitted, that their “hope [for victory] had been dashed” by their inability to sustain the supply lines needed for such a widespread advance. In May, French and British leaders pressed Wilson to hurry American troops into the fighting. By the end of the month, some 650,000 American ­soldiers were in Europe. In June, they were ready to fight. At the ­month-​­long Battle of Belleau Wood, which began on June 2, U.S. forces commanded by General John J. Pershing joined the French in driving the Germans back. A French officer watching the ­high-​­spirited, if untrained, American soldiers remarked that

The American Role in the War  1009


 they were providing “a wonderful transfusion of blood” for the Allied cause. Pershing was determined to use U.S. troops to break the stalemate on the Western Front. During the ferocious fighting, a French officer urged an American unit to retreat. In a famous exchange, U.S. Marine Captain Lloyd W. Williams refused the order, saying: “Retreat? Hell, we just got here.” In a massive Allied offensive, begun on September 26, 1918, American troops joined British and French armies in a drive toward Sedan, France, and its strategic railroad, which supplied the German army occupying northern France. With 1.2 million U.S. soldiers involved, including some 200,000 African Americans, it was the largest American casualties A Salvation Army worker writing a letter home for a American action of the war, and it wounded soldier. resulted in 117,000 American casualties, including 26,000 dead. But along the entire F ­ rench-​­Belgian front, the outnumbered Germans were in retreat during the early fall of 1918. “America,” wrote German General Erich Ludendorff, “became the decisive power in the war.” On October 6, the German government asked Wilson for peace negotiations based on his Fourteen Points. British and French leaders accepted the Fourteen Points as a basis of negotiations, but with two significant reservations: the British insisted on the right to discuss limiting freedom of the seas to preserve their naval dominance, and the French demanded massive reparations (payments) from Germany and Austria for war damages.

 the german collapse

By the end of October 1918, Germany
 was on the verge of collapse. Revolutionaries rampaged through the streets. Sailors mutinied. Germany’s allies (Bulgaria, Turkey, and ­Austria-​­Hungary) dropped out of the war, and panicked military leaders demanded that the civilian government ask for an armistice (­cease-​­fire agreement). On November 9, the German Kaiser resigned, and a republic was proclaimed. Early on the morning of November 11, an armistice was signed in which the Germans were assured that Wilson’s Fourteen Points would be the basis for the peace conference.

 1010  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

THE GREAT WAR, THE WESTERN FRONT, 1918

 ENGLAND

Rotterdam


NETHERLANDS
Rh 
 it

 de

 r

Mons


 e

Ri


 r

 ive r Oi s e R

 ra St

Versailles


 LUXEMBOURG

Soissons


A is


 ne Riv

 ReimsV

 Château-Thierry Épernay Paris iver M

 eR arn

 es

 FRANCE

 le

R.


Verdun
 Étain Metz

 ST

 r

Sedan
E
FOR NE ON RG
er 
Se


 ve

Koblenz


A


BELLEAU WOOD
Ri 
 GERMANY

 er

Cambrai
 ve

 Compiègne e

 iv eR

Arras
 m

Amiens
Cantigny


 in

M eus


 r

 m

Cologne


Brussels


BELGIUM
Lille 
So


Ri


R


Calais
Ypres
 Armentières

Boulogne


Antwerp


 l

Ghent S c h e
 e iv

 ve

 er Oostende ov D Dieppe

 ine

 of

NORTH SEA

St.-Mihiel


Strasbourg


Nancy
Mo
 sel

 le

Ri
 ve

 r

 Western front, March 1918 German offensive, spring 1918 Allied counteroffensive Western front, November 1918





50 Miles
50 Kilometers


 SWITZERLAND

 Why was the war on the Western Front a stalemate for most of the war? was the effect of the arrival of the American troops? Figure M22_2 ■ Why was the Second Battle of the Marne the turning point of the war? First proof ■

 WWN64 ■ What

 Six hours later, at the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh month, and after 1,563 days of terrible warfare, the killing ended. From Europe, Colonel House sent Wilson a telegram: “Autocracy [government by an individual with unlimited power] is dead; long live democracy and its immortal leader.” The end of fighting led to wild celebrations throughout the world. “The nightmare is over,” wrote African American activist W. E. B. Du Bois. “The world awakes. The long, horrible years of dreadful night are passed. Behold the sun!” Wilson was not as joyful. The Great War, he said, had dealt a grievous injury to civilization “which can never be atoned for or repaired.” During its nineteen months in the Great War, the United States had lost 53,000 servicemen in combat. Another 63,000 died of diseases, largely casu­

The Politics of Peace  1011


 Armistice Night in New York (1918) George Luks, known for his vivid paintings of urban life, captured the unbridled outpouring of patriotism and joy that extended into the night of Germany’s surrender.

 alties of the influenza epidemic that swept through the world in 1918. Ger­ many’s war dead totaled more than 2 million, including civilians; France lost nearly 1.4 million combatants, Great Britain 703,000, and Russia 1.7 million. The war also ruined the economies of Europe while decimating a whole generation of young men. The new Europe would be very different from the prewar version: much poorer, more violent, more polarized, more cynical, less sure of itself, and less capable of decisive action. The United States, for good or ill, emerged from the war as the world’s dominant power.

The Politics of Peace
 On June 25, 1918, Colonel Edward House wrote President Wilson from France, urging him to take charge of the peacemaking process. “It is one of the things with which your name should be linked during the ages.” House was right. Woodrow Wilson and the peace agreement ending the Great War would be forever linked, but not in a positive light. In the making of the peace agreement, Wilson showed himself both at his best and worst. His Fourteen Points embodied his vision of a better world governed by fairer principles. He felt guided “by the hand of God.” His vision of a peacekeeping “League of Nations” was, in his view, the key element to a “secure and lasting peace” and was the “most essential part of the peace settlement.” If the diplomats gathering

 1012  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

 to draft the peace treaty failed to follow his ambitious plans to reshape the world in America’s image, he warned, “there will be another world war” within a generation.

 Wilson’s Key Errors Whatever the merits of President Wilson’s peace plan, his efforts to implement it proved clumsy. He made several key decisions that would come back to haunt him. First, against the advice of his staff and of European leaders, he decided to attend the peace conference in Paris that opened on January 18, 1919. Never before had an American president left the nation for such a prolonged period (six months). During his months abroad, Wilson lost touch with political developments at home. Wilson’s second error of judgment involved politics. In the congressional elections of November 1918, Wilson defied his advisers and political tradition by urging voters to elect a Democratic Congress as a sign of approval of his policies in handling the w ­ ar—​­and the peace. He “begged” the public not to “repudiate” his leadership. Prior to that time, presidents had remained neutral during congressional elections and abstained from campaigning. Republicans, who for the most part had backed Wilson’s war measures, were not pleased. Theodore Roosevelt, whose son Kermit, a pilot, had been killed in the war, called Wilson’s s­ elf-​­serving appeal for votes “a cruel insult to every Republican father or mother whose sons have entered the Army or Navy.” Voters were not impressed, either. In the elections, the Democrats lost control of both houses of Congress, which was a bad omen for Wilson’s peacemaking efforts, since any treaty to end the war would have to be approved by at least ­two-​­thirds of the Senate, now controlled by Republicans. Meanwhile, Wilson had dispatched Colonel House and several aides to Europe to begin convincing Allied leaders to embrace the Fourteen Points. The lopsided defeat of Wilson and the Democrats in the elections, said House, “made his difficulties enormously greater.” Gordon Auchincloss, House’s s­ on-​ ­in-​­law who was serving as one of his lieutenants in Europe, displayed the brash confidence symptomatic of many American diplomats when he boasted from London that “before we get through with these fellows over here, we will teach them how to do things and to do them quickly.” It would not be so easy. Wilson further weakened support for his peacemaking efforts when, in a deliberate slight, he refused to appoint a prominent Republican to the American delegation headed to the peace conference. Although House had urged him to appoint Theodore Roosevelt or Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, the president’s archenemy and the leading Republican in Congress, Wilson refused. In the end, he appointed Harry White, an obscure Republican. Former president William Howard Taft groused that Wilson’s real intention in going to Paris was “to hog the whole show.” He almost did.

The Politics of Peace  1013


 Wilson’s participation in the Paris Peace Conference would be the climactic event of his career, an opportunity for him to convince Europe to follow his impassioned idealism in creating a very different postwar world. As Wilson prepared to board the George Washington with 113 staff members bound for Europe over a ­ten-​­day voyage, Ray Stannard Baker, a muckraking journalist, wrote that the president “has yet to prove his greatness. The fate of a drama lies in its last act, and Wilson is now coming to that.” Wilson’s last act would indeed be ­dramatic—​­tragically so. Initially, however, his entrance on the European stage was triumphant in December 1918. The cheering crowds in London, Paris, and Rome verged on hysteria. Millions of grateful Europeans greeted him as an almost mystical hero, even a savior. An Italian mayor described Wilson’s visit as the “second coming of Christ.” The ecstatic welcome led Wilson to think he truly was being directed by God to save the world. In a sign of his growing egotism, he claimed that he was now “at the apex of my glory in the hearts of these people.” He was determined to shape a peace treaty and postwar world based on principles of justice, fairness, and ­self-​­determination.

 Fit for a messiah Wilson rode down the Champs Élysées as the crowds showered him with flower petals and cheered, “Vive Wilson! Vive l’Amérique! Vive la liberté!”

 1014  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

 From such a height, there could only be a fall. Although popular with the European people, Wilson had to negotiate with t­ough-​­minded, wily European statesmen who shared neither his lofty goals nor his ideals. In fact, they resented his efforts to forge a peace settlement modeled on American values. That Wilson had not bothered to consult them about his Fourteen Points peace proposal before announcing it to the world did not help. In the end, the European leaders would force him to abandon many of his ideals.

The Paris Peace Conference
 The Paris Peace Conference lasted from January to June 1919. The participants had no time to waste. The German, A ­ ustro-​­Hungarian, and Ottoman thrones and empires were in ruins. Across much of Europe, food was scarce and lawlessness rampant. The threat of revolution hung over central Europe as Communists in the defeated nations threatened to take control. The peace conference dealt with immensely complex and controversial issues (including creating new nations and redrawing the maps of Europe and the Middle East) that required both political statesmanship and technical expertise. The British delegation alone included almost 400 members, many of them specialists in political geography or economics. The peacemakers met daily, debating, arguing, and compromising.

 the big four

 From the start, the Paris Peace Conference was controlled by the Big Four: the prime ministers of Britain, France, and Italy, and the president of the United States. Georges Clemenceau, the ­seventy-​­seven-​­year-​­old French ­premier known as “The Tiger,” had little patience with President Wilson’s preaching. In response to Wilson’s declaration that “America is the only idealistic nation in the world,” Clemenceau grumbled that talking with Wilson was like talking to Jesus Christ. “God gave us the Ten Commandments and we broke them,” the French leader sneered. “Wilson gave us the Fourteen ­Points—​­we shall see.” The Big Four fought in private and in public. The French and the British, led by Prime Minister David Lloyd George, insisted that Wilson agree to their harsh provisions to weaken Germany, while Vittorio Orlando, prime minister of Italy, focused on gaining territories from defeated Austria.

 the league of nations

 Although suffering from chronic health issues, including hypertension and blinding headaches, Wilson lectured the other statesmen about the need to embrace his beloved League of Nations, which he insisted must be the “keystone” of any peace settlement. He believed that a world peace organization would abolish war by settling international disputes and mobilizing united action against aggressors. Article X of the char-

The Politics of Peace  1015


 ter, which Wilson called “the heart of the League,” allowed member nations to impose military and economic sanctions, or penalties, against military aggressors. The League, Wilson predicted, would have such moral influence that it would make military action to preserve peace unnecessary. These unrealistic expectations became, for Wilson, a ­self-​­defeating crusade. On February 14, 1919, Wilson presented the final draft of the League covenant to the Allies and left Paris for a ­ten-​­day visit home, where he faced growing opposition among Republicans. The League of Nations, Theodore Roosevelt complained, would revive German militarism and undermine American morale. “To substitute internationalism for nationalism,” Roosevelt argued, “means to do away with patriotism.” Henry Cabot Lodge, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, also scorned Wilson and his idealism. Lodge told Roosevelt, “I never expected to hate anyone in politics with the hatred I feel toward Wilson.” He dismissed the League of Nations because he feared it would involve the U.S. military in foreign conflicts without Senate approval.

The Treaty of Versailles
 When Wilson returned to Paris in the spring of 1919, he had lost his leverage with the British and French because it was increasingly uncertain that the U.S. Senate would approve any treaty he endorsed. Although a skilled debater, Wilson was forced to concede many controversial issues to ensure that the Europeans would approve his League of Nations. Wilson yielded to French demands that Germany transfer vast territories to France on its west and to Poland on its east and north. In other territorial matters, Wilson had to abandon his principle of national s­ elf-​­determination, whereby every ethnic group would be allowed to form its own nation. As Secretary of State Robert Lansing correctly predicted, allowing each ethnic group to determine its own fate “will raise hopes which can never be realized.” ­(Wilson himself later told the Senate that he wished he had never said that “all nations have a right to ­self-​­determination.”) In their efforts to allow for at least some degree of ethnic ­self-​­determination in multiethnic regions, the statesmen at Versailles created the independent countries of Austria, Hungary, Poland, Yugoslavia, and Czechoslovakia in ­central Europe and four new nations along the Baltic Sea: Finland, Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia. The victorious Allies, however, did not create independent nations out of the colonies of the defeated and now defunct European empires. Instead, they assigned the former German colonies in Africa and the Turkish colonies in the Middle East to France and Great Britain to govern while they prepared themselves for independence at some undesignated point in the future. At the same time, Japan took control of the former German colonies in east Asia.

 1016  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

 The issue of r­eparations—​­payments by the vanquished to the v­ ictors—​ ­triggered especially bitter arguments. The British and the French (on whose soil much of the war was fought) wanted Germany to pay the entire financial cost of the war, including their veterans’ pensions. On this point, Wilson made perhaps his most fateful concessions. Although initially opposed to reparations, he eventually agreed to a crucial clause in the peace treaty by which Germany was forced to accept responsibility for the war and its entire expense. The “war guilt” clause, written by American John Foster Dulles, a future secretary of state, so offended Germans that it became a major factor in the rise of the Nazi party during the 1920s. Wilson himself privately admitted that if he were a German, he would refuse to sign the flawed treaty. Colonel House, the president’s closest confidante, privately blamed Wilson for many problems associated with the treaty. He found the president “so contradictory that it is hard to pass judgment on him.” He “speaks constantly of teamwork but seldom practices it.” Wilson was “becoming stubborn and angry, and he never was a good negotiator.” House worried that Wilson was too “unreasonable” about the League of Nations, “which does not make for solutions.” It was an eerily accurate prediction of what was in store. On May 7, 1919, the victorious powers presented the treaty to the German delegates, who returned three weeks later with 443 pages of criticism. Among other things, they noted that Germany would lose 13 percent of its territory, 10 percent of its population, and all of its colonies in Asia and Africa. A few minor changes were made, but when the Germans still balked, the French threatened to launch a new military attack. Finally, on June 28, the Germans gave up and signed the treaty in the glittering Hall of Mirrors at Versailles, the magnificent palace built by King Louis XIV in the late seventeenth century. Thereafter, the agreement was called the Treaty of Versailles. None of the peacemakers was fully satisfied. As France’s Clemenceau observed, “it was not perfect,” but it was, after all, the “result of human beings. We did all we could to work fast and well.” A British official reversed Wilson’s claim that it had been a “war to end all wars” by saying it was a “peace to end peace”—as turned out to be the case. When Adolf Hitler, a young German soldier who had been wounded in the war, learned of the treaty’s provisions, he vowed revenge. “It cannot be that two million Germans have fallen in vain,” he screamed during a speech in Munich in 1922. “We demand vengeance!”

 the treaty debate

 On July 8, 1919, Wilson arrived back in Washington, D.C., to begin working for approval of the treaty by the Senate, where the Republicans outnumbered the Democrats. Before leaving Paris, he had assured a French diplomat that he would not allow any changes to the treaty.

The Politics of Peace  1017


EUROPE AFTER THE TREATY OF VERSAILLES, 1918 FINLAND

 NORWAY

 NORTH

 ESTONIA

 DENMARK

 LATVIA

 BA

GREAT BRITAIN

LT IC

SEA IRELAND

 SEA

 SWEDEN

LITHUANIA DANZIG
(Gdansk) ´ GERMANY NETHERLANDS POLISH CORRIDOR SCHLESWIGHOLSTEIN 
London


Berlin


GE RMANY

 BELGIUM

 ATLANTIC

Paris


 OCEAN

 RHINELAND

 CZ

 SAAR

 LUX.

 ALSACELORRAINE

 FRANCE

 SILESIA

 EC

 HOS

Vienna


 RUSSIA

 POLAND

LOVA KIA

AUSTRIA HUNGARY

SWITZ. SOUTH TYROL

 ROMANIA

 PO

RT U

 GA

L


Fiume


YUGOSLAVIA S PA I N

 BULGARIA

 ITALY

BLACK SEA

 ALBANIA

M E D
I T
E R


R


NORT H

 1914 boundaries New nations Plebiscite areas Occupied area ■ ■

A F RI CA


 GREECE

A


N


E


A


 TURKEY

N


S E A




500 Miles
500 Kilometers


 Why was ­self-​­determination so difficult to apply in Central Europe? How did territorial concessions weaken Germany?

WWN64
Figure M22_3 First proof 
 “I shall consent to nothing,” he vowed. “The Senate must take its medicine.” Thus began one of the most brutally partisan and bitterly personal disputes in American history. On July 10, Wilson became the first president to enter the Senate and deliver a treaty to be voted on. He called upon senators to accept their “great duty” and ratify the treaty, which had been guided “by the hand of God.” Wilson then grew needlessly confrontational. He dismissed critics of the League of Nations as “blind and little provincial people.” The world, he claimed, was relying on the United States to sign the treaty: “Dare we reject it and break the heart of the world?” Yes, answered Senate Republicans, who had decided that Wilson’s commitment to the League was a reckless threat to America’s independence. Henry Cabot Lodge denounced the treaty’s “scheme of making mankind suddenly

 1018  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

 virtuous by a statute or a written constitution.” Lodge’s strategy was to stall approval of the treaty in hopes that public opposition would grow. He took six weeks simply reading aloud the lengthy text to his Foreign Relations committee. He then organized a parade of expert witnesses, most of them opposed to the treaty, to appear at the hearings on ratification. In the Senate, a group of “irreconcilables,” fourteen Republicans and two Democrats, refused to support American membership in the League. They were mainly western and midwestern progressives, isolationists who feared that such sweeping foreign commitments would threaten domestic reforms. Lodge himself belonged to a larger group called the “reservationists,” who insisted upon limiting American participation in the League in exchange for approving the treaty. The only way to get Senate approval was for Wilson to meet with Lodge and others and agree to revisions, the most important of which was the requirement that Congress authorize any American participation in a L ­ eague-​ ­approved war. Colonel House urged the president to “meet the Senate in a conciliatory spirit.” Wilson replied that he had long ago decided that you “can never get anything in this life that is worthwhile without fighting for it.” House courageously disagreed, reminding the president that American civilization was “built on compromise.” It was the last time the two men would speak to or see each other. As Republican senator Frank B. Kellogg of Minnesota noted, the proposed changes were crafted not by enemies of the treaty but by friends who wanted to save it. Republican senator James Watson of Indiana told Wilson that he had no choice but to accept some revisions: “Mr. President, you are licked. There is only one way you can take the United States into the League of Nations.” But the ­self-​­righteous president was temperamentally incapable of compromising. He refused to negotiate, declaring that “if the Treaty is not ratified by the Senate, the War will have been fought in vain.”

 let the people decide

 In September 1919, after a summer of fruitless debate, an exhausted Wilson decided to bypass his Senate opponents by speaking directly to voters. On September 2, against his doctor’s orders and his wife’s advice, he left Washington for a grueling railroad tour through the Midwest to the West Coast, intending to visit t­wenty-​­nine cities and deliver forty speeches on behalf of the treaty. No president had ever made such a strenuous effort to win public support. In St. Louis, Wilson said that he had returned from Paris “bringing one of the greatest documents of human history,” which was now in danger of being rejected by the Senate. He pledged to “fight for a cause . . . ​greater than the Senate. It is greater than the government. It is as great as the cause of mankind. . . .” Wilson traveled and spoke, sometimes as many as four times a day, despite suffering from pounding headaches. It did not help his morale to learn that

The Politics of Peace  1019


 his secretary of state, Robert Lansing, had said that the League of Nations was “entirely useless.” By the time Wilson’s train reached Spokane, Washington, the president was visibly fatigued. But he kept going through Oregon and California. Some 200,000 people greeted him in Los Angeles. In all, he had covered 10,000 miles in ­twenty-​­two days and given ­thirty-​­two major speeches. Then disaster struck. After delivering an emotional speech on September 25, 1919, in Pueblo, Colorado, Wilson collapsed from headaches so severe that he had to cancel the trip. On the train heading back, as he looked out the window with tears rolling down his cheeks, he told his doctor that he had suffered the “greatest disappointment of [his] life.”

 a stricken president Back in Washington, D.C., a week later, the president suffered a crushing stroke (cerebral hemorrhage) that left him paralyzed on his left side; he could barely speak or see. Only his secretary, his doctor, and his wife, Edith, knew his true condition. For five months at the end of 1919 and in early 1920, Wilson lay flat on his back while his doctor issued reassuring medical bulletins. If a document needed Wilson’s signature, his wife guided his trembling hand. Lansing urged the president’s aides to declare him disabled and appoint Vice President Thomas Marshall in his place; they angrily refused. Soon thereafter, Lansing was replaced. The stroke made Wilson even more arrogant and stubborn and paralyzed his administration as well. He became emotionally unstable, at times crying uncontrollably and displaying signs of paranoia. For the remaining seventeen months of his term, his protective wife, along with aides and trusted cabinet members, kept him isolated from all but the most essential business. When a group of Republican senators visited the White House, one of them said: “Well, Mr. President, we have all been praying for you.” Wilson replied, “Which way, Senator?” the treaty under attack Such presidential humor was rare, however. Wilson’s hardened arteries seemed to have hardened his political judgment as well. For his part, Lodge pushed through the Senate fourteen changes (the number was not coincidental) in the draft of the Treaty of Versailles. The exiled Colonel House became so concerned that he wrote Edith Wilson a letter in which he said how “vital” it was for some form of the treaty to be approved: The president’s “place in history is in the balance.” He pleaded for Wilson to negotiate a compromise. The First Lady refused to share his concerns with her husband. In the end, Wilson rejected any proposed changes to the treaty. As a result, his supporters in the Senate were thrown into an unlikely alliance with the irreconcilables, who opposed the treaty under any circumstances. The final Senate vote in 1920 on Lodge’s revised treaty was 39 in favor and 55 against. On the question of approving the original treaty without changes,

 1020  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

 the irreconcilables and the reservationists, led by Lodge, combined to defeat ratification, with 38 for and 53 against. Woodrow Wilson’s grand effort at global peacemaking had failed miserably. (Although, he did receive the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts.) When told of the final Senate vote, he said it “would have been better if I had died last fall.” After refusing to ratify the treaty, Congress tried to declare an official end to American involvement in the war by a joint resolution on May 20, 1920, which Wilson vetoed in a fit of spite. It was not until July 2, 1921, four months after he had left office and almost eighteen months after the fighting had stopped, that another joint resolution officially ended the state of war with Germany and ­Austria-​ ­Hungary. ­Separate peace treaties with Germany, Austria, and Hungary were ratified on October 18, 1921, but by then Warren G. Harding was president. The U.S. failure to ratify the Versailles Treaty or to exercise strong world leadership would prove to have ­long-​­range consequences. With Great Britain and France too exhausted and too timid to keep Germany weak and isolated, a dangerous power vacuum would emerge in Europe, one which Adolf Hitler and the Nazis would fill.

 Stumbling from War to Peace After the war, most Americans were far more concerned with domestic issues than with the Treaty of Versailles, as celebration over the war’s end soon gave way to widespread inflation, unemployment, labor unrest, socialist and Communist radicalism, race riots, terrorist bombings, and government tyranny. With millions of servicemen returning to civilian life, w ­ ar-​­related industries shutting down, and wartime price controls ending, unemployment and prices for consumer goods spiked. Bedridden by his stroke, the president became increasingly distant, depressed, and peevish. Wilson, observed David Lloyd George, the British prime minister, was “as much a victim of the war as any soldier who died in the trenches.” His administration was in disarray, he had never been so unpopular, and the Democratic party was floundering along with him.

 the spanish flu Beginning in 1918, many Americans confronted an infectious enemy that produced far more casualties than the war. It became known as the Spanish flu (although its origins continue to be debated), and its contagion spread around the globe. The disease appeared suddenly in the spring of 1918. Its initial outbreak lasted a year and killed as many as 100 million people worldwide, twice as many as died

 Stumbling from War to Peace  1021

 Influenza epidemic Office workers wearing gauze masks during the Spanish flu epidemic of 1918.

 in the war. In the United States alone, it accounted for 675,000 deaths, more than ten times the number of U.S. combat deaths in France. A fifth of the nation’s population caught the flu, and the public health system was strained to the breaking point. Hospitals ran out of beds, and funeral homes ran out of coffins. By the spring of 1919, the pandemic had run its course, ending as s­ uddenly—​­and as i­ nexplicably—​­as it had begun. Although another outbreak occurred in the winter of 1920, people had grown more resistant to it. No disease in human history had killed so many people, and no war, famine, or natural catastrophe had killed so many in such a short time.

 suffrage at last

 As the first outbreak of the Spanish flu was ending, American women finally gained a Constitutional guarantee of their right to vote. After six months of delay, debate, and failed votes, Congress passed the Nineteenth Amendment in the spring of 1919 and sent it to the states for ratification. Tennessee’s legislature was the last of ­thirty-​­six state assemblies to approve the amendment, and it did so in dramatic fashion. The initial vote was 48–48. Then a ­twenty-​­four-​­year-​­old Republican legislator named Harry T. Burn changed his vote to yes at the insistence of his mother. The Nineteenth Amendment became official on August 18, 1920, making the United States the t­wenty-​­second nation to allow women’s suffrage. It was a climactic achievement of the Progressive Era. Suddenly, 9.5 million women were eligible to vote in national elections; in the 1920 presidential election, they would make up 40 percent of the electorate.

 1022  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

 Their first votes Women of New York City’s East Side vote for the first time in the presidential election of 1920.

 economic turbulence As consumer prices rose, discontented workers, released from wartime controls on wages, grew more willing to go out on strike. In 1919, more than 4 million hourly wage workers, 20 percent of the U.S. workforce, participated in 3,600 strikes. Most of them wanted nothing more than higher wages and shorter workweeks, but their critics linked them with the worldwide Communist movement. Charges of a Communist conspiracy were greatly exaggerated, however. In 1919, fewer than 70,000 Americans nationwide belonged to the Communist party. The most controversial labor dispute was in Boston, where most of the police went on strike on September 9, 1919. Massachusetts governor Calvin Coolidge mobilized the National Guard to maintain order. After four days, the striking policemen offered to return, but instead Coolidge ordered that they all be fired. When labor leaders appealed for their reinstatement, Coolidge responded in words that made him an instant national hero: “There is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody, anywhere, any time.” race riots

 The summer of 1919 also brought a wave of deadly race riots. As more and more African Americans, including many of the 367,000 who were war veterans, moved out of the South to different parts of the c­ ountry,

 Stumbling from War to Peace  1023

 Safe, briefly Escorted by a police officer, an African American family moves its belongings from their home, likely destroyed by white rioters, and into a protected area of Chicago.

 ­ eveloped successful careers, and asserted their civil rights, resentful whites d reacted with an almost hysterical racism. In 1919 alone, s­eventy-​­six African Americans, including nine military veterans, were killed by southern whites. Among the victims was Sergeant Major Joe Green in Birmingham, Alabama, because he “had the insolence” to ask for his change on a streetcar, and Private William Little in Blakely, Georgia, because he had walked around town wearing his army uniform. What African American leader James Weldon Johnson called the Red Summer (red signifying blood) began in July, when a mob of whites invaded the black neighborhood in Longview, Texas, angry over rumors of interracial dating. They burned shops and houses and ran several African Americans out of town. A week later, in Washington, D.C., exaggerated and false reports of black assaults on white women stirred up white mobs, and gangs of white and black rioters waged a race war in the streets until soldiers and driving rains ended the fighting. The worst was yet to come. In late July, 38 people were killed and 537 injured in five days of race rioting in Chicago, where some 50,000 blacks, mostly from the rural South, had moved during the war, leading to tensions with local whites

 1024  CHAPTER 22  America and the Great War 1914–1920

 over jobs and housing. White unionized workers especially resented blacks who were hired as strikebreakers. Altogether, ­twenty-​­five race riots erupted in 1919, and eighty African Americans were lynched, including eleven war veterans. The race riots of 1919 were a turning point for many African Americans. “We made the supreme sacrifice,” a black veteran told ­poet-​­journalist Carl Sandburg. “Now we want to see our country live up to the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence.” Another ­ex-​­soldier noted how much the war experience had changed the outlook of blacks: “We were determined not to take it anymore.”

 the red scare With so many people convinced that the strikes and riots were inspired by Communists and anarchists (two very different groups who shared a hatred for capitalism), a New York journalist reported that Americans were “shivering in their boots over Bolshevism, and they are far more scared of Lenin than they ever were of the [German] Kaiser. We seem to be the most frightened victors the world ever saw.” Fears of revolution were fueled by the violent actions of a few militants. In early 1919, the Secret Service discovered a plot by Spanish anarchists to kill President Wilson and other government officials. In April 1919, postal workers intercepted nearly forty homemade mail bombs addressed to government officials. One mail bomb, however, blew off the hands of a Georgia senator’s maid. In June, another bomb damaged U.S. Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer’s house. Palmer, who had ambitions to succeed Wilson as president, concluded that a “Red Menace,” a Communist “blaze of revolution,” was “sweeping over every American institution of law and order.” That August, Palmer appointed a ­twenty-​­four-​­year-​­old attorney named J. Edgar Hoover to lead a new government division created to collect information on radicals. Hoover and others in the Justice Department worked with a network of 250,000 informers in 600 cities, all of them members of the American Protective League, which had been founded during the war to root out “traitors” and labor radicals. On November 7, 1919, federal agents rounded up 450 alien “radicals,” most of whom were ­law-​­abiding Russian immigrants. All were deported to Russia without a court hearing. On January 2, 1920, police in dozens of cities arrested 5,000 more suspects. What came to be called the First Red Scare (another would occur in the 1950s) represented one of the largest violations of civil liberties in American history. In 1919, novelist Katharine Fullerton Gerould announced in Harper’s Magazine that, as a result of the government crackdown, America “is no longer a free country in the old sense.” Panic about possible foreign terrorists erupted across the nation as vigilantes took matters into their own hands. At a patriotic

 Stumbling from War to Peace  1025

 pageant in Washington, D.C., a sailor shot a spectator who refused to rise for “The ­Star-​­Spangled Banner”; the crowd cheered. In Hammond, Indiana, a jury took only two minutes to acquit a man who had murdered an immigrant for yelling “To hell with the U.S.” In Waterbury, Connecticut, a salesman was sentenced to six months in jail for saying that Vladimir Lenin was “one of the brainiest” of the world’s leaders. By the summer of 1920, the Red Scare had begun to subside. Although Attorney General Palmer kept predicting more ­foreign-​­inspired terrorism, it never came. But the Red Scare left a lasting mark by strengthening the c­onservative crusade for “100 percent Americanism” and new restrictions on immigration.

J.
Edgar Hoover Fresh out of law  school, Hoover joined the Justice Department and rose the ranks to become the first director of the FBI.

Effects of the Great War
 The extraordinary turbulence in 1919 and 1920 was an unmistakable indication of how the Great War had changed the shape of modern history: it was a turning point after which little was the same. It had destroyed old ­Europe—​­not only many of its cities, people, economies, and four grand empires, but also its ­self-​­image as the center of civilized Western culture. Winston Churchill, the future British prime minister, called postwar Europe “a crippled, broken world.” Peace did not bring stability. Most Germans and Austrians believed they were the victims of a harsh peace, and many wanted revenge. At the same time, the war had hastened the already simmering Bolshevik Revolution that caused Russia to exit the war, abandon its western European allies, and, in 1922, reemerge as the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR). Thereafter, Soviet communism would be one of the most powerful forces shaping the twentieth century. Postwar America was a much different story. For the first time, the United States had decisively intervened in a major European war. The American economy had emerged from the war largely unscathed, and bankers and business executives were eager to fill the vacuum created by the destruction of the major European economies. The United States was now the world’s dominant power. What came to be called the “American Century” was at hand.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 An Uneasy Neutrality The Wilson administration declared the nation neutral but allowed businesses to extend loans to the warring nations, principally the Allies (Britain, France, and Russia), to purchase food and military supplies. Americans were outraged by the Germans’ use of submarine (­U-​­boat) warfare, especially after the sinking of the Lusitania. In 1917, submarine attacks and the publication of the Zimmermann telegram, which revealed that Germany had tried to encourage Mexico to wage war against the United States, led America to enter the Great War.

•


 Mobilizing a Nation The Wilson administration drafted young men into the army and created new agencies such as the War Industries Board and the Food Administration to coordinate industrial production and agricultural consumption. As white workers left their factory jobs to join the army, hundreds of thousands of African Americans migrated from the rural South to the urban North as part of the Great Migration. Many southern whites and Mexican Americans also migrated to industrial centers. One million women participated in war work but were encouraged to leave these jobs as soon as the war ended. The federal government severely curtailed civil liberties, and the Espionage and Sedition Acts of 1917 and 1918 criminalized virtually any public opposition to the war.

•


 The American Role in Fighting the War Communists seized power in November 1917 in Russia and negotiated a separate peace treaty with Germany, thus freeing the Germans to focus on the Western Front. By 1918, however, the arrival of millions of American troops turned the tide of the war. ­German leaders sued for peace, and an armistice was signed on November 11, 1918. Woodrow Wilson insisted that the United States wanted a new, democratic Europe. His Fourteen Points (1918) speech outlined his ideas for a League of Nations to promote peaceful resolutions to future conflicts.

•


The Fight for the Peace At the Paris Peace Conference, President Wilson was
 only partially successful. The Treaty of Versailles (1919) did create a League of Nations but included a “war guilt clause” that forced Germany to pay reparations for war damages to France and Britain. In the end, Wilson’s illness following a stroke, his refusal to compromise on the terms of the treaty, and his alienation of Republican senators resulted in the Senate voting against ratification.

•


 Lurching from War to Peace The United States struggled to come to terms with its new status as the leading world power and with changes at home. As wartime industries shifted to peacetime production, wage and price controls ended. As former soldiers reentered the workforce, unemployment rose, and ­consumer prices increased, provoking labor unrest in cities across the nation. Many ­Americans believed these problems were part of a Bolshevik plot. Several



 ­incidents of ­domestic terrorism provoked what would be known as the First Red Scare (1919–1920), during which the Justice Department illegally arrested and deported many ­suspected radicals, most of whom were immigrants. At the same time, race riots broke out as resentful white mobs tried to stop African Americans from exercising their civil rights. The summer of 1919 also brought the ratification of the Nineteenth ­Amendment (1919) to the Constitution, which gave women the right to vote.

Chronology


 The Great War (World War I) begins in Europe

 1915		The Lusitania is torpedoed by a German U-boat March 1917	Germany announces unrestricted submarine warfare in the

Atlantic
 United States enters the Great War January 1918	Woodrow Wilson delivers Fourteen Points speech November 11, 1918 Representatives of warring nations sign armistice 1919		Paris Peace Conference convenes Race riots break out during the Red Summer First Red Scare leads to arrests and deportations of suspected radicals Woodrow Wilson suffers stroke The Senate rejects the Treaty of Versailles The Nineteenth Amendment is ratified April 1917

Key Terms
Central Powers p. 989


Great Migration p. 1002


Allied Powers p. 989


Fourteen Points (1918) p. 1007


Western Front p. 989


League of Nations p. 1014


 trench warfare p. 991

Treaty of Versailles (1919) p. 1016


 ­U-​­boats p. 995

Nineteenth Amendment (1920)
 p. 1021

Lusitania p. 995
 Zimmermann telegram p. 999

First Red Scare (1919–1920) p. 1024


IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




A
Clash of Cultures
1920–1929


 Nightclub (1933) With all its striking sights and sounds, the roar of the twenties subsided for some at the heart of it all. In this painting by American artist Guy Pène du Bois, flappers and their dates crowd into a fashionable nightclub, yet their loneliness amid the excitement is deafening.

T


 he decade between the end of the Great War and the onset of the Great Depression at the end of 1929 was perhaps the most dynamic in American history, a period of rapid urbanization, technological innovation, widespread prosperity, social rebelliousness, cultural upheaval, and political conservatism. Women were at last allowed to vote in all states (although most African American ­women—​­and ­men—​­in the South were prevented from doing so) and to experience many freedoms previously limited to men. At the same time, the Eighteenth Amendment outlawed alcoholic beverages in 1920 (“Prohibition”), setting off an epidemic of ­lawbreaking—​­by citizens, police, and public officials. Cultural conflicts resulted largely from explosive tensions between rural and urban ways of life. For the first time in the nation’s history, more people lived in cities than in rural areas. While the urban middle class prospered, farmers suffered as the wartime boom in exports of grains and livestock to Europe ground to a halt. Four million people moved from farms to cities during the twenties, in part because of the better quality of life and in part because of the prolonged agricultural recession. Amid this massive rural/urban population shift, bitter fights erupted between traditionalists and modernists, as old and new values fought a cultural civil war that continues today. The postwar wave of strikes, bombings, ­anti-​­Communist hysteria, and race riots created a widespread sense of alarm that led many to cling to traditional religious beliefs and moral values and “native” ways of life. America during the twenties, said one social commentator, was the most “volcanic of any area on earth.” It was a period of “deep domestic strife” as new and old ways of life fought for influence. All of the changes punctuating the twenties created what one historian called a “nervous generation” of Americans “groping for what certainty they could find.”

 focus questions 1. Assess the consumer culture that emerged in America in the 1920s. What are the factors that contributed to its growth?

 2. What were the other major new social and cultural trends and movements that became prominent during the twenties? How did they challenge traditional standards and customs?

 3. What does “modernism” mean in intellectual and artistic terms? How did the modernist movements influence American culture in the early twentieth century?



