 1416  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 promised to unleash the capitalist spirit, restore national pride, and regain international respect. He did all of that and more. During his two terms as president, he inspired a conservative resurgence in politics, helped restore prosperity and raise the nation’s morale, and accelerated the forces that would cause the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the cold war.

The Carter Presidency
 James (Jimmy) Earl Carter Jr. won the 1976 election because he convinced voters that he was a common man of pure motives who would restore integrity and honesty to the presidency in the aftermath of the Watergate scandal. He represented a new generation of “moderate” southern Democrats who were committed to restraining “­big-​­government” spending. In his inaugural address, Carter stressed America’s limitations rather than its power: “We have learned that ‘more’ is not necessarily ‘better,’ that even our great nation has its recognized limits, and that we can neither answer all questions nor solve all problems.” That may have been true, but it was not what many Americans wanted to hear.

Jimmy Who?
 Like Gerald Ford before him, Jimmy Carter was honest and forthright. But his public modesty masked a complex and at times contradictory personality. No modern president was as openly committed to his Christian faith as Carter. At the same time, few presidents were as tough on others as Carter. The former governor of Georgia who came out of nowhere to win the ­presidential campaign (“Jimmy Who?”) was both blessed and cursed by a ­surplus of ­self-​­confidence. All his life, he had displayed a fierce d ­ etermination to succeed. He expected those around him to show the same tenacity. “I am pretty rigid,” Carter admitted. As he entered the White House in early 1977, Carter, the former naval officer, nuclear engineer, efficiency expert, and ­business executive, stressed that he wanted to be a “strong, aggressive ­president” who would reshape the federal government by eliminating waste and ­providing expert management. Carter faced difficult economic problems and formidable international challenges. He was expected to cure the stubborn recession and reduce inflation at a time when industrial economies around the world were struggling. Carter was also expected to restore U.S. stature abroad and lift the national spirit in the wake of the Watergate scandal. Meeting such expectations would

The Carter Presidency  1417


 be miraculous, but Carter displayed a sunburst smile, flinty willpower, and an “almost arrogant ­self-​­confidence,” as Time magazine described it. As it turned out, however, he was no miracle worker.

 early success

 During the first two years of his presidency, Carter enjoyed several successes, both symbolic and real. He reduced the size of the White House staff by a third and told cabinet officers to give up their government cars. His administration included more African Americans and women than any before. He fulfilled a controversial campaign pledge by offering amnesty (forgiveness) to the thousands of young men who had fled the The Carters After his inauguration in country rather than serve in Vietnam. 1977, President Jimmy Carter forgoes He reorganized the executive branch the traditional limousine and walks down Pennsylvania Avenue with his and reduced government red tape. wife, Rosalynn. Carter also pushed through the D ­ emocratic-​­controlled Congress several significant environmental initiatives, including stricter controls over the ­strip-​­mining of coal, the creation of a $1.6 billion “Superfund” to clean up toxic chemical waste sites, and a bill protecting more than 100 million acres of Alaskan land from development. At the end of his first 100 days in office, Carter enjoyed a 75 percent public approval rating.

 carter’s limitations

 But President Carter’s successes were ­short-​­lived. More than most presidents, he faced difficulties beyond his control, including ongoing inflation and a global energy crisis. Carter, however, contributed to the perception that he was not up to the challenges by failing to display two qualities necessary for presidential success: forcefulness and optimism. He was less an inspiring leader than an e­ fficiency-​­minded bureaucrat, a compulsive micromanager who failed to establish a compelling vision for the nation’s future. Carter tried to do too much too fast, deciding disastrously that he needed no chief of staff to help manage his schedule and implement his decisions. His senior aides were often more a burden than a blessing. The “outsider” president saw little need to consult with Democratic leaders in

 1418  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 Congress, which helps explain why many of his legislative requests were voted down. Ultimately, Carter’s mismanagement of the economy crippled his presidency. He first tried to attack unemployment, authorizing some $14 billion in federal spending to trigger job growth while cutting taxes by $34 billion. His actions helped generate new jobs but also caused a spike in inflation. Annual inflation (increases in consumer prices) jumped from 5 percent when he took office to as much as 13 percent during 1980. The result was a deepening recession and rising unemployment. What made Carter’s efforts to restore prosperity more challenging was the worsening global “energy crisis.” Since the Arab oil embargo in 1973, the price of imported oil had doubled, while U.S. dependence on foreign oil had grown from 35 percent to 50 percent of its annual needs. In April 1977, Carter presented Congress with a comprehensive energy proposal designed to cut oil consumption. However, the final energy bill, the National Energy Act of 1978, was so gutted by oil, gas, and automobile industry lobbyists that one presidential aide said it looked like it had been “nibbled to death by ducks.” In 1979, the energy crisis grew more troublesome when Islamic fundamentalists took over the government in ­oil-​­rich Iran and shut off the supply of Iranian oil to the United States, creating shortages of gasoline and much higher prices. Warning that the “growing scarcity in energy” would paralyze the U.S. economy, Carter asked the ­Democratic-​­controlled Congress for a new and much more comprehensive energy bill. But legislators again turned down its most important energy conservation provisions intended to reduce dependence on foreign oil.

 a “crisis of confidence”

 By July 1979, Carter had grown so discouraged by his failures that he took an unusual step: for two weeks he holed up at Camp David, the presidential retreat in the Maryland mountains. There he met privately with leaders from all walks of ­life—​­business, labor, education, religion, even psychiatry. Then, on July 15, he returned to the White House and delivered a televised speech in which he admitted that the people had lost confidence in his leadership. Carter then made a crucial mistake when he blamed Americans for the nation’s problems. “All the legislation in the world can’t fix what’s wrong with America,” he said, sounding more like an angry preacher than an uplifting president. People had become preoccupied with “owning and consuming things” at the expense of “hard work, strong families, ­close-​­knit communities, and our faith in God.” The nation was at a crossroads, he concluded. Americans could choose continued s­ elf-​­indulgence and political stalemate, or they could revive traditional values such as thrift, mutual aid, simple living, and

The Carter Presidency  1419


 spirituality. “We can take the first step down that path as we begin to solve our energy problem. Energy will be the immediate test of our ability to unite this nation.” Americans were not inspired by the president’s “sad and worried” speech. An Arizona newspaper expressed the feelings of many when it said that “the nation did not tune in Carter to hear a sermon. It wanted answers. It did not get them.” Carter’s new energy proposals got nowhere in Congress, and by the end of the summer, his negative ratings were the highest in history. “Our greatest single failure,” said Hamilton Jordan, Carter’s chief of staff, “is that we have not communicated effectively a description of the country’s problems or a pertinent solution to those problems.” It did not help matters when Carter took the unusual step two days after the speech of asking over thirty government officials, including his entire cabinet, to resign. He accepted the resignations of five cabinet officers. In doing so, he reinforced the public image of a White House out of control.

 Carter’s Foreign Policy Carter’s greatest success was facilitating a 1978 peace agreement between Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel and President Anwar Sadat of Egypt. When negotiations between the enemies stalled, Carter invited Begin and Sadat to Camp David. For twelve days in September, the three leaders engaged in ­non-​­stop discussions. At times the discussions to end the t­hirty-​­year state of war between the two nations grew so heated that the talks seemed doomed to fail. Thanks to Carter’s tireless efforts, however, the two sides persevered. The U.S. president played a crucial role in coaxing Sadat and Begin to compromise on key issues. Their efforts resulted in two landmark treaties, thereafter called the Camp David Accords. The first provided the framework for an eventual peace treaty. The Israelis pledged to end their military occupation of the Sinai region of Egypt, and the Egyptians promised to restore Israeli access to the Suez Canal. The second treaty called for a comprehensive settlement of the A ­ rab-​­Israeli tensions based on Israel’s willingness to allow the Palestinians living in the ­Israeli-​­controlled West Bank and Gaza Strip to govern themselves. Sadat’s willingness to recognize the legitimacy of the Israeli nation and sign the two treaties sparked waves of violent protests across the Arab world. The Arab League expelled Egypt and announced an economic boycott, and the Israelis later backtracked on aspects of the agreements. Sadat, however, paid the highest price. Most Arab nations condemned him as a traitor, and Islamic extremists assassinated him in 1981. Still, Carter’s ­high-​­level diplomacy made an ­all-​­out war between Israel and the Arab world less likely.

 1420  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 The Camp David Accords Egyptian president Anwar ­el-​­Sadat (left), Jimmy Carter (center), and Israeli prime minister Menachem Begin (right) at the announcement of the Camp David Accords, September 1978.

 Carter was also caught in a political crossfire when he vowed that “the soul of our foreign policy” should be an absolute “commitment to human rights” abroad, drawing a direct contrast between his international “idealism” and the geopolitical “realism” practiced by Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger. Carter created an Office of Human Rights within the State Department and selectively cut off financial assistance to some repressive governments. “America did not invent human rights,” he stressed. “In a very real sense, human rights invented America.” Critics, however, noted that the United States had its own human rights issues, including the plight of Native Americans and African Americans, and that Carter ignored abuses occurring among key allies, such as the shah of Iran. Others asserted that Carter’s definition of human rights was so vague and sweeping that few nations could satisfy it. Critics on the right argued that he was sacrificing America’s global interests to promote an impossible standard of international moral purity, while critics on the left highlighted his seeming hypocrisy in pursuing human rights in a few nations but not everywhere. Similarly, Carter’s controversial decision to turn over control of the ­ten-​ mile-​­ ­ wide Panama Canal zone to the Panamanian government aroused intense criticism. The president argued that Panama’s deep resentment of

The Carter Presidency  1421


 America’s having taken control of the Canal Zone during the presidency of Theodore Roosevelt left him no choice but to transfer management of the canal to Panama. Conservatives blasted Carter for surrendering U.S. control of such a strategic asset. Former California governor and presidential candidate Ronald Reagan repeatedly lambasted Carter’s “giveaway,” claiming that the canal was America’s forever: “We bought it, we paid for it, it’s ours.” Legal scholars and the Panamanian government disagreed, however. No Panamanian had ever signed the 1903 document granting the United States perpetual control of the strategic waterway (instead, a French engineer signed it). The new agreement between Panama and the United States called for the Canal Zone to be transferred to Panama at the end of 1999. Carter said the exchange reflected the American belief that “fairness, not force, should lie at the heart of our dealings with the world.” In late December 1979, Carter faced another crisis when 100,000 Soviet soldiers invaded Afghanistan, a remote, mountainous country where a ­ ­faltering Communist government was being challenged by Islamist jihadis (“holy ­warriors”) and ethnic warlords. It was the first Soviet army deployment outside of Europe since the Second World War, and the forces soon found themselves mired in what some called the Soviet Vietnam. “They have taken the ultimate step,” said a U.S. diplomat. “They’ve finally grasped the tar baby.” President Carter responded with a series of steps: in January 1980, he refused to sign a Strategic Arms Limitation Talks treaty with the Soviets (SALT II), suspended grain shipments to the Soviet Union, began supplying Afghan “freedom fighters” with weapons smuggled through Pakistan, requested large increases in military spending, required all ­nineteen-​­year-​­old men to register for the military draft, and called for an international boycott of the 1980 Olympic Games, which were to be held that summer in Moscow. Some sixty nations joined the United States in boycotting the Olympic games. Still, the Soviets persisted in their intervention for nine years. It ultimately cost 15,000 Soviet lives. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan also prompted Carter to announce what came to be called the Carter Doctrine, in which he threatened to use military force to prevent any nation from gaining control of the Persian Gulf waterways, through which most of the oil from the Middle East made its way to foreign ports.

 crisis in iran

 Then came the Iranian hostage crisis, a series of dramatic events that illustrated the inability of the United States to control world affairs. In January 1979, Islamic revolutionaries had ousted the p ­ ro-​­American

 1422  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 g­ overnment led by the shah of Iran, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, who owed his rule to a CIA intervention in 1953 that overthrew the elected Iranian government. The rebel leaders executed hundreds of the shah’s former officials. Thousands more Iranians were imprisoned, tortured, or executed for refusing to abide by strict Islamic social codes. The turmoil led to a sharp drop in oil production, driving gasoline prices up worldwide. By the spring of 1979, Americans were again waiting in long lines to pay record prices for limited amounts of gas. In October, the Carter administration allowed the deposed shah to receive medical treatment for cancer at an American hospital. This “humanitarian” decision enraged Iranian revolutionaries, millions of whom took to the streets to demand that the United States return the shah to Iran. On November 4, 1979, a frenzied mob stormed the U.S. embassy in Tehran and seized ­sixty-​­six diplomats and staff, including ­fifty-​­two American citizens. Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini endorsed the mob action and demanded the return of the hated shah (along with all his wealth) in exchange for the release of the hostages. Nightly television coverage of the taunting Iranian rebels generated among viewers a near obsession with the fate of the hostages.

 A king’s ransom An Iranian militant holds a group of U.S. embassy staff members hostage in Tehran, Iran, in 1979.

The Rise of Ronald Reagan  1423


 Angry Americans, including many in Congress, demanded a military response to the kidnappings. Carter, however, believed his options were limited; he wanted to keep the hostages alive. He appealed to the United Nations, but Khomeini scoffed at UN efforts. Carter then froze all Iranian financial assets in America and asked Europe to join the United States in a trade embargo of Iran, including its oil. The trade restrictions were only partially effective because America’s allies were not willing to lose access to Iranian oil. As the crisis continued and gasoline prices rose to record levels, Carter authorized a risky rescue attempt by U.S. commandos on April 24, 1980. (His decision caused his secretary of Ayatollah Khomeini Religious figure state, Cyrus Vance, to resign in pro- and leader of the Iranian Revolution who test.) The raid had to be cancelled when overthrew the Iranian monarchy in 1979. three of the eight helicopters developed mechanical problems; it ended with eight U.S. deaths when a helicopter collided with a transport plane in the Iranian desert. For fourteen months, the Iranian hostage crisis paralyzed Carter’s ability to lead the nation. For many, the prolonged standoff became a symbol of his failed presidency. “For the first time in its history,” Business Week magazine’s editors observed, “the United States is no longer growing in power and influence among the nations of the world.” The crisis finally ended after 444 days, on January 20, 1981, when Carter, just hours before leaving office, released several billion dollars of Iranian assets to ransom the hostages.

The Rise of Ronald Reagan
 No sooner had Carter been elected in 1976 than conservative Republicans (the “New Right”) began working to ensure that he would not win a second term. Their plans centered on the popularity of tall, ­square-​­shouldered, ­plain-​­speaking Ronald Reagan, the Hollywood actor, t­wo-​­term California

 1424  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 governor, and prominent political commentator. Reagan was not a deep thinker, but he was a superb reader of the public mood, an outspoken patriot, and a committed champion of conservative principles.

The Actor Turned
President
 Born in the town of Tampico, Illinois, in 1911, the son of an o ­ften-​­drunk, Irish Catholic shoe salesman and a devout, B ­ ible-​­quoting mother who preached a prairie Protestantism centered on individual freedom, Ronald Reagan grew up in a household short of money and frequently on the move. A football scholarship enabled him to Ronald Reagan The “Great attend tiny Eureka College during the Communicator” flashes his charming, Great Depression; he washed dishes trademark smile. in the dining hall to pay for his meals. After graduation, Reagan worked as a radio sportscaster before starting a movie career in Hollywood. He served three years in the army during the Second World War, making training films. At that time, as he recalled, he was a Democrat, “a New Dealer to the core” who voted “blindly” for Franklin D. Roosevelt four times. After the war, Reagan became president of the acting profession’s union, the Screen Actors Guild (SAG), where he honed his negotiating skills and fended off Communist efforts to infiltrate the union. Reagan supported Democrat Harry S. Truman in the 1948 presidential election, but during the fifties he decided that federal taxes were too high. In 1960, he campaigned as a Democrat for Richard Nixon, and two years later he joined the Republican party. Reagan achieved political stardom in 1964 when he delivered a rousing speech on national television on behalf of Barry Goldwater’s presidential candidacy. Wealthy admirers convinced him to run for governor of California in 1966, and he won by a landslide. As the Republican presidential nominee in 1980, Reagan set about drawing a vivid contrast between his optimistic vision of America’s future and Jimmy Carter’s bleak outlook. Reagan insisted that there was “nothing wrong with the American people” and that there were “simple answers” to the complex

The Rise of Ronald Reagan  1425


 problems facing the country, although they were not easy answers. He pledged to slash s­ ocial-​­welfare programs, increase military spending to “win” the cold war, dismantle the “bloated” federal bureaucracy, restore states’ rights, reduce taxes and government regulation of businesses (“get the government off our backs and release the energies of free enterprise”), and appoint conservative judges to the federal courts. He also promised to affirm ­old-​­time religious values by banning abortions and reinstituting prayer in public schools. (He ended up achieving neither.) Reagan’s popularity resulted in part from his skill as a speaker (journalists dubbed him the “Great Communicator”) and his steadfast commitment to a few basic principles and simple themes. Blessed with a reassuring baritone voice and a wealth of entertaining stories, he charmed audiences while rejecting Carter’s assumption that Americans needed “to start getting along with less, to accept a decline in our standard of living.” He instead promised boundless economic expansion.

The Rise of the “New Right”
 By 1980, social developments had made Ronald Reagan’s a­ nti-​­liberal stance a major asset. An increase in the number of senior citizens, a group that tends to be more politically and socially conservative, and the steady migration of ­people—​­especially older ­Americans—​­to the conservative sunbelt states were shifting the political balance of power. Fully 90 percent of the nation’s population growth during the eighties occurred in southern or western sunbelt states, while the Northeast and industrial states of the ­Midwest—​­Ohio, Michigan, and Illinois (called the “rust belt”)—experienced economic decline and population losses. A related development was a growing grassroots tax revolt. As consumer prices and home values rose, so did property taxes. In California, Reagan’s home state, skyrocketing property taxes threatened to force many ­working-​ ­class people from their homes. This led to efforts to cut back on the size and cost of government to enable reductions in property taxes. In June 1978, tax rebels, with Reagan’s support, succeeded in putting an initiative known as Proposition 13 on the state ballot. An overwhelming majority of voters approved the measure, which slashed property taxes by 57 percent and amended the state constitution to make it more difficult to raise taxes. The “Prop 13” tax revolt soon spread across the nation, leading the New York Times to call it a “modern Boston Tea Party.”

 the religious right

 The California tax revolt fed into a national conservative resurgence led by the “religious Right.” Religious conservatives

 1426  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 pushing a f­ aith-​­based political agenda formed the strongest grassroots movement of the late twentieth century. By the eighties, Catholic conservatives and Protestant evangelicals owned television and radio stations, operated their own schools and universities, and organized “mega churches” from which such “televangelists” as the Reverend Jerry Falwell launched a cultural crusade against the “demonic” forces of liberalism at home and communism abroad. In 1979, Falwell formed a group he called the Moral Majority (later renamed the Liberty Alliance) to campaign for the major political and social goals of the religious Right: the economy should operate without “interference” by the government, which should be reduced in size; the Supreme Court decision in Roe v. Wade (1973) legalizing abortion should be reversed; Darwinian evolution should be replaced in school textbooks by the biblical story of creation; prayer should return to public schools; women should submit to their husbands; and, communism should be opposed as a form of pagan totalitarianism. That Ronald Reagan became the hero of the religious Right was a tribute to his political skills, for he rarely attended church and had no strong religious affiliations. President Carter, though famous as a b ­ orn-​­again Baptist Sunday School teacher, lost the support of religious conservatives because he was not

 Look on the Right side The rise of the religious right saw protests against Supreme Court rulings that reinforced the separation of church and state. Here, in a 1984 rally organized by the Moral Majority, students chant “Kids want to pray!” in support of an amendment to reinstate prayer in public schools. (The effort failed.)

The Rise of Ronald Reagan  1427


 willing to ban abortions or restore prayers in public schools. His push for state ratification of the e­ qual-​­rights constitutional amendment (ERA) also cost him the support of ­anti-​­feminist conservatives.

 anti-​­feminist backlash

 By the late seventies, a ­well-​­organized and w ­ ell-​­financed backlash against the feminist movement reinforced the rise of the “New Right.” Activists like Republican Phyllis Schlafly, a conservative Catholic attorney from Illinois, campaigned successfully to keep the ERA from being ratified by the required ­thirty-​­eight states. Schlafly’s STOP (Stop Taking Our Privileges) ERA organization warned that the ERA would allow husbands to abandon their wives, force women into military service, and give gay “perverts” the right to marry. She and others stressed that the gender equality promised by the proposed amendment violated biblical teachings about women’s “­God-​­given” roles as nurturers and helpmates. By the late seventies, the effort to gain ratification of the ERA had failed, largely because no states in the conservative South and West had ratified it. Many of Schlafly’s supporters also participated in the growing ­ anti-​ ­abortion, or “­pro-​­life,” movement. The National Right to Life Committee, supported by the National Conference of Catholic Bishops, denounced abortion as murder, and the emotional intensity of the issue made it a powerful political force. Reagan highlighted his support for traditional “family values,” gender roles, and the “rights” of the unborn, which helped persuade many northern D ­ emocrats—​­mostly w ­ orking-​­class ­Catholics—​­to support him.

 financing conservatism

 The business community as well had become a source of revitalized conservative activism. In 1972, the leaders of the nation’s largest corporations formed the Business Roundtable to promote their interests in Congress. Within a few years, many of them had created political action committees (PACs) to distribute money to p ­ ro-​­business political candidates. Corporate donations also helped fund conservative “think tanks,” such as the American Enterprise Institute, the Cato Institute, and the Heritage Foundation. By 1980, the conservative insurgency had become a powerful political force with substantial financial resources, carefully crafted ideas, and grassroots energy.

 the election of 1980

 Ronald Reagan’s supporters during the 1980 campaign loved his simple solutions, upbeat personality, and folksy humor, and they responded passionately to his recurring question: “Are you better off than you were four years ago?” Their answer was a resounding “No!” On Election Day, Reagan swept to a lopsided victory, with 489 electoral votes to 49

 1428  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 for Jimmy Carter, who carried only six states. (It was the second worst defeat of an incumbent president in the twentieth century behind William Howard Taft in 1912). The popular vote was 44 million (51 percent) for Reagan to Carter’s 35 million (41 percent), with 7 percent going to John Anderson, a moderate Republican who ran as an independent. Reagan’s resounding victory signaled a major realignment of voters in which many ­so-​­called Reagan ­Democrats—​ ­conservative white southern Protestants and ­blue-​­collar northern ­Catholics—​ ­crossed over to the Republican party. The Reagan era had begun.

The Reagan Revolution
 Democrats who dismissed s­ ixty-​­nine-​­year-​­old Ronald Reagan, the oldest man to assume the presidency, as a ­third-​­rate actor and mental lightweight underrated his many virtues. Few people in public life had Reagan’s stage ­presence—​ ­or confidence. He may have been a mediocre actor, but no one played the part of president better. His remarkable ability to make Americans believe again in the greatness of their country won him two presidential elections, in 1980 and 1984, and ensured the victory of his anointed successor, Vice President George H. W. Bush, in 1988. Just how revolutionary the “Reagan era” was remains a subject of debate, but it cannot be denied that Reagan’s actions and beliefs set the tone for the decade’s political and economic life.

 Reagan’s First Term “Fellow conservatives,” President Reagan said in a speech in 1981, “our moment has arrived.” He and others were determined to “get America moving again.” In his inaugural address, he promised to help Americans “renew our faith and hope” in their nation as a “shining city on a hill” for the rest of the world to emulate. Reagan helped restore the prestige of the presidency through the force of his personality and the appeal of his ideas and ideals. He succeeded for three main reasons. First, he focused on a few priorities (slowing the rate of inflation, lowering tax rates, reducing the scope of the federal government, increasing military spending, and conducting an ­anti-​­Soviet foreign policy), and he pursued those goals with what an aide called a “warmly ruthless” intensity. Second, Reagan, unlike Carter, was skilled at negotiating with congressional leaders and foreign heads of states. He also recognized that politics is a profession built on compromises. Because the Democrats controlled Congress, Reagan was forced to convince the public to pressure their legislators to support his initiatives. As a former union leader, Reagan was a masterful

The Reagan Revolution  1429


THE ELECTION OF 1980 WA OR

 CA

MT ID

 NV

 ND

WY UT

 AZ

 CO

 SD

KS OK

 NM

 WI

 MI

 NY

 IA

 NE

TX HI

 MN

 NH 4 VT 3

PA OH IL IN 25 WV VA 26 13 MO 6 12 KY 9 NC TN 10 AR SC MS AL GA LA FL

ME MA 14 RI 4 CT 8 NJ 17 DE 3 MD 10 DC 3

Electoral Vote Popular Vote
 AK

■
■


Ronald Reagan
(Republican)




44,000,000


Jimmy Carter
(Democrat)




35,000,000


 Why WWN64 was Ronald Reagan such an appealing candidate in 1980? M31_1 WhatFigure factors contributed to Reagan’s overwhelming victory? First proof

 negotiator with Congress, willing to modify his positions while sustaining his overarching goals, accepting a partial success and then going back again and again for the rest of what he wanted. Third, Reagan’s infectious optimism gave people a sense of renewed confidence. Voters wanted to believe his insistent claim that America could do no wrong. An uncommon politician, he avoided both the arrogance and s­ elf-​ ­importance that often accompany the highest office. Public affection for Reagan spiked just two months into his presidency when an assassination attempt left him with a punctured lung and a bullet lodged near his heart. The witty Reagan told doctors as they prepared for surgery: “Please tell me you’re Republicans.” His gritty response to his injuries created an outpouring of support that gave added momentum to his presidency. The Democratic Speaker of the House, Tip O’Neill, told colleagues that Reagan “has become a hero. We can’t argue with a man as popular as he is.”

 1430  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 Reagan inherited an economy in shambles: the annual rate of inflation had reached 13 percent, and unemployment hovered at 7.5 percent. None of this fazed him, however. His philosophy was simple: “Government is not the solution to our problem. Government is the problem.” At the same time, the cold war was heating up again. The Soviet Union had just invaded Afghanistan and had placed missiles with nuclear weapons in the nations of central and Eastern Europe under its control, which threatened all of Europe. But Reagan refused to be intimidated. He discarded the earlier policies of containment and détente in favor of a confrontational posture against the Soviet Union which he summarized as “We win, you lose.” He convinced Congress to support a huge increase in the military budget, deployed U.S. missiles in Europe, and sought to root out Communist insurgencies in Central America.

 reaganomics

 On August 1, 1981, President Reagan signed the Economic Recovery Tax Act (ERTA), which cut personal income taxes by 25 percent, lowered the maximum rate from 70 to 50 percent for 1982, and offered a broad array of tax concessions. The bill was the centerpiece of what Reagan called his “common sense” economic plan. While theorists called the philosophy behind the plan “­supply-​­side economics,” journalists dubbed the president’s proposals Reaganomics. Simply put, Reaganomics argued that the stagflation of the seventies had resulted from excessive corporate and personal income taxes, which weakened incentives for individuals and businesses to increase productivity, save money, and reinvest in economic expansion. The Reaganomics solution was to slash tax rates, especially on the wealthy, in the belief that they would spend their tax savings on business expansion and consumer goods (the “supply side” of the economy). Such spending, advocates believed, would provide “trickle down” benefits to the masses. By generating economic growth, Reaganomics promised to produce enough new tax revenues from rising corporate profits and personal incomes to pay for the tax cuts. In the short term, however, ERTA did not work as planned. The federal budget deficit grew, and by November 1981, the economy was officially in recession.

 managing the budget

 To offset the loss of government tax revenues, David Stockman, President Reagan’s budget director, proposed sharp reductions in federal spending, including Social Security and Medicare, the two most ­expensive—​­and most ­popular—​­federal programs. Liberal Democrats howled at Stockman’s proposal, and Reagan responded that he was committed to maintaining the “safety net” of government services for the “truly

The Reagan Revolution  1431


 A miss for Reaganomics A throng of more than 5,000 senior citizens staged a demonstration in downtown Detroit against Reagan’s decision to make cuts in Social Security and other federal programs supporting the elderly in 1982.

 needy.” According to Stockman, Reagan was “too kind, gentle, and sentimental” to make the drastic cuts needed to balance the budget. The Reagan administration also continued huge federal subsidies to corporations and ­agribusinesses—​­what critics called “welfare for the rich.” In the end, Reagan never dismantled the major New Deal programs that he had savagely criticized. Conservative political columnist George Will explained Reagan’s failure to make substantial cuts in federal spending by noting that “Americans are conservative. What they want to conserve is the New Deal.” Within a year, Stockman realized that the cuts in domestic spending approved by Reagan had fallen far short of what would be needed to balance the budget in four years, as the president had promised. Massive increases in military spending greatly complicated the situation. In essence, Reagan gave the Defense Department a blank check. Over the next five years, the administration would spend some $1.2 trillion on military expenses. Something had to give. In the summer of 1981, Stockman warned that “we’re heading for a crash landing on the budget. We’re facing potential deficit numbers so big that they could wreck the president’s entire economic program.” The ­fast-​­growing ­federal deficit, which had helped trigger the worst economic recession since

 1432  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 the 1930s, was Reagan’s greatest failure, as he himself admitted. During 1982, an estimated 10 million Americans were unable to find jobs. Stockman and other aides finally convinced the president that the government needed “revenue enhancements” (tax increases). With Reagan’s support, Congress passed a tax bill in 1982 that would raise almost $100 billion, but the economic slump persisted for a time. In the 1982 congressional midterm elections, Democrats picked up ­twenty-​­six seats in the House of Representatives. But Reagan’s determination to “stay the course” with his economic program began to pay off. By the summer of 1983, a major economic recovery was under way, in part because of increased government spending and lower interest rates and in part because of lower tax rates. Inflation subsided, as did unemployment. Reaganomics was not helping to balance the budget, however. In fact, the federal deficits had grown l­arger—​­so much so that the president had in fact run up an accumulated debt larger than that of all his predecessors combined. Reagan was willing to tolerate the deficits in part because he believed that they would force more responsible spending behavior in Congress, and in part because he was so committed to increased military spending as a way to intimidate the Soviets.

 reagan’s a ­ nti-​­liberalism

 During Reagan’s presidency, organized labor suffered severe setbacks, even though Reagan himself had been a union leader. In 1981, he fired members of the Professional Air Traffic ­Controllers Organization who had participated in an illegal strike intended to shut down air travel (air traffic controllers were deemed essential to public safety and therefore were prohibited from ­ ­ striking). Reagan’s actions broke the political power of the American Federation of ­ Labor–​ ­Congress of Industrial Organizations (­AFL-​­CIO), the national confederation of labor unions that traditionally supported Democratic candidates. His criticism of unions reflected a general trend in public opinion. Although record ­numbers of jobs were created Sandra Day O’Connor Her Supreme during the eighties, union memberCourt confirmation hearing in ship steadily dropped. By 1987, unions September 1981 was picketed by represented only 17 percent of the ­ conservatives who decried her p ­ ro-​ nation’s ­­full-​­time workers, down from ­abortion stance. 24 percent in 1979.

The Reagan Revolution  1433


 Reagan also went on the offensive against feminism. He opposed the Equal Rights Amendment, legal abortion, and proposals to require equal pay for jobs of comparable worth. He did name Sandra Day O’Connor as the first woman Supreme Court justice, but critics labeled it a token gesture. In addition, he cut funds for civil rights enforcement and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and he opposed renewal of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 before being overruled by Congress.

 the election of 1984

 By 1983, prosperity had returned, the stock market was soaring, and President Reagan’s “­supply-​­side” economic program was at last working as ­advertised—​­except for the growing budget deficit. Like the l­iberal presidents he often criticized, Reagan was a big spender, especially when it came to military growth. At the same time, his decision to remove price controls on oil and natural gas and his efforts to pressure Saudi Arabia to increase oil production produced a decline in energy prices that helped to stimulate economic growth. By 1984, reporters had begun to speak of the “Reagan Revolution.” The slogan at the Republican National Convention was “America is back and standing tall.” The Democrats’ presidential nominee, Walter Mondale (Jimmy Carter’s vice president), struggled to present a competing vision. Endorsed by the ­AFL-​ ­CIO, the National Organization for Women (NOW), and many prominent African Americans, Mondale was viewed as the candidate of liberal ­special-​ ­interest groups. He set a precedent by choosing as his running mate Geraldine Ferraro, a New York congresswoman, who was quickly placed on the defensive by the need to explain her husband’s complicated business dealings. A bit of frankness in Mondale’s acceptance speech ended up hurting his campaign. “Mr. Reagan will raise taxes, and so will I,” he told the convention. “He won’t tell you. I just did.” Reagan responded by vowing never to approve a tax increase (a promise he could not keep) and by chiding Mondale for his stance. Reagan also repeated a theme he had used against Carter: the future, according to Mondale and the Democrats, was “dark and getting darker.” Reagan’s vision of America’s future, however, was bright. As his campaign ads claimed, “It’s morning again in America,” and record numbers of Americans were headed to work. In the end, Reagan took 59 percent of the popular vote and lost only Minnesota (Mondale’s home state) and the District of Columbia.

 Reagan’s Second Term Spurred by his overwhelming victory, Ronald Reagan called for “a Second American Revolution of hope and opportunity.” He dared Democrats to raise taxes; his veto pen was ready. “Go ahead and make my day,” he said, echoing a

 1434  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 popular line from a Clint Eastwood movie. Through much of 1985, the president drummed up support for a ­tax-​­simplification plan. After vigorous debate, Congress passed a comprehensive Tax Reform Act in 1986. The measure cut the number of federal tax brackets from fourteen to two and reduced rates from the maximum of 50 percent to 15 and 28 ­percent—​­the lowest since Calvin Coolidge was president in the twenties.

 reagan’s ­half-​­hearted revolution

Although Ronald
 Reagan had promised to “curb the size and influence of the federal establishment,” the number of federal employees actually grew during his two terms as president. Neither the Social Security system nor Medicare, the two largest federal social programs, were overhauled, and the federal agencies that Reagan had threatened to abolish, such as the Department of Education, not only survived but saw their budgets grow. The federal deficit almost tripled during Reagan’s two terms. He blamed Congress for the problem, “since only Congress can spend money,” but in fact the legislators essentially approved the budgets that Reagan submitted to them (and he never submitted a balanced budget). As Dick Cheney, a future Republican vice president, quipped, “Reagan showed that deficits don’t matter.” The cost of Social Security, the most expensive “entitlement” program, grew by 27 percent under Reagan, as some 6,000 Americans each day turned 65. Moreover, Reagan failed to fulfill his campaign promises to the religious Right, such as reinstituting daily prayer in public schools and a ban on abortions. But he did follow through on his pledge to reshape the federal court system. He appointed 368 mostly conservative judges, three of them to the U.S. Supreme Court: Sandra Day O’Connor, Antonin Scalia, and Anthony Kennedy. Martin Anderson, Reagan’s domestic policy adviser, stressed that it was “a mistake to think that there ever was a Reagan Revolution, or that Reagan gave it life.” It was the grassroots conservative revolution that “caused R ­ eagan—​ ­and the same forces will continue to the end of the century.” What Reagan did accomplish was to end the prolonged period of “stagflation” and set in motion what economists called “The Great Expansion,” an unprecedented, ­twenty-​­year burst of productivity and prosperity. True, Reagan’s presidency left the nation with a massive debt burden that would eventually cause major problems, but the “Great Communicator” also renewed the nation’s strength, ­self-​­confidence, and soaring sense of possibilities. Ronald Reagan was a transformational president. While restoring the stature of the presidency and reviving the economy, he transformed political life by accelerating the nation’s shift toward conservatism and by revitalizing the Republican party. He put the Democrats on the defensive and forced conven-

An A
 ­ nti-­Soviet Foreign Policy  1435

 tional New Deal “liberalism” into a panicked retreat. For the next twenty years or so, Reagan’s ­anti-​­government, ­anti-​­tax conservative agenda would dominate the national political landscape.

 An ­A nti-​­S oviet Foreign Policy On a flight to Detroit, Michigan, to accept the Republican party’s presidential nomination in the summer of 1980, Ronald Reagan was asked why he wanted to be president. He answered: “To end the Cold War.” As president, Reagan systematically promoted what he called his “peace through strength” strategy. Through a series of bold steps, he would build up U.S. military strength to the point it would overwhelm the Soviet Union, both financially and militarily. Reagan also launched a “war of ideas” by charging that the Soviet Union was “the focus of evil in the modern world.” What came to be called the Reagan Doctrine pledged to combat Soviet adventurism throughout the world, even if it meant partnering with brutal dictatorships. Reagan believed that aggressive ­CIA-​­led efforts to stymie Soviet expansionism would eventually cause the unstable Soviet system to implode “on the ash heap of history.”

 a massive defense buildup

 Reagan’s conduct of foreign policy reflected his belief that trouble in the world stemmed mainly from Moscow, the capital of what he called the “evil empire.” Reagan had long believed that Nixon and ­Ford—​­following the advice of Henry K ­ issinger—​­had been too soft on the Soviets. Kissinger’s emphasis on détente, he said, had been a “­one-​­way street” favoring the Soviets. Reagan first wanted to reduce the risk of nuclear war by convincing the Soviets that they could not win such a conflict. To do so, he and Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger embarked upon a major buildup of nuclear and conventional weapons. Under Reagan, defense spending came to represent a fourth of all federal government expenditures. Reagan claimed that the defense allocations had another purpose: to bankrupt the Soviets by forcing them to spend much more on their own military budgets. To critics who complained about the defense spending, Reagan replied, “It will break the Soviets first.” It did.

 “star wars”

 On March 23, 1983, just two weeks after denouncing the Soviet Union as “the focus of evil in the modern world,” Reagan escalated the nuclear arms race when he announced in a televised address that he was authorizing the Defense Department to develop the controversial Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI). It featured a complex a­ nti-​­missile defense system that would

 1436  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 Strategic Defense Initiative President Reagan addresses the nation on March 23, 1983, promoting the development of a ­space-​­age shield to intercept Soviet missiles.

 make nuclear weapons “impotent and obsolete.” He described a defensive shield provided by satellites equipped with laser weapons in outer space that would “intercept and destroy” all Soviet missiles in flight before they could harm the United States. The expensive program was controversial from the start because it relied upon untested technology and violated a 1972 ­U.​­S.–​­Soviet treaty banning such ­anti-​­missile defensive systems. Despite skepticism among the media, scientists, and even government officials that such a defense system (dubbed “Star Wars” by the media) could be built, Congress approved the first stage of funding, eventually allocating $30 billion to the fanciful program. In the end, SDI was never implemented, but it did fulfil Reagan’s pledge to change “the course of history” because it forced the Soviets to launch an expensive research and development effort of their own, which helped bankrupt their economy.

 confronting the evil empire

 Reagan also borrowed the rhetoric of Harry S. Truman, John Foster Dulles, and John F. Kennedy to express resolve in the face of “Communist aggression anywhere in the world.” When the Polish government declared martial law during the winter of 1981, Reagan forcefully protested and imposed economic sanctions against Poland’s Communist government. He also worked behind the scenes to support the Polish protest movement, Solidarity, which sought independence from Soviet control.

An A
 ­ nti-­Soviet Foreign Policy  1437

 the americas

 President Reagan’s foremost international concern, however, was Central America, where he detected the most serious Communist threat. The tiny nation of El Salvador, caught up since 1980 in a brutal struggle between ­Communist-​­supported revolutionaries and ­right-​­wing militants, received U.S. economic and military assistance. Critics argued that U.S. involvement ensured that the revolutionary forces would gain favor by capitalizing on “­anti-​­Yankee” sentiment. Reagan’s supporters countered that a victory by the revolutionaries would lead all of Central America into the Communist camp (a new “domino” theory). By 1984, the U.S.-backed government of President José Napoleón Duarte had brought some stability to El Salvador. More troubling to Reagan was the situation in Nicaragua. The State Department claimed that the C ­ ­uban-​­ sponsored Sandinista socialist ­government, which had seized power in 1979, was sending arms to leftist Salvadoran rebels. In response, the Reagan administration ordered the CIA to train ­anti-​­Communist Nicaraguans, or Contras (short for contrarevolucionarios, or counterrevolutionaries), who staged attacks on Sandinista bases from sanctuaries in Honduras. In supporting these “freedom fighters,” Reagan sought not only to impede the traffic in arms to Salvadoran rebels but also to replace the Sandinistas with a democratic government. Critics accused the Contras of being mostly r­ ight-​­wing fanatics who killed indiscriminately. They also feared that the United States might eventually commit its own combat forces, leading to a V ­ ietnam-​­like intervention. Reagan warned that if the Communists prevailed in Central America, “our credibility would collapse, our alliances would crumble, and the safety of our homeland would be jeopardized.”

 the middle east

 The Middle East remained a tinderbox of conflict during the 1980s. No peaceable end seemed possible in the prolonged bloody ­Iran-​­Iraq War, entangled as it was with the passions of Islamic fundamentalism. In 1984 both sides began to attack tankers in the Persian Gulf, a major source of the world’s oil. (The main international response was the sale of arms to both sides.) Nor was any settlement in sight in Afghanistan, where the Soviet occupation forces had bogged down as badly as the Americans had in Vietnam. American administrations continued to see Israel as the strongest and most reliable ally in the volatile region, all the while seeking to encourage moderate Arab groups. But the forces of moderation were dealt a blow during the ­mid-​ ­1970s when Lebanon, long an enclave of peace despite its ethnic complexity, collapsed into an anarchy of warring groups. The capital, Beirut, became a battleground for Sunni and Shiite Muslims, the Druze, the Palestine Liberation

 1438  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 Organization (PLO), Arab Christians, Syrian invaders cast as peacekeepers, and Israelis responding to PLO attacks across the border. In 1982, Israeli forces pushed the PLO from southern Lebanon all the way north to Beirut and then began shelling PLO strongholds in Beirut. The United States sent a special ambassador to negotiate a settlement. Israeli troops moved into Beirut and looked the other way when Christian ­militiamen slaughtered Muslim women and children in Palestinian refugee camps. French, Italian, and U.S. forces then moved into Lebanon as “peacekeepers,” but in such small numbers as to become targets themselves. Angry Muslims kept them constantly harassed. American warships and planes responded by shelling and bombing Muslim positions in the highlands behind Beirut, thereby increasing Muslim resentment. By 1983, Israel had driven the PLO from Beirut, but it made the capital city even more unstable. In April 1983, Islamic suicide bombers drove a truck laden with explosives into the U.S. embassy compound in Beirut, detonated it, and killed forty people, including seventeen Americans. On October 23, 1983, an Islamic suicide bomber attacked the U.S. Marine headquarters at the Beirut airport; the explosion left 241 Americans and 58 Frenchmen dead. In early 1984, Reagan announced that the U.S. Marines remaining in Lebanon would be “redeployed” to warships offshore. The Israeli forces pulled back to southern Lebanon, while the Syrians remained in eastern Lebanon. Bloody anarchy remained a way of life in a formerly peaceful country.

 grenada

 Fortune, as it happened, presented Reagan the chance for an easy triumph closer to home, a “rescue mission” that eclipsed news of the debacle in Lebanon. On the tiny Caribbean island of Grenada, the smallest independent country in the Western Hemisphere, a leftist government had admitted Cuban workers to build a new airfield and signed military agreements with Communist countries. In 1983 an even more radical military council seized power. Appeals from the governments of neighboring islands led Reagan to order 1,900 marines to invade the island, depose the new government, and evacuate a small group of American students at Grenada’s medical school. The UN General Assembly condemned the action, but it was popular among Grenadans and their neighbors and immensely popular in the United States. Although a lopsided affair, the decisive action served as notice to Latin American revolutionaries that Reagan might use military force elsewhere in the region.

 the ­iran-​­contra affair

 During the fall of 1986, Democrats regained control of the Senate with a 55 to 45 majority. They also picked up 6 seats in the House to increase their already comfortable margin to 259 to 176.

An A
 ­ nti-­Soviet Foreign Policy  1439

 These results were less a referendum on Reagan than they were a response to the qualities of the particular candidates and particular local and state issues. Whatever the reason, the 1986 elections meant that Reagan would face an oppositional Congress during the last two years of his presidency. What boded worse, reports surfaced in late 1986 that the United States had been secretly selling arms to U.S.-hating Iran (which Reagan had called an “outlaw state”) in the hope of securing the release of American hostages held in Lebanon by extremist groups sympathetic to Iran. Such action contradicted Reagan’s insistence that his administration would never negotiate with terrorists. The disclosures angered America’s allies as well as many Americans who vividly remembered the 1979 Iranian takeover of the embassy in Tehran. Over the next several months, revelations emerged of a complicated series of covert activities carried out by administration officials. At the center of what came to be called the I­ ran-​­Contra affair was marine lieutenant colonel Oliver North, a National Security Council aide who specialized in counterterrorism. Working from the basement of the White House, North had been secretly selling military supplies to Iran and using the proceeds to support the Contra rebels in Nicaragua at a time when Congress had voted to ban such aid. North’s illegal activities, it turned out, had been approved by national security adviser Robert McFarlane; McFarlane’s successor, Admiral John Poindexter; and CIA director William Casey. Both Secretary of State George Shultz and Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger criticized the arms sales to Iran, but their objections were ignored, and they were thereafter kept in the dark about what was going o ­ n—​­as was Reagan. After information about the secret dealings surfaced, North and others erased incriminating computer files and destroyed documents. McFarlane attempted suicide before being convicted of withholding information from Congress; Poindexter resigned; North, described by the White House as a “loose cannon,” was fired. Casey, who denied any connection to the clumsy operation, left the CIA and died shortly thereafter from a brain tumor. Facing a barrage of criticism, Reagan appointed a ­three-​­member commission, led by former Republican senator John Tower, to investigate the ­Iran-​­Contra hearings Admiral John scandal. The Tower Commission issued Poindexter listens warily to a question from the Congressional investigation a devastating report early in 1987 that committee on July 21, 1987. placed much of the responsibility for

 1440  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 The ­Iran-​­Contra ­cover-​­up In Paul Szep’s 1987 cartoon, political figures including President Ronald Reagan, Robert McFarlane, lieutenant colonel Oliver North, and Iran’s Ayatollah Khomeini attempt to deflect blame for the I­ ran-​­Contra Affair.

 the ­Iran-​­Contra affair on Reagan’s loose management style. When asked if he had known of Colonel North’s illegal actions, the president simply replied: “I don’t remember.” He was stunned that “for the first time in my life, people didn’t believe me.” During the spring and summer of 1987, a joint ­House-​­Senate committee began holding hearings into the I­ ran-​­Contra affair. In his own testimony, Oliver North claimed that he thought “he had received authority from the President.” The investigations led to six indictments in 1988. North was found guilty of three relatively minor charges but innocent of nine more serious counts, apparently reflecting the jury’s reasoning that he acted as an agent of ­higher-​ ­ups. His conviction was later overturned on appeal. Of those involved, only John Poindexter received a jail s­entence—​­six months for obstructing justice and lying to Congress.

 a historic treaty

 The most positive achievement at the end of Reagan’s second term was a surprising a­ rms-​­reduction agreement with the

An A
 ­ nti-­Soviet Foreign Policy  1441

 Soviet government. Under the charming Mikhail Gorbachev, who came to power in 1985, the Soviets pursued three dramatic initiatives. They renewed the policy of détente, encouraging a reduction of tensions with the United States, so that they could reduce military spending and focus on more pressing problems, especially a notoriously inefficient economy and a losing war in Afghanistan. Gorbachev also instituted what he called perestroika (restructuring), an ambitious effort to streamline the clunky Soviet government bureaucracy and make it more efficient. And, third, Gorbachev encouraged glasnost (openness), a radical reappraisal of the Soviet system that allowed for open debate and shared information. In the end, however, the modernization forces that Gorbachev helped unleash would end up dismantling the Soviet Union itself.

 the reykjavik summit

In October 1986, Reagan and Gorbachev
 met for the first time in Reykjavik, Iceland, to discuss ways to reduce the threat of nuclear war. At one point during a private ­one-​­on-​­one meeting, Reagan shocked Gorbachev and the Soviets by saying, “It would be fine with me if we eliminated all nuclear weapons.” Equally shocking was Gorbachev’s reply: “We can do that.” By the end of the meeting, however, the two sides were still far apart, and Gorbachev privately called Reagan a “feebleminded cave man.” The main sticking point was Reagan’s refusal to call off the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI, or “Star Wars”). Reagan’s arms control director, Kenneth Adelman, privately admitted that SDI was unworkable, “little more than pie in the colorful sky of Ronald Reagan’s imagination.” But it became a dazzling bluff in the standoff with the Soviet Union.

 the inf treaty

 The logjam in the disarmament negotiations suddenly broke in 1987, when Gorbachev announced that he was willing to consider mutual reductions in nuclear weaponry. A member of the

 Mikhail Gorbachev Deputy chairman, and later president, of the Soviet Union in 1988.

 1442  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 Soviet negotiating team acknowledged Reagan’s role in the breakthrough. The U.S. president, he explained, “takes you by the arm, walks you to the cliff ’s edge, and invites you to step forward for the good of humanity.” After nine months of strenuous negotiations, Reagan and Gorbachev met amid much fanfare in Washington, D.C., on December 9, 1987, and signed the ­Intermediate-​­Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, an agreement to eliminate ­intermediate-​­range (300- to 3,000-mile) missiles. The treaty marked the first time that the two nations had agreed to destroy a whole class of weapons systems and produced the most sweeping cuts in nuclear weaponry in history. Gorbachev’s successful efforts to liberalize Soviet domestic life and improve ­East–​­West relations cheered Americans. In the Middle East, the Soviets urged the Palestine Liberation Organization, founded in 1964 to represent the Palestinian people, to recognize Israel’s right to exist and advocated a greater role for the United Nations in the volatile Persian Gulf. Perhaps the most dramatic symbol of the thawing cold war was the phased withdrawal of 115,000 Soviet troops from Afghanistan, which began in 1988.

 reagan’s global legacy

 Ronald Reagan achieved the unthinkable by helping to end the cold war. Although his massive defense buildup almost bankrupted the United States, it forced the Soviet Union to the bargaining table. By negotiating the nuclear disarmament treaty and lighting the fuse of democratic freedom in ­Soviet-​­controlled East Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Czechoslovakia, Reagan set in motion events that would cause the collapse of the Soviet Union. In June 1987, Reagan visited the Berlin Wall in East Germany and, in a dramatic speech, called upon the Soviet Union to allow greater freedom within the countries under its control. “General Secretary Gorbachev, if you seek peace, if you seek prosperity for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, if you seek liberalization: Come here to this gate! Mr. Gorbachev, open this gate! Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall!” It was great theater and good politics.

The Changing Economic
 and ­S ocial Landscape During the eighties, the U.S. economy went through a wrenching transformation in adapting to an increasingly interconnected global marketplace. The nations that had been devastated by the Second World ­War—​­France, Germany, the Soviet Union, Japan, and C ­ hina—​­had now developed formidable economies with higher levels of productivity than the United States. More and

The Changing Economic and ­Social Landscape  1443


 more American companies shifted their production overseas, accelerating the transition of the economy from its ­once-​­dominant industrial base to a more ­services-​­oriented approach. Driving all of these changes were the impact of the computer revolution and the development of the Internet.

 the computer revolution

 The idea of a programmable machine that would rapidly perform mental tasks had been around since the eighteenth century, but it took the Second World War to marshal the intellectual and financial resources needed to create such a “computer.” In 1946, a team of engineers at the University of Pennsylvania developed ENIAC (electronic numerical integrator and computer), the first ­all-​­purpose, ­all-​­electronic digital computer. It was so primitive that it required 18,000 vacuum tubes to operate. The following year, researchers at Bell Telephone Laboratories invented the transistor, which replaced the bulky vacuum tubes and enabled much smaller, yet more powerful, ­computers—​­as well as new devices such as hearing aids and transistor radios. The next major breakthrough was the invention in 1971 of the ­microprocessor—​­virtually a tiny computer on a silicon chip. Functions once performed by huge computers that filled entire rooms could now be performed by a microchip the size of a postage stamp. The microchip made possible the

 “Introducing Macintosh. For the rest of us.” Personal computers are introduced to the masses in this 1980s Apple advertisement.

 1444  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 personal computer. In 1975, an engineer named Ed Roberts developed the Altair 8800, the prototype of the personal computer. Its potential excited a Harvard University sophomore named Bill Gates, who improved the software of the Altair 8800, dropped out of college, and formed a company called Microsoft. During the 1980s, IBM (International Business Machines), using a microprocessor made by the Intel Corporation and an operating system provided by Microsoft, had helped transform the personal computer into a mass consumer product. In 1963, a h ­ alf-​­million computer chips were sold worldwide; by 1970, the number was 300 million. Computer chips transformed a variety of electronic products—televisions, calculators, wristwatches, clocks, ovens, and automobiles—while also facilitating American efforts to land astronauts on the moon and launch satellites in space. The development of the Internet, electronic mail (­e-​­mail), and ­cell-​­phone technology during the eighties and nineties allowed for instantaneous communication, thereby accelerating the globalization of the economy and dramatically increasing productivity in the workplace.

 debt and the stock market plunge

 In the late seventies, Jimmy Carter had urged Americans to lead simpler lives, cut back on conspicuous consumption, reduce energy use, and invest more time in faith and family. During the eighties, Ronald Reagan promoted very different behavior: he reduced tax rates so people would have more money to spend. Americans preferred Reagan’s emphasis on prosperity rather than Carter’s focus on propriety, for it endorsed entrepreneurship as well as an increasingly ­consumption-​ ­oriented and hedonistic leisure culture. But Reagan succeeded too well in shifting the public mood back to the “more is more,” “bigger is better” tradition of heedless consumerism. During the “age of Reagan,” marketers and advertisers celebrated instant gratification at the expense of the future. Michelob beer commercials began assuring Americans that “you can have it all,” and many consumers went on a s­ elf-​­indulgent spending spree. The more they bought the more they wanted. In 1984, Hollywood producers launched a new TV show called Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous that exemplified the decade’s runaway materialism. As the stock market soared, the number of ­multi-​­millionaires working on Wall Street and in the financial industry nationwide mushroomed. The money fever was contagious. Compulsive shoppers donned ­T-​­shirts proclaiming: “Born to Shop.” By 1988, 110 million Americans had an average of seven credit cards each. ­Money—​­lots of i­t—​­came to define the American Dream. In the hit movie Wall Street (1987), the h ­ igh-​­flying land developer and corporate raider G ­ ordon Gekko, played by actor Michael Douglas, announced that “greed . . . ​is good. Greed is right.” During the eighties, many Americans caught up in the materi-

The Changing Economic and ­Social Landscape  1445


 alism of the times began spending more money than they earned. All kinds of d ­ ebt—​­personal, corporate, and g­ overnment—​­increased dramatically. Americans in the sixties had saved on average 10 percent of their income; in 1987 the figure was less than 4 percent. The federal debt more than tripled, from $908 billion in 1980 to $2.9 trillion at the end of the 1989 fiscal year. Then, on October 19, 1987, the bill collector suddenly arrived at the nation’s doorstep. On that “Black Monday,” the stock market experienced a tidal wave of selling reminiscent of the 1929 crash as investors worried that the United States would never address the federal government’s massive budget ­deficits. The Dow Jones industrial average plummeted an astounding 22.6 percent. The market plunge nearly doubled the record 12.8 percent fall on October 28, 1929. Wall Street’s selling frenzy reverberated throughout the capitalist world, sending stock prices plummeting in Tokyo, London, Paris, and Toronto. In the aftermath of the calamitous selling spree on Black Monday, fears of an impending recession led business leaders and economists to attack President Reagan for allowing such huge budget deficits. Reagan responded by agreeing to work with Congress to develop a d ­ eficit-​­reduction package. For the first time, the president indicated a willingness to include increased taxes in such a package to reduce the deficit. But the eventual compromise plan was so modest that it did little to restore investor confidence. As one Republican

 Black Monday A 508-point plunge devastated the stock market on October 19, 1987, and sent traders on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange into a ­panic-​­selling frenzy.

 1446  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 senator lamented, “There is a total lack of courage among those of us in the Congress to do what we all know has to be done.”

 the poor

 The eighties were years of vivid contrast. Despite unprecedented prosperity, homelessness became the most acute social issue. A variety of causes had led to a shortage of ­low-​­cost housing. The government had given up on building public housing, u ­ rban-​­renewal programs had demolished blighted areas but provided no housing for those who were displaced, and owners had abandoned unprofitable buildings in poor neighborhoods or converted them into expensive condominiums, a process called gentrification. In addition, after new medications allowed for the release of some mentally ill patients from institutions, many of them ended up on the streets because the promised m ­ ental-​­health services failed to materialize. Drug and alcohol abuse were rampant among the homeless, mostly unemployed single adults. A quarter of them had spent time in mental institutions; some 40 percent had spent time in jail; a third were delusional.

 the aids epidemic

 Act Up! Members of the influential AIDS activist group Act Up! protest a New Orleans convention center where President Reagan was scheduled to speak in 1988. The protester in the front holds a sign which reads “He Kills Me.”

Still
 another group of outcasts included those suffering from a newly identified disease called AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome). At the beginning of the eighties, public health officials had reported that gay men and intravenous drug users were especially at risk for developing AIDS. People contracted the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which causes AIDS, by coming into contact with the blood or body fluids of an infected person. Those infected with the virus showed signs of extreme fatigue, developed a strange combination of infections, and soon died. The Reagan administration showed little interest in AIDS in part because it was initially viewed as a “gay” disease.

The Presidency of George H. W. Bush  1447


 Patrick Buchanan, who served as Reagan’s director of communications, said that homosexuals had “declared war on nature, and now nature is extracting an awful retribution.” Buchanan and others convinced Reagan not to engage the HIV/AIDS issue. By 2000, AIDS had claimed almost 300,000 American lives. Nearly 1 million Americans were carrying the deadly virus, and it had become the leading cause of death among men ages ­twenty-​­five to ­forty-​­four.

The Presidency of George H. W. Bush
 During 1988, Ronald Reagan’s final year in office, his influence waned. His claim that “government is the problem, not the solution” was losing its appeal, and people were ready for a new approach to governing. Kevin Phillips, a Republican strategist, explained that during the 1986 congressional elections, voters chose candidates who promised to “make the government work” for the public good. Even conservatives had come to realize that “Hey, we need something from government after all.” Reagan’s t­ wo-​­term vice president, George H. W. Bush, won the Republican presidential nomination in 1988 because he pledged to insist on ethical government, be a more “hands on” president than Reagan and promote “a more compassionate conservatism.” The prominent Republican mayor of Indianapolis, Indiana, William Hudnut, observed that Republicans were moving away from “the ­ laissez-​­ faire approach of Ronald Reagan to one that takes a more active, more compassionate approach to those in need.” It was time to move away from s­elf-​ ­congratulation and deal more seriously with the thorny problems of i­nner-​­city poverty, homelessness, and drug abuse. George H. W. Bush His son, Born into a prominent New George W. Bush, would also serve as England family, the son of a U.S. sena- president, making them the second tor, George H. W. Bush had, at the age ­father-​­son presidential duo in history (the first was John Adams and John of eighteen, enlisted in the U.S. Navy Quincy Adams). at the start of the Second World War,

 1448  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 becoming America’s youngest combat pilot. After his distinguished military service, Bush graduated from Yale University and became a wealthy oil executive in Texas before entering government service. He served first as a member of the U.S. House of Representatives, then as U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, chair of the Republican National Committee, a diplomat in China, and director of the CIA before becoming Reagan’s loyal vice president, patiently waiting his turn. In all of those roles, Bush had displayed intelligence, integrity, and courage. But he lacked Reagan’s charm and eloquence. One Democrat described Bush as a man born “with a silver foot in his mouth.” A centrist Republican who had never embraced ­right-​­wing conservatism, Bush promised to use the White House to fight bigotry, illiteracy, and homelessness. “I want a kinder, gentler nation,” Bush said in accepting the Republican nomination. But his most memorable line in his acceptance speech was a defiant statement ruling out any tax increases: “The Congress will push me to raise taxes, and I’ll say no, and they’ll push, and I’ll say no, and they’ll push again. And I’ll say to them: Read my lips. No new taxes.” In the end, Bush won a decisive victory over the Democratic nominee, Massachusetts governor Michael Dukakis. Dukakis carried only ten states plus the District of Columbia. Bush won with a margin of about 54 percent to 46 percent in the popular vote and 426 to 111 in the electoral college, but the Democrats retained control of the House and Senate. Bush sought to consolidate the initiatives that Reagan had put in place rather than launch his own array of programs and policies. “We don’t need to remake society,” he announced. As an example of his compassionate conservatism, Bush supported the ­Democratic-​­proposed Americans with Disabilities Act (1990), which strengthened the civil rights of the physically or mentally disabled in areas such as employment, public transportation, and housing. The act also required organizations (­for-​­profit, ­non-​­profit, and governmental) to ensure that people with disabilities could access facilities by providing amenities such as mechanized doors, wheelchair ramps, and elevators.

 the federal debt and recession

 The biggest problem facing the Bush administration was the huge national debt, which stood at $2.6 trillion in 1989, nearly three times its 1980 level. Bush’s pledge not to increase taxes (mainly meaning income taxes) made it more difficult to reduce the deficit or trim the debt. Likewise, Bush was not willing to make substantial cutbacks in spending on defense or s­ ocial-​­welfare programs like Social Security, Medicare, and food stamps. As a result, by 1990 the country faced “a fiscal mess.” During the summer of 1990, Bush agreed with congressional Democrats that the size of the deficit required “tax revenue increases,” which he had sworn

The Presidency of George H. W. Bush  1449


THE ELECTION OF 1988 WA OR

 CA

MT ID

 NV

 ND

WY UT

 AZ

 CO

 SD

KS OK

 NM

 AK

■


 WI

 MI

 IA

 NE

TX HI

 MN

 NH 4 VT 3 NY

PA OH IL IN 23 WV VA 24 12 MO 6 12 KY 9 NC TN 11 AR SC MS AL GA LA FL

ME MA 13 RI 4 CT 8 NJ 16 DE 3 MD 10 DC 3

Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


George H. W. Bush
(Republican)




47,900,000


Michael Dukakis
(Democrat)




41,000,000


 How did George H. W. Bush overtake Michael Dukakis in the campaign?

WWN64
What were the differences between the goals of Bush and Reagan? Figure M31_02 First proof 
■


 to avoid. His decision set off a revolt among conservative Republicans from which he never recovered. Increasing the top tax rate from 28 to 31 percent raised federal revenue but eroded Bush’s political support, in part because the tax increases coincided with a prolonged economic recession. The economy barely grew at all during the first three years of the Bush a­ dministration—​­the worst record since the end of the Second World War.

 the democracy movement abroad

George H. W. Bush
 entered the White House with more ­foreign-​­policy experience than most ­presidents, and, like Nixon before him, preferred to deal with international relations rather than the deficit, drug abuse, and the problems of the inner cities. In the Soviet Union, amazing changes were under way. With his nation’s economy failing, Mikhail Gorbachev accelerated the implementation of his policies designed to democratize Soviet life. And his foreign policy sought

 1450  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 harmony and trade with the West, staking the Soviet Union’s future on cooperation and trade with its cold war enemies. Early in 1989, Soviet troops left Afghanistan after nine years. Gorbachev then renounced the right of the Soviet Union to intervene in the internal affairs of other Communist countries. His foreign minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, told the Soviet legislature that the nations of Eastern Europe had “absolute freedom” to choose their own form of governments. Soon thereafter, the Communist regimes in Eastern Europe fell with surprisingly little bloodshed, first in Poland and Hungary, then in Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria. In Romania, the year of peaceful revolution ended when the people joined the army in a bloody uprising against Nicolae Ceauşescu, the country’s brutal dictator. He and his wife were captured and tried, then executed on Christmas Day. Although all of the new democratic governments faced immense economic and social challenges, Europe had at last been born anew.

 the destruction of the berlin wall The most spec-

 A hammer to the Soviet Empire A West German demonstrator pounds away at the Berlin Wall on November 11, 1989, while East German border guards look on. Two days later, all the crossings between East and West Germany were opened.

 tacular event in the collapse of the Soviet Empire came on November 9, 1989, when tens of thousands of East Germans gathered at the Berlin Wall and demanded that the border guards open the gates to West Berlin. Sensing the fierce determination of the crowds, the guards reluctantly did so, and soon Germans on both sides of the wall began tearing it down. Because the wall divided not only a city but a nation, its destruction symbolized a revolutionary change. What Germans called the “peaceful revolution” had occurred with dramatic suddenness. With the borders to West Germany now fully open, the Communist government of East Germany collapsed and Germans rushed to reunify their divided nation. On October 3, 1990, the five states of East Germany were united with West Germany.

The Presidency of George H. W. Bush  1451


 The reform impulse that Gorbachev helped unleash in the ­Eastern-​­bloc countries sped out of control within the Soviet Union itself, however. Gorbachev had proven unusually adept at political restructuring and building a new presidential system that gave him, if anything, increased powers. His skills, however, could not salvage an antiquated economy that resisted change.

 communist coup fails

 Gorbachev’s popularity shrank in the Soviet Union as it grew abroad. Communist ­hard-​­liners saw in his reforms the unraveling of their bureaucratic and political empire. On August 18, 1991, a group of “old guard” political and military leaders accosted Gorbachev at his vacation retreat in Crimea and demanded that he proclaim a state of emergency and transfer his powers to them so that they could restore the supremacy of the Communist party. He replied, “Go to hell,” whereupon he was placed under house arrest. The coup, however, was poorly planned and clumsily implemented. The plotters failed to arrest popular leaders such as Boris Yeltsin, the feisty president of the Russian Republic. They also neglected to close the airports or cut off telephone and television communications, and they were opposed by key elements of the military and KGB (the Soviet secret police). On August 20, President Bush responded favorably to Yeltsin’s request for support and persuaded other leaders to join him in refusing to recognize the new Soviet government. The next day, word began to seep out that the plotters had given up and were fleeing. Several committed suicide, and a newly released Gorbachev ordered the others arrested. Although Gorbachev reclaimed the title of president, he was forced to resign as head of the Communist party and admit that he had made a grave mistake in appointing the men who had turned against him. Yeltsin emerged as the most popular political figure in the country. What had begun as a reactionary coup turned into a powerful accelerant for astonishing changes in the Soviet Union, or the “Soviet Disunion,” as one journalist termed it. Most of the fifteen republics proclaimed their independence from Russia, with the Baltic states of Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia regaining the status of independent nations. The Communist party was ­dismantled, prompting celebrating crowds to topple statues of Lenin and other Communist heroes.

 panama

 The end of the cold war did not spell the end of international tensions, however. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, the world has experienced numerous wars, violent turbulence, and fractious fundamentalisms of all ­sorts—​­religious, ethnic, and imperial. Before the close of 1989, U.S. troops

 1452  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 were engaged in battle in Panama, where a petty tyrant provoked the first of America’s military engagements under President Bush. In 1983, General Manuel Noriega had become the ruthless leader of the Panamanian Defense Forces, which made him head of the government in fact if not in title. In 1988, federal grand juries in Florida indicted Noriega and fifteen others on charges of conspiring with Colombia’s illegal drug lords to ship cocaine trough Panama to the United States. The next year, the Panamanian president tried to fire Noriega, but the National Assembly ousted the president instead and named Noriega “maximum leader.” The legislators then declared Panama “in a state of war” with the United States. On December 16, 1989, a U.S. marine in Panama was killed. Bush thereupon ordered an invasion (“Operation Just Cause”) to capture Noriega and install a government to be headed by Guillermo Endara, who had won the presidency in an election that was nullified by Noriega. In the early morning of December 20, U.S. troops struck at strategic targets. Noriega surrendered within hours. ­Twenty-​­three U.S. servicemen were killed; estimates of Panamanian casualties were as high as 4,000, including civilians. In April 1992, Noriega was convicted in the United States on eight counts of racketeering and drug distribution.

 the gulf war

 Months later, Saddam Hussein, dictator of Iraq, focused U.S. attention back upon the Middle East when his army suddenly invaded its tiny neighbor, Kuwait, on August 2, 1990. Kuwait had increased its production of oil, contrary to agreements with the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). The resulting drop in global oil prices offended the Iraqi regime, which was deeply in debt and heavily dependent upon oil revenues. President Bush condemned Iraq’s “naked aggression” and dispatched warplanes and troops to Saudi Arabia on a “wholly defensive” mission: to protect Saudi Arabia. British forces soon joined in, as did Arab units from Egypt, Morocco, Syria, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, and Qatar. Iraq refused to yield, and on January 12, 1991, Congress authorized the use of U.S. armed forces. Four days later, more than thirty nations, including ten Islamic countries, launched Operation Desert Storm. During the next six weeks, Iraqi soldiers surrendered by the thousands, and on February 28, Bush called for a ­cease-​­fire. The Iraqis accepted. There were 137 American fatalities. The lowest estimate of Iraqi deaths, civilian and military, was 100,000. But although coalition forces occupied about a fifth of Iraq, Hussein’s tyrannical regime remained intact. What came to be called the First Gulf War was thus a triumph without victory. Hussein had been defeated, but he was allowed to escape to foster greater

The Presidency of George H. W. Bush  1453


 Operation Desert Storm Allied soldiers patrol the southern Iraqi town of Salman on February 27, 1991. On the side of a building is a propaganda mural of dictator Saddam Hussein in military uniform.

 mischief. The consequences of the brief but intense war would be played out in the future, as Arabs humiliated by the American triumph began plotting revenge that would spiral into a new war of terrorism.

 bush’s “new world order”

 For months after the First Gulf War, George Bush seemed unbeatable; his public approval rating soared to 91 percent. But the aftermath of Desert Storm was mixed, with Saddam Hussein’s iron grip on Iraq still intact. The Soviet Union, meanwhile, stumbled to its surprising end. On December 25, 1991, the Soviet flag over the Kremlin was replaced by the flag of the Russian Federation. The cold war had ended with the dismemberment of the Soviet Union and its fifteen republics. “Containment” of the communist Soviet Union, the bedrock of U.S. foreign policy for more than four decades, had suddenly become irrelevant. For all of its potential horrors, the cold war had brought stability; the two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, had restrained themselves from an ­all-​­out war using nuclear weapons. Now the world would witness a growing number of unresolved crises and unstable regimes, some of which had access to weapons of mass ­destruction—​­nuclear as well as chemical and biological weapons.

 1454  CHAPTER 31  Conservative Revival 1977–1990

 Bush struggled to understand the fluid new international scene. He spoke of a “new world order” but never defined it, admitting he had trouble with “the vision thing.” He faced a challenge in the Republican primary from Patrick Buchanan, the conservative commentator and former White House aide, who adopted the slogan “America First” and called on Bush to “bring home the boys.” The excitement over the victory in the Gulf War also gave way to anxiety over the depressed economy. In addressing the recession, Bush tried a clumsy balancing act, on the one hand acknowledging that “people are hurting” while on the other telling Americans that “this is a good time to buy a car.” By 1991, the public approval rating of his economic policy had plummeted to 18 percent.

 the election of 1992

 At the 1992 Republican National Convention, Patrick Buchanan, who had won about a third of the votes in the party’s primaries, blasted Bush for breaking his pledge not to raise taxes and for becoming the “biggest spender in American history.” As the 1992 election unfolded, however, Bush’s real problem proved to be his failed effort to improve the economy. A popular bumper sticker reflected the growing public frustration: “Saddam Hussein still has his job. What about you?” In contrast, the Democrats at their convention presented an image of moderate forces in control. For several years, the Democratic Leadership Council, led by Arkansas governor William Jefferson Clinton, had been pushing the party from the liberal left to the center. The 1992 campaign also featured a ­third-​­party candidate, Texan H. Ross Perot, a puckish billionaire who found a large audience for his criticism of Reaganomics as “voodoo economics” (a phrase originally used by Bush in the 1980 Republican primary before he was named the v­ ice-​­presidential candidate). Born in 1946 in Hope, Arkansas, Bill Clinton never knew his biological father, a traveling salesman who died before his son was born. As a teen, Clinton yearned to be a political leader on a national scale. He attended Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., won a Rhodes Scholarship to Oxford University, and earned a law degree from Yale University, where he met his future wife, Hillary Rodham. Clinton returned to Arkansas and won election as the state’s attorney general. By 1979, at age ­thirty-​­two, he was the youngest governor in the country. He served three more terms as Arkansas governor and emerged as a dynamic national leader of the “New Democrats” committed to winning back the m ­ iddle-​­class whites (“Reagan Democrats”) who had voted Republican during the 1980s. In seeking the Democratic nomination, Clinton promised to cut the defense budget, provide tax relief for the middle class, and create a massive

The Presidency of George H. W. Bush  1455


 economic aid package to help the former republics of the Soviet Union forge democratic societies. Witty, intelligent, and charismatic, with an ­ in-​­ depth knowledge of public policy, Clinton projected energy, youth, and optimism, reminding many of John F. Kennedy, his boyhood hero. But beneath Clinton’s charisma and expertise were several flaws. The New York Times explained that Clinton was “emotionally needy, indecisive, and undisciplined.” He had also earned a w ­ ell-​­deserved reputation for h ­ alf-​­truths, exaggerations, and talking out of both sides of his mouth. Clinton Bill Clinton and Al Gore The used opinion polls to shape his stances Democratic candidates celebrate the on issues, pandered to s­ pecial-​­interest end of their presidential campaign in groups, and ­ flip-​­ flopped on contro- Clinton’s hometown of Little Rock, versial subjects, leading critics to label Arkansas, on November 3, 1992. him “Slick Willie.” Even more enticing to the media were charges that Clinton was a chronic adulterer and that he had manipulated the Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (ROTC) program during the Vietnam War to avoid military service. Clinton’s evasive denials could not dispel a lingering mistrust of his character. After a series of bruising primaries, Clinton won the Democratic presidential nomination and promised to restore the “hopes of the forgotten middle class.” He chose Senator Albert “Al” Gore Jr. of Tennessee as his running mate. Gore described himself as a “raging moderate.” Flushed with their convention victory and sporting a t­ en-​­point lead over Bush in the polls, the C ­ linton-​ ­Gore team hammered the president on economic issues. Clinton pledged that, if elected, he would cut the federal budget deficit in half in four years while reducing taxes on ­middle-​­class Americans. Such promises helped Clinton win with 370 electoral votes and about 43 percent of the vote. Bush received 168 electoral votes and 39 percent of the vote. Perot garnered 19 percent of the popular vote, more than any t­ hird-​­party candidate since Theodore Roosevelt in 1912. As 1992 came to an end, Bill Clinton, the “New Democrat,” prepared to lead the United States through the last decade of the twentieth century. “The urgent question of our time,” he said, “is whether we can make change our friend and not our enemy.” Clinton would embrace unexpected changes while ushering America into the ­twenty-​­first century.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 The Carter Presidency While Jimmy Carter had some notable achievements, such as the Camp David Accords, his administration suffered from legislative inexperience, a deepening economic recession, soaring inflation, and the Iranian hostage crisis. His sermonizing about the need for Americans to lead simpler lives compounded the public’s loss of faith in his presidency.

•


 The Rise of Conservatism Ronald Reagan’s charm, coupled with disillusionment over Carter’s presidency, won Reagan the election in 1980. The Republican insurgency was dominated by Christian conservatives like those who made up the Moral Majority. The migration of older Americans and others to conservative southern and western states increased the voting power of the ­so-​­called sunbelt, where voters were socially conservative and favored lower taxes and a smaller, less intrusive federal government.

•


 Reaganomics Reagan introduced a “­supply-​­side” economic philosophy, commonly called Reaganomics, that championed tax cuts for the rich, reductions in government regulations, cuts to ­social-​­welfare programs, and increased defense spending. Reagan was unable to cut domestic spending, however, and the tax cuts failed to pay for themselves as promised. The result was a dramatic increase in the national debt.

•


 The End of the Cold War Reagan’s military buildup, including preliminary development of a ­space-​­based a­ ntiballistic-​­missile system called the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), helped force the Soviets to the negotiating table to conclude the ­Intermediate-​­Range Nuclear Forces (INF) ­Treaty—​­the beginning of the end of the cold war. But Reagan’s ­foreign-​­policy efforts were badly tarnished by the ­Iran-​­Contra affair, in which members of his administration sold ­American-​­made armaments to Iran in exchange for Iranian influence to secure the release of American hostages held in Lebanon (despite the president’s public claims that he would never deal with terrorists).

•


 America in the 1980s Americans in the eighties not only experienced unprecedented prosperity but also rising poverty and homelessness. Conservatives condemned (and dismissed) HIV/AIDS as a “gay” disease. The development of the microprocessor paved the way for the computer revolution, which dramatically increased productivity and communications while generating whole new industries. Consumerism flourished all too well during the eighties, the result of which was massive public and private debt.

•


A
New World Order Toward the end of the 1980s, democratic ­political ­m­ovements emerged in Eastern Europe. In the Soviet Union, Mikhail G ­ orbachev’s 


 steps to restructure the economy (perestroika) and promote more open policies (glasnost) led to further reform and the collapse of the Soviet Empire. But new trouble spots quickly emerged. Iraq, led by Saddam Hussein, invaded n ­ eighboring Kuwait in 1990. When Iraq did not withdraw, ­American-​­led allied forces launched Operation Desert Storm, and the Iraqis surrendered within six weeks.

Chronology




November 1979
November 1989
December 1989






 President Carter helps negotiate the Camp David Accords Tax revolt in California leads to the passage of Proposition 13 Islamist militants storm the U.S. embassy in Tehran and take ­fifty-​­two Americans hostage Ronald Reagan elected president President Reagan enacts major tax cuts President Reagan authorizes development of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) Reagan delivers his famous Berlin Wall speech George H. W. Bush is elected president Berlin Wall is torn down U.S. troops invade Panama and capture Manuel Noriega Iraq forced from Kuwait in the First Gulf War Breakup of the USSR Bill Clinton is elected president

Key Terms
Camp David Accords p. 1419


 glasnost p. 1441

 Iranian hostage crisis p. 1421

­Intermediate-​­Range Nuclear Forces
 (INF) Treaty (1987) p. 1442

Moral Majority p. 1426
Reaganomics p. 1430
 Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) p. 1435 ­Iran-​­Contra affair p. 1439 perestroika p. 1441

 microprocessor p. 1443 HIV/AIDS p. 1447 Operation Desert Storm (1991) p. 1452 “New Democrats” p. 1454

IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




Twenty-​­First-​
Century
­America
1993–Present


 Youth speaks The Occupy Wall Street movement was born when thousands of protesters, many of them unemployed young adults, “occupied” Wall Street, the famous financial district in downtown Manhattan, to protest the “tyrannical” power of corporate America. The grassroots movement soon spread across the nation, then the world. Here, members of the movement stage a protest outside the New York Stock Exchange in September 2011.

T


 he United States entered the final decade of the twentieth century triumphant. American persistence in fighting and financing the cold war had contributed to the collapse of the Soviet Union and the birth of democracy and capitalism in Eastern Europe. By the end of the century, the United States was the world’s only superpower. Yet no sooner did the century come to an end than America’s sense of physical security and material comfort was shattered by terrorist attacks in 2001 on New York City and Washington, D.C. The attacks killed thousands, plunged the economy into recession, and raised profound questions about national security. In leading the fight against global terrorism, the United States became embroiled in long, costly, and controversial wars in Iraq and A ­ fghanistan. Opposition to the wars would provide much of the momentum for ­Democrat Barack Obama to win election in 2008 as the nation’s first African ­American president. Obama entered the White House at the same time that the United States and Europe were experiencing the Great Recession, a prolonged ­economic downturn that threatened the global banking system, caused ­widespread unemployment, and ignited social unrest and political tensions at home and abroad.

 focus questions 1. What were the major population trends (demographics) in the United States during the ­t wenty-​­first century? How did they impact the nation’s politics?

 2. What were the accomplishments and the setbacks of Bill Clinton’s presidency?

 3. What was the impact of global terrorism on the United States during the presidency of George W. Bush? How effective was his “war on terror?”

 4. What were the issues and developments during Bush’s second term that helped lead to Barack Obama’s historic victory in the 2008 presidential election?

 5. What were President Obama’s priorities at home and abroad? How effective were his efforts to pursue them?



