 202  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 l­ evels—​­local, state, and national. After all, as the Declaration of Independence asserted, governments derive “their just powers from the consent of the governed.” The common people readily took advantage of their new opportunities. In Virginia, voters in 1776 elected a new state legislature that, as an observer noted, “was composed of men not quite so well dressed, nor so politely educated, nor so highly born” as had been the case in the past.

Mobilizing for War
 The British Empire sent some 35,000 soldiers and half of its huge navy across the Atlantic to put down the American rebellion. The British also hired foreign soldiers (mercenaries), as some 30,000 Germans served in the British armies in America. Most were from the German state of ­Hesse-​­Cassel—​­thus they became known to Americans as Hessians. The British also recruited American Loyalists, Native Americans, and African Americans to fight on their behalf, but there were never as many willing to join them as they had hoped. Further, the British faced a formidable challenge in supplying their large army and navy in America. They initially assumed that there would be enough food for their troops and plenty of forage for their horses in America. As the war ground on, however, most of the supplies had to come from Britain. The war in America became terribly expensive and eventually demoralizing to the British people, as it dragged on year after year costing more and more in lives and money. The British government under Lord North also never had a consistent war strategy. Initially, the British focused on blockading New England’s seaports to strangle American commerce. When that failed, British military leaders sought to destroy George Washington’s Continental army in New York. Despite their initial success in driving the Americans out of the city, the British commanders failed to pursue and eliminate the retreating Continental army. They next tried to drive a wedge between New England and New York, splitting the colonies in two. That too would fail, leading to the final British strategy: moving their main army into the southern colonies in hopes of rallying Loyalists in the region.

 the continental army While the Patriots had the advantage of fighting on their home ground, they also had to create an army and navy from scratch, and with little money to do so. Recruiting, supplying, equipping, training, and paying soldiers and sailors were monumental challenges. Before the war, ­citizen-​­soldiers (militiamen) were primarily civilians summoned from their farms and shops to defend their communities. Once the danger passed, the militiamen quickly dispersed and returned to their homes

Mobilizing for War  203


 or farms. Many militiamen were unreliable and ungovernable. They “come in, you cannot tell how,” General Washington said in exasperation, “go, you cannot tell when, and act, you cannot tell where, consume your provisions, exhaust your stores [supplies], and leave you at last at a critical moment.” Once the war started, Washington knew that militiamen alone could not win against veteran British and German soldiers. He needed a professional army with ­full-​­time soldiers. While recruiting fighters, General Washington was pleased to see that the men from different colonies were developing a national (or “continental”) viewpoint, in which they thought of themselves as fighting for a new nation, not just protecting their particular communities like militiamen. Washington thus decided to call it the Continental army. About half of the 200,000 Americans who served in the war were in the Continental army. They were mostly young, single, relatively poor farmers, laborers, or indentured servants. What the Continental army needed most at the start of the war were capable officers, intensive training, modern weapons, and multiyear enlistment contracts. The Revolutionary soldiers also needed strict discipline, for they had no room for error against the British. As Washington began whipping his new army into shape, those who violated the rules were jailed, flogged, or sent packing. Some deserters were hanged. Many Patriots who had not fought in the French and Indian War found army life unbearable and combat horrifying. As General Nathanael Greene, a Rhode Island Quaker who abandoned the pacifism of his religion for the war effort and became Washington’s ablest commander, pointed out, few Patriots had ever engaged in mortal combat, and they were ­hard-​­pressed to “stand the shocking scenes of war, to march over dead men, to hear without concern the groans of the wounded.” Desertions grew as the war dragged on. At times, Washington could put only a few thousand men in the field. Eventually, to recruit more soldiers, Congress was forced to provide more generous enticements, such as land grants and cash bonuses, in exchange for recruits agreeing to serve in the Continental army for the duration of the war.

 problems of finance and supply

 Financing the Revolution was much harder for the new American nation than it was for Great Britain. Lacking the power to impose taxes, the Confederation Congress could only ask the states to provide funds for the national government. Yet the states rarely provided their expected share of the war’s expenses, and the Continental Congress reluctantly had to allow the Patriot armies to take supplies directly from farmers in return for written promises of future payment.

 204  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 In a predominantly agricultural society, like America, turning farmers into soldiers hurt the national economy. William Hooper, a North Carolinian who signed the Declaration of Independence, grumbled that “a soldier made is a farmer lost.” In April 1776, the Continental Congress had ended Britain’s trade regulations by opening American ports to the ships of all nations. Soon, however, British warships set up blockades around America’s major coastal cities. Many states found a ready source of revenue in the sale of abandoned Loyalist homes, farms, and plantations. Nevertheless, Congress and the states still fell short of funding the war’s cost and were forced to print more and more paper money, which eroded its value. At the start of the fighting there George Washington at Princeton Commissioned for Independence were no uniforms for the soldiers and Hall in Philadelphia, this 1779 painting sailors, and weapons were “as variby Charles Willson Peale portrays ous as their costumes.” Most weapons Washington as the hero of the Battle of and ammunition were acquired either Princeton. by capturing British supplies or by importing them from France, a government all too glad to help the Patriots fight its ­arch-​­enemy.

 native americans and the revolution

 Both the British and Americans recruited Indians to fight with them, but the British were far more successful, largely because they had longstanding relationships with chieftains and they promised to protect Indian lands. The peoples making up the Iroquois League split their allegiances, with most Mohawks, Onondagas, Cayugas, and Senecas, led by Mohawk Joseph Brant and Seneca Old Smoke, joining the British, and most Oneidas and Tuscaroras supporting the Patriots. The Cherokees also joined the British in hopes of driving out American settlers who had taken their lands. Most Indians in New England tried to remain neutral or sided with the Patriots. The Stockbridge Indians in Massachusetts, mostly Mahicans, formed

Mobilizing for War  205


 a company of Minutemen who fought alongside Patriot units. They pledged that “wherever your armies go, there we will go; you shall always find us by your side; and if providence calls us to sacrifice our lives in the field of battle, we will fall where you fall, and lay our bones by yours.” Yet however much the British or Americans claimed Native Americans as allies, most Indians engaged in the war as a means of protecting themselves and their own interests.

 disaster in canada

In July 1775, the Continental Congress
 authorized an ­ill-​­planned military expedition in Canada against Quebec, in the vain hope of rallying support among the French Canadians. One Patriot detachment, under General Richard Montgomery, a former British army officer, headed toward Quebec by way of Lake Champlain along the New ­York–​ Canadian border; another, under General Benedict Arnold, struggled ­ westward toward Quebec through the dense Maine woods. The Americans arrived outside Quebec in September, tired, exhausted, and hungry. A silent killer then ambushed them: smallpox. As the deadly virus raced through the American camp, General Montgomery faced a brutal dilemma. Most of his soldiers had signed up for short tours of duty, and many were scheduled for discharge at the end of the year. Because of the impending departure of his men, Montgomery could not afford to wait until spring for the smallpox to subside. Seeing little choice but to fight, he ordered an attack on the British forces defending Quebec during a blizzard, on December 31, 1775. The American assault was a disaster. Montgomery was killed early in the battle, and Benedict Arnold was seriously wounded. More than 400 Americans were taken prisoner. The rest of the Patriot force retreated to its camp outside the walled city and appealed to the Continental Congress for reinforcements. Smallpox spread throughout the American army, and Arnold warned George Washington in February 1776 that the runaway disease would soon bring “the entire ruin of the Army.” The British, sensing weakness, attacked the American camp and sent the ragtag Patriots on a frantic retreat up the St. Lawrence River to the ­American-​­held city of Montreal, and eventually back to New York and New England. By the summer of 1776, the American Revolutionaries had come to realize that their quest for independence would be neither short nor easy, for the king and Parliament were determined to smash the revolt and restore their empire. George Washington confessed to his brother that his efforts to form an effective American army out of “the great mixture of troops” were filled with “difficulties and distresses.” Most of the New England ­soldiers—​­farmers, sailors, fishermen, and a few former s­ laves—​­were, he said, “an exceeding[ly]

 206  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 dirty and nasty people.” Units from Pennsylvania, Washington added, did not “know more of a Rifle than my horse.”

 washington’s narrow escape

On July 2, 1776, the day the
 Continental Congress voted for independence, a huge army of British redcoats came ashore on undefended Staten Island, across New York City’s harbor from Manhattan. By late August, two thirds of the entire British army, veterans of many campaigns around the world, were camped on Staten Island. They were the first wave in an effort to end the war quickly with a decisive victory. For the next several weeks, while more ships, supplies, and troops landed and prepared for action, General William Howe and his older brother, Admiral Richard Howe, both of whom sympathized with American grievances but felt strongly that the rebellion must be put down, met with Patriot leaders in an effort to negotiate a settlement of the revolution. Their orders from London told them to “make peace if possible” and then wage “war if peace was out of the question.” After the negotiations failed, on August 22, 1776, a massive British fleet of 427 ships carrying 32,000 troops, including 8,000 hired German soldiers, began landing on Long Island near New York City. It was the largest seaborne military expedition in history to that point. “I could not believe my eyes,” recalled a Pennsylvania militiaman. “I declare that I thought all London was afloat.” Meanwhile, George Washington, after ousting the British from Boston, had moved his forces to defensive positions around New York City in February 1776. He still struggled to raise an army powerful enough to match the British. During the winter and spring, he could gather only about 19,000 poorly trained militiamen and recruits. Nor did he have any warships to defend a city surrounded by rivers and bays. It was too small a force to defend New York from the expected British invasion, but the Continental Congress insisted that the strategic city be defended. As John Adams explained, New York was the “key to the whole continent.” Although a veteran of frontier fighting, Washington had never commanded a large force or supervised artillery (cannon) units. As he confessed to the Continental Congress, he had no “experience to move [armies] on a large scale” and had only “limited . . . ​knowledge . . . ​in military matters.” Washington was still learning the art of generalship, and the British invasion of New York taught him some costly and painful lessons. The new American army suffered a humiliating defeat at the Battle of Long Island as the British invaders perfectly executed their assault. An American

Mobilizing for War  207


 officer noted that the fighting on Long Island was nothing but “fright, disgrace, and confusion.” As General Washington watched the British advance, he sighed: “Good God! What brave fellows I must this day lose.” In the face of steadily advancing ranks of British soldiers with ­bayonet-​­tipped muskets, many of the untested American defenders and their officers panicked. The smoke and chaos of battle disoriented the Patriots. Over the next week of intense fighting, the confused, disorganized, undisciplined, and indecisive Americans steadily gave ground. Only a timely rainstorm and heroic efforts by experienced boatmen enabled the retreating Americans to cross the harbor from Brooklyn to Manhattan during the night of August 29. Had Howe’s British army moved more quickly in pursuing the retreating Patriots, it could have trapped Washington’s entire force and ended the Revolution. But the British rested as the main American army, joined by Patriot civilians, made a miraculous escape from Manhattan over the next several weeks. They crossed the Hudson River and retreated with furious urgency into New Jersey and then over the Delaware River into eastern Pennsylvania. A New Jersey resident reported that the retreating Americans “marched two abreast, looked ragged, some without a shoe to their feet, and most of them wrapped in blankets.” Thousands had been captured during the New York campaign, and hundreds more deserted, eager to go home ahead of their British pursuers. General Washington was “wearied almost to death” by one of the greatest chases in military history as the ragged remnants of his army outraced their British pursuers over 170 miles in two months. “In one thing only” did the British fail, reported an observer; “they could not run as fast as their Foe.” A British general predicted a quick victory in the war. The Americans, he claimed, would “never again stand before us in the field. Everything seems to be over with them.” The situation was bleak in the fall of 1776. New York City became the headquarters of both the Royal Navy and the British army. Local Loyalists (Tories) in New York City and New Jersey excitedly welcomed the British occupation. “Hundreds in this colony are against us,” a New York City Patriot wrote to John Adams. “Tories openly express their sentiments in favor of the enemy.” By December 1776, the American Revolution was near collapse. A British officer reported that many “rebels” were “without shoes or stockings, and several were observed to have only linen drawers . . . ​without any proper shirt. They must suffer extremely” in the winter weather. Indeed, the Continental Army was shrinking before Washington’s eyes. He had only 3,000 men left by Christmas. Unless a new army could be raised quickly, he warned, “I think the game is pretty near up.”

 208  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 Then, almost miraculously, help emerged from an unexpected source: the ­English-​­born war correspondent, Thomas Paine. Having opened the eventful year of 1776 with his inspiring pamphlet Common Sense, Paine now composed The American Crisis, in which he wrote these stirring lines: These are the times that try men’s souls: The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of his country; but he that stands it NOW deserves the love and thanks of man and woman. Tyranny, like Hell, is not easily conquered. Yet we have this consolation with us, that the harder the conflict, the more glorious the triumph. Paine’s rousing pamphlet boosted Patriot morale. Out of the disastrous defeat came major changes in the way the Continental Congress managed the war. On December 27, 1776, it gave General Washington “large powers” to strengthen the war effort, including the ability to offer army recruits cash, land, clothing, and blankets. In December 1776, General William Howe, commander in chief of the British forces, decided that the war with America was all but won. He then casually settled down with his “flashing blonde” Loyalist mistress (­twenty-​­five-​ ­year-​­old Elizabeth Loring, the wife of a New England Tory) to wait out the winter in New York City. (­Eighteenth-​­century armies rarely fought during the

 Thomas Paine’s Common Sense Thomas Paine’s inspiring pamphlet was originally published anonymously because the British viewed it as treasonous.

Mobilizing for War  209


 winter months.) One American general concluded that Howe “shut his eyes, fought his battles, drank his bottle and had his little whore.”

 a desperate gamble George Washington, however, was not ready to hibernate for the winter. The morale of his men and the hopes of the nation, he decided, required “some brilliant stroke” of good news after the devastating defeats around New York City. So the normally cautious Washington grew bold out of necessity, launching a desperate gamble to achieve a ­much-​­needed victory before more of his soldiers decided to leave the army and return home. On Christmas night 1776, Washington led some 2,400 men, packed into ­forty-​­foot-​­long boats, from Pennsylvania across the icy Delaware into New Jersey. A blizzard of sleet and snow helped cloak their movements on the frigid night. Near dawn, at Trenton, the Americans surprised 1,500 sleeping Hessians, attacking them from three sides. An American sergeant said his “blood chill’d to see such horror and distress, blood mingling together, the dying groans. . . . The sight was too much to bear.” The Battle of Trenton was a total rout, from which only 500 Hessians escaped. Just two of Washington’s men were killed. The American commander had been in the thick of the battle, urging his men forward: “Press on! Press on, boys!” A week later, General Washington and the Americans again crossed the Delaware and won another battle in New Jersey, at Princeton, before taking shelter at Morristown, in the hills of northern New Jersey. A British officer muttered that the Americans had “become a formidable enemy.” The surprising victories at Princeton and Trenton saved the cause of independence and shifted the war’s momentum, as a fresh wave of inspired Americans signed up to serve in Washington’s army. A British officer recognized that the victories at Trenton and Princeton would “revive the dropping spirits of the rebels and increase their force.” The military successes in New Jersey also revived Patriot confidence in George Washington’s leadership. British war correspondents claimed that he was more talented than any of their own commanders. Yet although the “dark days” of the autumn of 1776 were over, unexpected challenges quickly chilled the Patriots’ excitement. winter in morristown

 During the ­record-​­cold winter in early 1777, George Washington’s ragged army again nearly disintegrated as s­ix-​ ­month enlistment contracts expired and deserters fled the hardships caused by the brutal weather, inadequate food, and widespread disease. One soldier recalled that “we were absolutely, literally starved. . . . ​I saw several of the men roast their old shoes and eat them.”

 210  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

MAJOR CAMPAIGNS IN NEW YORK AND NEW JERSEY, 1776–1777
Peekskill 
 American forces British forces

 NEW

 YORK

 Battle site





River
 dson Hu



10 Miles
10 Kilometers


White
Plains
Howe


NEW JERSEY
Hackensack Fort Lee 
Fort Washington


Harlem Heights


Morristown


W
 as hi ng or nw to n al lis

Newark


New
Brunswick


LONG ISLAND

Brooklyn


C


Gener
 al William Howe

Ad


Newton
Riv e r
 re

Allentown


 al Lo

 rd Howe

ATLANTIC OCEAN

 aw

 a

 PA

Trenton


Henry Clinton
General


Princeton


 m ir

De


 l

■


 Why did General Washington lead his army from Brooklyn to Manhattan and from

■


 What is the significance of the Battle of Trenton?

 WWN64 there to New Jersey? Figure M5_1 ■ How could the British army commander, General William Howe, have ended the First proof in New York? 31p0xrebellion 40p0

American Society at War  211


 Smallpox and other diseases continued to cause more casualties among the American armies than combat. By 1777, Washington had come to view smallpox with greater dread than “the Sword of the Enemy.” On any given day, a fourth of the American troops were deemed unfit for duty, usually because of smallpox. The threat was so great that in early 1777 Washington ordered a mass inoculation, which he managed to keep secret from the British. Inoculating an entire army was a risky undertaking in the eighteenth century, but it paid off. The successful inoculation of the American army marks one of Washington’s greatest strategic accomplishments of the war. Only about 1,000 Patriots stayed with Washington through the brutal Morristown winter. With the spring thaw, however, recruits began arriving to claim the bounty of $20 and 100 acres of land offered by Congress to those who would enlist for three years or for the duration of the conflict, if less. Having cobbled together some 9,000 regular troops, Washington began skirmishing with the British forces in northern New Jersey.

 a strategy of evasion

 General Howe had been making his own plans, however, and so had other British officers. Howe hoped to maneuver the American army into fighting a single “decisive action” that the superior British forces would surely ­win—​­and thereby end the war in one glorious engagement. George Washington, however, refused to take the bait. The fighting around New York City had shown him that his outmanned army almost certainly could not defeat the British in a large open battle. The only way to beat them, he decided, was to evade the main British army, carefully select when and where to attack, and, in the end, wear down the enemy forces and their will to fight on. Washington was willing to concede control of major cities like New York to the British, for it was his army, “not defenseless towns, [that] they have to subdue.” So the Americans in the Revolution did not have to win large battles; they simply had to avoid losing the war. Britain, on the other hand, could win only by destroying the American will to resist. With each passing year, it became more ­difficult—​­and ­expensive—​­for the British to supply their large army and navy in America. Over time, the British government and people would tire of the human and financial toll of conducting a prolonged war across the Atlantic.

American Society at War
 The Revolution was as much a ruthless civil war among Americans (including the Native American peoples allied with both sides) as it was a prolonged struggle against Great Britain. The necessity of choosing sides divided families and friends, towns and cities.

 212  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 Benjamin Franklin’s illegitimate son, William, for example, was the royal governor of New Jersey. An ardent Loyalist, he sided with Great Britain in the war. His Patriot father later removed him from his will. Similarly, ­eighteen-​ ­year-​­old Bostonian Lucy Flucker defied her Loyalist father’s wishes and married bookseller Henry Knox in 1774. (Knox would become an American general.) Lucy’s estranged family fled with the British army when it left Boston in 1776, and she never saw them again. “I have lost my father, mother, brother, and sister, entirely lost them,” she wrote. The colonists were generally divided into three groups: Patriots, who formed the Continental army and fought in state militias; Loyalists, or Tories, as the Patriots mockingly called them; and, a less committed middle group that sought to remain neutral but were eventually swayed by the better organized and more energetic Patriots. Loyalists may have represented 20 percent of the American population, but Patriots were the largest of the three groups. Some Americans (like Benedict Arnold) switched sides during the war. Both the Patriots and the British, once they took control of a city or community, would often require the residents to swear an oath of loyalty to their cause. In Pennsylvania, Patriots tied a rope around the neck of John Stevens, a Loyalist, and dragged him behind a canoe in the Susquehanna River because he refused to sign a loyalty oath. Where the Patriots rejected the monarchy, the Loyalists, whom George Washington called “abominable pests of society,” viewed the Revolution as an act of treason. The British Empire, they felt, was much more likely than an independent America to protect them from foreign foes and enable them to prosper. Loyalists were most numerous in the seaport cities, especially New York City and Philadelphia, as well as the Carolinas, but they came from all walks of life. Governors, judges, and other royal officials were almost all Loyalists; most Anglican ministers also preferred the mother country, as did many Anglican worshippers. In the backcountry of New York and across the Carolinas, many small farmers who had largely been unaffected by the controversies over British efforts to tighten colonial regulations rallied to the British side. More New York men joined Loyalist regiments than the Continental army. Many Loyalists calculated that the Revolution would fail or feared that it would result in mob rule. In few places, however, were there enough Loyalists to assume control without the support of British troops. The Loyalists did not want to “dissolve the political bands” with Britain, as the Declaration of Independence demanded. Instead, as some 700 of them in New York City said in a petition to British officials, they “steadily and uniformly opposed” this “most unnatural, unprovoked Rebellion.” Jacob Bailey

American Society at War  213


 Four Soldiers (ca. 1781) This illustration drawn by a French lieutenant captures the varied uniforms worn by Patriot forces in the war (left to right): a black soldier (freed for joining the 1st Rhode Island Regiment), a New England militiaman, a frontiersman, and a French soldier.

 of Massachusetts dismissed the Patriots as a “set of surly & savage beings who have power in their hands and murder in their hearts.” In few places, however, were there enough Loyalists to assume control of areas or communities without the presence of British troops. The British were repeatedly frustrated by both the failure of Loyalists to materialize in strength and the collapse of Loyalist militia units once British troops departed. Because Patriot militias quickly returned whenever the British left an area, any Loyalists in the region faced a difficult choice: either accompany the British and leave behind their property or stay and face the wrath of the Patriots. Even more disheartening was what one British officer called “the licentiousness of the [Loyalist] troops, who committed every species of rapine and plunder” and thereby converted potential friends to enemies. The Patriots, both moderates and radicals, supported the war because they realized that the only way to protect their liberty was to separate themselves from British control. Patriots also wanted to establish an American republic, a unique form of government that would convert them from being subjects of a king to being citizens in a republic with the power to elect their own government and pursue their own economic interests. “We have it in our power,” wrote Thomas Paine, “to begin the world over again. . . . ​The birthday of a new world is at hand.”

 214  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

Setbacks for the British (1777)
 In 1777, a carefully conceived but poorly executed British plan to defeat the “American rebellion” involved a ­three-​­pronged assault on the state of New York. By gaining control of that important state, the British planned to split America in two, cutting off New England from the rest of the colonies. The complicated plan called for a British army, based in Canada and led by General John Burgoyne, to advance southward from Quebec via Lake Champlain to the Hudson River. At the same time, another British force would move eastward from Oswego, in western New York. General William Howe, meanwhile, would lead a third British army up the Hudson River from New York City. All three advancing armies would eventually converge in central New York and wipe out any remaining Patriot resistance. The three British armies, however, failed in their e­ xecution—​­and in their communications with one another. At the last minute, Howe changed his mind and decided to move his army south from New York City to attack the Patriot capital, Philadelphia. General Washington withdrew most of his men from New Jersey to meet the British threat in Pennsylvania while other American units banded together in upstate New York to deal with the British threat there. On September 11, 1777, at Brandywine Creek, southwest of Philadelphia, the British overpowered Washington’s army and occupied Philadelphia, then the largest and wealthiest American city. The members of the Continental Congress were forced to flee the city. Battered but still intact, Washington and his army withdrew to winter quarters twenty miles away at Valley Forge, while Howe and his men remained in the relative comfort of Philadelphia. General John Burgoyne Commander of Britain’s northern forces. Burgoyne and most of his troops surrendered to the Americans at Saratoga on October 17, 1777.

 the campaign of 1777

 Meanwhile, in northern New York, a second British army had stumbled into an American trap. In June, an overconfident General Burgoyne (nicknamed

Setbacks for the British (1777)  215


 “General Swagger”) had led his mistress and 7,000 soldiers southward from Canada toward New York’s Lake Champlain. The American commander in northern New York was General Horatio Gates. ­Thirty-​­two years earlier, in 1745, he and Burgoyne had served as officers in the same British regiment. Now they were commanding opposing armies. As Burgoyne’s army pushed deeper into New York, it became harder to get food and supplies from Canada. Short of wagons and carts, the advance slowed to a snail’s pace in the dense forests and swamps, thereby allowing the Americans to spring a trap. The outnumbered but more mobile Patriots had the benefit of fighting in familiar territory. They inflicted two serious defeats on the British forces in August 1777. At Oriskany on August 6, Patriot militiamen, mostly local German American farmers and their Indian allies, withstood an ambush by Loyalists and Indians and gained time for Patriot reinforcements to arrive at nearby Fort Stanwix, which had been besieged by British soldiers. When the British demanded the fort’s surrender, General Gates rejected the offer “with disdain,” saying that the fort would be defended to the “last extremity.” As the days passed, the Iroquois deserted the British army, leading the British commander to order a withdrawal. As a result, the strategic Mohawk Valley running across central New York was secured by the Patriot forces. To the east, at Bennington, Vermont, on August 16, New England militiamen, led by Colonel John Stark, decimated a detachment of Hessians and Loyalists. Stark had pledged that morning, “We’ll beat them before night, or Molly Stark will be a widow.” As Patriot militiamen converged from across central New York, Burgoyne pulled his dispirited forces back to the village of Saratoga, near the Hudson River. In the ensuing, t­ hree-​­week-​­long Battles of Saratoga, Gates’s army surrounded the British forces, cutting off their supply lines. Desperate for food and ammunition, the British failed twice to break through the encircling Americans. “Thus ended all our hopes of victory,” noted a British officer. The trapped Burgoyne surrendered on October 17, 1777, turning over 5,800 troops, 7,000 muskets, and ­forty-​­two brass cannons to Gates. In London, King George fell “into agonies on hearing the account” of Burgoyne’s defeat. William Pitt, the former British prime minister, made a shocking prediction to Parliament after the defeat: “You cannot conquer America.”

 alliance with france

 The surprising American victory at Saratoga was a strategic turning point because it convinced the French, who had lost four wars to the British in the previous eighty years, to sign two crucial treaties that created an American alliance with France.

 216  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 Under the Treaty of Amity and Commerce, France officially recognized the new United States and offered important trading privileges to American ships. Under the Treaty of Alliance, both parties agreed, first, that if France entered the war, both countries would fight until American independence was won; second, that neither would conclude a “truce or peace” without “the formal consent of the other”; and, third, that each would guarantee the other’s possessions in America “from the present time and forever against all other powers.” France further agreed not to seek Canada or other British possessions on the mainland of North America. In the end, the intervention of the French army and navy determined the outcome of the war. The Americans would also form important alliances with the Spanish (1779) and the Dutch (1781), but neither provided as much support as the French. After the British defeat at Saratoga and the news of the French alliance with the United States, Parliament tried to end the war by granting all the demands that the Americans had made before they declared independence. But the Continental Congress would not negotiate until Britain officially recognized American independence and withdrew its military forces. King George refused.

1778: Both Sides Regroup
 valley forge and stalemate

 For George Washington’s army at Valley Forge, near Philadelphia, the winter of 1777–1778 was a time of intense suffering and unrelenting cold, hunger, and disease. Some soldiers lacked shoes and blankets, and their makeshift l­ og-​­and-​­mud huts offered little protection from the chilling winds. By February, 7,000 troops were too ill for duty. More than 2,500 soldiers died at Valley Forge; another 1,000 deserted. Fifty officers resigned on one December day, and several hundred more left before winter’s end. Desperate for relief, Washington sent troops across New Jersey, Delaware, and the Eastern Shore of Maryland to confiscate horses, cattle, and hogs in exchange for “receipts” promising future payment. By March 1778, the troops at Valley Forge saw their strength restored. Their improved health enabled Washington to begin a rigorous training program. Because few of the American officers had any formal military training, their troops lacked leadership, discipline, and skills. To remedy this defect, Washington turned to an energetic Prussian soldier of fortune, Friedrich Wilhelm, baron von Steuben, who used an interpreter and frequent profanity to instruct the troops in the fundamentals of ­close-​­order drill.

1778: Both Sides Regroup  217


 Valley Forge During the harsh winter of 1777–1778, Washington’s army battled starvation, disease, and freezing temperatures.

 Steuben was one of several foreign volunteers who joined the American army at Valley Forge. Another was a n ­ ineteen-​­year-​­old, ­red-​­haired French orphan named Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette. A wealthy idealist excited by the American cause (“I was crazy [with desire] to wear a uniform,” he said), Lafayette offered to serve in the Continental army for no pay in exchange for being named a general. Washington was initially skeptical of the young French aristocrat, but Lafayette soon became the commander in chief ’s most trusted aide. Washington noted that Lafayette possessed “a large share of bravery and military ardor.” The young French general also proved to be an able diplomat in helping to forge the military alliance with France (there are forty cities, seven counties, and a private college named for Lafayette across the United States). The Continental army’s morale rose when the Continental Congress promised extra pay and bonuses after the war, and it rose again with the news of the military alliance with France. In the spring of 1778, British forces withdrew from Pennsylvania to New York City, with the American army in hot pursuit. Once the British were back in Manhattan, Washington’s army encamped at

 218  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

MAJOR CAMPAIGNS IN NEW YORK AND PENNSYLVANIA, 1777
Quebec 


100 Miles


100 Kilometers


Burgoyne




Montreal


 CANADA

S
St
. L t. L
 aw

 eg

 er n ce re

 er Riv

Crown Point
Fort Ticonderoga


St.


Leger


Arnold


Oriskany Fort Stanwix


 MD

Ho
 w

Valley Forge
(Winter Quarters)
Brandywine Creek
 e

 CT

New York
Princeton
Trenton
Philadelphia
Wilmington


NEW JERSEY

ATLANTIC OCEAN

 DE

Che


 sap eake

Bay


 VIRGINIA

 RI

Wa
 shi

 ive r

 r ve Ri

 MASSACHUSETTS

Ho
 we

 a

 a nn

 w Dela are R

Susqu
 eh

 PENNSYLVANIA

Saratoga
Bennington


 ngt on

Hudson River


NEW YORK

■


 NH

Connecticut River


Fort Oswego


■


 VT

Gates


Lake Ontario


■


 MAINE (Mass.)

 American forces British forces Battle site

 What were the consequences of Burgoyne’s strategy of dividing the colonies by invading upstate New York from Canada? WWN64 How didM5_2 life in the American winter camp at Valley Forge transform the army? Figure Why were the Battles of Saratoga a turning point in the American Revolution? First proof

 23p0 x 34p5

1778: Both Sides Regroup  219


 nearby White Plains, north of the city. From that time on, the combat in the north settled into a long stalemate.

 war in the west

 The Revolution had created two wars. In addition to the main conflict between armies in the east, a frontier guerrilla war of terror and vengeance pitted Indians and Loyalists against isolated Patriot settlers along the northern and western frontiers. In the Ohio Valley, as well as western New York and Pennsylvania, the British urged frontier Loyalists and their Indian allies to raid farm settlements and offered to pay bounties for American scalps. To end the ­ English-​­ led attacks, Joseph Brant This 1786 portrait of early in 1778 George Rogers Clark Thayendanegea (Joseph Brant) by took 175 Patriot frontiersmen on flat- Gilbert Stuart features the Mohawk leader who fought against the boats down the Ohio River. On the Americans in the Revolution. evening of July 4, the Americans captured ­English-​­controlled Kaskaskia, in ­present-​­day Illinois. Then, without bloodshed, Clark took Cahokia (in Illinois across the Mississippi River from St. Louis) and Vincennes (in ­present-​­day Indiana). After the British retook Vincennes, Clark led his men (almost half of them French volunteers) across icy rivers and flooded prairies, sometimes in water ­neck-​­deep, and prepared to attack the British garrison. Clark’s rugged frontiersmen, called Rangers, captured five Indians carrying American scalps. Clark ordered his men to kill the Indians in sight of the fort. After watching the terrible executions, the British surrendered. While Clark’s Rangers were in the Indiana territory, a much larger U.S. military force moved against Iroquois strongholds in western New York, where Loyalists (Tories) and their Indian allies had been terrorizing frontier settlements. These Iroquois attacks, led by Mohawk chief Joseph Brant, had killed hundreds of Patriot militiamen. In response, George Washington sent 4,000 men under General John Sullivan to crush “the hostile tribes” and “the most mischievous of the Tories.” At Newton, New York, on August 29, 1779, Sullivan’s soldiers destroyed about

 220  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 forty Seneca and Cayuga villages, which broke the power of the Iroquois Confederacy for all time. In the Kentucky territory, the legendary frontiersman Daniel Boone and his small band of settlers repeatedly clashed with the Shawnees and their British and Loyalist allies. In 1778, Boone and some thirty men, aided by their WESTERN CAMPAIGNS, 1776–1779 American forces British forces Battle site Tory-Iroquois raids (1778)

Lake
Huron


 NY

 Cherokee settlements

Lake Ontario


E


Lake Erie


A
W


A
 EC

S


I N


7 79


 PA

A


 NJ

 NEE

 MD

 DE

U


N


Chillicothe


 ve r

M


Ri


 VIRGINIA

ATLANTIC OCEAN



 io



Oh


O


Vincennes


N


A
I


Cla


 rk,

H


Rive
 r

A


C


 a d C umberl n

 ve r

L


 CHEROKEE

NORTH CAROLINA

A


 iss iss ipp i R iver

Kaskaskia


Minisink


T


 SHAW

Te
 nn es se e Ri

Cahokia


, 17
 ark Cl

M


Fort Pitt


W
Britis ab
 h,

St.
Louis


O


Wyoming Valley an
,1


E
 h as 8

U


O
R
I
Newton 

D


 r ve Ri

Q


 l li v

 LA

N


Su


Fort
Detroit


R


Lake
Michigan


 SE

Fort Niagara


Fort
S
I
Stanwix 

A


P


P


 CREEK

 GEORGIA

SOUTH CAROLINA





 ■ How did George Rogers Clark secure Cahokia and Vincennes? WWN64 ■ Why Figure M5_3did the American army destroy Iroquois villages in 1779? First proof were the skirmishes between settlers and Indian tribes significant ■ Why 31p0 x32p6

 the future of the ­trans-​­Appalachian frontier?

200 Miles


200 Kilometers


 for

1778: Both Sides Regroup  221


 wives and children, held off an assault by more than 400 Indians at Boonesborough. Later, Boone himself was twice shot and twice captured. Indians killed two of his sons, a brother, and two ­brothers-​­in-​­law. His daughter was captured, and another brother was wounded four times. In early 1776, a delegation of northern I­ndians—​­Shawnees, Delawares, and ­Mohawks—​­had talked the Cherokees into attacking frontier settlements in Virginia and the Carolinas. Swift retaliation had followed as Carolina militiamen, led by Andrew Pickens, burned dozens of Cherokee villages. By weakening the major Indian tribes along the frontier, the American Revolution cleared the way for white settlers to seize Indian lands after the war.

The War Moves South
 In late 1778, the British launched their southern strategy, built on the assumption that large numbers of Loyalists in the Carolinas, Virginia, and Georgia would join the British cause. Once the British gained control of the southern colonies, they would have the shrinking United States pinched between Canada and a ­British-​­controlled South. In December 1778, General Sir Henry Clinton, the new commander in chief of British forces in America, sent 3,000 redcoats, Hessians, and Loyalists to take the port city of Savannah, on the southeast Georgia coast, and roll northeast from there. The plan was to enlist support from local Loyalists and the Cherokees, led by Chief Dragging Canoe, who promised to leave the ground “dark and bloody.”

 british momentum Initially, Clinton’s southern strategy worked. Within twenty months, the British and their allies had defeated three American armies, seized the strategic port cities of Savannah and Charleston, South Carolina; occupied Georgia and much of South Carolina; and killed, wounded, or captured some 7,000 American soldiers. The success of the “southern campaign” led Lord George Germain, the British official in London overseeing the war, to predict a “speedy and happy termination of the American war.” Germain’s optimistic prediction, however, fell victim to three developments: first, the Loyalist strength in the South was weaker than estimated; second, the British effort to unleash Indian attacks convinced many undecided backcountry settlers to join the Patriot side; and, third, some British and Loyalist soldiers behaved so harshly that they drove Loyalists to switch sides. war in the carolinas

 The Carolina campaign took a major turn when British forces, led brilliantly by Generals Clinton and Charles

 222  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 ­ ornwallis, bottled up an entire American army on the Charleston Peninsula. C Benjamin Lincoln, the U.S. commander, begged local planters to arm their slaves and let them join the defense of the city, but the slaveholders refused. Prominent South Carolina leaders then used their control of local militia units to prevent Lincoln and his Continental army from escaping the British invasion. On May 12, 1780, General Lincoln surrendered Charleston and its 5,500 defenders. It was the single greatest Patriot loss of the war. Soon thereafter, General Cornwallis, in charge of the British troops in the South, defeated a much larger American force led by General Horatio Gates at Camden, South Carolina. Cornwallis had Georgia and most of South Carolina under British control by 1780. Then he made a tactical blunder by sending lieutenants into the Carolina countryside to organize Loyalist fighters to root out Patriots. In doing so, they mercilessly burned homes and hacked to death surrendering rebels. Their behavior alienated many poor rural folk who had been neutral. Francis Kinlock, a Loyalist, warned a British official that “the lower sort of people, who were in many parts . . . ​originally attached to the British government, have suffered so severely and been so frequently deceived, that Great Britain now has a hundred enemies where it had one before.” In ­mid-​­1780, small bands of Patriots based in the swamps and forests of South Carolina launched a successful series of h ­ it-​­and-​­run raids. Led by colorful fighters such as Francis Marion, “the Swamp Fox,” and Thomas Sumter, “the Carolina Gamecock,” the Patriot guerrillas gradually wore down British confidence and morale. By August 1780, the British commanders were forced to admit that South Carolina was “in an absolute state of rebellion” against them. Warfare in the Carolinas was especially brutal. Patriots fought Loyalists who were neighbors of each other. Both sides looted farms and plantations and tortured, scalped, and executed prisoners. Families were fractured by divided loyalties. Fathers fought sons and brothers killed brothers. Edward Lacey, a young South Carolina Patriot who commanded a militia unit, had to tie his Tory father to a bedstead to prevent him from informing the British of his whereabouts. Chilling violence occurred on both sides. In Virginia, the planter Charles Lynch set up vigilante courts to punish Loyalists by “lynching” ­them—​­which in this case meant whipping them. Others were tarred and feathered. In the Carolinas and Georgia, British army commanders encouraged their poorly disciplined Loyalist allies to wage a s­corched-​­ earth war of ­terror, arson, and intimidation. “In a civil war,” the British general Charles

1778: Both Sides Regroup  223


 ­ ornwallis declared, “there is no admitting of neutral characteristics.” He C urged his ­commanders to use the “most vigorous measures to extinguish the rebellion.” Tory militiamen took civilian hostages, assaulted women and children, burned houses and churches, stole property, bayoneted wounded Patriots, and tortured and executed unarmed prisoners. Vengeful Patriots responded in kind. When Georgia Loyalist Thomas “Burnfoot” Brown refused to join the revolutionary side, a mob of Patriots bludgeoned him, took his scalp, tarred his legs, and then held his feet over a fire, costing him several toes. Brown thereafter conducted a personal war of vengeance. After a battle near Augusta, Georgia, Brown ordered Loyalists to hang thirteen Patriot prisoners from a staircase banister.

 the battle of kings mountain

 Cornwallis’s two most c­ old-​ ­blooded cavalry officers, Sir Banastre Tarleton and Major Patrick Ferguson, who were in charge of training Loyalist militiamen, eventually overreached themselves. The British officers often let their men burn Patriot farms, liberate slaves, and destroy livestock. Major Ferguson sealed his doom when he threatened to march over the Blue Ridge Mountains, hang the mostly S­ cots-​ ­Irish Presbyterian Patriot leaders (“backwater barbarians”), and destroy their frontier farms. Instead, the feisty “overmountain men” from southwestern Virginia and western North and South Carolina (including “Tennesseans”), all of them experienced hunters and riflemen who had often fought Cherokees, went hunting for Ferguson and his army of Carolina Loyalists in late September 1780. On October 7, the two sides clashed near Kings Mountain, a heavily wooded ridge along the border between North Carolina and South Carolina. In a ferocious h ­ our-​­long battle, Patriot sharpshooters, told by an officer to “shout like hell and fight like devils,” devastated the Loyalist troops. Major Ferguson had boasted beforehand that “all the rebels in hell could not push him off ” Kings Mountain. By the end of the battle, his lifeless body was riddled with seven bullet holes. Seven hundred Loyalists were captured, ­twenty-​­five of whom were later hanged. “The division among the people is much greater than I imagined,” an American officer wrote to one of General Washington’s aides. The Patriots and Loyalists, he said, “persecute each other with . . . ​savage fury.” As with so many confrontations during the war in the South, the Battle of Kings Mountain resembled an extended family feud. ­Seventy-​­four sets of brothers fought on opposite sides, and ­twenty-​­nine sets of fathers and sons.

 224  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 After the battle, Patriot Captain James Withrow refused to help his Loyalist ­brother-​­in-​­law, who had been badly wounded, and left him to die on the battlefield. When Withrow’s wife learned how her husband had treated her brother, she asked for a separation. Five brothers in the Goforth family from Rutherford County, North Carolina, fought at Kings Mountain; three were Loyalists, two were Patriots. Only one of them survived. Two of the brothers, Preston and John Preston, fighting on opposite sides, recognized each other during the battle, took deadly aim as if in a duel, and fired simultaneously, killing each other. The American victory in the Battle of Kings Mountain was crucial because it undermined the British strategy in the South. Thomas Jefferson later said that the battle was “the turn of the tide of success.” After Kings Mountain, the British forces under Cornwallis were forced to retreat to South Carolina and found it virtually impossible to recruit more Loyalists.

 southern retreat

 In late 1780, the Continental Congress chose a new commander for the American army in the South: General Nathanael Greene, “the fighting Quaker” of Rhode Island. A former blacksmith blessed with unflagging persistence, he was bold and daring, and ­well-​­suited to a d ­ rawn-​­out war. Greene arrived in Charlotte, North Carolina, to find himself in charge of a “shadow army.” The 2,200 troops lacked everything “necessary either for the Comfort or Convenience of Soldiers.” Greene wrote General Washington that the situation was “dismal, and truly distressing.” Yet he also knew that if he could not create a victorious army, the whole South would be “­re-​­annexed” to Britain. Like Washington, Greene adopted a h ­ it-​­and-​­run strategy. From Charlotte, he moved his army eastward while sending General Daniel Morgan, one of the heroes of the Battles of Saratoga, a h ­ eavy-​­drinking, ­fist-​­fighting wagonmaster, with about 700 riflemen on a sweep to the west of Cornwallis’s headquarters at Winnsboro, South Carolina. On January 17, 1781, Morgan’s force took up positions near Cowpens, an area of cattle pastures in northern South Carolina about t­ wenty-​­five miles from Kings Mountain. There he lured Sir Banastre Tarleton’s army into an elaborate trap. Tarleton, known for his bravery but hated for his brutality, rushed his men forward, “running at us as if they intended to eat us up,” only to be ambushed by Morgan’s cavalry. Tarleton escaped, but 110 British soldiers were killed and more than 700 were taken prisoner. Cowpens was the most complete victory for the American side in the Revolution and was one of the few times that Patriots won a battle in which

A
War of Endurance 225 

 the two sides were evenly matched. When General Cornwallis learned of the American victory, he was so furiously disappointed that he snapped his ceremonial sword in two, saying that the news “broke my heart.” After the victory at Cowpens, Morgan’s army moved into North Carolina and linked up with Greene’s troops. Greene lured Cornwallis’s starving British army north, then attacked the redcoats at Guilford Courthouse (near what became Greensboro, North Carolina) on March 15, 1781. The Americans lost the Battle of Guilford Courthouse but inflicted such heavy losses that Cornwallis left behind his wounded and marched his weary men toward Wilmington, on the North Carolina coast, to lick their wounds and take on supplies from British ships. The British commander reported that the Americans had “fought like demons.” Greene then resolved to go back into South Carolina, hoping to lure Cornwallis after him or force the British to give up the state. Greene connected with local guerrilla bands led by Francis Marion, Andrew Pickens, and Thomas Sumter. By targeting outlying British units and picking them off one by one, the guerrillas eventually forced the British back into Charleston and Savannah. George Washington praised Greene for having done “great things with little means.”

A
War of Endurance  During 1780, the Revolutionary War became a contest of endurance, and the Americans held the advantage in time, men, and supplies. They knew they could outlast the British as long as they avoided a catastrophic defeat. “We fight, get beat, rise, and fight again,” General Greene said.

 the virginia campaign

By September 1781, the Americans had
 narrowed British control in the South to Charleston and Savannah, although local Patriots and Loyalists would continue to battle each other for more than a year in the backcountry, where there was “nothing but murder and devastation in every quarter,” Greene said. Meanwhile, Cornwallis had pushed his army northward from Wilmington. Before the Carolinas could be subdued, he had decided that Virginia must be eliminated as a source of American reinforcements and supplies. In May 1781, the British marched into Virginia. There, Benedict Arnold, the former American general whom the British had bribed to switch sides in the war, was eager to strike at the Americans. Arnold had earlier plotted to sell out his former American command of West Point, a critically important

 226  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

MAJOR CAMPAIGNS IN THE SOUTH, 1778–1781
American forces 
Petersburg


 British forces Battle site

 n

100 Kilometers


 so



Hillsborough


100 Miles


Guilford Courthouse


 er

 gu





F


 ga

 n G

NORTH CAROLINA

 ne ree

 r Mo

Charlotte


Sav
 an

C


 na

 h

Ri


 ve r

SOUTH CAROLINA

 or

 nw

Lincoln


 GEORGIA

 is

Camden


 a ll i

Wilmington
 s,

 n

Winnsboro


 l al

 e Ta r l

 to

,1
 s te Ga

Kings
Mountain


 w rn Co

Cowpens


Cornwallis, 1781




 VIRGINIA

 s

C li n


 ton

 d an

 li al nw r Co

Charleston


Savannah
 r ve

Altama
 ha Ri

ATLANTIC OCEAN

EAST FLORIDA
(British) 
 ■ Why did the British suddenly shift their military campaign to the South in 1778? ■ Why were the battles at Savannah and Charleston major victories for the WWN64 British? Figure M5_4 First proof ■ How did General Nathanael Greene undermine British control of the Lower 25p0South? x 30p0

 fortress on the Hudson River north of New York City. Only the lucky capture of a British spy, Major John André, had exposed Arnold’s plot. Warned that his plan had been discovered, Arnold joined the British, while the Americans hanged André as a spy.

A
War of Endurance 227 

Cornwallis


Jam


 er

Gr
 a

 ves

Rocham
 and bea u

 on Washingt

Y


KE BAY SAPEA CHE

Wayne


La
 fa ye

 to

 yorktown When Cornwallis YORKTOWN, 1781 and his army joined Arnold’s at PENNSYLVANIA ­Petersburg, Virginia, their combined NJ Po forces totaled 7,200 men. As the e MD m tt ac Ri Americans approached, Cornwallis ve r picked Yorktown, a small tobacco DE VIRGINIA port between the York and James Rivers on the Chesapeake Bay, as his base of operations. He was not woror k Ri ried about an American attack, since i v R v e r es General Washington’s main force Richmond ra s seemed preoccupied hundreds of miles Petersburg Yorktown B ar away with the British occupation of de G rass e New York City, and the British navy 50 Miles still controlled American waters. NORTH CAROLINA 0 50 Kilometers In July 1780, the French had finally managed to land 6,000 solWWN64 diers at Newport, Rhode Island, but they Figure had been bottled up there for a year, M5_4 a first proof ­blockaded by the British fleet. As long as the British navy maintained suprem15p5 x15p5 acy along the coast, the Americans could not hope to win the war. In May 1781, however, the elements for a combined F ­ rench-​­American action suddenly fell into place. As Cornwallis’s army moved into Virginia, Washington persuaded the commander of the French army in Rhode Island to join in an attack on the British in New York City. Before they could strike, however, word came from the Caribbean that Admiral F ­ rançois-​­Joseph-​­Paul de Grasse was headed for the Chesapeake Bay with his large fleet of French warships and some 3,000 soldiers. The u ­ nexpected news led General Washington to change his strategy. He ­immediately began moving his army briskly south toward Yorktown. At the same time, French ships slipped out of the British blockade at Newport and also headed south. Somehow, in an age when communications were difficult, the French and Americans coordinated a complex plan to join naval and army forces and destroy the main British army. Success depended on the French fleet getting to the Chesapeake Bay off the coast of Virginia before the British navy did. On August 30, Admiral de Grasse’s t­wenty-​­four warships won the race to Yorktown, and French troops landed to join the Americans. On September 6, the day after a British fleet appeared, de Grasse attacked and forced the British navy to abandon Cornwallis’s surrounded army, leaving him with no way to get fresh food and supplies. De Grasse then sent ships up the Chesapeake to ferry down the soldiers who were marching south from New York,

 228  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 Surrender of Lord Cornwallis The artist, John Trumball, completed his painting of the pivotal British surrender at Yorktown in 1781.

 ­ ringing the combined American and French armies to 19,000 ­men—​­more b than double the size of Cornwallis’s army. The Battle of Yorktown began on September 28. The American and French troops soon closed off Cornwallis’s last escape route and began bombarding the British with cannons. They held out for three grim weeks before running out of food and suffering from widespread disease. On October 17, 1781, a glum Cornwallis surrendered. Two days later, the British forces marched out and laid down their weapons. Cornwallis himself claimed to be too ill to participate. His report to the British commander in chief in New York was painfully brief: “I have the mortification to inform your Excellency that I have been forced to surrender the troops under my command.” Among Cornwallis’s surrendered army were five of Thomas Jefferson’s former slaves and two owned by George Washington.

The Treaty of Paris (1783)
 The war was not yet over. The British still controlled New York City, Charleston, and Savannah, and British ships still blockaded other American ports, but any lingering British hopes of a military victory vanished at Yorktown. In

A
War of Endurance 229 

 London, Lord North reacted to the news as if he had “taken a ball [bullet] in the breast.” The shaken prime minister exclaimed: “Oh God, it is all over.” In December 1781, King George decided against sending more troops to America. On February 27, 1782, Parliament voted to begin negotiations to end the war, and on March 20, Lord North resigned. In part, the British leaders chose peace in America so that they could concentrate on their continuing global war with France and Spain. NORTH AMERICA, 1783

 RUSSIANS

 UNEXPLORED

HUDSON BAY

Lake of
 the Woods

Claimed
 by Spain, Russia, and England

U


 pi sip sis er iv

Mis
R


 LO

PACIFIC OCEAN

Claimed by
England
 and U.S.

St
.


Claimed by
England
 and U.S.

Lawr
 enc

 NEWFOUNDLAND

 IS

 IA

 e

 er Riv

NOVA SCOTIA
Boston New York 
UNITED STATES

 NA

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Charleston
Savannah


Claimed by
U.S. and Spain


 FLORIDA

M
E


GULF OF MEXICO

X


Hispaniola


I
C


Cuba


O


Great Britain


BRITISH HONDURAS

United States
Spain


 CEN

 Disputed territory





1,000 Miles
1,000 Kilometers


TR AL

Russia


St.-Pierre Et
Miquelon
(France)
Magdalen
Islands


Haiti
(France)
CARIBBEAN SEA

AM RICA E

SOUTH AMERICA

 ■ What were the terms of the Treaty of Paris? WWN64 Figure M5_5 ■ Why might the ambiguities in the treaty’s language have led to conflicts among the FirstAmericans, proof the Spanish, and the British? 31p0 x 31p0

 230  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 a negotiated peace Upon learning of the British decision to negotiate, the Continental Congress named a group of prominent Americans to go to Paris to discuss terms with the British. They included John Adams, who was then representing the United States in the Netherlands; John Jay, minister (ambassador) to Spain; and Benjamin Franklin, already in France. The cranky John Adams was an odd choice since, as Thomas Jefferson said, “He hates [Benjamin] Franklin, he hates John Jay, he hates the French, he American Commissioners of the Preliminary hates the English.” In the end, Franklin Peace Negotiations with Great Britain An and Jay did most of the work leading to unfinished painting from 1782 by Benjamin West. From left, John Jay, John Adams, Benjamin the peace treaty. Franklin, Henry Laurens, and Franklin’s The negotiations dragged on for grandson William Temple Franklin. months until, on September 3, 1783, the Treaty of Paris was finally signed. Its provisions were surprisingly favorable to the United States. Great Britain recognized the independence of the thirteen former colonies a­ nd—​­surprisingly—​ ­agreed that the Mississippi River was America’s western boundary, thereby more than doubling the territory of the new nation. The boundaries of the United States created by the treaty covered some 900,000 square miles, most of which were west of the Proclamation Line of 1763, a vast region long inhabited by Indians and often referred to as ­trans-​­Appalachia. Native Americans were given no role in the negotiations, and they were by far the biggest losers in the final treaty. The treaty’s unclear references to America’s northern and southern borders would be a source of dispute for years. Florida, as it turned out, passed back to Spain from Britain. As for the prewar debts owed by Americans to British merchants, the U.S. negotiators promised that British merchants should “meet with no legal impediment” in seeking to collect money owed them.

War as an Engine of Change
 Like all major wars, the American war for independence had unexpected effects on political, economic, and social life. The long war upset traditional social relationships and affected the lives of people who had long been dis-

War as an Engine of Change  231


 criminated a­ gainst—​­African Americans, women, and Indians. In important ways, then, the Revolution was an engine for political experimentation and social change. It ignited a prolonged debate about what new forms of government would best serve the new American republic.

 republican ideology

 American Revolutionaries embraced a republican ideology instead of the aristocratic or monarchical outlook that had long dominated Europe. The new American republic was not a democracy in the purest sense of the word. In ancient Greece, the Athenians had practiced direct democracy, which meant that citizens voted on all major decisions affecting them. The new United States, however, was technically ­ roperty-​­holding white men governed a representative democracy, in which p themselves through the concept of republicanism, whereby they elected representatives, or legislators, to make key decisions on their behalf. As Thomas Paine observed, representative democracy had many advantages over monarchies, one of which was greater transparency: “Whatever are its excellencies and defects, they are visible to all.” To preserve the delicate balance between liberty and power in the new republic, Revolutionary leaders believed that they must protect the rights of individuals and states from being violated by the national government. The war for independence thus sparked a wave of new state constitutions that remains unique in history. Not only was a new nation coming into being as a result of the Revolutionary War, but new s­ tate-​­level governments were also being created, all of which were designed to reflect the principles of the republican ideology limiting the powers of government so as to protect the rights of the people.

 state governments

 Most of the political experimentation between 1776 and 1787 occurred at the state level in the form of written constitutions in which the people granted limited authority to their governments. The first state constitutions created state governments during the War of Independence much like the colonial governments, but with elected governors and senates instead of royally appointed governors and councils. Most of the constitutions also included a bill of rights that protected freedom of speech, trial by jury, freedom from ­self-​­incrimination, and the like. Most also limited the powers of governors and strengthened the powers of the legislatures.

 the articles of confederation

 Once the colonies had declared their independence in 1776, the Patriots needed to form a national government as well. Before March 1781, the Continental Congress had exercised emergency powers without any legal or official authority.

 232  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 Plans for a permanent form of government emerged quickly. As early as July 1776, a committee appointed by the Continental Congress had produced a draft constitution called the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union. When the Articles of Confederation finally were ratified in March 1781, they essentially legalized the way things had been operating since independence had been declared. The Confederation government reflected the ­long-​­standing fears of monarchy by not allowing for a president or chief executive. In the Confederation government, Congress was given full power over foreign affairs and disputes between the states. But it had no national courts and no power to enforce its resolutions and ordinances. It could not levy taxes, and its budgetary needs depended on requisitions from the states, which state legislatures often ignored. The states were in no mood to create a strong central government. The Confederation Congress, in fact, had less power than the colonists had once accepted in the British Parliament, because it could not regulate interstate and foreign commerce. For certain important acts, moreover, a “special majority” in the Confederation Congress was required. Nine states had to approve measures dealing with war, treaties, coinage, finances, and the army and navy. Unanimous approval from the states was needed both to impose tariffs (often called “duties,” or taxes) on imports and to amend the Articles. For all its weaknesses, however, the Confederation government represented the most practical structure for the new nation. After all, the Revolution on the battlefields had yet to be won, and an America besieged by British armies and warships could not risk divisive debates over the distribution of power. The new state governments were not willing in 1776 to create a strong national government that might threaten their liberties.

 expansion of political participation The new political opportunities afforded by the creation of state governments led more ordinary citizens to participate than ever before. Property qualifications for voting, which already allowed an overwhelming majority of white men to vote, were lowered after 1776 as a result of the Revolutionary fervor. As a group of farmers explained, “no man can be free and independent” unless he possesses “a voice . . . ​in the most important officers in the legislature.” In Pennsylvania, Delaware, North Carolina, and Georgia, any male taxpayer could vote, regardless of how much, if any, property they owned. Farmers, tradesmen, and shopkeepers were soon elected to state legislatures. In general, a higher percentage of American males could vote in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century than could their counterparts in Great Britain.

The Social Revolution  233


The Social Revolution
 What did the Revolution mean to those workers, servants, farmers, and freed slaves who participated? Many hoped that the Revolution would remove, not reinforce, the elite’s traditional political and social advantages. Wealthy Patriots, on the other hand, would have been content to replace royal officials with the rich, the wellborn, and the ­able—​­and let it go at that. In the end, the new republic’s social fabric and political culture were visibly different after the war. The energy created by the concepts of liberty, equality, and democracy changed the dynamics of American social and political life in ways that people could not have imagined in 1776.

 the exodus of loyalists The Loyalists were hurt the most by the brutal civil war embedded within the Revolutionary War. They suffered greatly for their stubborn loyalty to King George III and for their refusal to pledge allegiance to the new United States. During and after the Revolution, their property was confiscated, and many Loyalists were assaulted, brutalized, and executed by Patriots (and vice versa). After the American victory at Yorktown, tens of thousands of panicked Loyalists made their way to seaports to board British ships and flee the United States. Thousands of African Americans, mostly runaway slaves, also flocked to New York City, Charleston, and Savannah, with many of their angry owners in hot pursuit. Boston King, a runaway, said he saw white slave owners grabbing their escaped slaves “in the streets of New York, or even dragging them out of their beds.” General Guy Carleton, the commander in chief of British forces in North America, organized the mass evacuation after the war. He intentionally violated the provisions of the Treaty of Paris by refusing to return slaves to their owners, defiantly telling a furious George Washington that his slaves from Mount Vernon had already escaped and boarded British ships bound for Canada. Some 80,000 desperate ­refugees—​­white Loyalists, free blacks, freed slaves, and Native Americans who had allied with the B ­ ritish—​­dispersed throughout the British Empire, changing it in the process. Among the refugees who resettled in Canada were 3,500 former slaves who had been given their freedom in exchange for joining the British army. Some 2,000 freed blacks opted to go to Sierra Leone, where British abolitionists helped them create an experimental colony called Freetown. About 12,000 Georgia and South Carolina Loyalists, including thousands of their slaves (the British granted freedom only to the slaves of Patriots),

 234  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 The Fate of the Loyalists (1783) After the Revolution, many Loyalists fled to British colonies in the Caribbean and Canada. This British cartoon shows Patriots, depicted as “savages let[ting] loose,” mercilessly hanging and scalping Loyalists.

 went to ­British-​­controlled East Florida, only to see their new home handed over to Spain in 1783. Spanish authorities gave them a hard choice: swear allegiance to the Spanish king and convert to Catholicism or leave. Most of them left. Some of the doubly displaced Loyalists sneaked back into the United States, but most went to British islands in the Caribbean. “We are all cast off,” complained one embittered Loyalist. “I shall ever tho’ remember with satisfaction that it was not I deserted my King [George III], but my King that deserted me.” The largest number of Loyalist exiles landed in Canada, where royal officials wanted them to displace the earlier French presence. The departure of so many Loyalists from America was one of the most important social consequences of the Revolution. Their confiscated homes, lands, and vacated jobs created new social, economic, and political opportunities for Patriots. In Paris, however, the Americans negotiating the peace treaty agreed that the Continental Congress would “earnestly recommend” to the states that the confiscated property be restored, although it rarely was.

 freedom of religion

 The Revolution also tested traditional religious loyalties and set in motion important changes in the relationship

The Social Revolution  235


 Religious development The Congregational Church developed a national presence in the early nineteenth century. Lemuel Haynes, depicted here, was its first African American minister.

 between church and government. Before the Revolution, Americans tolerated religious dissent; after the Revolution, Americans insisted on complete freedom of r­ eligion as embodied in the principle of separation of church and state. The Anglican Church, established as the official religion in five colonies and parts of two others, was especially vulnerable to changes prompted by the war. Anglicans tended to be ­pro-​­British, and ­non-​­Anglicans, notably Baptists and Methodists, outnumbered Anglicans in all states except Virginia. All but Virginia eliminated tax support for the church before the fighting was over, and Virginia did so soon afterward. Although Anglicanism survived in the form of the new Episcopal Church, it never regained its p ­ re-​­Revolutionary stature. In 1776, the Virginia Declaration of Rights guaranteed the free exercise of religion, and in 1786 the Virginia Statute of Religious Freedom (written by Thomas Jefferson) declared that “no man shall be compelled to frequent

 236  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 or support any religious worship, place or ministry whatsoever” and “that all men shall be free to profess, and by argument to maintain, their opinions in matters of religion.” These statutes, and the Revolutionary ideology that justified them, helped shape the course that religious life would take in the new United States: diverse and voluntary rather than monolithic and enforced by the government.

Slaves and the Revolution
 The sharpest irony of the American Revolution is that Great Britain offered enslaved blacks more opportunities for freedom than did the United States. In November 1775, the British royal governor of Virginia, John Murray (Lord Dunmore), himself a slave owner, announced that all slaves and indentured servants would gain their freedom if they joined the Loyalist cause. Within a month, the British had attracted more than 300 former servants and slaves to what came to be called the “Ethiopian Regiment.” The number soon grew to almost 1,000 males and twice as many women and children. One former slave renamed himself “British Freedom.” Another runaway who joined the a­ ll-​­black Ethiopian Regiment was Harry Washington, one of George Washington’s slaves. In his new role as soldier, he wore a uniform embroidered with the motto, “Liberty to Slaves.” Washington’s farm manager wrote the general that all his slaves “would leave us if they believed they could make their escape,” for “liberty is sweet.” The British recruitment of slaves outraged George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and other white plantation owners in Virginia, where 40 percent of the population was black. Washington predicted that if Dunmore’s efforts were “not crushed” soon, the number of slaves joining the British army would “increase as a Snow ball by Rolling.” Jefferson expressed the same concerns after t­wenty-​­three slaves escaped from his plantation outside Charlottesville. Jefferson eventually reclaimed six of them, only to sell them for their “disloyalty.” Another Virginia planter captured a ­fifteen-​­year-​­old girl who tried to join the British army, lashed her eighty times with his whip, and then poured hot coals on her wounds.

 southern backlash

 In the end, the British policy of recruiting slaves backfired. The “terrifying” prospect of British troops arming slaves persuaded many f­ence-​­ ­ straddling southerners to join the Patriot cause. Edward Rutledge of South Carolina said that the British decision to arm

Slaves and the Revolution  237


 slaves did more to create “an eternal separation between Great Britain and the colonies than any other expedient.” For Rutledge and many other southern whites, the Revolution became primarily a war to defend slavery. In 1775, Thomas Jeremiah, a free black, was convicted and executed in Charleston, South Carolina, for telling slaves that British troops were coming “to help the poor Negroes.” In response to the British recruitment of enslaved African Americans, at the end of 1775 a desperate General Washington authorized the enlistment of free ­blacks—​­but not ­slaves—​­into the American army. In February 1776, however, southern representatives convinced the Continental Congress to instruct General Washington to enlist no more African Americans, free or enslaved. Two states, South Carolina and Georgia, refused to allow any blacks to serve in the Patriot forces. As the American war effort struggled, however, some states ignored southern wishes. Massachusetts organized two ­all-​­black army units, and Rhode Island organized one, which also included Native Americans. About 5,000 African Americans fought on the Patriot side, and most of them were free blacks from northern states. The white Belknap family of ­Framingham, Massachusetts, freed their African American slave Peter Salem so that he might enlist in the Massachusetts militia. Salem was with the Minutemen at Concord in 1775 and also fought alongside other blacks at the Battles of Bunker Hill and Saratoga. Another former slave who fought at Bunker Hill, Salem Poor, was commended after the battle for being a “Brave & gallant Soldier” who “behaved like an experienced officer, as well as an excellent soldier.” Overall, the British army, which liberated 20,000 enslaved blacks during the war, was a far greater instrument of emancipation than the American forces. Most of the newly freed blacks found their way to Canada or to British colonies on Caribbean islands. While thousands of free blacks and runaway slaves fought in the war, the vast majority of African Americans did not choose sides so much as they chose freedom. Several hundred thousand enslaved blacks, mostly in the southern states, took advantage of the disruptions caused by the war to seize their freedom. In the North, which had far fewer slaves than the South, the ideals of liberty and freedom led most states to end slavery, either during the war or shortly afterward. But those same ideals had little to no impact in the southern states. These contrasting attitudes toward slavery would continue to shape the political disputes of the young nation.

 238  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 the status of women

 The ideal of liberty spawned by the Revolution applied to the status of women as much as to that of African Americans. The legal status of women was governed by British common law, which essentially treated them like children, limiting their roles to child rearing and maintaining the household. Women could not vote or hold office. Few had access to formal education. Boys were taught to read and write; girls were taught to read and sew. Most New England women in the eighteenth century could not write their own names. Until married, women were subject to the dictates of their fathers. Once a woman married, she essentially became the property of her husband, and her property became his. A married woman had no right to buy, sell, or manage property. Technically, any wages a wife earned belonged to the husband. Women could not sign contracts, file lawsuits, or testify in court. A husband could beat and even rape his wife without fearing legal action. Divorces were extremely difficult to obtain. Yet the Revolution offered women new opportunities for independence and public service. Women in many communities made clothing for soldiers and organized ­fund-​­raising efforts. Others became camp followers, traveling and camping with the soldiers, often with their children in tow. The women in the army camps cooked meals, washed clothes, nursed wounds, and, on occasion, took part in battle. In 1777, some 400 armed women mobilized to defend Pittsfield, Vermont. The men of the town had gone off to fight when a band of Loyalists and Indians approached the village. In a ­day-​­long battle, the women held off the attackers until help arrived. A few women disguised their gender and fought as ordinary soldiers. An exceptional case was Deborah Sampson, who joined a Massachusetts regiment as “Robert Shurtleff ” and served from 1781 to 1783 by the “artful concealment” of her gender. She was wounded twice, leading Congress to declare after the war that she was the highest “example of female heroism, fidelity, and courage.” Perhaps the feistiest of the fighting women was Georgian Nancy Hart, a tall, ­red-​­haired cousin of American general Daniel Morgan and a skilled hunter (local Native Americans called her “War Woman”). When a group of Loyalists accused her of helping a Patriot escape, she didn’t deny the charge. Instead, she shot two of them, then held the others at gunpoint until her husband arrived. Her husband, so the story goes, wanted to shoot the remaining Tories, but she insisted on hanging them instead.

 women and liberty

 America’s war against Great Britain led some women to demand their own independence. Early in the Revolution-

Slaves and the Revolution  239


 ary struggle, Abigail Adams, one of the most learned, spirited, and independent women of the time, wrote to her husband, John: “In the new Code of Laws which I suppose it will be necessary for you to make, I desire you would remember the Ladies. . . . ​Do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the Husbands.” Since men were “Naturally Tyrannical,” she wrote, “why then, not put it out of the power of the vicious and the Lawless to use us with cruelty and indignity with impunity.” Otherwise, “if particular care and attention is not paid to the Ladies we are determined to foment a Rebellion, and will not hold ourselves bound by any Laws in which we have Abigail Adams Abigail Adams, wife of no voice, or Representation.” John Adams, in a 1766 portrait. Though John Adams could not help but an ardent Patriot, Adams and other “laugh” at his wife’s radical proposals women like her saw disappointingly few for female equality. While surprised changes in women’s rights emerging in the new United States. that women might be dissatisfied, he insisted on retaining the traditional privileges enjoyed by males: “Depend upon it, we know better than to repeal our Masculine systems.” If women were to be granted equality, he warned, then “children and apprentices” and “Indians and Negroes” would also demand equal rights and freedoms. Thomas Jefferson shared Adams’s stance. In his view, there was no place in the new American republic for female political participation. Women should not “wrinkle their foreheads with politics” but instead “soothe and calm the minds of their husbands.” Improvements in the status of women would have to wait. New Yorker Margaret Livingston admitted as much in 1776 when she wrote that “our Sex are doomed to be obedient [to men] at every stage of life so that we shan’t be great gainers by this contest [the Revolutionary War].”

 native americans and the revolution Most Native Americans sought to remain neutral in the war, but both British and American agents urged the chiefs to fight on their side. The result was chaos. Indians on both sides attacked villages, burned crops, and killed civilians.

 213003_05_197-243_r3_th.indd 239

24/10/15 1:06 PM


 240  CHAPTER 5  The American Revolution 1776–1783

 During and after the war, the new American government assured its Indian allies that it would respect their lands and their rights. But many white Americans used the disruptions of war to destroy and displace Native Americans. Once the war ended and independence was secured, there was no peace for the Indians. By the end of the eighteenth century, ­land-​­hungry Americans were again pushing into Indian territories on the western frontier.

The Emergence of an American Culture
 On July 2, 1776, when the Second Continental Congress had resolved “that these United Colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independent states,” John Adams had written Abigail that future generations would remember that date as their “day of deliverance.” People, he predicted, would celebrate the occasion with “pomp and parade, with shows, games, sports, guns, bells, bonfires and illuminations [fireworks] from one end of this continent to the other, from this time forward, forever more.” Adams got everything right but the date. As luck would have it, July 4, the date the Declaration of Independence was approved, became Independence Day rather than July 2, when independence was formally declared. The celebration of Independence Day quickly became the most important public ritual in the United States. People from all walks of life suspended their normal routine in order to devote a day to parades, patriotic speeches, and fireworks displays. In the process, the infant republic began to create its own myth of national identity. “What a day!” exclaimed the editor of the Southern Patriot in 1815. “What happiness, what emotion, what virtuous triumph must fill the bosoms of Americans!” American nationalism embodied a stirring idea. This new nation was not rooted in antiquity. Its people, except for the Native Americans, had not inhabited it over many centuries, nor was there any notion of a common ethnic descent. “The American national consciousness,” one observer wrote, “is not a voice crying out of the depth of the dark past, but is proudly a product of the enlightened present, setting its face resolutely toward the future.” Many people, at least since the time of the Pilgrims, had thought of the “New World” as singled out for a special identity, a special mission assigned by God. John Adams proclaimed the opening of America “a grand scheme and design in Providence for the illumination and the emancipation of the slavish part of mankind all over the earth.” This sense of providential mission provided much of the energy for America’s development as a new national republic. From the democratic rhetoric of

The Emergence of an American Culture  241


 Thomas Jefferson to the pragmatism of George Washington to heady toasts bellowed in South Carolina taverns, patriots everywhere claimed a special role for American leadership in history. The first mission was to gain independence. Now, people believed, God was guiding the United States to lead the world toward greater liberty and equality. Benjamin Rush, a Philadelphia doctor and scientist, issued a prophetic statement in 1787: “The American war is over: but this is far from being the case with the American Revolution. On the contrary, but the first act of the great drama is closed.”

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 Military Challenges In 1776 the British had the mightiest army and navy in the world, and they supplemented their military might by hiring professional German soldiers called Hessians to help put down the American Revolution. The Americans had to create an ­army—​­the Continental a­ rmy—​­from scratch. George Washington realized that the Americans had to turn unreliable ­citizen-​­soldiers into a disciplined fighting force and try to wage a long, costly war, staking that the British army was fighting thousands of miles from its home base and would eventually cut its losses and give up.

•


 Turning Points After forcing the British to evacuate Boston, the American army suffered a string of defeats before George Washington surprised the Hessians at the Battle of Trenton at the end of 1776. The victory bolstered American morale and prompted more enlistments in the Continental Army. The French were likely allies for the colonies from the beginning of the conflict because they resented their losses to Britain in the Seven Years’ War. After the British defeat at the Battles of Saratoga, the colonies brokered an alliance with France. Washington’s ability to hold his ragged forces together, despite daily desertions and two especially difficult winters in Morristown and Valley Forge, was another major turning point. The British lost support on the frontier and in the southern colonies when terrorist tactics backfired. The Battle of Kings Mountain drove the British into retreat, and French supplies and the French fleet helped tip the balance and ensure the American victory at the Battle of Yorktown.

•


 Civil War The American Revolution was also a civil war, dividing families and communities. There were at least 100,000 Loyalists in the colonies. They included royal officials, Anglican ministers, wealthy southern planters, and the elite in large seaport cities; they also included many humble people, especially recent immigrants. After the hostilities ended, many Loyalists, including slaves who had fled plantations to support the British cause, left for Canada, the West Indies, or England.

•


A
Political and Social Revolution The American Revolution disrupted and transformed traditional class and social relationships. American Revolutionaries embraced a republican ideology, and more white men gained the right to vote as property requirements were removed. But fears of a monarchy being reestablished led colonists to vest power in the states rather than in a national government under the Articles of Confederation. New state constitutions instituted more elected positions, and most included bills of rights that protected individual liberties. The Virginia Statute of Religious Freedom led the way in guaranteeing the separation of church and state, and religious toleration was transformed into religious freedom. 


•


 African Americans, Women, and Native Americans Northern states began to free slaves, but southern states were reluctant. Although many women had undertaken nontraditional roles during the war, afterward they remained largely confined to the domestic sphere, with no changes to their legal or political status. The Revolution had catastrophic effects on Native Americans, regardless of which side they had allied with during the war. American settlers seized Native American land, often in violation of existing treaties.

Chronology






















 British forces seize New York City General Washington’s troops defeat British forces at the Battle of Trenton States begin writing new constitutions American forces defeat British in a series of battles at Saratoga Americans and French form a military alliance George Rogers Clark’s militia defeats British troops in Mississippi Valley American forces defeat the Iroquois Confederacy at Newtown, New York Patriots defeat Loyalists at the Battle of Kings Mountain British invasion of southern colonies turned back at the Battles of Cowpens and Guilford Courthouse American and French forces defeat British at Yorktown, Virginia Articles of Confederation are ratified Continental Congress becomes Confederation Congress Treaty of Paris is signed, formally ending Revolutionary War Virginia adopts the Statute of Religious Freedom

Key Terms
Hessians p. 202


Battle of Yorktown (1781) p. 228


 ­citizen-​­soldiers p. 202

 republican ideology p. 231

Battle of Trenton (1776) p. 209


 state constitutions p. 231

Battles of Saratoga (1777) p. 215


Articles of Confederation p. 232


 alliance with France p. 215

Virginia Statute of Religious
Freedom (1786) p. 235


Valley Forge (1777–1778) p. 216


IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve ­learned—​­and learn what you’ve ­missed—​­with personalized feedback along the way. 




Strengthening
 the New Nation

 Washington as a Statesman at the Constitutional Convention (1856) This painting by Junius Brutus Stearns is one of the earliest depictions of the drafting of the Constitution, capturing the moment after the convention members, including George Washington (right), completed the final draft.

D


 uring the 1780s, the United States of America was rapidly emerging from its colonial past as the lone large republic in an unstable world dominated by monarchies. It was distinctive in that it was born out of a conflict over ideas, principles, and ideals rather than from ­centuries-​­old shared racial or ancestral bonds, as in Europe and elsewhere. America was a democratic republic “brought forth” by certain ­self-​­evident political i­deals—​­that people should govern themselves, that people should have an equal opportunity to prosper, and that governments exist to protect liberty and promote the public good. Those ideals were captured in lasting phrases: All men are created equal. Liberty and justice for all. E pluribus unum (“Out of many, one”—the phrase on the official seal of the United States). How Americans understood, applied, and violated these ideals shaped the new nation’s development after 1783.

Power to the People
 The American Revolution created not only an independent new republic but also a different conception of politics than prevailed in Europe. What Americans most feared in the late eighteenth century was the governmental abuse of power. Memories of the tyranny of King George III, his prime ministers, and royal colonial governors were still raw and frightful. Freedom from such

 focus questions 1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation? How did they contribute to the creation of a new U.S. constitution in 1787? 2. What political innovations did the 1787 Constitutional Convention develop for the new nation?

 3. What were the debates surrounding the ratification of the Constitution? How were they resolved? 4. In what ways did the Federalists’ vision for the United States differ from that of their Republican opponents during the 1790s?

 5. How did the attitudes toward Great Britain and France shape American politics in the late eighteenth century?



