 800  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 full of the zest of darers.” By 1900, a New West and a New South had emerged, and eleven new states had been created out of the western territories.

The Myth of the New South
 After the war between the states, the South fought an inner civil war over the region’s future. Many white southerners embraced the “Lost Cause,” a romanticized interpretation of the war that painted the Confederates as noble defenders of their distinctive way of life against a tyrannical federal government headed by Abraham Lincoln. Southerners were haunted by a lingering nostalgia for the mythic Old South of ­white-​­columned plantations, white supremacy, and ­cotton-​­generated wealth produced by armies of enslaved blacks. As one southerner said, his native region remained “­old-​­fashioned, medieval, [and] provincial, worshipping the dead.” At the same time, no region has inspired a more tenacious pride of place, a localism anchored in family life enlivened by visions of a mythic past. Mississippi writer Eudora Welty once explained that in the South, “feelings are bound up with place.” Home and history are two of the most revered words in southern life. N ­ ineteenth-​­century southerners did not simply live in the present and dream of the future. They were forever glancing backward in the process of moving forward. As William Faulkner recognized in his novel Intruder in the Dust, “The past isn’t dead. It’s not even past.” Other prominent southerners, however, looked more to the future. They called for a New South where the region’s predominantly agricultural economy would be diversified by an expanded industrial sector. The tireless champion of the New South ideal was Henry Woodfin Grady (1850–1889), the powerful managing editor of the Atlanta Constitution. In 1886, Grady told a New York City audience that there had been an Old South “of slavery and ­secession—​­that South is dead. There is now a New South of union and ­freedom—​­that South, thank God, is living, breathing, and growing every hour.” The Old South, he added, “rested everything on slavery and agriculture, unconscious that these could neither give nor maintain healthy growth.” Grady saw the New South becoming “a perfect democracy” of small farms complemented by mills, mines, factories, and cities. The postwar South, Grady claimed, would become a real democracy, no longer run by the planter aristocracy or dependent upon slave labor. Many southerners shared Grady’s vision. The Confederacy, they concluded, had lost the war because it had relied too much upon King C ­ otton—​

The Myth of the New South  801


 a­ nd slavery. In the future, the New South must follow the North’s example (“­out-​­Yankee the Yankees”) and develop a strong industrial sector to go with its agricultural foundation. New South advocates also stressed that m ­ ore-​­efficient farming, using the latest machinery and technical expertise, was essential; that widespread vocational training was urgently needed; and that racial harmony built upon the acceptance by blacks of white supremacy (a peculiar form of a “perfect democracy”) would provide a stable social environment for economic growth.

 textile mills

 The chief accomplishment of the New South’s effort to industrialize was a dramatic expansion of the region’s textile industry, which produced thread and cotton bedding and clothing. From 1880 to 1900, the number of cotton mills in the South grew from 161 to 400, the number of mill workers (most of whom were white, with women and children outnumbering men) increased fivefold, and the demand for cotton products went up eightfold. Thousands of ­dirt-​­poor farm ­folk—​­many of them ­children—​­rushed to take jobs in the mill villages that arose after the war. Seventy percent of mill workers were under the age of t­wenty-​­one, and many were under the age of fourteen. A d ­ awn-​­to-​­dusk job in a mill paying fifty cents a day “was much more interesting than o ­ ne-​­horse farming,” noted one worker, “because you can meet your bills.” Those bills were usually paid to the mill owner, who provided housing and supplies to the workers in his v­ illage—​­for a fee. By 1900, the South had surpassed New England as the largest producer of cotton fabric in the nation.

 the tobacco industry

 Tobacco growing and cigarette production also soared in the New South. Essential to the rise of the tobacco industry was the Duke family of Durham, North Carolina. At the end of the Civil War, Washington Duke took his barn load of tobacco, dried it, and, with the help of his two sons, hitched two mules to his wagon, and traveled across the state, selling tobacco in small pouches as he went. By 1872, the Dukes had a cigarette factory producing 125,000 pounds of tobacco annually. Washington’s son, James Buchanan Duke, wanted even greater success, however. He spent millions on advertising schemes and perfected the mechanized mass production of cigarettes. Duke also undersold competitors and cornered the supply of ingredients needed to make cigarettes. Eventually his primary competitors agreed to join forces with him, and in 1890 Duke brought most of them into the American Tobacco Company, which controlled 90 percent of the nation’s cigarette production. A ferociously hard worker, Duke was

 802  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 well on his way to becoming one of the wealthiest and most powerful men in the nation. “I needed no vacation or time off,” Duke explained. “There ain’t a thrill in the world to compare with building a business and watching it grow before your eyes.”

 other new south industries Effective use of other nat-

 ural resources helped revitalize the South along the Appalachian chain from West Virginia to Alabama. Coal production in the South grew from 5 million tons in 1875 to 49 million tons by 1900. At the southern end of the mountains, Birmingham, Alabama, sprang up during the 1870s in large part because of the massive deposits of iron ore in the surrounding ridges, leading boosters to label the steelmaking city the “Pittsburgh of the South.” Urban and industrial expansion as well as rapid population growth created a need for housing, and after 1870 Southern smokes Allen & Ginter was lumbering became the fastest growing a major tobacco manufacturer that was industry in the South. Northern invesacquired by the American Tobacco tors bought up vast forests of yellow Company. This advertisement, featuring black laborers in the tobacco fields, pine and set about ­clear-​­cutting them plays to the southern nostalgia for the and hauling the logs to new sawmills, “Old Dominion” before the Civil War. where they were milled into lumber for the construction of homes and businesses. By 1900, lumber had surpassed textiles in annual economic value. Still, for all of its advances, the South continued to lag behind the rest of the nation in industrial development.

 the redeemers

 Henry Grady’s vision of a New South celebrated the Redeemers, the conservative, ­pro-​­business, white politicians in the Democratic party who had embraced the idea of industrial progress grounded in white supremacy. Their supporters referred to them as Redeemers because

The Failings of the New South  803


 they supposedly saved (“redeemed”) the South from Yankee domination and “black rule” during Reconstruction. The Redeemers included a rising class of lawyers, merchants, railroad executives, and entrepreneurs who wanted a more diversified economy. They also sought cuts in state taxes and expenditures, including those for the p ­ ublic-​ ­school systems started after the war. “Schools are not a necessity,” claimed a Virginia governor. Louisiana cut school funding so much that the percentage of its residents unable to read and write actually increased between 1880 and 1900. Black children in particular suffered from such cutbacks. But the Redeemers did not want educated African Americans. “What I want here is Negroes who can make cotton,” explained a white planter, “and they don’t need education to help them make cotton.”

The Failings of the New South
 Despite the development of mills and factories, the South in 1900 remained the least industrial, least urban, least educated, and least prosperous region in the nation. Per capita income in the South in 1900 was only 60 percent of the national average. The typical southerner was less likely to be tending a textile loom or a steel furnace than, as the saying went, facing the eastern end of a westbound mule. The South was still dependent on the North for investment capital and manufactured goods. Cotton remained king after the Civil War, although it never regained the huge profitability it had generated in the 1850s. By the 1880s, southern farmers were producing as much cotton as they had before the war, but were earning far less money because the world price for cotton had declined.

 southern poverty

 Henry Grady also hoped that growing numbers of southern farmers would own their own land by the end of the nineteenth century. But the opposite occurred. Many southern farmers actually lost ownership of the land that they worked each year. A prolonged decline in crop prices during the last third of the nineteenth century made it more difficult than ever to buy and own land. By 1900, an estimated 70 percent of farmers did not own the land they worked, and in no southern state were more than half of farmers landowners.

 the ­crop-​­lien system

 Because most southern communities had no banks after the Civil War, people had to find ways to operate with little or no cash. Many rural areas adopted a barter economy in which a “crossroads”

 804  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 “Free slaves” Sharecroppers painstakingly pick cotton while their white overseer watches them from atop his horse.

 or “furnishing” merchant would provide food, clothing, seed, fertilizer, and other items to poor farmers “on credit” in exchange for a share (or “lien”) of their crops when harvested. Southern farmers, white and black, who participated in the ­crop-​­lien system fell into three distinct categories: small farm owners, sharecroppers, and tenants. The farms owned by most southerners were small and did not generate much cash income. As a result, even those who owned their own farms had to pledge a portion of their future crop to the local merchant in return for supplies purchased “on credit.” Sharecroppers, mostly blacks who had nothing to offer but their labor, worked an owner’s land in return for shelter, seed, fertilizer, mules, supplies, ­food—​­and a share of the crop, generally about half. Share tenants, mostly white farmers who were barely better off, might have their own mule or horse, a plow and tools, and a line of credit with the country store, but they still needed to rent land to farm. A few paid their rent in cash, but most, like sharecroppers, pledged a share of the harvested crops to the landowner. Usually, the tenant farmers were able to keep a larger share of the crop (about 60 percent) than allowed to the sharecroppers, which meant that landowners often preferred to rent to “croppers” rather than tenants. And many African American sharecroppers worked for the same planter who had owned them as slaves. “The colored folks,” said a black Alabama sharecropper, “stayed

The Failings of the New South  805


 with the old boss man and farmed and worked on the plantations. They were still slaves, but they were free slaves.” Eighty percent of southern blacks lived on farms in the late nineteenth century. The ­crop-​­lien system was ­self-​­destructive. The overwhelming focus on planting cotton or tobacco year after year stripped the soil of its fertility and stability. This led to disastrous erosion of farmland during rainstorms as soil washed into nearby creeks, collapsing riverbanks and creating e­ ver-​­deepening gullies. In addition, landowners required croppers and tenants to grow only a “cash crop,” usually cotton or tobacco. This meant that the landless farmers could not grow their own vegetable gardens; they had to get their food from the local merchant in exchange for promised cotton. Because most farmers did not own the land they worked, the cabins they lived in, or the tools they used, they had little incentive to enrich the soil or maintain buildings and equipment. “The tenant,” explained a study of southern agriculture in 1897 written by Matthew B. Hammond, a South C ­ arolina–​ ­born economist, “is interested only in the crop he is raising, and makes no effort to keep up the fertility of the land.” The tenant system of farming, Hammond concluded, had been “more wasteful and destructive than slavery was anywhere.” The ­crop-​­lien system was a ­post–​­Civil War version of economic slavery for poor whites as well as for blacks. The landowner or merchant (often the same person) decided what crop would be planted and how it would be cultivated, harvested, and sold. In good times, croppers and tenants barely broke even; in bad times, they struggled to survive. Sharecroppers and share tenants were among the poorest people in the nation. Most of them had little or no education, rarely enough healthy food, and little hope for a better future. Those who worked the farms developed an intense suspicion of their landlords, who often swindled workers by not giving them their fair share of the crops. Landlords kept the books, handled the sale of the crops, and gave the cropper or tenant his share of the proceeds after deducting for all the items supplied during the year, plus interest that ranged, according to one newspaper, “from 24 percent to grand larceny.” Often, the cropper or tenant received nothing at the end of a harvest but a larger debt to be rolled over to the next year’s crop. Over time, the high interest charged on the credit offered by the local store or landowner, coupled with sagging prices for cotton and other crops, created a hopeless cycle of debt among small farmers, sharecroppers, and share tenants.

 falling cotton prices

 As cotton production soared during the last quarter of the nineteenth century, largely because of dramatic growth in

 806  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

SHARECROPPING AND TENANCY, 1880–1900 NH VT

WA MT

 MN

OR ID

 NY

 MI

 WI

SD WY

 PA

IA NE

 NV

OH IL

UT CA

 ME

 ND

 CO

IN WV

 KS

 MO

 VA

MA RI CT NJ DE MD

KY NC

AZ TERR.

Percentage of All
Farmers, 1900


NM TERR.

Increase in Percentage of
Tenants and Sharecroppers
 between 1880 and 1900

 Over 55 percent

 Over 10 percent

 40–55 percent

 7–10 percent

 20–39 percent

 Under 7 percent

 Under 20 percent

Decrease


 TN

OK TERR.

 MS

 GA

 AL

 LA

 TX

 FL



■


 SC

 AR

INDIAN TERR.



500 Miles


500 Kilometers


 Why was there a dramatic increase in sharecropping and tenancy in the late

 WWN64 nineteenth century? Figure M18_1 Explain why the South had more sharecroppers than other parts of the country. First■ proof

 Texas cultivation, the price paid for raw cotton fell steadily. “Have you all felt the effects of the low price of cotton,” Mary Parham of Amite, Louisiana, wrote to her father in 1892. “It nearly ruined us. I did not get my house built. The farmers are very blue here. But [they are] getting ready to plant cotton again.” As the price paid for cotton dropped, desperate farmers planted even more cotton, which only accelerated the decline in price. In the 1870s, annual production of cotton was about 2.6 billion pounds, which brought an average price of 11.77 cents per pound. In the 1880s, the average annual production was 3 billion pounds at 10.44 cents per pound. By 1896, the average price of cotton was down to 7.72 cents. The average annual income of white southerners in 1900 was about half that of Americans outside the South. Eleven percent of whites in the South were illiterate, twice the national average. The region’s poorest people were the 9 million former slaves and their children. Per capita black income in 1900 was a third of that of southern whites, and the black illiteracy rate in the South was nearly 50 percent, almost five times higher than that of whites.

 Race Relations during the 1890s  807

 Race Relations during the 1890s The desperate plight of southern farmers in the 1880s and 1890s affected race relations—​­ ­ for the worse. During the 1890s, white farmers and politicians demanded that blacks be stripped of their voting rights and other civil rights. A violent “Negrophobia” swept across the South and much of the nation. In part, the new wave of racism was spurred by the revival of the old idea that the A ­­ nglo-​ ­Saxon “race” was intellectually and genetically superior to blacks. Another ­reason was that many whites had come to resent any signs of African American ­financial success and political influence. An Alabama newspaper editor declared that “our blood boils when the educated Negro asserts himself politically.”

 disfranchising african americans

 By the 1890s, a new generation of African Americans born and educated since the end of the Civil War was determined to gain true equality. They were more assertive and less patient than their parents. “We are not the Negro from whom the chains of slavery fell a quarter century ago, most assuredly not,” a black editor announced. A growing number of young white adults, however, were equally determined to keep “Negroes in their place.” Mississippi took the lead in stripping blacks of their voting rights. The ­so-​ ­called Mississippi Plan, a series of state constitutional amendments in 1890, set the pattern of disfranchisement that nine more states would follow. The disfranchisement plan first instituted a residence requirement for ­voting—​­two years in the state, one year in a local election district. This was aimed at African American tenant farmers who were in the habit of moving yearly in search of better economic opportunities. Second, Mississippi disqualified blacks from voting if they had committed certain crimes. Third, in order to vote, people had to have paid all of their taxes on time, including a ­so-​­called poll tax specifically for ­voting—​­a restriction that hurt both poor blacks and poor whites. Finally, all voters had to be able to read or at least “understand” the U.S. Constitution. White registrars decided who satisfied this requirement, and they usually discriminated against blacks. Other states added variations on the Mississippi Plan. In 1898, Louisiana inserted into its state constitution the “grandfather clause,” which allowed illiterate whites to vote if their fathers or grandfathers had been eligible to vote on January 1, 1867, when African Americans were still disfranchised. By 1910, Georgia, North Carolina, Virginia, Alabama, and Oklahoma had incorporated the grandfather clause. Also in the Democratic “Solid South,” every southern state created a Democratic primary process to select candidates, and most of these primaries excluded African American voters.

 808  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 When such “legal” means were not enough to ensure their political dominance, white candidates used fraud and violence. Benjamin Tillman, the white supremacist who served as South Carolina’s governor from 1890 to 1894, maintained that his state’s problems were caused by white farmers renting their land to “ignorant lazy negroes.” His effective use of such racist e­ xplanations gained him the support of poor whites in his crusade to oust the ruling Redeemers. Tillman claimed that “I organized the majority [of voters] and put the old families out of business, and we became and are the rulers of the state.” To ensure his election, Tillman and his followers effectively eliminated the black vote. He admitted that “we have done our level best [to prevent blacks from voting]. . . . ​We stuffed ballot boxes. We shot them. We are not ashamed of it.” The whites had regained control of the state government, he concluded, and they were determined to maintain their supremacy. By the end of the nineteenth century, widespread racial ­discrimination—​ ­segregation of public facilities, political disfranchisement, and vigilante justice—​ ­had elevated ­government-​­sanctioned bigotry to an official way of life in the South. Tillman bluntly declared in 1892 that blacks “must remain subordinate or be exterminated.” The efforts to suppress the black vote succeeded throughout the South. In 1896, Louisiana had 130,000 registered black voters; by 1900, it had only 5,320. In Alabama in 1900, the census reported that 121,159 black men were literate; only 3,742, however, were registered to vote. By that year, black voting across the South had declined by 62 percent, the white vote by 26 percent.

 the spread of segregation

 At the same time that southern blacks were being shoved out of the political arena, they were also being segregated socially. The symbolic first target was the railroad passenger car. In 1885, novelist George Washington Cable noted that in South Carolina, blacks “ride in ­first-​­class [rail] cars as a right” and “their presence excites no comment.” From 1875 to 1883, in fact, any local or state law requiring racial segregation violated the federal Civil Rights Act (1875). By 1883, however, many northern whites endorsed the resegregation of southern life. In that year, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the Civil Rights Act of 1875 was unconstitutional. The judges explained that private individuals and organizations could engage in acts of racial discrimination because the Fourteenth Amendment specified only that “no State” could deny citizens equal protection of the law. The Court’s interpretation in what came to be called the Civil Rights Cases (1883) left as an open question the validity of state laws requiring racially segregated public facilities under the principle of “separate but equal,” a slogan

 Race Relations during the 1890s  809

 popular in the South in the late nineteenth century. In the 1880s, Tennessee and Mississippi required railroad passengers to ride in segregated cars. When Louisiana followed suit in 1890 with a similar law, blacks challenged it in the case of Plessy v. Ferguson (1896). The case originated in New Orleans when Homer Plessy, an octoroon (a person having ­one-​­eighth African ancestry), refused to leave a w ­ hites-​­only railroad car and was convicted of violating the law. In 1896, the Supreme Court ruled that states had a right to create laws segregating public places such as schools, hotels, and restaurants. Justice John Marshall Harlan, a Kentuckian who had once owned slaves, was the only member of the Court to dissent. He stressed that the Constitution is “­color-​ ­blind, and neither knows nor tolerates classes among citizens. In respect of civil rights, all citizens are equal before the law.” He feared that the Court’s ruling would plant the “seeds of race hate” under “the sanction of law.” That is precisely what happened. The Court’s ruling in the Plessy case legitimized the widespread practice of racially “separate but equal” facilities in virtually every area of southern life. In 1900, the editor of the Richmond Times insisted that racial segregation “be applied in every relation of Southern life. God Almighty drew the color line, and it cannot be obliterated. The negro must stay on his side of the line, and the white man must stay on his side, and the sooner both races recognize this fact and accept it, the better it will be for both.” The new regulations came to be called “Jim Crow” laws. The name derived from “Jump Jim Crow,” an old s­ ong-​­and-​­dance caricature of African A ­ mericans. During the 1890s, the term Jim Crow became a derisive e­ xpression meaning “Negro.” Signs reading “white only” or “colored only” above restrooms and water fountains emerged as hallmarks of the Jim Crow system. Old racist customs dating back before the Civil War were revived. If whites walked along a sidewalk, blacks were expected to step aside and let them pass. There were even racially separate funeral homes, cemeteries, and churches. When a white deacon in a Mississippi Baptist church saw a black man in the sanctuary, he asked: “Boy, what you doin’ in there? Don’t you know this is a white church?” The black man replied: “Boss, I’m here to mop the floor.” The white man paused and said, “Well, that’s all right then, but don’t let me catch you prayin’. ” Widespread racist violence accompanied the Jim Crow laws. From 1890 to 1899, the United States averaged 188 racial lynchings per year, 82 percent of which occurred in the South. Lynchings usually involved a black man (or men) accused of a crime, often rape. White mobs would seize, torture, and kill the accused, always in ghastly ways. Participating whites viewed lynchings as forms of outdoor recreation. Large crowds, including women and children, would watch amid a ­carnival-​­like atmosphere. The governor of Mississippi

 810  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 The lynching of Henry Smith Despite lack of evidence, Smith was convicted of murdering a white girl in Paris, Texas. A large crowd assembled to watch her family torture Smith on a platform labeled “Justice.” After Smith was burned alive, the townspeople kept his charred teeth and bones as souvenirs.

 declared that “if it is necessary that every Negro in the state will be lynched, it will be done to maintain white supremacy.”

 mob rule in north carolina

 White supremacy was violently imposed in the thriving coastal port of Wilmington, North Carolina, then the largest city in the state, with about 20,000 residents. In 1894 and 1896, black voters, by then a majority in the city, elected African ­Americans to ­various municipal offices, infuriating the white elite. “We will never surrender to a ragged raffle of Negroes,” warned Alfred Waddell, a former congressman and Confederate colonel, “even if we have to choke the Cape Fear River with [black] carcasses.” It was not an idle threat. On the morning of November 10, 1898, some 2,000 white men and teens rampaged through the streets of Wilmington. They first destroyed the offices of the Daily Record, the ­black-​­owned newspaper, then moved into black neighborhoods, shooting African Americans and destroying homes and businesses. Almost 100 blacks were killed. The mob then stormed the city hall, declared that Colonel Waddell was the new mayor, and forced the African American business leaders and elected

 Race Relations during the 1890s  811

 officials to board northbound trains. The new, s­ elf-​­appointed city government issued a “Declaration of White Independence” that stripped blacks of their jobs and voting rights. Desperate black residents appealed for help to the governor as well as President William McKinley, but received none. The Wilmington insurrection marked the first time that a lawfully elected municipal government had been overthrown in the United States. Two years later, in the 1900 statewide elections, white supremacist Democrats vowed to cement their control of the political process. The night before the election, Colonel Waddell urged supporters to use any means necessary to suppress black voting: “You are A ­ nglo-​­Saxons. You are armed and prepared and you will do your duty. . . . ​Go to the polls tomorrow, and if you find the negro out voting, tell him to leave the polls, and if he refuses, kill him, shoot him down in his tracks. We shall win tomorrow if we have to do it with guns.” The Democratic party won by a landslide.

The Black Response
 By the end of the nineteenth century, white supremacy had triumphed across the South. Some African Americans chose to leave in search of equality and opportunity. Those who stayed and resisted white ­supremacy—​­even in ­self-​ defense—​­ ­ were ruthlessly suppressed. When a white woman, Mrs. Pines, struck her black maid, Sarah Barnett, with a stick, Barnett retaliated, hitting the woman. Infuriated that a black woman would hit his wife, Pines’s husband Richard grabbed his pistol and shot Barnett through the shoulder. She survived, only to be convicted of assault and jailed. Another black house servant,

 Wilmington insurrection A mob of white supremacists pose with their rifles before the demolished printing press of the Daily Record, an African American newspaper.

 812  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 Ann Beston, stabbed and killed her abusive mistress in Rome, Georgia. A mob then lynched her. In the face of such overwhelming discrimination and abuse, most African Americans had no choice but to accommodate themselves to the realities of white supremacy and segregation. “Had to walk a quiet life,” explained James Plunkett, a Virginian. “The least little thing you would do, they [whites] would kill ya.” Survival in the Jim Crow South required blacks to wear a mask of deference and discretion. They readily behaved in a “servile way” when shopping at ­white-​­owned stores. News of lynchings, burnings, and beatings sent chilling reminders of the dangers they constantly faced. Black novelist Richard Wright remembered how in his native Mississippi the “sustained expectation of violence” at the hands of whites induced a “paralysis of will and impulse” in him and others. It unconsciously affected his speech, movements, and manners around whites. “The penalty of death awaited me if I made a false move.” Yet accommodation did not mean surrender, as African Americans constructed their own lively culture. A young white visitor to Mississippi in 1910 noticed that nearly every black person he met had “two distinct social selves, the one he reveals to his own people, the other he assumes among the whites.” African churches continued to provide an anchor and hub for black communities. In fact, they were often the only public buildings blacks could use for large group gatherings, such as club meetings, political rallies, and social events. For men especially, churches offered leadership roles and political status. Being elected or appointed a deacon was one of the most prestigious roles a black man could achieve. As was the case in many white churches, men preached and governed church affairs; the women often did everything else. Religious life provided great comfort to people worn down by the daily hardships and abuses associated with segregation. As the Reverend Benjamin Mays explained, he and his black neighbors in South Carolina “believed that the trials and tribulations of the world would be all over when one got to heaven. Beaten down at every turn by the white man, as they were, Negroes could perhaps not have survived without this kind of religion.” One irony of Jim Crow segregation is that it opened up new economic opportunities for African Americans. Black entrepreneurs emerged to provide essential services to the black ­community—​­insurance, banking, barbering, funerals, hair salons. At the same time, blacks formed their own social and fraternal clubs and organizations, all of which provided fellowship, mutual support, and opportunities for service. ­Middle-​­class African American women formed a network of thousands of social clubs that served as engines of social service across the South and the

 Race Relations during the 1890s  813

 nation. They cared for the aged, infirm, orphaned, and abandoned. They provided homes for single mothers and nurseries for working mothers, and they sponsored health clinics and classes in home economics. In 1896, the leaders of women’s clubs formed the National Association of Colored Women. The organization’s first president, Mary Church Terrell, told the members that they had an obligation to serve the “lowly, the illiterate, and even the vicious to whom we are bound by the ties of race and sex, and put forth every effort to uplift and reclaim them.” Courageous African American women declared that black men were not providing sufficient leadership. An editorial in the Woman’s Era called for “timid men and ignorant men” to step aside and let the women show the way.

 ida b. wells

 One of the most outspoken African American activists of the time was Ida B. Wells. Born into slavery in 1862 in Mississippi, she attended a school staffed by white missionaries. She moved in 1880 to Memphis, where she taught in segregated schools and gained entrance to the social life of the city’s African American middle class. In 1883, after being denied a seat on a railroad car because she was black, Wells became the first African American to file suit against such discrimination. The circuit court decided in her favor and fined the railroad, but the Tennessee Supreme Court overturned the ruling. Wells thereafter discovered “[my] first and [it] might be said, my only love”—­journalism—​­and, through it, a weapon with which to wage her crusade for justice. She became editor of Memphis Free Speech, a newspaper that focused on African American issues. In 1892, when three of her friends were lynched by a white mob, Wells launched a crusade against lynching. Angry whites responded by destroying her office and threatening to lynch her. She moved to New York, where she continued to criticize Jim Crow Ida B. Wells While raising four children, Wells sustained her laws and demand that blacks have commitment to ending racial and gender their voting rights restored. She helped discrimination and lynching. found the National Association for

 814  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in 1909 and worked for women’s suffrage. In promoting racial equality, Wells often found herself in direct opposition to Booker T. Washington, the most influential African American leader of the time.

 booker t. washington

 Born a slave in Virginia, in 1856, the son of a black mother and a white father, Booker T. Washington at sixteen had enrolled at Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute, one of several colleges for ­ex-​­slaves created during Reconstruction. There he met the school’s founder, Samuel Chapman Armstrong, who preached moderation Booker T. Washington Founder of the and urged the students: “Be thrifty and Tuskegee Institute, a historically black industrious,” “Command the respect of vocational training school. He went on your neighbors by a good record and a to become the nation’s most prominent good character,” “Make the best of your African American leader. difficulties,” and “Live down prejudice.” Washington listened and learned well. Nine years later, Armstrong received a request from a group in northern Alabama starting a black college called Tuskegee Institute. The new college needed a president, and Armstrong urged them to hire Washington. Although only ­twenty-​­five years old, Washington was, according to Armstrong, “a very capable mulatto, clear headed, modest, sensible, polite, and a thorough teacher and superior man.” Young Washington quickly went to work. He became a skilled fundraiser, gathering substantial gifts from wealthy whites, most of them northerners. The complicated racial dynamics of the late nineteenth century required him to walk a tightrope between being candid and being an effective college president. He learned that he needed to be like a fox rather than a lion if he hoped to maintain the support of the white community. As the years passed, Tuskegee Institute became celebrated for its dedication to discipline and vocational training, and Booker T. Washington became a source of inspiration and hope to millions. Washington’s recurring message to black students focused on the importance of gaining “practical knowledge.” In part to please his white donors, he argued that

 Race Relations during the 1890s  815

 African Americans should not focus on fighting racial segregation. They should instead work hard and remain silent; their priority should be s­ elf-​­improvement rather than social change. Washington told young African Americans to begin “at the bottom” as ­well-​­educated, hardworking farmers, not as social activists. In a famous speech at the Cotton States and International Exposition in Atlanta in 1895, Washington urged the African American community to “Cast down your bucket where you ­are—​­cast it down in making friends . . . ​ of the people of all races by whom we are surrounded. Cast it down in agriculture, mechanics, in commerce, in domestic service, and in the professions.” ­Fighting for “social equality” and directly challenging white rule would be a huge ­mistake (“the extremest folly”). Any effort at “agitation” in the w ­ hite-​ ­dominant South would, he warned, backfire. African Americans first needed to become ­self-​­sufficient economically. Civil rights would have to wait.

 w. e. b. du bois

 Other African American leaders disagreed with Booker T. Washington’s “accommodationist” strategy. W. E. B. Du Bois emerged at the turn of the century as Washington’s foremost rival. A native of ­Massachusetts, Du Bois first experienced racial prejudice as a student at Fisk University in Nashville, Tennessee. Later he became the first African American to earn a doctoral degree from Harvard (in history and sociology). In addition to promoting civil rights, he left a distinguished record as a scholar, authoring more than twenty books. Du Bois had a flamboyant personality and a combative spirit. Not long after he began teaching at Atlanta University in 1897, he launched a public assault on Washington’s strategy for improving the quality of life for ­African Americans. Du Bois called Washington’s celebrated 1895 speech “the Atlanta Compromise” and said that he would not “surrender the leadership of this race to cowards.” Washington, Du Bois argued, “accepted the alleged inferiority of the W. E. B. Du Bois A fierce advocate for Negro” so blacks could “concentrate all black education and civil rights. their energies on industrial education,

 816  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 the accumulation of wealth, and the conciliation of the South.” Du Bois stressed that African American leaders should adopt a strategy of “ceaseless agitation” directed at ensuring the right to vote and winning civil equality. The education of blacks, Du Bois maintained, should not be merely vocational but comparable to that enjoyed by the white elite. Black education should help develop bold leaders willing to challenge Jim Crow segregation and discrimination. The dispute between Washington and Du Bois came to define the tensions that would divide the t­ wentieth-​­century civil rights movement: militancy versus conciliation, separatism versus assimilation, social justice versus economic opportunities. What Du Bois and others did not know was that Washington secretly worked to finance lawsuits challenging segregation and disfranchisement, to stop the brutal culture of race lynching, and to increase funding for public schools. He acted privately because he feared that public activism would trigger violence against Tuskegee and himself.

The Settling of the New West
 Like the South, the West has always been a region wrapped in myths and stereotypes. The vast land west of the Mississippi River contains remarkable geographic extremes: majestic mountains, roaring rivers, d ­ eep-​­sculpted canyons, searing deserts, grassy plains, and dense forests. For most western Americans, the Civil War and Reconstruction were remote events that hardly touched the lives of the Indians, Mexicans, Asians, farmers, ranchers, trappers, miners, and Mormons scattered through the plains, valleys, and mountains. In the West, the relentless march of white conquest, settlement, and exploitation continued, propelled by a special sense of “manifest destiny,” a lust for land, a hope for quick fortunes, and a restless desire to improve one’s lot in life. Between 1870 and 1900, Americans settled more land in the West than they had in the centuries before 1870. By 1900, a third of the nation lived west of the Mississippi River. The p ­ ost–​­Civil War West came to symbolize economic opportunity and personal freedom. On another level, however, the economic exploitation of the West was a story of irresponsible behavior and reckless abuse of nature that scarred the land, decimated its wildlife, and nearly exterminated much of Native American culture.

 the western landscape

 After midcentury, farmers and their families began spreading west to the Great P ­ lains—​­western Kansas, Nebraska, Oklahoma, northern Texas, the Dakotas, eastern Colorado, Wyoming, and Montana. From California, miners moved eastward through the mountains to Utah and Nevada, drawn by one new strike after another. From Texas, nomadic

The Settling of the New West  817


 cowboys annually migrated with herds of cattle northward onto the plains and even across the Rocky Mountains, into the Great Basin of Utah and Nevada. The settlers in the West encountered challenges markedly different from those they had left behind. The Great Plains had little rainfall and few rivers. The scarcity of water and timber rendered useless the familiar trappings of the p ­ ioneer—​­the ax, the log cabin, the rail ­fence—​­as well as traditional methods of tilling the soil. For a long time, the region had been called the Great American Desert, unfit for human habitation and therefore, in the minds of most Americans, the perfect refuge for Indians who refused to embrace the white way of life. But that view changed in the last half of the nineteenth century. The discovery of gold, silver, copper, iron, and coal; the completion of the transcontinental railroads; the collapse of Indian resistance; and the rise of the buffalo hide and ­range-​­cattle industries convinced many Americans, as well as the federal government, that economic development of the West held the key to national prosperity. Capitalists made huge profits investing in western mines, cattle, railroads, and commercial farms. With the use of what water was available, new techniques of dry farming and irrigation could make the vast western lands fruitful after all.

 the migratory stream

 During the second half of the nineteenth century, an unrelenting stream of migrants flowed into what had been the largely Indian and Hispanic West. As millions of ­Anglo-​­Americans, Native Americans, African Americans, Mexicans, South Americans, and European and Chinese immigrants intermingled, they transformed western life and culture. Most of the settlers were white, n ­ ative-​­born farm folk. Three quarters of the p ­ ost–​­Civil War western migrants were men, but they often traveled with wives and children. The largest number of foreign immigrants to the West came from northern Europe and Canada. In the northern plains, Germans, Scandinavians, and Irish were especially numerous. In Nebraska in 1870, a quarter of the 123,000 residents were ­foreign-​­born. In North Dakota in 1890, immigrants composed 45 percent of the residents. Compared with European immigrants, those from China and Mexico were much less numerous but nonetheless ­significant. More than 200,000 Chinese arrived in California between 1876 and 1890, joining some 70,000 others who had come earlier to build railroads and work in mining communities. The Chinese were frequently discriminated against and denied citizenship rights, and they became scapegoats whenever there was an economic downturn. In 1882, Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act, effectively banning further immigration from China.

 the african american migration

 In the aftermath of the collapse of Radical Republican rule in the South, some blacks decided to

 818  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

THE NEW WEST

 CAN

S
E


C o l um b


MONTANA TERRITORY
iver u ri R 1864–1889 Mis so Last Chance Gulch (Helena) 
Lewiston
 i a R i ve r

C A


S


Butte


Sn


 Sutter’s Fort (Sacramento)

R iv


 er

WYOMING TERRITORY 1868–1890

Great
Salt
Lake


UTAH TERRITORY 1868–1896

Leadville
Pikes Peak


Cripple Creek


E


V
A


COLORADO TERRIT 1861–1876

S


 night-Loving Tr ail Good

Co
 lo

A


 do

 r

 ra

 ve

T


D


Ri


ARIZONA TERRITORY 1866–1912 G
i la River 
PACIFIC OCEAN

 te

Denver
Central City


M


N


 CALIFORNIA

 at

Cheyenne


Gold Hill


 NEVADA

Pl


Y


Virginia City


 e

IDAHO TERRITORY 1868–1890

K


S I E R R A


COMSTOCK LODE

Lake
Tahoe


Boise
 ak

 ne

M
C


C


Caldwell
Silver City


 sto

Bozeman
Virginia City


Bannack


Centerville


 OREGON

San
Francisco


Ye l l o w


O


C


A


D


R


WASHINGTON TERRITORY 1863–1889

Santa Fe


NEW MEXICO TERRITORY 1863–1912

Bisbee
Rio


Gr
 an

 de

 Arid lands Grassland Forest Cattle country Mining ■ What were the main industries of the New West? WWN64 ■ How did mining transform its ecology? Figure M18_2 First proof

 MEXICO

The Settling of the New West  819


 CANADA

 uperior ke S La

 iver

 r

 u ri R

Ri


Mis so


 ve

 RY

 ne

Mi


 ss

BLACK HILLS
at 
 te

Ri


 ve

 r

 r

Cheyenne


Omaha


 pu b l i c a n R i v e r Re

 ville

 le Creek Dodge City

RADO TERRITORY 1861–1876

 IN

ILLINOIS
Kansas City Sedalia 
 KANSAS

 kes Peak

Abilene
Ellsworth


St. Louis


 MISSOURI

Wichita


 r ive

 KY

Caldwell


 pi R

 sip

 si s

Tr
 ail

Se
 da lia

Centerville


Ri


 d

 de

 ve

 r

New Orleans


Ri v


 r

Caldwell
Austin


LOUISIANA
Re 
 lor a R i v do er

 os R ive

 ARKANSAS

 zo s

 an

Pec


 TN

 MS

Bra


Gr


 s R iv

 e UNORGANIZED r TERRITORY

Mi s


 k

Co


Western Trail


 TEXAS

Chisholm Trail


MEXICO ITORY
–1912 
 sa

 iv e r

Ar


 an

 night-Loving Tr ail Good

Fe


Rio


Chicago


 IOWA

Ogallala


Denver
 l City

 MI

Centerville


NEBRASKA TERRITORY 1863–1867

R


Pl


 WISCONSIN

 o ve Ri uri

Deadwood
Gulch


NG RY

 MINNESOTA

DAKOTA TERRITORY 1863–1889

Lake Michigan


Miles
City


 io

 sto

Oh


Ye l l o w


 er

San Antonio


EXICO
Corpus Christi 
Galveston


GULF OF MEXICO



200 Miles


200 Kilometers


 820  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 Nicodemus, Kansas By the 1880s, this African A ­ merican colony had become a thriving town of Exodusters. Here, its residents are photographed in front of the First Baptist Church and general store.

 found their own towns in Kansas, Oklahoma, and Mississippi. Others had larger communities in mind. Thousands of African Americans began migrating westward; some 6,000 southern blacks arrived in Kansas in 1879, and as many as 20,000 followed the next year. These migrants came to be known as Exodusters because they were making their exodus from the South in search of a haven from racism and poverty. The foremost promoter of black migration to the West was Benjamin “Pap” Singleton. Born a slave in Tennessee in 1809, he escaped and made his way to Michigan. After the Civil War, he returned to Tennessee and decided that African Americans could never gain equal treatment if they stayed in the former Confederacy. When he learned that land in Kansas could be had for $1.25 an acre, he led a party of 200 colonists to the state in 1878, bought 7,500 acres that had been an Indian reservation, and established the Dunlop community. Over the next several years, thousands of African Americans followed Singleton to Kansas, leading many southern leaders to worry about the loss of black laborers. In 1879, white southerners closed access to the Mississippi River and threatened to sink all boats carrying blacks to the West. An army

The Settling of the New West  821


 officer reported to President Rutherford B. Hayes that “every river landing is blockaded by white enemies of the colored exodus; some of whom are mounted and armed, as if we are at war.” By the early 1880s, however, the exodus of black southerners to the West had petered out. Many African American settlers were unprepared for the harsh living conditions on the plains. Their Kansas homesteads were often not large enough to be ­self-​­sustaining, and most of the black farmers were forced to supplement their income by hiring themselves out to white ranchers. Drought, grasshoppers, prairie fires, and dust storms led to frequent crop failures and bankruptcy. The sudden influx of so many southern blacks also taxed resources and patience. There were not enough houses, stores, or construction materials; few government services; and rarely enough water. Disappointed and frustrated, many African American pioneers in Kansas soon abandoned their land and moved to the few cities in the state. The frontier was not the “promised land” that they had been led to expect, but it was better than what they had experienced in the South. As an Exoduster minister stressed, “We had rather suffer and be free.” By 1890, some 520,000 African Americans lived west of the Mississippi River. As many as 25 percent of the cowboys who participated in the Texas cattle drives were African Americans, and many federal horse soldiers in the West were black.

 western mining

 After the Civil War, the dream of striking it rich by finding gold or silver continued to be the most powerful lure to the West. The nature of mining, however, had changed drastically. Like much of western agriculture, mining had become a m ­ ass-​­production industry as individual prospectors gave way to large mining companies. The first wave of miners who rushed to California in 1849 had sifted gold dust and nuggets out of riverbeds by means of “placer” mining, or “panning.” But once the placer deposits were exhausted, efficient mining required l­arge-​ scale operations, massive machinery, and substantial capital investment. ­ Companies shifted from surface digging to hydraulic mining, dredging, or d ­ eep-​­shaft “­hard-​­rock” mining. Industrial miners used huge hydraulic cannons to strip canyon walls of rock and topsoil in a search for veins of gold or silver. The tons of dirt and debris unearthed by the water cannons covered rich farmland downstream and created sandbars that clogged rivers and killed fish. All told, some 12 billion tons of earth were blasted out of the Sierra Nevada and washed into local rivers. Irate California farmers in the fertile Central Valley bitterly protested the damage done downstream by the industrial mining operations. In 1878, they formed the A ­ nti-​­Debris Association to challenge the powerful mining companies. Efforts to pass state legislation restricting hydraulic mining r­ epeatedly

 822  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 failed because mining companies controlled the votes. The A ­ nti-​­Debris Association then turned to the courts. On January 7, 1884, the farmers won their case when federal judge Lorenzo Sawyer, a former miner, outlawed the dumping of mining debris where it ­ could reach farmland or navigable r­ ivers. Thus Woodruff v. North Bloomfield Gravel Mining Company became the first major environmental legal ­victory in the nation. As a result of the ruling, hydraulic mining dried up, leaving a legacy of abandoned equipment, ugly ravines, ditches, gullies, and mountains of discarded rock and gravel.

 mining boomtowns Tombstone, Arizona, only thirty miles from the Mexican border, was a major silver mining site in the 1870s. By only its fourth year of existence, it was the ­fastest-​­growing boomtown in the South­west. It boasted a bowling alley, four churches, a school, two banks, three newspapers, and an ice cream parlor alongside 110 saloons, fourteen gambling halls, and numerous dance halls and brothels. Some of the other largest and most famous mining boomtowns included Virginia City in Nevada, Cripple Creek and Leadville in Colorado, and Deadwood in the Dakota Territory. They were ­male-​­dominated communities with a substantial population of immigrants: Chinese, Chileans, Peruvians, Mexicans, French, Germans, Scots, Welsh, Irish, and English. Ethnic prejudice was as common as violence in mining towns. The Chinese, for example, were usually prohibited from laboring in the mines but were allowed to operate laundries and work in boardinghouses. Mexicans were often treated the worst. “Mexicans have no business in this country,” a Californian insisted. “The men were made to be shot at, and the women were made for our purposes.” Most of the boomtowns lasted only a few years. Once the mines played out, the people moved on, leaving ghost towns behind. In 1870, Virginia City, then called the richest city in America, had a population of 20,000. Today, it has fewer than 1,000 residents. Deadwood, Dakota Territory A ­gold-​ ­rush town in 1876, before the Dakotas became states.

Life in the New West  823


 New discoveries of gold and silver kept occurring throughout the late ­nineteenth century. The Comstock Lode was found near Gold Hill, Nevada, on the eastern slope of the Sierra Nevadas near the California border. Henry Comstock, a C ­ anadian-​­born fur trapper, gave the new discovery (actually made by other prospectors in 1859) his name. The Comstock Lode, a seam of gold and silver more than fifty feet wide and thousands of feet deep, was the most profitable mine in history to that point. The rapid growth of mining spurred the creation of territorial governments and cries for statehood. But after Colorado’s admission in 1876, there was a long pause in admitting new states because of party divisions in Congress; Democrats refused to create states out of territories that were dominated by Republicans. After the sweeping Republican victory in the 1888 legislative races, however, Congress admitted North and South Dakota, Montana, and Washington as states in 1889, and Idaho and Wyoming in 1890. Utah entered the Union in 1896 (after the Mormons agreed to abandon the practice of polygamy), Oklahoma in 1907; and in 1912 Arizona and New Mexico became the ­forty-​­seventh and ­forty-​­eighth contiguous states. (The final two states, Alaska and Hawaii, were added fifty years later.)

Life in the New West
 In the 1880s, James H. Kyner, a railroad builder in Oregon, witnessed “an almost unbroken stream of emigrants from horizon to horizon.” These “hardy, optimistic folk” traveled west in wagons, on horses, and on foot, “going west to seek their fortunes and to settle an empire.” Most of them thought little about forcing out the Native Americans, Chinese workers, and Hispanic cowboys who were there first. Americans claimed a special “destiny” to settle, develop, and dominate the entire continent. To encourage new settlers in the West, the federal government generously helped finance the construction of four transcontinental railroads, dispatched federal troops to conquer and relocate Indians to designated reservations, and sold ­government-​­owned land at low p ­ rices—​­or gave it to railroad companies as a means of rapidly populating areas served by trains. The transcontinental railroads received some 200 million acres of government land. Over time, the railroads sold much of the land to create towns and ranches along the rail lines. The New West of ranchers and farmers was in fact largely the product of the railroads; the arrival of trains was the lifeblood of the western economy. The surge of western migration had many of the romantic qualities so often depicted in novels, films, and television shows. Those who braved harsh con-

 824  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 ditions and uncertain circumstances were indeed courageous and tenacious. Cowboys and Indians; outlaws and vigilantes; farmers, ranchers, and herders populated the plains, while miners and trappers led more nomadic lives in the hills and backwoods. These familiar images of western life tell only part of the story, however. Drudgery and tragedy were as commonplace as adventure and success. In contrast to the Hollywood versions of the West, the people who settled the ­trans-​ ­Mississippi frontier were a diverse lot: they included women as well as men, African Americans, Hispanics, Asians, and European immigrants. The feverish quest for quick profits also helped fuel a boom/bust economic cycle that injected chronic instability into the society and politics of the region. While the West was being taken from the Indians, cattle were herded into the grasslands where the buffalo had roamed. For many years, wild cattle first brought to America by the Spanish had competed with buffalo in the ­borderlands of Texas and Arizona. Breeding them with ­Anglo-​­American domesticated cattle produced the hybrid Texas longhorns: tough, lean and rangy, they were noted more for speed and endurance than for yielding lots of choice steak. By the time the Confederacy surrendered, millions of longhorns in Texas were wandering freely across the state. They had marginal value, moreover, because the largest urban markets for beef were so far ­away—​­until the railroads arrived.

 the cattle boom

At the end of the Civil War, the Kansas Pacific
 Railroad crews were beginning to lay rails in the buffalo country of the southern plains, between St. Louis and Kansas City. As buffalo hunters roamed the prairies, a few entrepreneurs began to imagine how the extension of the railroad might “establish a market whereat the Southern [cattle] drover and Northern buyer would meet upon an equal footing.” That junction was Abilene, Kansas, a “very small, dead place, consisting of about one dozen log huts.” Once the rail lines reached Kansas from Missouri, Joseph G. McCoy, an Illinois livestock dealer, recognized the possibilities of driving vast herds of cattle raised in Texas northward to Kansas, where they would be loaded onto freight cars and sent to the rest of the nation. In 1867, in tiny Abilene in eastern Kansas, McCoy bought 250 acres and built a s­ tockyard, barn, an office building, livestock scales, a hotel, and a bank. He then sent an agent to Texas to convince the owners of herds bound north on the Chisholm Trail to go through Abilene. Once the bellowing mass of Texas longhorns reached Abilene in August, 1867, cattle by the thousands were loaded onto rail cars and shipped to Chicago stockyards where they were slaughtered and then sent (as sides of beef) to the cities around the nation.

Life in the New West  825


 Herding cattle Cowboys on horseback herd cattle into a corral beside the Cimarron River in 1905.

 Abilene flourished as the first successful cow town. By 1871, there were 700,000 steers passing through it every year. The ability to ship huge numbers of cattle by rail transformed ranching into a huge national industry and turned Kansas into a major economic crossroads. Other cattle towns sprouted along the rail line: Ellsworth, Wichita, Caldwell, Dodge City. None of them lasted more than a few years. Once people bought farms nearby, they lobbied successfully to stop the stampeding Texas herds from coming through their area. The cattlemen simply developed new routes north, to new cow towns and rail hubs in Colorado, Wyoming, and Montana. Soon, those states had their own cattle ranches. By 1883, there were half a million cattle in eastern Montana alone, as the disappearing buffalo herds gave way to steers and sheep. Like miners, cattle ranchers were forced to meet together and develop their own code of laws and ways of enforcing them. As cattle often wandered onto other ranchers’ land, cowboys would “ride the line” to keep the animals off the adjoining ranches. In the spring they would “round up” the herds, which invariably got mixed up, and sort out ownership by identifying the distinctive ranch symbols “branded,” or burned, into the cattle.

 826  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 All that changed in 1873, when Joseph Glidden, an Illinois farmer, developed the first effective and inexpensive form of b ­ arbed-​­wire fencing. Soon the open ­range—​­owned by all, where a small rancher could graze his cattle ­anywhere—​­was no more. B ­ arbed-​­wire fences triggered “range wars,” where small ranchers, called fence cutters, fought to retain the open range. Fencing converted prairie into pastures put a lot of ranchers out of business, and many of them became cowboys working for wages. Cattle raising, like mining, evolved from a romantic adventure into a business dominated by “cattle barons” and large corporations. As one cowboy lamented, “times have changed.”

 chicago

 The rise of the cattle industry helped make Chicago the fastest growing city in the nation in the decades after the Civil War. No city had more influence on the development of ­post–​­Civil War America than Chicago. Located on Lake Michigan and served by several rivers and nine railroads in 1865, it was the gateway to the western economy, a crossroads where city and frontier intersected for mutual benefit. Its lumber yards, grain elevators, stockyards, and slaughterhouses became magnets for immigrants seeking jobs. Chicago, so large, so powerful, so rapidly growing, was the catalyst for much of the West’s development; the bridge between city and country, urban and rural. “The Great Grey City, brooking no rival,” wrote Frank Norris in his novel The Pit (1903), “imposed its dominion upon a reach of country larger than many a k­ ingdom of the Old World. For thousands of miles beyond its confines its i­nfluence was felt. . . . ​Here, ­mid-​­most in the land, beat the Heart of the Nation, whence inevitably must come its immeasurable power, its infinite, infinite, inexhaustible vitality.” The meatpacking industry in places like Cincinnati and Chicago had started not with cattle but with hogs, in part because pork could be preserved longer with salt and smoking than beef. Since colonial days, pork packing had been one of the earliest and most important frontier industries. Hogs reproduce much faster than cattle, and they thrive on corn. As a n ­ ineteenth-​­century economist explained, “what is a hog, but fifteen or twenty bushels of corn on four legs?” In 1850, Chicago slaughterhouses butchered and packed 20,000 hogs. By contrast, Cincinnati (called “Porkopolis”) processed 334,000 each year. That changed after the Civil War as the federal government ordered vast quantities of pork for its armies. By 1862, Chicago had displaced Cincinnati as the world’s largest p ­ ork-​­packing center. By the 1870s, thanks to the railroad connections, the city was processing over 2 million hogs per year. The use of ice cut from frozen Lake Michigan and placed in freight trains enabled Chicago pork to be shipped all the way to the East Coast. But there was no ice in the summer months. This challenge led Gustavus F. Swift, a New Englander who arrived in Chicago in 1875, to begin

Life in the New West  827


 e­ xperimenting with ways to “refrigerate” railcars year round. Within a few years, Swift, and his main competitor Philip Armour, had engineered refrigerated freight cars that enabled them to ship processed meat rather than live hogs and cattle long distances. It was this key innovation that enabled Chicago to add beef packing to its already huge h ­ og-​­processing operations. “The refrigerator car,” announced Swift and Company, “is one of the vehicles on which the packing industry has ridden to greatness.” By the end of the nineteenth century, the economies of scale enjoyed by the four dominant Chicago meatpacking corporations drove most local butchers across the nation out of business. A New York City butcher in 1888 confessed that, up and down the East Coast, “the slaughtering of cattle by butchers is a thing of the past.” Gustavus Swift and Philip Armour became two of the richest men in the world. They soon branched out beyond pork and beef processing by becoming traders in g­ rain—​­wheat and corn. They also built packing plants across the West, in cattle towns such as Kansas City and Omaha, which soon were processing almost half as much meat as Chicago.

 farming on the plains

 Farming on the Great Plains was made harder by the region’s unforgiving environment, bitterly cold winters, and scorching summers. A New York newspaper publisher traveling to California described the Great Plains as “a treeless desert” that baked during daylight and was “chill and piercing” cold at night. Still, people made the dangerous trek, lured by inexpensive federal land and misleading advertisements celebrating life on the plains. Between 1870 and 1900, homesteaders, ranchers, miners, railroad operators, and commercial farmers took control of 430 million acres of land west of the Mississippi River.

 homesteaders

 The first homesteaders in the Great Plains were mostly landless folk eager to try their hand at farming. Many of them had never used a hoe or planted a seed. “I was raised in Chicago without so much as a back yard to play in,” said a Montana homesteader, “and I worked 48 hours a week for $1.25. When I heard you could get 320 acres just by living on it, I felt that I had been offered a kingdom.” Yet the farmers faced a grim struggle. Although land was essentially free as a result of the Homestead Act (1862), horses, livestock, wagons, wells, lumber, fencing, seed, machinery, and fertilizer were not. Freight rates and interest rates were criminally high. Declining crop prices produced chronic indebtedness, leading strapped farmers to embrace virtually any plan to increase the money supply and thus pay off their debts with inflated currency. The virgin land itself, although fertile, resisted planting; the heavy sod woven with tough

 828  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 Innovative farming Powered by over a dozen horses and driven by two men, this early ­nineteenth-​­century “combine” machine could cut, thresh, bag, and weigh wheat all at the same time.

 grass roots broke many a plow. Since wood and coal were rare on the prairie, pioneer families initially had to use buffalo chips (dried dung from buffaloes and cattle) for fuel. Farm families also fought a constant battle with the elements: tornadoes, hailstorms, droughts, prairie fires, blizzards, and pests. Swarms of locusts often clouded the horizon; a Wichita newspaper reported in 1878 that they devoured “everything green . . . ​destroying every plant that is good for food or pleasant to the eyes.” In the late 1880s, a prolonged drought forced many homesteaders to give up. In the end, t­ wo-​­thirds of the people who gained land under the Homestead Act failed to become ­self-​­sustaining farmers.

 commercial farming

 Eventually, as the railroads brought piles of lumber from the East, farmers could upgrade their houses built of sod (“Kansas brick”) into more comfortable ­wood-​­framed dwellings. New machinery and equipment, for those who could afford them, improved productivity. In 1868, James Oliver, a Scottish immigrant living in Indiana, made a sturdy

Life in the New West  829


 c­ hilled-​­iron “sodbuster” plow that greatly eased the task of preparing land for planting. At the same time, new threshing machines, hay mowers, planters, manure spreaders, and other equipment lightened the burden of farm labor but often deepened the debts that farmers owed. In Minnesota, the Dakotas, and central California, wealthy capitalists created gigantic “bonanza farms” that became the marvels of the age. On one bonanza farm in North Dakota, a single field of wheat encompassed 13,000 acres. Wheat became for farmers in the High Plains what cotton had been for southern planters: a perennial cash crop. ­American-​­grown wheat was exported around the world. Another bonanza farm in South Dakota employed more than 1,000 migrant workers to tend 34,000 acres. Such agribusinesses were the wave of the future. Thomas Jefferson’s dream of an America primarily made up of small farmers continued to give way to industrial agriculture and bonanza farms. While the overall value of farmland and farm products increased in the late nineteenth century, small farmers did not keep up. Their numbers grew in size but decreased in proportion to the population at large. Wheat in the Western states, like cotton in the antebellum South, was the great export crop that spurred economic growth. For a variety of reasons, however, including an inability to afford new machinery, few small farmers prospered. By the 1890s they were in open revolt against the “system” of corrupt processors (middlemen) and “greedy” bankers who they believed conspired against them.

 women in the west

 The West remained a largely male society throughout the nineteenth century. Women in mining towns, most of whom worked as house cleaners, were as valued as gold. Many mining towns had a ­male-​­to-​­female ratio as high as nine to one. When four “respectable” women arrived in Nevada City, one of them reported that the men stood and gazed “at us with mouth and eyes wide open, every time we go out” in the streets. In both mining and farming communities, women were prized as spouses, in part because farming required help. In 1900, an estimated 98 percent of the women in Nebraska were married. But the women pioneers continued to face many of the same legal barriers and social prejudices prevalent in the East. A wife could not sell property without her husband’s approval, for example. Texas women could not sue except for divorce, nor could they serve on juries, act as lawyers, or witness a will. The constant fight for survival west of the Mississippi, however, made men and women ­more-​­equal partners than in the East. Many women who lost their mates to the deadly toil of “sod busting” assumed complete responsibility for their farms. In general, women on the prairie became more independent than

 830  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 Women of the frontier A woman and her family in front of their sod house. The difficult life on the prairie led to more egalitarian marriages than were found in other regions of the country because women had to play so many roles.

 women leading domestic lives back East. A Kansas woman explained “that the environment was such as to bring out and develop the dominant qualities of individual character. Kansas women of that day learned at an early age to depend on t­ hemselves—​­to do whatever work there was to be done, and to face danger when it must be faced, as calmly as they were able.” It was not coincidental, then, that the new western territories and states were among the first to allow women to vote and hold o ­ ffice—​­in the hopes that by allowing women to vote they would attract more women settlers. In 1890, Wyoming was admitted to the Union as the first state that allowed women to vote in all elections. Utah, Colorado, and Idaho followed soon thereafter.

The Fate of Western Indians
 As settlers spread across the continent, some 250,000 Native Americans, many of them originally from east of the Mississippi, were forced into what was supposed to be their last refuge, the Great Plains and mountain regions of the Far West. The 1851 Fort Laramie Treaty, in which the chiefs of the Plains Indians agreed to accept definite tribal borders and allow white emigrants to travel

The Fate of Western Indians  831


 across their lands, worked for a while. Fighting resumed, however, as Indians continued their ancient practice of following the buffalo herds and as white (and black) emigrants began to settle on Indian lands rather than pass through them.

 indian relations in the west

 From the early 1860s until the late 1870s, the ­trans-​­Mississippi West, often called “Indian Country,” raged with the ­so-​­called Indian wars. Although the U.S. government had signed numerous treaties with Indian nations giving them ownership of reservation lands for “as long as waters run and the grass shall grow,” those commitments were repeatedly violated by buffalo hunters, miners, ranchers, farmers, railroad ­surveyors—​­and horse soldiers. In the 1860s, the federal government ousted numerous tribes from lands they had been promised “forever.” A Sioux chieftain named Spotted Tail expressed the grieving anger felt by many Indians when he asked “Why does not the Great Father [U.S. president] put his red children on wheels so that he can move them as he will?” In the two decades before the Civil War, the U.S. Army’s central mission in the West was to protect pioneers traveling on the major Overland Trails. During and after the war, the mission changed to ensuring that Native Americans stayed on the reservations they had been assigned and that Americans did not trespass on Indian lands. Americans, however, repeatedly violated treaties with Native American peoples. The result was simmering frustration punctuated by outbreaks of tragic violence. In the summer of 1862, an uprising of Sioux warriors killed 644 white traders, settlers, government officials, and soldiers in the Minnesota Valley. It was the first of many clashes between the growing number of American settlers and miners and the Indians living on reservations in the Great Plains.

 the sand creek massacre

 Two years later, a horrible i­ncident occurred in Colorado as a result of the influx of white miners into the ­territory. After Indians murdered a white family near Denver, John Evans, the t­erritorial governor, called on whites to “kill and destroy” the “hostile Indians on the plains.” At the same time, Evans persuaded “friendly Indians” (mostly Cheyenne and Arapaho) to gather at “places of safety” such as Fort Lyon, in southeastern ­Colorado near the Kansas border, where they were promised protection. Despite that promise, at dawn on November 29, 1864, Colonel John M. Chivington’s 700 untrained militiamen attacked a camp of Cheyennes and Arapahoes along Sand Creek, about forty miles from Fort Lyon. Black Kettle, the chief, frantically waved first an American flag and then a white flag, but

 832  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 the attacking soldiers paid no heed. Over seven hours, the Colorado militiamen slaughtered, scalped, and mutilated 165 peaceful ­Indians—​­men, women, ­children, and the elderly. Chivington, a former abolitionist and Methodist minister (the “Fighting Parson”) who had preached against the brutalities of slavery, had told his men to “kill and scalp all [Indians], big and little, you come across.” In his report on the lopsided bloodbath to army officials, Chivington lied, claiming a great victory against 1,000 entrenched Cheyenne warriors. The bloodthirsty colonel was greeted as a hero back in Denver. “Colorado soldiers have again covered themselves in glory,” the Rocky Mountain News in Denver initially proclaimed. Then the truth about Sand Creek began to come out. Captain Silas Soule, an abolitionist from Kansas who had joined the Union army at the start of the Civil War, witnessed the massacre but, along with his company of soldiers, had disobeyed orders to join the attack. “I refused to fire and swore [to my men] that none but a coward” would shoot unarmed women and children. Three weeks after the massacre, Soule wrote a letter to a superior officer revealing in graphic detail what had actually happened at Sand Creek: “Hundreds of women and children were coming toward us, and getting on their knees for mercy,” he noted, only to be murdered and “have their brains beat out by men professing to be civilized.” Far from being a hero, Soule added, Chivington encouraged the ­one-​­sided slaughter through his lack of leadership: “There was no organization among our troops, they were a perfect ­mob—​ ­every man on his own hook.” Soule’s company “was the only one that did not fire a shot.” He predicted that “we will have a hell of a time with Indians this winter” because of what had happened at Sand Creek. Congress and the army launched lengthy investigations into the tragedy at Sand Creek, and Captain Soule was among those called to testify in January 1865. The eventual congressional report concluded that Chivington had “deliberately planned and executed a foul and dastardly massacre,” murdering “in cold blood” Indians who “had every reason to believe they were under [U.S.] protection.” An army general described the Sand Creek Massacre as the “foulest and most unjustifiable crime in the annals of America.” Chivington resigned from the militia in disgrace in order to escape a military trial. He soon became the Denver sheriff. On April 23, 1865, Soule, the ­whistle-​­blower, was shot and killed in Denver. One of his ­murderers—​­never ­prosecuted—​­was identified as one of Chivington’s soldiers. Instead of pacifying the Indians, the Sand Creek Massacre ignited warfare that raged across the central plains for the next three years. Arapaho, Cheyenne, and Sioux war parties attacked scores of ranches and stagecoach

The Fate of Western Indians  833


 stations, killing hundreds of white men and kidnapping many white women and children. More massacres were to come, on both sides. The federal government responded by authorizing the recruitment of soldiers from among Confederate military prisoners (called “­white-​­washed Rebels”) and the creation of African American cavalry regiments. In 1866, Congress passed legislation establishing two “colored” cavalry units and dispatched them to the western frontier. The Cheyenne nicknamed them “buffalo soldiers” because they “fought like a cornered buffalo; who, like a buffalo, had suffered wound after wound, yet had not died; and who, like a buffalo, had a thick and shaggy mane of hair.” The buffalo soldiers were mostly Civil War veterans from Louisiana and Kentucky. They built and maintained forts, mapped vast areas of the Southwest, strung hundreds of miles of telegraph lines, protected railroad construction crews, subdued hostile Indians, and captured outlaws and rustlers. Eighteen of the buffalo soldiers won Congressional Medals of Honor for their service.

 indian relocation

 With other scattered battles erupting, a congressional committee in 1865 gathered evidence on the grisly Indian wars and massacres. Its 1867 “Report on the Condition of the Indian Tribes” led to the creation of an Indian Peace Commission charged with removing the causes of the Indian wars. Congress decided that this would be best accomplished by persuading nomadic Indians yet again to move to o ­ ut-​­of-​­the-​­way federal reservations where they would take up farming that would “civilize” them. They were to give up their ancestral lands in return for peace so that the whites could move in. In 1870, Indians outnumbered whites in the Dakota Territory by two to one; by 1880, whites, mostly gold prospectors, would outnumber Indians by more than six to one. The U.S. government had decided it had no choice but to gain control of the r­ egion—​­by purchase if possible, by force if necessary. In 1867, a conference at Medicine Lodge, Kansas, ended with the Kiowas, Comanches, Arapahoes, and Cheyennes reluctantly agreeing to move to land in western Oklahoma. The following spring, the western Sioux, the Lakotas, signed the Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868), in which they agreed to settle within the huge Black Hills Reservation in southwestern Dakota Territory, in part because they viewed the Black Hills as holy ground.

 grant’s indian policy

 In his inaugural address in 1869, President Ulysses S. Grant urged Congress to adopt ­more-​­progressive policies toward Native Americans: “The proper treatment of the original inhabitants of

 834  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 this land” should enable the Native Americans to become citizens with all the rights enjoyed by every other American.” Grant’s noble intentions, however, ran afoul of longstanding prejudices against Native Americans and the unrelenting efforts of miners, farmers, railroaders, and ranchers to trespass on Indian lands and reservations. The president recognized the challenges he faced. Indians, he admitted, “would be harmless and peaceable if they were not put upon by whites.” Yet he also stressed that protecting the new transcontinental railroad across the plains was his top priority. In the end, however, Grant told army officers that “it is much ­better to support a peace commission than a [military] campaign against Indians.” Periodic clashes brought vengeful demands for military action. William T. Sherman, commanding general of the U.S. Army, directed General Philip Sheridan, who was in charge of the military effort in the West, to “kill and punish the hostiles [Indian war parties], capture and destroy the ponies” of the “Cheyennes, Arapahoes, and Kiowas.” Sherman then declared that “the more we kill this year, the less we will have to kill next year.” Neither Sherman nor Sheridan agreed with Grant’s “peace policy.” In their view, the president’s naive outlook was shaped by the distance between the Great Plains and Washington, D.C. Fairness and understanding were not the correct weapons against Indian warriors. Sherman ordered Sheridan to force all “nonhostile” Indians onto federal reservations, where they would be provided land for farming, immediate rations of food, and supplies and equipment (a promise that was rarely kept). Some Native Americans refused to be moved again. In the southern plains of New Mexico, north Texas, Colorado, Kansas, and Oklahoma, the Native Americans, dominated by the Comanches, the greatest h ­ orse-​­borne warriors in America, focused on hunting buffalo. Armed clashes occurred with increasing frequency until the Red River War of 1874–1875, when Sheridan’s soldiers won a series of battles in the Texas Panhandle. He boasted that it was “the most successful of any Indian Campaign in this country since its settlement by the whites.” The defeated Comanches, Cheyennes, Kiowas, and Arapahoes were forced onto reservations.

 custer and the sioux

 Meanwhile, trouble was brewing again in the northern plains. White prospectors searching for gold were soon trespassing on Sioux hunting grounds in the Dakotas despite promises that the army would keep them out. Ohio senator John Sherman warned that nothing would stop the mass migration of Americans across the Mississippi River: “If the whole Army of the United States stood in the way, the wave of emigration would pass over it to seek the valley where gold was found.”

The Fate of Western Indians  835


 The massive gold rush in the Black Hills convinced some Indians to make a last stand. As Red Cloud, a Sioux chief, said, “The white men have crowded the Indians back year by year, and now our last hunting ground, the home of my people, is to be taken from us. Our women and children will starve, but for my part I prefer to die fighting rather than by starvation.” Another prominent Sioux war chief, Sitting Bull, told Indians living on the Black Hills reservation that “the whites may get me at last, but I will have good times till then.” In 1875, Lieutenant Colonel George George A. Custer The reckless and Armstrong Custer, a veteran Indian ­glory-​­seeking lieutenant colonel of fighter driven by reckless ambition and the U.S. Army. courage, led 1,000 soldiers in the Seventh Cavalry regiment into the Black Hills, where he announced the discovery of gold on French Creek near p ­ resent-​­day Custer, South Dakota. The news set off a massive gold rush, and within two years, the mining town of Deadwood overflowed with 10,000 miners. The undermanned army units in the area could not keep the miners from violating the rights guaranteed the Sioux by federal treaties. President Grant and federal authorities tried to convince the Sioux to sell the Black Hills to the government. Sitting Bull told the American negotiator to tell “the Great Father [Grant] that I do not want to sell any land to the government.” With that news, Custer was sent back to the Black Hills, this time to find roving bands of Sioux and Cheyenne warriors and force them back onto reservations. If they resisted, he was to kill them. The colorful Custer, strikingly handsome with golden curly hair, stood out among his 600 horse soldiers. Having graduated last in his class at West Point, he was first in his class at gambling and socializing. ­Free-​­spirited and f­un-​ ­loving, he studied and behaved just enough to graduate. He later urged cadets not to follow his own example. Custer loved war and the thrill of combat. An army officer said Custer was one of the few soldiers who fought for the fun of it; to him, war was “glorious.” Like Crazy Horse, Custer was a natural warrior whose goal was “not to be wealthy, not to be learned, but to be great.” For all of Custer’s flamboyant rebelliousness and lust for adventure, he was a bold, talented cavalry officer with remarkable endurance. During the Civil

 836  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 War, he had been promoted to general at the age of ­twenty-​­three (reporters dubbed him the “Boy General”) and had played an important role in the Union victory at Gettysburg, leading a gallant cavalry charge. Now he was in charge of an expedition to attack the wandering bands of Sioux hunting parties, even though he recognized that intruding American miners had caused the renewal of warfare. As Custer told newspaper reporters, “We are goading the Indians to madness by invading their hallowed [hunting] grounds.” What became the Great Sioux War was the largest military campaign since the end of the Civil War. The war against the northern Indians lasted fifteen months and entailed fifteen battles in ­present-​­day Wyoming, Montana, South Dakota, and Nebraska. In June 1876, after several indecisive encounters, Custer found a large encampment of Sioux and their Northern Cheyenne and Arapaho allies on the Little Bighorn River in the southeast corner of the Montana Territory. On June 25, Custer ordered his exhausted men to attack the Indian camp. “Hurrah boys, we’ve got them,” he shouted, not realizing how vastly outnumbered they were. Within minutes, they were surrounded by as many as 2,500 warriors led by the fierce Crazy Horse (“A good day to fight, a good day to die!”). After a half hour of desperate fighting, Custer’s 210 men, their ammunition exhausted, were all dead. Custer was said to laugh as he fired his last bullet, for

 Battle of Little Bighorn, 1876 Amos Bad Heart Bull, an Oglala Sioux artist and historian, painted this scene from the Battle of Little Bighorn.

The Fate of Western Indians  837


 he knew his fate. Among the dead were two of Custer’s brothers, a b ­ rother-​­in-​ ­law, and a nephew. Afterwards, Cheyenne women pierced Custer’s eardrums with sewing needles because he had failed to listen to their warnings to stay out of their ancestral lands. Custer’s brave death echoed a line from his favorite Shakespeare play, Julius Caesar: “I shall have glory by this losing day.” The Sioux had won their greatest battle, but in doing so they helped ensure that they would lose the war. Upon learning of the Battle of Little Bighorn (“Custer’s Last Stand”), President Grant and Congress abandoned the “peace policy” and dispatched more supplies and troops (“Custer’s Avengers”) to the plains. General Sheridan now planned for “total war” against the Sioux. Under Sheridan’s aggressive leadership, the army quickly regained the offensive and relentlessly pursued the Sioux and Cheyenne across Montana. Warriors were slain, villages destroyed, and food supplies burned. Iron Teeth, a Cheyenne woman, recalled an attack by “white soldiers” in November 1876. “They killed our men, women, and children.” She ran away with her three daughters. Her husband and two sons remained to fight. “My husband,” she remembered, “was walking, leading his horse, and stopping at times to shoot. Suddenly, I saw him fall. I started to go back to him, but my sons made me go on.” The last time she saw her husband he was dead in the snow. “From the hilltops, we Cheyennes saw our lodges and everything in them burning.” Forced back onto reservations, the remaining Native Americans soon found themselves struggling to survive. Many of them died of starvation or disease. By the end of 1876, the chiefs living on the Dakota reservation agreed to sell the Black Hills to the U.S. government. In the spring of 1877, Crazy Horse and his people surrendered. The Great Sioux War was over. By 1880, most of the western Indians were confined on reservations.

 the demise of the buffalo

 Over the long run, the collapse of Indian resistance in the face of white settlement on the Great Plains resulted as much from the decimation of the buffalo herds as from the actions of federal troops. In 1750, there were an estimated 30 million buffalo on the plains; the herds were so vast that one traveler said they changed the color of the landscape, “blackening the whole surface of the country.” By 1850, there were fewer than 10 million; by 1900, only a few hundred were left. What happened to them? The conventional story focuses on intensive harvesting of buffalo by white commercial hunters after the Civil War. The construction of railroads through buffalo country brought hundreds of commercial hunters who shipped huge numbers of hides each year to cities in the East, where consumers developed a voracious demand for buffalo robes, buffalo leather, and trophy heads. The

 838  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 average commercial hunter killed 100 of the shaggy beasts a day. “The buffalo,” reported an army officer, “melted away like snow before a summer’s sun.” The story is more complicated, however. The buffalo disappeared for a variety of health and environmental reasons, notably a prolonged drought during the late 1880s into the 1890s that severely reduced the grasslands upon which the animals depended. At the same time, the buffalo had to compete for food with other grazing animals; by the 1880s, more than 2 million horses were roaming buffalo lands. The Plains Indians themselves, empowered by horses and rifles and spurred by the profits reaped from selling hides and meat to white traders, accounted for much of the devastation of the buffalo herds after 1840. If there had been no white hunters, the buffalo would probably have lasted only another thirty years because their numbers had been so greatly reduced by other factors. Whatever the reasons, the disappearance of the buffalo gave the Plains Indians little choice but to settle on the government reservations.

 the last resistance

Chief Joseph Leader of the Nez Perce,
 he was widely recognized as a strong, eloquent voice against the injustices suffered by the Native Americans.

In
 the Rocky Mountains and west to the Pacific Ocean, the same story of courageous yet hopeless resistance to masses of white intruders was repeated again and again. Indians were the last obstacle to white western expansion, and they suffered as a result. The Blackfeet and Crows had to leave their homes in Montana. In a war along the C ­alifornia-​­ Oregon boundary, the Modocs held out for six months in 1871–1872 before they were overwhelmed. In 1879 the Utes were forced to give up their vast territories in western Colorado. In Idaho the peaceful Nez Perce bands refused to surrender land along the Salmon River, and prolonged fighting erupted there and in eastern Oregon. In 1877, Joseph, a Nez Perce chief, led some 650 of his people on a 1,300-mile journey through Montana

The Fate of Western Indians  839


 in hopes of reaching safety in Canada. Just before reaching the border, they were caught by U.S. soldiers. As he surrendered, Joseph delivered an eloquent speech that served as an epitaph to the Indians’ efforts to withstand the march of the American empire: “I am tired of fighting. Our chiefs are killed. . . . ​The old men are all dead. . . . ​I want to have time to look for my children, and see how many of them I can find. . . . ​Hear me, my chiefs! I am tired. My heart is sick and sad. From where the sun now stands I will fight no more forever.” The Nez Perce requested that they be allowed to return to their ancestral lands in western Idaho, but they were forced to settle in the Indian Territory (Oklahoma), where many died of malaria. A generation of Indian wars virtually ended in 1886 with the capture of Geronimo, a powerful chief of the Chiricahua Apaches, who had outridden, outwitted, and outfought American forces in the Southwest for fifteen years. Once, the Apaches captured a group of settlers, tied them to their wagon wheels, and roasted them alive. U.S. Army units routinely lynched ­captured Apaches and treated women and children as combatants. General Nelson A. Miles, the ­commander of the soldiers who captured Geronimo, called him “one of the brightest, most resolute, ­determined-​­looking men that I have ever encountered.”

 the ghost dance

 The last major clash between Indians and American soldiers occurred near the end of the nineteenth century. Late in 1888, Wovoka (or Jack Wilson), a Paiute in western Nevada, fell ill. In a delirium, he imagined being in the spirit world, where he learned of a deliverer coming to rescue the Indians and restore their lands. To hasten their deliverance, he said, the Indians must perform a ceremonial dance that would make them bulletproof against white soldiers. The Ghost Dance craze fed upon old legends of the dead reuniting with the living and bringing prosperity and peace. The Ghost Dance movement spread rapidly. In 1890, the western Sioux adopted it with such passion that it alarmed white authorities. They banned the Ghost Dance on Lakota reservations, but the Indians defied the order and a crisis erupted. On December 29, 1890, a bloodbath occurred at Wounded Knee, South Dakota, after nervous soldiers fired into a group of Indians who had surrendered. Nearly 200 Indians, men, women, and children, and 25 soldiers died in the Battle of Wounded Knee. The Indian wars had ended with characteristic brutality and misunderstanding. General Philip Sheridan, commander of U.S. troops in these conflicts, was acidly candid in summarizing how whites had treated the Indians: “We took away their country and their means of support, broke up their mode of living, their habits of life, introduced disease and

 840  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

INDIAN WARS C A N A D A BLACKFOOT

Fort
Laramie


 ARAPAHO

Denver
CO TERR. 1861–1876

UTES CHEYENNE

AZ TERR. 1863–1912

IL MO
St. Louis 
Kansas City
KS
Sand Creek Massacre, 1864 
KIOWA
Santa Fe 
PUEBLO NM TERR. 1863–1912

 APACHE

 R iver

HOPI NAVAJO

IA
Omaha 
UNORG. TERR.
Red River War, 1874–1875 
 TN

 pi

 CA

St. Paul


Sioux Uprising,


FIVE CIVILIZED TRIBES COMANCHE TX

 AR

 sip

UT TERR. 1868–1896

NE TERR. 1863–1867

Tr
 ail

MI WI

 SIOUX

Wounded Knee,
Dec. 29, 1890


 an ze m Bo

 NV

San
Francisco


WY TERR. 1868–1890

 CHEYENNE

Great Salt Lake


 MN

Little Bighorn,
DAKOTA TERR. 1861–1889

NEZ PERCE

 MODOC

Sacramento


Bozeman


Virginia City
ID TERR. 1868–1890

 OR

Superior
 ke La

 SIOUX and (NORTHERN) CHEYENNE

MT TERR. 1864–1889

Mi s s i s


WA TERR. 1853–1889

Lake Michigan


Seattle


 MS

 LA

PACIFIC OCEAN

M E X I C O


GULF OF MEXICO

■




300 Miles


300 Kilometers


What was the Great Sioux War?


 ■ What happened at the Little Bighorn battle, and what were the consequences? WWN64 Figure M18_3 ■ Why were hundreds of Native Americans killed at Wounded Knee? First proof

 decay among them, and it was for this and against this that they made war. Could anyone expect less?” Many politicians and religious leaders condemned the persistent mistreatment of Indians. In his annual message of 1877, President Rutherford B. Hayes joined the protest: “Many, if not most, of our Indian wars have had their origin in broken promises and acts of injustice on our part.” Helen Hunt Jackson, a novelist and poet, focused attention on the Indian cause in A Century of Dishonor (1881), a book that powerfully detailed the sad history of America’s exploitation of Native Americans over the centuries.

The End of the Frontier  841


 In part as a reaction to Jackson’s book, U.S. policies regarding Native Americans gradually improved, but they did little to enhance the Indians’ difficult living conditions and actually helped destroy remnants of their culture. The reservation policy inaugurated by the Peace Commission in 1867 did little more than extend a practice that dated from colonial Virginia. Partly humanitarian in motive, it also saved money: housing and feeding Indians on reservations cost less than fighting them. ­Well-​­intentioned but biased white reformers sought to “Americanize” Indians by forcing them to become ­self-​­reliant farmers owning their own plots of land rather than allowing them to be members of nomadic bands or tribes holding property in common. Such reform efforts produced the Dawes ­Severalty Act of 1887 (also called the General Allotment Act), the most sweeping policy directed at Native Americans in U.S. history. Sponsored by Senator Henry L. Dawes of Massachusetts, the act divided tribal lands and “allotted” them to individuals, granting 160 acres to each head of a family and lesser amounts to others. White Bear, a Kiowa chief, expressed a common complaint when he said that his people did “not want to settle down in houses you [the federal government] would build for us. I love to roam over the wild prairie. There I am free and happy.” But his preferences were not heeded. Between 1887 and 1934, Indians lost an estimated 86 million of their 130 million acres. As New York-​ ­born Henry Teller, a Congressman from Colorado, pointed out, the allotment policy was designed solely to strip the “Indians of their lands and to make them vagabonds on the face of the earth.”

The End of the Frontier
 The end of Native American resistance was one of several developments at the close of the nineteenth century that suggested that the New West was indeed different from the Old West. Other indicators of the region’s transformation led some scholars to conclude that American society itself had reached a turning point as the century came to a close.

 frederick jackson turner

 The 1890 national census reported that the frontier era was over; Americans by then had spread across the entire continent. This news led Frederick Jackson Turner, a young historian at the University of Wisconsin, to announce his “frontier thesis” in 1893, in which he argued that more than slavery or any other single factor, “the existence of an area of free land, its continuous recession, and the advance of American settlement westward, explain American development.” The experience of t­ aming

 842  CHAPTER 18  The New South and the New West 1865–1900

 and settling the frontier, he added, had shaped the national character in fundamental ways. It was to the frontier [that] the American intellect owes its striking characteristics. That coarseness and strength combined with acuteness and acquisitiveness; that practical, inventive turn of mind, quick to find expedients; that masterful grasp of material things, lacking in the artistic but powerful to effect great ends; that restless, nervous energy; that dominant individualism, working for good and for evil, and withal that buoyancy and exuberance which comes with ­freedom—​­these are traits of the frontier, or traits called out elsewhere because of the existence of the frontier. Now, however, Turner stressed, “the frontier has gone and with its going has closed the first period of American history.” Turner’s view of the ­frontier—​­as the ­westward-​­moving source of the nation’s democratic politics, open society, unfettered economy, and rugged ­individualism—​­gripped the popular imagination. But his frontier thesis left out much of the story of American development. The frontier experience that Turner described was in many respects a s­elf-​­serving myth involving only Christian white men and devoid of towns and cities, which in fact grew along with the frontier, not after it had been tamed. He virtually ignored the role of women, African Americans, Native Americans, Hispanics, and Asians in shaping the human geography of the western United States. Moreover, Turner’s frontier was always the site of heroism, triumph, and progress. He downplayed the evidence of greed, exploitation, and failure in the settling of the West. Turner also implied that America would be fundamentally different after 1890 because the frontier experience was essentially over. In many respects, however, the West has retained the qualities associated with the rush for land, gold, timber, and water rights. The mining frontier, as one historian has recently written, “set a mood that has never disappeared from the West: the attitude of every extractive ­industry—​­get in, get rich, get out.”

 discontented farmers

 By 1900, both the South and West were quite different socially and culturally from what they had been in 1865. In both cases, dramatically changed economic conditions spurred the emergence of a New South and a New West. In the West, the widespread use of mechanized commercial agriculture changed the dynamics of farming. By the end of the nineteenth century, many homesteaders had been forced to abandon their own farms and become ­wage-​­earning laborers, “migrant workers” moving with the seasons to different states to harvest different crops produced on

The End of the Frontier  843


 large commercial farms or ranches. Migrant workers were often treated as poorly as the white and black sharecroppers in the South. One western worker complained that the landowner “looked at me, his hired hand, as if I was just another workhorse.” As discontent rose among farmers and farmworkers in the South and the West, many of them joined the People’s party, whose followers were known as Populists, a grassroots social and political movement that was sweeping the poorest rural regions of the nation. In 1892, a Minnesota farm leader named Ignatius Donnelly told Populists at their national convention that “We meet in the midst of a nation brought to the verge of moral, political, and material ruin.” He affirmed that Populism sought “to restore the Government of the Republic to the hands of the ‘plain people’ with whom it originated.” The Populist movement would tie the South and West together in an effort to wrest control of the political system from Republicans in the Northeast and Midwest. That struggle would come to define the 1890s and determine the shape of the twentieth century.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 The New South Many southerners embraced the vision of the New South p ­ romoted by Henry Grady and others, who called for a more diverse economy with greater industrialization, more vocational training, and a ­widespread acceptance of white supremacy in social relations. The cotton textile industry grew to surpass that of New England, iron manufacturing increased, and the ­American Tobacco Company became the world’s largest manufacturer of ­cigarettes. But ­agriculture—​­and especially the growing of ­cotton—​­still dominated the southern e­ conomy, much as it had before the Civil War. Under the ­crop-​­lien system, large landowners rented land to ­cash-​­poor tenant farmers or sharecroppers (the latter usually African Americans) in return for a “share” of the cotton they grew each year. The ­crop-​­lien system kept millions in ­long-​ ­term debt and limited where they could live and how they could make a living.

•


 Jim Crow Policies in the South During the 1890s, southern states disfranchised the vast majority of African American voters and instituted a series of p ­ olicies known as Jim Crow laws segregating blacks and whites in public facilities. Starting with the Mississippi Plan, state governments passed a series of comprehensive measures that included poll taxes, grandfather clauses, literacy tests, and residency requirements, making voting nearly impossible for most African Americans and some poor whites. Disfranchisement was followed by legalized segregation, ruled constitutional by the Supreme Court in the 1896 Plessy v. Ferguson decision. African Americans who resisted were often the target of violence at the hands of whites, the worst form being organized lynching.

•


 Western Migrants Life in the West was often harsh and violent, but the promise of cheap land or wealth from mining drew settlers from the East. Although most westerners were white Protestant Americans or immigrants from Germany and Scandinavia, Mexicans, African Americans (the Exodusters), and Chinese, as well as many other nationalities, contributed to the West’s diversity. About t­ hree-​ ­fourths of those who moved to the West were men.

•


 Miners, Farmers, Ranchers, and Women Many migrants to the West were attracted to opportunities to mine, ranch, farm, or work on the railroads. Miners were drawn to the discovery of precious minerals such as silver at the Comstock Lode in Nevada in 1861. But most miners and cattle ranchers did not become wealthy, because mining and raising cattle, particularly after the development of barbed wire and the end of the open range, became ­large-​­scale enterprises. Farmers on the Great Plains were able to produce wheat for export, but declining grain prices and the need for expensive machinery and transportation meant that only ­large-​­scale farms owned by a wealthy few could sustain real profits.

•


 Indian Wars and Policies By 1900, Native Americans were no longer free to roam the plains, as the influx of miners, ranchers, farmers, and soldiers had curtailed their traditional way of life. Instances of armed resistance, such as the Great Sioux



 War, were crushed. Beginning in 1887, with the Dawes Severalty Act, the American government’s Indian policy shifted. It now forced Indians to relinquish their traditional culture and adopt the “American way” of individual landownership.

•


 The South and West in 1900 By 1900, the West resembled the South where agricultural resources were concentrated in the hands of a few. In the 1890s, poor farmers in the West joined with tenant farmers in the South to support the People’s party or the Populist movement, which sought to wrest control of the political and economic system from the powerful East and return it to the “plain” folk. This contest would dominate the nation’s politics in the 1890s and set its course for the twentieth century.

Chronology
 1880s





 Congress passes the Homestead Act Sand Creek Massacre Joseph Glidden invents barbed wire Battle of Little Bighorn Henry Grady spreads the New South idea Surrender of Geronimo marks the end of the Indian wars Congress passes the Dawes Severalty Act Battle of Wounded Knee James Duke forms the American Tobacco Company Frederick J. Turner outlines his “frontier thesis” Plessy v. Ferguson mandates “separate but equal” racial facilities

Key Terms


 textile industry p. 801

Exodusters p. 820


American Tobacco Company p. 801


 boomtown p. 822

Redeemers p. 802


Comstock Lode p. 823


 ­crop-​­lien system p. 804

 open range p. 826

 sharecroppers p. 804

 Indian wars p. 831

 share tenants p. 804

Sand Creek Massacre (1864) p. 832


Mississippi Plan (1890) p. 807


Great Sioux War p. 836


 “separate but equal” p. 809

 Ghost Dance movement p. 839

Atlanta Compromise (1895) p. 815


Dawes Severalty Act (1887) p. 841


IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




Political
­Stalemate and
Rural Revolt
1865–1900


 Wet Night on the Bowery (1911) This scene of early t­ wentieth-​­century life in New York City by John Sloan captures people of all walks of life converging on a rainy night: a smartly dressed society woman (left), a prostitute (center), and drunks stumbling about farther down the block. Running overhead is the elevated train, while an electric trolley gleams from the wet street.

W


 ithin three decades after the Civil War, American life had experienced a stunning transformation. An agricultural society long rooted in the soil and little involved in global issues had become an urban and industrialized nation deeply entwined in world markets and international politics. The period from the end of the Civil War to the beginning of the twentieth ­century was an era noted for the widening social, economic, and political gap between the powerful and the powerless, the haves and h ­ ave-​­nots. It was sardonically labeled the Gilded Age for its greed and vulgarity, and was a time marked by conspicuous consumption by the newly rich as they flaunted their enormous personal ­wealth—​­the same wealth that financed extensive political and corporate corruption. While the Gilded Age brought dramatic changes across all socioeconomic classes, the resulting transformations to social and cultural life could hardly be considered “gilded” to average Americans or recent immigrants.

Urban America
 During the late nineteenth century, the United States became a nation dominated by rapidly growing cities. Between 1865 and 1900, the urban population skyrocketed from 8 million to 30 million. In 1865, fewer than twenty cities had populations of more than 50,000; by 1900, there were four times that many.

 focus questions 1. What were the effects of urban growth during the Gilded Age? What problems did it create?

 2. Who were the “new immigrants” of the late nineteenth century? How were they viewed by American society?

 3. How did urban growth and the increasingly important role of science influence leisure activities, cultural life, and social policy in the Gilded Age?

 4. How did the nature of politics during the Gilded Age contribute to political corruption and stalemate?

 5. How effective were politicians in developing responses to the major economic and social problems of the Gilded Age?

 6. Why did the money supply become a major political issue, especially for farmers, during the Gilded Age? How did it impact American politics?



