 600  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 The Wilmot Proviso Taylor would refuse to veto the proviso as president, even though he was a slave owner. This political cartoon, “Old Zack at Home,” highlights his seeming hypocrisy.

 f­orbid” that slavery would be allowed there. He proposed a bill (“proviso”) doing just that. In part, his opposition to slavery in Mexican territories reflected his desire to keep southern political power in Congress from expanding. The Wilmot Proviso reignited debate over the westward extension of slavery. The Missouri Compromise (1820) had provided a temporary solution by protecting slavery in states where it already existed but not allowing it in newly acquired territories. Now, with the possible addition of territories taken from Mexico, the stage was set for an even more explosive debate. The House of Representatives approved the Wilmot Proviso, but the Senate balked at the insistence of southerners. When Congress reconvened in December 1846, President Polk dismissed the proviso as “mischievous and foolish.” He convinced Wilmot to withhold his amendment from any bill dealing with the annexation of Mexican territory. By then, however, others were ready to take up the cause. In one form or another, Wilmot’s idea would continue to frame the debate in Congress over the expansion of slavery for the next fifteen years. During his one term as a congressman, in 1847–1849, Abraham Lincoln voted for it “as good as forty times.”

Slavery in the Territories  601


 popular sovereignty

 Senator Lewis Cass of Michigan, a Democrat, tried to remove the explosive controversy over slavery from national politics by giving the voters in each territory the right to “regulate their own internal concerns in their own way,” like the citizens of a state. Popular sovereignty, as Cass’s idea was called, appealed to many because it seemed to be the most democratic solution to the question of allowing slavery or not. The moral defects of popular sovereignty, however, were obvious: it did not allow African Americans to vote on their fate, and it allowed a majority of whites to take away the most basic human right: freedom. When Polk followed through on his promise to serve only one term and refused to run again in 1848, Cass won the Democrats’ presidential nomination. But the party refused to endorse his “popular sovereignty” plan. Instead, it simply denied the power of Congress to interfere with slavery in the states and criticized all efforts by a­ nti-​­slavery activists to bring the question of restricting or abolishing slavery before Congress. The Whigs, as in 1840, again passed over their leader, Henry Clay, a ­three-​ ­time presidential loser. This time they nominated General Zachary Taylor, whose fame had grown during the ­Mexican-​­American War. Taylor, born in Virginia and raised in Kentucky, now owned a Louisiana plantation with more than 100 slaves. But he was also an ardent nationalist who vigorously opposed the extension of slavery into new western territories.

 the ­free-​­soil movement

 As it had done in 1840, the Whig party offered no platform during the 1844 campaign in an effort to avoid the divisive issue of slavery. The a­ nti-​­slavery crusade was not easily silenced, however. Americans who worried about the morality of slavery but could not endorse abolition could support banning slavery from the western territories. As a result, “free soil” in the new territories became the rallying cry for a new political organization: the ­Free-​­Soil party. The ­Free-​­Soil party attracted three groups: northern Democrats opposed to slavery, a­ nti-​­slavery northern Whigs, and members of the abolitionist Liberty party. In 1848, the Free Soil party nominated former president Martin Van Buren as their candidate. The party’s platform stressed that slavery would not be allowed in the western territories. As their campaign slogan shouted, “Free soil, Free Speech, Free Labor, and Free Men.” The new party infuriated John C. Calhoun and other southern Democrats. Calhoun called Van Buren a “bold, unscrupulous, and vindictive demagogue.” In the 1848 election, punctuated by parades, rallies, barbecues, banners, and bands, the ­Free-​­Soilers were spoilers: they split the Democratic vote enough to throw New York to the Whigs’ Zachary Taylor, and they split the

 602  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 Whig vote enough to give Ohio to the Democrat Lewis Cass. But nationwide, Van Buren’s 291,000 votes lagged well behind the totals of 1,361,000 for Taylor and 1,222,000 for Cass. Taylor won with 163 to 127 electoral votes.

 the california gold rush

 Meanwhile, a new issue had emerged to complicate the growing debate over territorial expansion and slavery. On January 24, 1848, gold nuggets were discovered in a stream on the property of John A. Sutter along the south fork of the American River in the Mexican province of California, which nine days later would be transferred to the United States through the treaty ending the ­Mexican-​­American War. News of the gold strike spread like wildfire, especially after President Polk announced to Congress that there was an “extraordinary abundance of gold” in California and other territories acquired from Mexico. Suddenly, a gold mania infected the nation. “We are on the brink of the Age of Gold,” gushed Horace Greeley, editor of the New York Tribune. In 1849, nearly 100,000 Americans, mostly men, set off for California, eager to find riches. Sailors jumped ship, soldiers deserted, and husbands abandoned their families to join the California gold rush. “Men are here nearly crazed with the riches forced suddenly into their pockets,” a Tennessean wrote. By 1854, the number of newcomers would top 300,000, and the surge of interest in California’s golden news added to the urgency of bringing the profitable new western territory into the Union. Among the “­forty-​­niners” (also called argonauts) who rushed to California were several family members of former President John Tyler. His wife, Julia, wrote her mother that “the president” was not much taken with “this California fever. . . . He thinks a good farm on the James River [in Virginia] with plenty of slaves is gold mine enough.” Others, however, raced to California as fast as they could get there. The gold rush was the greatest mass migration in American ­history—​­and one of the most significant events in the first half of the nineteenth century. Between 1851 and 1855, California produced almost half the world’s output of gold. The infusion of California gold into the U.S. economy led to a prolonged national prosperity that eventually helped finance the Union military effort in the Civil War. In addition, it spurred the construction of railroads and telegraph lines, hastened the demise of the Indians, and excited dreams of an American economic empire based in the Pacific. The gold rush also transformed San Francisco into the nation’s largest city west of Chicago. In just two years, it grew from a small coastal village of 800 to a bustling city of 20,000. New business ­enterprises—​­saloons, taverns, restaurants, ­stores—​­emerged to serve the burgeoning population of miners, including one dedicated to the production of sturdy denim trousers made of sailcloth,

Slavery in the Territories  603


 California News (1850) by William Sidney Mount During the California gold rush, San Francisco quickly became a bustling city as the population increased almost fiftyfold in a few months.

 with their pockets reinforced by copper rivets. The blue jeans, known to this day as Levi’s, were developed by the ­German-​­Jewish immigrant Levi Strauss. The ­forty-​­niners included people from every social class and every state and territory, as well as local Indians and slaves brought by their owners. “Never was there such a ­gold-​­thirsty race of men brought together,” a Californian said of the waves of prospectors flowing into the newest American territory. On one December day in 1848, a New York City newspaper announced that ­sixty-​­two different ships were leaving for California. When one ­steamship arrived in San Francisco harbor, its entire crew deserted and headed for the gold diggings. The influx of gold seekers quickly reduced the 14,000 Mexican natives in California to a minority, and sporadic conflicts with the Indians of the Sierra Nevada foothills decimated California’s Native American population.

 mining life

 The miners were mostly unmarried young men of varied ethnic and cultural backgrounds. Few were interested in staying in California; they wanted to strike it rich and return home. Mining camps thus sprang up like mushrooms and disappeared almost as rapidly. As soon as rumors of a new strike made the rounds, miners converged on the area; when no more gold could be found, they picked up and moved on.

 604  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 Gold miners Chinese immigrants and white settlers mine for gold in the Auburn Ravine of California in 1856.

 The wild mining camps and shantytowns may have had colorful n ­ ames—​ ­ hiskey Flat, Lousy Ravine, Petticoat Slide, Piety ­Hill—​­but they were dirty, lawW less, and dangerous places. In Calaveras County, there were fourteen murders in a single week. Vigilante justice prevailed; one newcomer reported that “in the short space of t­ wenty-​­four days, we have had murders, fearful a­ ccidents, bloody deaths, a mob, whippings, a hanging, an attempt at suicide, and a fatal duel.” Within six months of arriving in California in 1849, one gold seeker in every five was dead. The goldfields and mining towns were so dangerous that insurance companies refused to provide coverage. Suicides were common and disease was rampant. Women were as rare in the mining camps as liquor and guns were abundant. In 1850, less than 8 percent of California’s population was female. The few women who dared to live in the camps could demand a premium for their work as cooks, laundresses, entertainers, and prostitutes. In the mining camps, white miners often looked with disdain upon the Hispanics and Chinese, who were most often employed as wage laborers to help in the panning process, separating gold from sand and gravel. But the whites focused their contempt on the Indians: it was not considered a crime to kill Indians or work them to death.

 the compromise of 1850

 By late 1849, as confrontations over slavery mounted, each national political party was dividing into factions along ­North–​­South lines. Irate southern Whigs abandoned their party and joined the ­pro-​­slavery Democrats. Some threatened that their states would leave the Union if President Taylor followed through on his proposal to bring California and New Mexico directly into the Union as free states, skipping the territorial phase.

Slavery in the Territories  605


 Jefferson Davis, Taylor’s s­ on-​­in-​­law, dismissed the president’s plan as being ­anti-​­southern. Taylor responded by criticizing “intolerant and revolutionary southerners.” ­Southerners—​­ministers, planters, and ­politicians—​­rushed to attack the president. “I avow before this House and country, and in the presence of the living God,” shouted Robert Toombs, a Georgia congressman, “that if by your legislation you seek to drive us [slaveholders] from the territories of California and New Mexico . . . and to abolish slavery in this District [of Columbia] . . . I am for disunion.” As the controversy unfolded, the spotlight fell on the Senate, where an ­all-​ ­star cast of outsized personalities with swollen egos resolved to find a way to preserve the Union. The “lions” of the S­ enate—​­Henry Clay, John C. Calhoun, and Daniel Webster (all of whom would die within two years)—took center stage, with William H. Seward, Stephen A. Douglas, and Jefferson Davis in supporting roles. Together, they staged one of the great dramas of American politics: the Compromise of 1850, a ­ten-​­month-​­long debate over a series of resolutions intended to reduce the crisis between North and South that had “unhinged” both political parties.

 in search of compromise

 With southern extremists threatening secession, congressional leaders again turned to an aging Henry Clay, now ­seventy-​­two years old and struggling with tuberculosis. As Abraham Lincoln acknowledged, Clay was “regarded by all, as the man for the crisis.” No man had amassed a more distinguished political career. Clay had gained every position he had sought except the presidency: senator, congressman, Speaker of the House, secretary of state. Now, as his career was winding down, Clay hoped to save the Union by presenting his own plan to end another sectional crisis. On December 3, 1849, as the ­Thirty-​­First Congress assembled for what would become the longest session in its history, Clay strode into the Senate to waves of applause. He asked to be relieved of all committee responsibilities so that he could focus on the national crisis. Unless some compromise could be found, the slaveholding Clay warned, a “furious” civil war would fracture the Union. The next day, in his annual message to Congress, President Taylor urged immediate statehood for California and the same as soon as possible for New Mexico. He then pleaded with Congress to avoid injecting slavery into the issue. It was too late, however. Admitting California as a free state would tip the political balance against slavery, with sixteen free states to fifteen slave states. The slaveholding states would become a permanent minority. As Jefferson Davis argued, the South could not allow that to happen. Taylor hoped that his proposals would “create confidence and kind feeling” among the contending sections. But his speech only aggravated the seething

 606  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 tensions. It took weeks of combative debate before a Speaker of the House, Georgia slaveholder Howell Cobb, could be elected on the s­ixty-​­third ballot. “Madness rules the hour,” wrote Philip Hone, a New York Whig, in his diary. For the first time in history, he noted, members of Congress were openly threatening to dissolve the Union. Clay then stepped into the breach. On January 29, 1850, having gained the wholehearted support of Daniel Webster, the senior senator from Massachusetts whom he had known for ­thirty-​­six years, Clay presented to Congress his “amicable” plan for “compromise and harmony.” Eager to see the Great Compromiser, people filled the Senate. Using all of his charm and passion, Clay pleaded with the Senate to pass eight resolutions, six of which were paired as compromises between North and South, and all of which were designed to settle the “controversy between the free and slave states, growing out of the subject of slavery.” He proposed (1) to admit California as a free state; (2) to organize the territories of New Mexico and Utah without restrictions on slavery, allowing the residents to decide the issue for themselves; (3) to deny Texas its extreme claim to much of New Mexico; (4) to compensate Texas by having the federal government pay the p ­ re-​­annexation Texas debts; (5) to retain slavery in the District of Columbia, but (6) to abolish the sale of slaves in the nation’s capital; (7) to adopt a more effective federal fugitive slave law (“the recapture of fugitives was not just a legal duty, but a moral one”); and (8) to deny congressional authority to interfere with the interstate slave trade. Clay’s cluster of proposals became in substance the Compromise of 1850, but only after seven months of negotiations punctuated by the greatest debates in congressional history. Clay’s eloquence had won over the moderates but not those at the extremes: northern abolitionists or southern secessionists.

 the great debate

 On March 4, a feeble John C. Calhoun, desperately ill with tuberculosis, arrived in the Senate chamber. The uncompromising defender of slavery was so sick and shriveled that a colleague had to read his defiant speech. Calhoun urged that Clay’s compromise be rejected. The “great questions” dividing the nation must be settled on southern terms. The South, he explained, needed Congress to protect the rights of slave owners to take their “property” into the new territories. Otherwise, Calhoun warned, the “cords which bind” the Union would be severed. If California were admitted as a free state, the South could no longer “remain honorably and safely in the Union.” The southern states would leave the Union (secede) and form their own national government. Three days later, Calhoun, who would die in three weeks, hobbled into the Senate to hear Daniel Webster speak. Webster was so famous for his theatrical

Slavery in the Territories  607


 Clay’s compromise (1850) Warning against an impending sectional conflict, Henry Clay outlines his plan for “compromise and harmony” on the Senate floor.

 speeches that they were major public events. The visitors’ galleries were packed as he rose to address the Senate. “I wish to speak today,” Webster began, “not as a Massachusetts man, not as a Northern man, but as an American. . . . I speak today for the preservation of the Union.” He blamed both northerners and southerners for the crisis but acknowledged that both regions had legitimate grievances: the South understandably objected to the excesses of “infernal fanatics and abolitionists” in the North, and the North resented aggressive southern efforts to expand slavery into the new western territories. With respect to escaped slaves, Webster shocked his fellow New Englanders by declaring that “the South, in my judgment, is right, and the North is wrong.” Fugitive slaves must be returned to their owners. Webster had no patience, however, with the notion of secession. Leaving the Union would bring civil war. “Secession! Peaceable secession! Sir, your eyes and mine are never destined to see that miracle.” Instead of looking into such “caverns of darkness,” let “men enjoy the fresh air of liberty and union.

 608  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 Let them look to a more hopeful future.” For almost four hours, he pleaded with his colleagues not to be uncompromising “pigmies” but compromising statesmen. Webster’s evenhanded speech angered both sides. No sooner had he finished than Calhoun stood to assert that the Union could indeed “be broken. Great moral causes will break it.” At the same time, northern abolitionists savaged Webster for calling them fanatics. On March 11, William Seward, a ­first-​­year Whig senator from New York, gave an intentionally provocative speech in which he opposed Clay’s compromise, declaring that any compromise with slavery was “radically wrong and essentially vicious.” There was, he said, “a higher law than the Constitution,” and it demanded the abolition of slavery through acts of civil disobedience. He encouraged his fellow New Yorkers to defy the federal fugitive slave law by extending a “cordial welcome” to escaped slaves and defending them from all efforts to return them south. The southern supporters of slavery, he concluded, must give way to the inevitable “progress of emancipation.” Seward’s inflammatory speech outraged southerners, who repudiated his “fanatical and wild notion” of there being a “higher law” than the Constitution and the implication that the godly abolitionists were somehow above the law. Clay felt compelled to dismiss Seward’s “wild, reckless, and abominable theories.” Seward, however, was unapologetic. He had sought to speak for the enslaved as well as all of humankind.

 compromise efforts

 For his part, Henry Clay was “angry at everybody.” The extremists had taken control of the debate and were postponing a vote on his compromise proposal. He got little help from President Taylor, who continued to focus solely on the admission of California as a new state. In a letter to his son, Clay reported that the “Administration, the Abolitionists, the Ultra Southern men, and the timid Whigs of the North are all combined against” his compromise plan. On July 4, 1850, Congress took a break and celebrated Independence Day by gathering beneath a broiling summer sun at the base of the unfinished Washington Monument. President Taylor suffered a mild heatstroke while listening to three hours of patriotic speeches. He tried to recover by gorging himself on iced milk, cherries, and raw vegetables. That night, he suddenly developed a violent stomach disorder. He died five days later, the second president to die in office. Taylor’s shocking death actually bolstered the chances of a compromise in Congress, for his successor, Vice President Millard Fillmore, supported Clay’s proposals. It was a striking reversal: Taylor, the Louisiana slaveholder, had

Slavery in the Territories  609


 been ready to make war on his native South to save the Union; Fillmore, whom southerners thought opposed slavery, was ready to make peace. The new president asserted his control by asking his entire cabinet to resign. He then appointed Webster as secretary of state, signaling that he also joined Webster in supporting compromise. Fillmore was aided by Illinois senator Stephen A. Douglas, a rising young star in the Democratic party, who was friendly to the South. Douglas dramatically stepped up to rescue Clay’s struggling plan. Brash and brilliant, short and ­ stocky—​­ he stood just five feet ­four—​­Douglas, the “Little Giant” who Millard Fillmore Fillmore’s support of modeled himself after Andrew Jack- the Compromise of 1850 helped sustain son, cleverly suggested that the best the Union through the crisis. way to salvage Clay’s “comprehensive scheme” was to break it up into separate proposals and vote on them one at a time. Fillmore endorsed the idea. The plan worked, in part because John C. Calhoun had died and was no longer in the Senate to obstruct efforts at conciliation. Each component of Clay’s compromise plan passed in the Senate and the House, several of them by the narrowest of margins. (Only five senators voted for all of the items making up the compromise.) In its final version, the Compromise of 1850 included the following elements: (1) California entered the Union as a free state, ending forever the old balance of free and slave states; (2) the T ­ exas–​­New Mexico Act made New Mexico a territory and set the Texas boundary at its present location. In return for giving up its claims, Texas was paid $10 million, which secured payment of the state’s debt; (3) the Utah Act set up the Utah Territory and gave the territorial legislature authority over “all rightful subjects of legislation” (slavery); (4) a Fugitive Slave Act required the federal government and northern states to help capture and return runaway slaves; and (5) as a gesture to ­anti-​­slavery groups, the public sale of slaves, but not slavery itself, was abolished in the District of Columbia. By September 20, President Fillmore had signed the last of the measures into law, claiming that they represented a “final settlement” to the sectional

 610  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

THE COMPROMISE OF 1850 CANADA ME

OREGON TERRITORY

 VT

MINNESOTA TERRITORY WI

UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

 NY

MI PA

IA UTAH TERRITORY CALIFORNIA
(admitted as free state, 1850) 
 IL

 Free states and territories Slave states Open to slavery by popular sovereignty, Compromise of 1850

■


 RI

 MD

 NC

 TN

 SC

AR MS TX

CT NJ DE

 KY

Missouri Compromise Line
36˚30´N


PACIFIC OCEAN

■


 VA

MO NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

 OH

 IN

 n -Dixo Mason Line

NH MA

 AL

 GA

ATLANTIC OCEAN

LA FL

Gulf of Mexico


 MEXICO





300 Miles


150 300 Kilometers


 What events forced the Compromise of 1850? How did Stephen A. Douglas rescue the compromise? What were its final terms?

WWN64
Figure M14_1 1st proof 
 tensions over slavery. “Let us cease agitating,” Douglas urged, “stop the debate, and drop the subject” of slavery. The nation celebrated the compromise. “Harmony is secured. Patriots rejoice!” blared one newspaper. Henry Clay predicted that his solution would “pacify, tranquilize, and harmonize the country.” At the least, Daniel Webster sighed, he could “now sleep nights.” The ­so-​­called Compromise of 1850 defused an explosive situation and settled each of the major points at issue, but it was not so much an example of warring people making concessions as it was a temporary and imperfect truce. As Salmon P. Chase, an Ohio F ­ ree-​­Soiler, stressed, “the question of slavery in the territories has been avoided. It has not been settled.” The Compromise of 1850 only postponed secession and civil war for ten years. It was a brilliant form of evading the fundamental issue dividing the nation. Soon, aspects of the compromise would reignite sectional tensions.

 the fugitive slave act

 People were naive to think that the Compromise of 1850 would eliminate discussions about the legitimacy of

Slavery in the Territories  611


 s­ lavery. Within two months of the bill’s passage, the squabbling between North and South resumed. The Fugitive Slave Act was the most controversial element of the Compromise of 1850. It did more than strengthen the hand of slave catchers; it sought to recover slaves who had already escaped. The law also unwittingly enabled slave traders to kidnap free blacks in northern “free” states, claiming that they were runaway slaves. The law denied fugitives a jury trial. In addition, citizens under the new law were forced to help locate and capture runaways. Abolitionists fumed. “This filthy enactment was made in the nineteenth century, by people who could read and write,” Ralph Waldo Emerson marveled in his diary. He urged people to break the new law “on the earliest occasion.” In late October 1850, two slave catchers from Georgia arrived in Boston, determined to use the new federal Fugitive Slave Act to recapture William and Ellen Craft, h ­ usband-​­and-​­wife cabinet­ makers. Abolitionists m ­ obilized to prevent the Crafts from being seized by the “man stealers.” After five days, the slave catchers gave up and returned to Georgia. Upon learning of the incident, President Fillmore assured the South that he would use federal troops, if necessary, to return the Crafts to Georgia. But he was too late. Abolitionists had spirited the Crafts to safety in Great Britain. Theodore Parker, a prominent white Boston minister who was a leading abolitionist, wrote a letter to President Fillmore explaining the willingness of his congregation to engage in civil disobedience in order to protect the Crafts, who were church members: “You cannot think that I am to stand by and see my own church carried off to slavery and do nothing to hinder such Threats to free blacks This 1851 notice a wrong.” The occasion soon arose in Detroit, warned free blacks about police and Michigan, where only military force others who could easily kidnap and sell them back into slavery under the new stopped the rescue of a fugitive slave Fugitive Slave Act. by an outraged mob in October 1850.

 612  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 There were relatively few such incidents, however. The efforts to protect the Crafts was one of several similar episodes of public resistance to slave catchers in the North. In the eleven years of the Fugitive Slave Act, barely more than 300 escaped slaves were returned to bondage. The mere existence of the Fugitive Slave Act, however, was intolerable to many northern abolitionists; several of them advocated violence. “The only way to make the Fugitive Slave Law a dead letter,” Frederick Douglass threatened, “is to make h ­ alf-​­a-​­dozen or more dead kidnappers.” In Springfield, Massachusetts, a fiery abolitionist named John Brown formed an armed band of African Americans, called the League of Gileadites, to attack slave catchers. Such efforts led Horace Greeley, the prominent New York newspaper editor, to write that the Fugitive Slave Act was proving to be “a very bad investment for slaveholders” because it was creating such a backlash against slavery itself throughout the northern states.

 uncle tom’s cabin

 During the 1850s, ­anti-​­slavery advocates gained a powerful new weapon in the form of Harriet Beecher Stowe’s b ­ est-​­selling novel, Uncle Tom’s Cabin; or Life among the Lowly (1852). The pious Stowe epitomized the powerful religious underpinnings of the abolitionist movement. While raising six children in Cincinnati, Ohio, during the 1830s and 1840s, she helped runaway slaves who had crossed the Ohio River from Kentucky. Like many ­anti-​­slavery activists, Stowe was disgusted by the Fugitive Slave Act. In the spring of 1850, having moved to Maine, she began writing Uncle Tom’s Cabin. “The time has come,” she wrote, “when even a woman or a child who can speak a word for freedom and humanity is bound to speak.” Uncle Tom’s Cabin was a smashing success. Within two days, the first printing had sold out, and by the end of its first year, it had sold 300,000 copies in the United States and more than a million in Great Britain. Soon there was a children’s version and a traveling theater production. By 1855, it was called “the most popular novel of our day.” Uncle Tom’s Cabin depicted a combination of improbable saints and sinners, crude stereotypes, impossibly virtuous black victims, and melodramatic escapades involving fugitive slaves. The persecuted Uncle Tom, whose gentleness and generosity grow even as he is sold as a slave and taken south; the villainous white planter Simon Legree, who torments and tortures Tom before ordering his death; the angelic Little Eva, a white girl who dies after befriending Tom; the beautiful but desperate Eliza, who escapes from slave catchers by carrying her child to freedom across the icy Ohio ­River—​­all became stock characters in American folklore. The novel revealed how the brutal realities of slavery harmed everyone associated with it. Abolitionist leader Frederick Douglass, a former slave

Slavery in the Territories  613


 ­ imself, said that Uncle Tom’s Cabin h was like “a flash” that lit “a million camp fires in front of the embattled host of slavery.” Slaveholders were incensed by the book, calling Stowe that “wretch in petticoats.” One of them mailed her a parcel containing the severed ear of a disobedient slave.

 the election of 1852

In
 1852, it took the Democrats ­ forty-​ ­nine ballots before they chose Franklin Pierce of New Hampshire as their presidential candidate. When Pierce heard the results, he was stunned: “You are looking at the most surprised man who ever lived!” When his wife Jane learned of the nomination, she fainted. Their “The Greatest Book of the Age” concerns were ­well-​­founded. Uncle Tom’s Cabin, as this advertisement The Democrats’ platform endorsed indicated, was an influential best seller. the Compromise of 1850, including enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act. For their part, the Whigs repudiated the lackluster Millard Fillmore, who had faithfully supported the Compromise of 1850, and chose General Winfield Scott, a hero of the M ­ exican-​­American War. Scott, however, proved to be an inept campaigner. He carried only Tennessee, Kentucky, Massachusetts, and Vermont. The Whigs, now without their greatest leaders, Henry Clay and Daniel Webster, had lost virtually all of their support in the Lower South. Pierce overwhelmed Scott in the electoral college, 254 to 42, although the popular vote was close: 1.6 million to 1.4 million. The t­ hird-​­party F ­ ree-​­Soilers mustered only 156,000 votes. The ­forty-​­eight-​­year-​­old Pierce, an undistinguished congressman and senator who had fought in the M ­ exican-​­American War, was, like James K. Polk, touted as another Andrew Jackson. Pierce eagerly promoted western expansion and the conversion of more territories into states, even if it meant adding more slave states to the Union, but he also acknowledged that the ­Compromise of 1850 had defused a “perilous crisis.” He urged both North and South to avoid aggravating the other. As a Georgia editor noted, however, the feud between the two regions might be “smothered, but never overcome.” Pierce was burdened by the death of his e­ leven-​­year-​­old son, Benjamin, killed in a train accident just days before his father was sworn in as president. Benjamin was the third son that the Pierces had lost. Still in mourning, Jane

 614  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 Pierce refused to attend her husband’s inauguration and thereafter lived in seclusion, writing letters to her dead children, cursing politics, and blaming Franklin for her troubles. Writer Nathaniel Hawthorne, Pierce’s close friend, confided in a letter that he wished the new president “had a better wife, or none at all.” President Pierce, an intelligent man capable of eloquent speechmaking, had tragic flaws and private demons: blinded by a desire to be liked and cursed with raging ambition, he was a timid, indecisive leader who was often drunk. (He would die in 1869 of alcoholism.) Commissioned as a general in the ­Mexican-​­American War, he had fainted during his first battle. As president, Pierce proved unable to unite the warring factions of his own party. By the end of his first year in office, Democratic leaders had decided that he was a failure. James W. Forney, a political friend, confessed that the presidency “overshadows him. He is crushed by its great duties and seeks refuge in [alcohol].” By trying to be all things to all people, Pierce was labeled a “doughface”: a “Northern man with Southern principles.” His closest friend in the cabinet was Secretary of War Jefferson Davis, the future president of the Confederacy. Such friendships led Harriet Beecher Stowe to call Pierce an “­arch-​­traitor.”

 the ­k ansas-​­nebraska crisis

 During the ­mid–​­nineteenth century, Americans discovered the vast markets of Asia. As trade with China and Japan grew, merchants and manufacturers called for a transcontinental railroad connecting the Eastern Seaboard with the Pacific coast to facilitate both the flow of commerce with Asia and the settlement of the western territories. Those promoting the railroad did not realize that the issue would renew sectional rivalries and reignite the debate over the westward extension of slavery. In 1852 and 1853, Congress considered several proposals for a transcontinental rail line. Secretary of War Jefferson Davis of Mississippi favored a southern route across the territories acquired from Mexico. Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois insisted that Chicago be the Midwest hub for the new rail line and urged Congress to pass the ­Kansas-​­Nebraska Act so that the vast territory west of Missouri and Iowa could be settled. To win the support of southern legislators, Douglas championed “popular sovereignty,” whereby voters in each new territory would decide whether to allow slavery. It was a clever way to get around the 1820 Missouri Compromise, which excluded slaves north of the 36th parallel, where Kansas and Nebraska were located. Southerners demanded more, however, and Douglas reluctantly complied. Although he knew it would “raise a hell of a storm” in the North, Douglas

The Emergence of the Republican ­Party  615


 supported the South in recommending the formal repeal of the Missouri Compromise and the creation of two new territorial governments rather than one: Kansas, west of Missouri, and Nebraska, west of Iowa and Minnesota. This meant that millions of fertile acres would be opened to slaveholders. What came to be called the ­Kansas-​­Nebraska Act “took us by s­urprise—​­astounded us,” recalled Abraham Lincoln. In May 1854, Douglas masterfully assembled the votes for his K ­ ansas-​ ­Nebraska Act, recruiting both Democrats and southern Whigs. The measure passed by a vote of 37 to 14 in the Senate and 113 to 100 in the House. The a­nti-​­slavery faction in Congress, mostly Whigs, had been crushed, and the national Whig party essentially died with them. Out of its ashes would arise a new party: the Republicans.

Stephen A. Douglas, ca. 1852 The
 Illinois Democratic senator authored the ­Kansas-​­Nebraska Act.

The Emergence of the Republican P
 ­ arty The dispute over the ­Kansas-​­Nebraska Act led northern ­anti-​­slavery Whigs and some northern ­anti-​­slavery Democrats to gravitate toward two new parties. One was the American (“­Know-​­Nothing”) party, which had emerged in response to the surge of mostly Catholic immigrants from Ireland and Germany, nearly 3 million of whom arrived in the United States between 1845 and 1854. Many of the immigrants were poor and Catholic, which made them especially unwanted. The “­Know-​­Nothings” embraced nativism (opposition to foreign immigrants) by denying citizenship to newcomers. Many also were opposed to the territorial expansion of slavery and the “fanaticism” of abolitionists. The other new party, the Republicans, attracted even more northern Whigs. It was formed in February 1854 in Ripon, Wisconsin, when the ­so-​ ­called “conscience Whigs” (those opposed to slavery) split from the southern ­pro-​­slavery “cotton Whigs.” The conscience Whigs joined with ­anti-​­slavery

 616  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 Democrats and ­Free-​­Soilers to form a new party dedicated to the exclusion of slavery from the western territories.

 “bleeding kansas”

 The passage of the ­Kansas-​­Nebraska Act soon placed Kansas at the center of the increasingly violent debate over slavery. While Nebraska would become a free state, Kansas was up for grabs. According to the ­Kansas-​­Nebraska Act, the residents of the Kansas Territory were “perfectly free to form and regulate their domestic institutions [slavery] in their own way.” The law, however, said nothing about when Kansans could decide about slavery, so each side tried to gain political control of the vast territory. “Come on then, Gentlemen of the Slave States,” New York senator William Seward taunted. “We will engage in competition for the virgin soil of Kansas, and God give the victory to the side which is stronger in numbers as it is in the right.” Groups for and against slavery recruited armed emigrants to move to Kansas. “Every slaveholding state,” said an observer, “is furnishing men and money to fasten slavery upon this glorious land, by means no matter how foul.” When Kansas’s first federal governor arrived in 1854, he sent an urgent message to President Pierce, reporting that southerners were arriving with a “dogged determination to force slavery into this Territory” in advance of an election of a territorial legislature in March 1855. On Election Day, thousands of heavily armed “border ruffians” from Missouri traveled to Kansas, illegally elected ­pro-​­slavery legislators, and vowed to kill every “­God-​­damned abolitionist in the Territory.” As soon as it convened, the territorial legislature expelled its few a­ nti-​­slavery members and declared that the territory would be open to slavery. The governor then rushed to Washington, D.C., to plead with Pierce to intervene with federal troops. Pierce acknowledged that he was concerned about the situation, but his spineless solution was to replace the territorial governor with a man who would support the ­pro-​­slavery faction. Outraged ­free-​­state advocates in Kansas, now a majority, spurned this “bogus” government and elected their own delegates to a constitutional convention which met in Topeka in 1855. They drafted a state constitution excluding slavery and applied for statehood. By 1856, a f­ree-​­state “governor” and “legislature” were operating in Topeka. There were now two illegal governments claiming to rule the Kansas Territory. And soon there was a territorial civil war, which journalists called “Bleeding Kansas.” In May 1856, a ­pro-​­slavery force of more than 500 Missourians, Alabamans, and South Carolinians invaded the ­free-​­state town of Lawrence, Kansas, just ­twenty-​­five miles from the Missouri border. David Atchison, a

The Emergence of the Republican ­Party  617


THE ­KANSAS-​­NEBRASKA ACT

CANADA WASHINGTON TERRITORY

ME VT

MINNESOTA TERRITORY

OREGON TERRITORY

NEBRASKA TERRITORY

 WI

MI PA

IA
Inset area 
UTAH TERRITORY

IL KANSAS TERRITORY

 CALIFORNIA

PACIFIC OCEAN

NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

CT NJ DE

 RI

 MD

VA KY NC

 TN

 SC

AR MS

 TX

 n -Dixo Mason Line

 OH

 IN

 MO

Missouri Compromise Line 36˚30´N
INDIAN AND OKLAHOMA TERRITORIES

NH MA

 NY

 AL

 GA

ATLANTIC OCEAN

LA FL

 MEXICO

Gulf of Mexico


BLEEDING KANSAS
Atchison 
Leavenworth


 ri

I S


 KANSAS

 u

 R iver

Lecompton
Lawrence


T E R R I T O R Y
Osawatomie Pottawatomie
Massacre


Os
 a

I
U R
S O


 Open to slavery by popular sovereignty, Compromise of 1850 Open to slavery by popular sovereignty, Kansas-Nebraska Act, 1854 Battle site

150 300 Kilometers


 o iss M

 Slave states

300 Miles


M


 Free states and territories



 ge River

 What were the terms of the ­Kansas-​­Nebraska Act? How did it lead to the creation of the Republican party? ■ What happened at Pottawatomie and Osawatomie? WWN64 ■ ■

Figure M14_2
 1st proof

 former U.S. senator from Missouri, urged the southern raiders not “to slacken or stop until every spark of ­free-​­state, ­free-​­speech, f­ ree-​­niggers, or free in any shape is quenched out of Kansas.” The mob rampaged through the town, destroying the newspaper printing presses, burning homes, and ransacking shops. The “Sack of Lawrence” ignited the passions of abolitionist John Brown. The son of fervent Ohio Calvinists who taught their children that life was a crusade against sin, the grim, humorless Brown believed that Christians must “break the jaws of the wicked,” and that the wickedest Americans were those

 618  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 who owned and traded slaves. Upon meeting Brown, many declared him crazy; those who supported his efforts thought he was a saint. He was a little of both. By the ­mid-​­1850s, the ­fifty-​­five-​ ­year-​­old Brown, the father of twenty children, had left his home in Springfield, Massachusetts, to become a holy warrior against slavery. In his view, blacks in the United States deserved both liberty and full social equality. A newspaper reporter said that Brown was a “strange” and “­iron-​­willed” old man with a “fiery nature and a cold temper, and a cool ­ head—​­ a volcano beneath a covering of snow.” Two days after the attack on Lawrence, Brown led four of his sons and a ­son-​­in-​­law to Pottawatomie, Kansas, a ­pro-​­slavery settlement near the Missouri border. On the night of May 24, Kansas a Free State This broadside Brown and his group dragged five men advertises a series of mass meetings in Kansas in support of the f­ ree-​ from their houses and hacked them to ­state cause, based on the principle death with swords. “God is my judge,” of “squatter” or popular sovereignty, Brown told one of his sons. “We were letting the residents decide the issue of justified under the circumstances.” slavery. Without “the shedding of blood,” he added, “there is no remission of sins.” The Pottawatomie Massacre started a brutal guerrilla war in the Kansas Territory. On August 30, pro-slavery Missouri ruffians raided a ­free-​­state settlement at Osawatomie. They looted and burned houses and shot Frederick Brown, John’s son, through the heart. By the end of 1856, about 200 settlers had been killed in “Bleeding Kansas.”

 senate bloodshed

 On May 22, 1856, two days before the Pottawatomie Massacre, an ugly incident in the U.S. Senate astounded the nation. Two days before, Republican senator Charles Sumner of Massachusetts, a passionate abolitionist, had delivered a fiery speech (“The Crime Against Kansas”) in which he showered slave owners with insults and charged them with

The Emergence of the Republican ­Party  619


 unleashing thugs and assassins in Kansas. His most savage attack was directed at Andrew Pickens Butler, an elderly senator from South Carolina, a state that Sumner said displayed a “shameful imbecility” resulting from its passion for slavery. Butler, Sumner charged, was a fumbling old man who had “chosen a mistress . . . who . . . though polluted in the sight of the world, is chaste [pure] in his ­sight—​­I mean the harlot [prostitute], Slavery.” Sumner’s speech enraged Butler’s cousin Preston S. Brooks, a South Carolina congressman with a h ­ air-​­trigger temper. On May 22, Brooks confronted Sumner as he sat at his Senate desk. Brooks shouted that Sumner had slandered Butler and the state of South Carolina, then began beating him about the head with a g­ old-​­knobbed walking stick until the cane splintered. Sumner, his head gushing blood, nearly died; he would not return to the Senate for almost four years. In the South, Butler was celebrated as a hero. The Richmond Enquirer described his attack as “good in conception, better in execution, and best of all in consequences.” Dozens of southerners sent Butler new canes. In satisfying his rage, though, Brooks had created a m ­ artyr—“Bloodied Sumner”—for the ­anti-​­slavery cause. Sumner’s empty Senate seat would serve as a solemn reminder of the violence done to him. His brutal beating also had an unintended political effect: it drove more northerners into the new Republican party.

 “Bully” Brooks attacks Charles Sumner This violent incident in Congress worsened the strains on the Union.

 620  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 sectional squabbles

 The violence of “Bleeding Kansas” and “Bloodied Sumner” spilled over into the tone of the 1856 presidential ­election—​­one in which the major parties could no longer evade the slavery issue. At its first national convention, the Republicans fastened on the eccentric John C. Frémont, “the Pathfinder,” who had led the conquest of Mexican California. The Republican platform borrowed heavily from the former Whigs. It endorsed federal funding for a transcontinental railroad and other transportation improvements. It denounced the repeal of the Missouri Compromise, the Democratic party’s policy of territorial expansion, and the “barbarism” of slavery. For the first time, a m ­ ajor-​­party platform had taken a stand against slavery. The ­southern-​­dominated Democrats dumped President Franklin Pierce, who remains the only elected president to be denied renomination by his party. Instead, they chose s­ ixty-​­five-​­year-​­old James Buchanan of Pennsylvania, a former senator and secretary of state who had long sought the nomination. The Democratic platform endorsed the K ­ ansas-​­Nebraska Act, called for vigorous enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act, and stressed that Congress should not interfere with slavery in states or territories. In the campaign of 1856, the Republicans had very few southern supporters and only a handful in the border slave states of Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri. Frémont swept the northernmost states with 114 electoral votes, but Buchanan added five free ­states—​­Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Illinois, Indiana, and ­California—​­to his southern majority for a total of 174. The Democrats now would control the White House, the Congress, and the Supreme Court.

 president buchanan

 As Franklin Pierce prepared to leave the White House in March 1857, a friend asked what he was going to do. Pierce replied: “There’s nothing left to do but get drunk.” James Buchanan also loved to drink, but he had different priorities. The ­president-​­elect had built his political career on his commitment to states’ rights and his aggressive promotion of territorial expansion. Saving the Union, he believed, depended upon making concessions to the South. Republicans charged that he lacked the backbone to stand up to the southern slaveholders who dominated the Democratic majorities in Congress. His choice of four ­slave-​­state men and only three f­ ree-​­state men for his cabinet seemed another bad sign. It was. Although Buchanan had vast experience, he had limited ­ability—​­and bad luck. During his first six months in office, two major events caused his undoing: (1) the Supreme Court decision in the Dred Scott case, and (2) new troubles in s­ trife-​­torn Kansas.

The Emergence of the Republican ­Party  621


THE ELECTION OF 1856

WASHINGTON TERR.

 NH 5 ME VT 5

OREGON TERR.

 CA

MINNESOTA WI NEBRASKA TERR. MI TERRITORY IA UTAH IL IN OH TERRITORY KANSAS MO TERR. KY 12 UNORG. TN NEW MEXICO TERR. AR TERRITORY MS AL GA TX LA

NY PA VA

 MA 13 RI 4 CT 6 NJ 7 DE 3 MD 8

NC SC

 FL

Electoral Vote
James Buchanan (Democrat)




 John C. Frémont (Republican)



Millard Fillmore (American)


■
■
■




 What was the platform of the new Republican party? Why did Democrats pick James Buchanan? What were the key factors that decided the election?

WWN64
Figure M14_3 1st proof 
 The financial Panic of 1857 only made a bad situation worse, for the new president and for the nation. By the summer of 1857, the economy was growing too fast. Too many railroads and factories were being built, and European demand for American corn and wheat was declining. The result was a financial panic triggered by the failure of the Ohio Life Insurance and Trust Company on August 24, 1857. Upon hearing the news, worried customers began withdrawing their money from banks, which forced the banks to call in loans, causing many ­businesses

 622  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 to go bankrupt. By the fall, newspapers across the North highlighted the “hard times” that had befallen the nation. Jobless men roamed city streets demanding work or food or money. Federal troops had to be sent to disperse angry mobs in New York City. Planters in the South, whose agricultural economy suffered the least during the panic, took great delight in the problems plaguing the northern economy. Senator James Henry Hammond of South Carolina gave a speech in early 1858 in which he told northern businessmen Your slaves are white, of your own race; you are brothers of one blood. They are your equals in natural endowment of intellect, and they feel galled by your degradation. Our slaves do not vote. We give them no political power. Yours do vote, and being the majority, they are the depositories of all your political power. Hammond suggested that the North adopt ­race-​­based slavery to prevent ­working-​­class whites from taking control of the social and political order. “Cotton is king,” he triumphantly roared, and ­race-​­based slavery made it so.

 the dred scott case

 Dred Scott The Supreme Court’s refusal to give Scott and his family their freedom fanned the flames of the intense debate over slavery.

On
 March 6, 1857, two days after Buchanan’s inauguration, the Supreme Court delivered a decision in the l­ ong-​ ­pending case of Dred Scott v. ­Sandford. Scott, born a slave in Virginia, had been taken to St. Louis in 1830 and sold to an army surgeon, who took him to Illinois, then to the Wisconsin Territory (later Minnesota), and finally back to St. Louis in 1842. While in the Wisconsin Territory, Scott had married Harriet Robinson, and they eventually had two daughters. In 1846, Scott filed suit in Missouri, claiming that his residence in Illinois and the Wisconsin Territory had made him free because slavery was outlawed in those areas. A jury decided in his favor, but the state supreme court ruled against him. When the case was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court,

The Emergence of the Republican ­Party  623


 the nation anxiously awaited its opinion on whether freedom once granted could be lost by returning to a slave state. Seven of the nine justices were Democrats, and five were southerners. The vote was 7 to 2 against Scott. ­Seventy-​­nine-​­year-​­old Chief Justice Roger B. Taney of Maryland, a supporter of the South and of slavery, wrote the majority opinion. The chief justice ruled that Scott lacked legal standing because, like all former slaves, he was not a U.S. citizen. At the time the Constitution was adopted, Taney claimed, blacks “had for more than a century been regarded as . . . so far inferior, that they had no rights which the white man was bound to respect.” On the issue of Scott’s residency, Taney argued that the n ­ ow-​­defunct Missouri Compromise of 1820 had deprived citizens of property by prohibiting slavery in selected states, an action “not warranted by the Constitution.” In the Dred Scott decision, the Supreme Court had declared an act of Congress (the Missouri Compromise) unconstitutional for the first time since Marbury v. Madison (1803). Even more important, the decision now challenged the concept of popular sovereignty. If Congress itself could not exclude slavery from a territory, as Taney argued, then neither could a territorial government created by an act of Congress. Yet instead of settling the issue of slavery in the territories, Taney’s ruling fanned the flames. ­Pro-​­slavery advocates loved the Court’s decision. Even President Buchanan approved. Republicans, on the other hand, protested the Dred Scott decision because it nullified their ­anti-​­slavery program.

 the lecompton constitution

Meanwhile, in the Kansas
 Territory, the furious fight over slavery continued, with both sides resorting to voting trickery and violence. Just before James Buchanan’s inauguration, in early 1857, the ­pro-​­slavery territorial legislature scheduled a constitutional convention. The governor vetoed the measure, but the legislature overrode his veto. The governor resigned in protest, and Buchanan replaced him with Robert J. Walker. With Buchanan’s approval, Governor Walker pledged to ­free-​­state Kansans (who made up an overwhelming majority of the residents) that the new constitution would be submitted to a fair vote. But when the ­pro-​­slavery constitutional convention, meeting at Lecompton, drafted a constitution under which Kansas would become a slave state, opponents of slavery boycotted the vote on the new constitution. At that point, Buchanan took a critical step. Influenced by southern ­advisers and politically dependent upon southern congressmen, he endorsed the ­pro-​­slavery Lecompton convention. A new wave of outrage swept across

 624  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 the northern states. Stephen A. Douglas, the most prominent Midwestern Democrat, sided with ­anti-​­slavery Republicans because the majority of Kansas voters had been denied the right to decide the issue. Douglas told a newspaper reporter that “I made Mr. James Buchanan, and by God, sir, I will unmake him.” The rigged election in Kansas went as predicted: 6,226 for the constitution with slavery, 569 for the constitution without slavery. Meanwhile, a new acting governor had organized the ­anti-​­slavery legislature, which scheduled another election to decide the fate of the Lecompton Constitution. Most of the ­pro-​ ­slavery settlers boycotted this election. The result, on January 4, 1858, was decisive: 10,226 voted against the Lecompton Constitution, while only 138 voted for it. In April 1858, Congress ordered that Kansans vote again. On August 2, 1858, they rejected the constitution, 11,300 to 1,788. With that vote, Kansas cleared the way for its eventual admission as a free state.

 douglas versus lincoln

 The controversy over slavery in Kansas fractured the Democratic party. Stephen A. Douglas, one of the few remaining Democrats with support in both the North and the South, struggled to keep the party together. But first he had to secure his home base in Illinois, where in 1858 he faced reelection to the Senate. To challenge Douglas, Illinois Republicans selected a respected lawyer from Springfield, Abraham Lincoln. Lincoln had served in the Illinois legislature and in 1846 had won a seat in the U.S. Congress. After a single unremarkable term, he returned to Springfield. In 1854, however, the ­Kansas-​­Nebraska Act drew Lincoln back into the political arena. Lincoln hated slavery but was no abolitionist. He did not believe that the nation should force the South to end “the monstrous injustice” but did insist that slavery not be expanded into new western territories. In 1856, Lincoln joined the Republican party, and two years later he emerged as the obvious choice to oppose Douglas. Lincoln sought to raise his profile by challenging Douglas to a series of debates across the state. The seven ­Lincoln-​­Douglas debates took place from August 21 to October 15, 1858. They attracted tens of thousands of spectators and transformed the Illinois Senate race into a battle for the very future of the republic. The two men differed as much physically as they did politically. Lincoln was six feet four, sinewy and ­craggy-​­featured, with a long neck, big ears, and ­deep-​­set, brooding gray eyes. Unassuming in manner and attire, he lightened his demeanor with a refreshing sense of humor. To sympathetic observers, he conveyed an air of simplicity, sincerity, and common sense.

The Emergence of the Republican ­Party  625


Abraham Lincoln and Stephen A. Douglas—Debate at Charleston, Illinois,
 September 18, 1858 This mural by Midwestern impressionist Robert Marshall Root, painted to commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of the debates, can still be seen hanging in the Governor’s Office in Springfield, Illinois.

 The short, stocky Douglas, on the other hand, was quite the dandy and wore only the finest ­custom-​­tailored suits. A man of considerable abilities and even greater ambition, he strutted with the pugnacious air of a predestined champion. Douglas traveled to the debate sites in a private railroad car; Lincoln rode alone on his horse. The basic dispute between the two candidates, Lincoln insisted, lay in Douglas’s indifference to the immorality of slavery. Douglas, he said, was preoccupied only with process (“popular sovereignty”); in contrast, Lincoln claimed to be focused on principle. “I have always hated slavery as much as any abolitionist,” he stressed. The American government, he predicted, could not “endure, permanently half slave and half free. . . . It will become all one thing, or all the other.” Douglas disagreed, asking what was to keep the United States from tolerating both slavery for blacks and freedom for whites? Douglas won the close election, but Lincoln’s energetic underdog campaign made him a national figure. And across the northern states, the Republicans won so many congressional seats in 1858 that they seized control of the House of Representatives.

 an outnumbered south

 By the late 1850s, national politics was undergoing profound changes. In May 1858, the free state of Minnesota entered the Union; in February 1859, another ­non-​­slave territory, Oregon, gained statehood. The slave states of the South were quickly becoming a besieged minority, and their insecurity, even paranoia, deepened.

 626  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 At the same time, political tensions over slavery were becoming more violent. In 1858, members of Congress engaged in the largest brawl ever staged on the floor of the House of Representatives. Harsh words about slavery incited the ­free-​­for-​­all, which involved more than fifty legislators shoving, punching, and wrestling one another. The fracas ended when John “Bowie Knife” Potter of Wisconsin yanked off the wig of a Mississippi congressman and claimed, “I’ve scalped him.” Like the scuffling congressmen, more and more Americans began to feel that compromise was impossible: slavery could be ended or defended only with violence. The editor of a ­pro-​­slavery Kansas newspaper wanted to kill abolitionists: “If I can’t kill a man, I’ll kill a woman; and if I can’t kill a woman, I’ll kill a child.” Some southerners were already talking of secession again. In 1858, former Alabama congressman William L. Yancey, the leader of a group of ­hot-​­tempered southern secessionists called “­fire-​­eaters,” said that it would be easy “to precipitate the Cotton States into a revolution.”

 john brown’s raid

 The gradual return of prosperity in 1859 offered hope that the sectional storms of the 1850s might pass, but the slavery issue continued to simmer. In October 1859, the militant abolitionist John Brown surfaced again, this time in the East. Since the Pottawatomie Massacre in Kansas in 1856, he had kept a low profile while acquiring money and weapons from New England sympathizers. His heartfelt commitment to abolishing slavery and promoting racial equality had intensified because he saw slavery becoming more deeply entrenched, cemented by law, economics, and religious sanction. Brown was convinced that he was carrying out a divine mission on behalf of a vengeful God. He struck fear into supporters and opponents alike, for he was a moral absolutist who disdained compromise. As one of the few whites willing to live among black people and die for them, he was a brilliant propagandist for the abolitionist cause. In 1859, Brown hatched a plan to steal federal weapons and give them to rebellious slaves in western Virginia and Maryland, in the hope of triggering mass uprisings across the South. “I want to free all the negroes in this state,” Brown said. “If the citizens interfere with me, I must burn the town and have blood.” When Brown asked Frederick Douglass to join the effort, the nation’s leading black abolitionist declined, saying the suicidal plan “would array the whole country against us.” He warned Brown that he was “going into a perfect steel trap” and would never get out alive. Brown, the fiery crusader, replied that something “startling” must be done to awaken the nation to the evil of slavery. He decided to proceed without Douglass.

The Emergence of the Republican ­Party  627


 On the cool, rainy night of October 16, 1859, Brown left a Maryland farm and crossed the Potomac River with about twenty men, including three of his sons and five African Americans. Under cover of darkness, they walked five miles to the federal rifle arsenal in Harpers Ferry, Virginia (now West Virginia). Brown and his righteous soldiers took the sleeping town by surprise, cut the telegraph lines, and occupied the arsenal with its 100,000 rifles. He then dispatched several men to kidnap prominent slave owners and sound the alarm for local slaves to rise up and join the rebellion. Only a few slaves heeded the call, however, and by dawn, armed townsmen had surrounded the raiders. Brown and a dozen of his men, along with eleven white hostages (including George Washington’s g­reat-​­ grandnephew) and two of their slaves, holed up for ­thirty-​­two hours in a firehouse. Meanwhile, hundreds of armed whites poured into Harpers Ferry. Lieutenant ­Colonel ­Robert E. Lee also arrived with a force of U.S. Marines. On the morning of October 18, a marine officer ordered the abolitionists to surrender. Brown replied that he preferred to die fighting, warning that he “would sell his life as dearly as possible.” Twelve marines then broke open the barricaded doors and rushed in. Lieutenant Israel Green reported that he found himself face to face with “an old man kneeling with a carbine in his hand, with a long gray beard falling away from his face.” Green would have killed Brown had his sword not bent back double when he plunged it into the abolitionist’s chest. He then beat Brown until he passed out. Brown’s men had killed four townspeople and one marine while wounding another dozen. Of their own force, ten were killed (including two of Brown’s sons) and five were captured; another five escaped. A week later, Brown and his accomplices were tried and convicted of treason, murder, and “conspiring with Negroes to produce insurrection.” At his sentencing, Brown delivered an eloquent speech in which he expressed John Brown On his way to the gallows, Brown predicted that slavery would end pride in his effort to “mingle my blood only “after much bloodshed.” further with the blood of my children

 628  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 and with the blood of millions in this slave country whose rights are disregarded by wicked, cruel, and unjust enactments.” For four weeks, as Brown waited to be hanged, he met with newspaper reporters and wrote a host of letters, many of which were printed in ­anti-​ ­slavery newspapers. Henry Wise, governor of Virginia, visited Brown in jail and reported that he was a man “of courage, fortitude, and simple ingeniousness. He is cool, collected, and indomitable.” On December 2, 1859, some 1,500 Virginia militiamen, including a young actor named John Wilkes Booth, who would later assassinate Abraham Lincoln, assembled for Brown’s execution. Just before being placed atop his coffin in a wagon to take him to the scaffold, Brown wrote a final message, predicting that the “crimes of this guilty land will never be purged away, but with Blood.” Although John Brown’s Raid on Harpers Ferry failed to ignite a massive slave rebellion, it achieved two things: he became a martyr for the abolitionist cause, and he set off a hysterical panic throughout the slaveholding South. The pacifist abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison called Brown, the man with the burning eyes, “misguided, wild, and apparently insane.” Others were not so sure. “John Brown may be a lunatic,” said a Boston newspaper, but if so, “­one-​­fourth of the people of Massachusetts are madmen.” The transcendentalist leader Ralph Waldo Emerson called Brown a “saint” who had made “the gallows glorious like a cross.” Frederick Douglass proclaimed Brown “our noblest American hero” whose commitment to ending slavery “was far greater than mine.” Caught up in a frenzy of fear, southerners circulated wild rumors about slave rebellions. They “have declared war on us,” warned a Mississippi legislator. Southern congressmen brought weapons to the Capitol. One of them reported that the only ones “who do not have a revolver and a knife are those who have two revolvers.” John Brown’s raid convinced southern states to strengthen their militia units and pass new restrictions on the movements of slaves. “We regard every man in our midst an enemy to the institutions of the South,” said the Atlanta Confederacy, “who does not boldly declare that he believes African slavery to be a social, moral, and political blessing.” Other newspapers claimed that Brown’s raid had dramatically increased support for secession in the South. The Richmond Whig reported that thousands of Virginians had decided that the Union’s “days are numbered, its glory perished” as a result of John Brown’s actions.

 the democrats divide

 President Buchanan had chosen not to seek a second term, leaving Stephen A. Douglas as the frontrunner for the nomination. His northern supporters tried to straddle the slavery issue by

The Emergence of the Republican ­Party  629


 promising to defend the institution in the South while assuring northerners that slavery would not spread to new states. Southern firebrands, however, demanded federal protection for slavery in the territories as well as the states. When the p ­ ro-​­slavery advocates lost, delegates from eight southern states walked out of the convention in Charleston, South Carolina. The delegates then decided to leave Charleston. Douglas’s supporters reassembled in Baltimore on June 18 and nominated him for president. Southern Democrats met first in Richmond and then in Baltimore, where they adopted the ­ pro-​­ slavery platform defeated in Charleston and named John C. Breckinridge, vice president under Buchanan, as Abraham Lincoln A lanky and their candidate because he promised to rawboned ­small-​­town lawyer, Lincoln ensure that Congress would protect the won the presidential election in 1860. right of emigrants to take their slaves to the western territories. Thus another cord of union had snapped: the last remaining national party had split into northern and southern factions. The fracturing of the Democratic party made a Republican victory in 1860 almost certain.

 lincoln’s election

 The Republican convention was held in May in the ­fast-​­growing city of Chicago, where everything came together for Abraham Lincoln. The uncommon common man won the nomination over New York senator William H. Seward, and the resulting cheer, wrote one journalist, was “like the rush of a great wind.” The convention reaffirmed the party’s opposition to the extension of slavery and, to gain broader support, endorsed a series of traditional Whig policies promoting national economic expansion: a higher protective tariff, free farms on federal lands out west, and federally financed internal improvements, including a transcontinental railroad. The presidential nominating conventions revealed that opinions tended to be more radical in the Northeast and the Lower South. Attitude followed latitude. In the border states of Maryland, Delaware, Kentucky, and Missouri, a sense of moderation aroused former Whigs to make one more try at ­reconciliation. Meeting in Baltimore a week before the Republicans met in

 630  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

THE ELECTION OF 1860

WASHINGTON TERR. OR

 CA

KANSAS TERR. UNORG. TERR. TX

■


 WI

 IA

UTAH TERRITORY

NEW MEXICO TERRITORY

■


 NH 5 VT 5

UNORG. TERR. MN NEBRASKA TERRITORY

 IL

MO AR LA

 OH

 KY 12 TN 12 MS

 AL

MA RI 4 CT 6 4 NJ DE 3 MD 8

 NY

MI IN

 ME

 GA

PA VA SC

 NC

 FL

Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Abraham Lincoln (Republican)




1,866,000


 Stephen A. Douglas (Democrat—northern)



1,383,000


 John C. Breckinridge (Democrat—southern)



848,000


John Bell (Constitutional Union)




593,000


 What caused the division within the Democratic party in 1860? What were the major factors that led to Lincoln’s electoral victory?

WWN64
Figure M14_4 1st proof Chicago, 
 they reorganized themselves as the Constitutional Union party and nominated John Bell of Tennessee for president. Their platform centered on a vague statement promoting “the Constitution of the Country, the Union of the States, and the Enforcement of the Laws.” The bitterly contested campaign became a choice between Lincoln and Douglas in the North (Lincoln was not even on the ballot in the South), and Breckinridge and Bell in the South. Douglas, the only candidate to mount a nationwide campaign, promised that he would “make war boldly against Northern abolitionists and Southern disunionists.” But his heroic effort did no good. By midnight on November 6, Lincoln’s victory was announced. He had won 39 percent of the popular vote, the smallest plurality ever, but garnered a

The Response in the South  631


 clear majority (180 votes) in the electoral college. He carried all eighteen free states but none of the slave states. Lincoln, a man of remarkable humility and empathy, agreed with the many journalists and politicians who said his election was a fluke. His political experience was meager, his learning limited, and his popular support shallow. “Never did a President enter upon office with less means at his command,” the poet and Harvard professor James Russell Lowell remarked. Yet the unassuming prairie lawyer from Springfield, Illinois would emerge the acknowledged leader of his distinguished cabinet, earning the respect of colleagues and opponents who had originally scorned him, and becoming in the process, as the poet Walt Whitman wrote, “the grandest figure yet, on all the crowded canvas of the Nineteenth Century.”

The Response in the South
 Between November 8, 1860, when Lincoln was officially named president-elect, and March 4, 1861, when he was inaugurated, the United States of America disintegrated. The election of Lincoln, an ­anti-​­slavery Midwesterner, panicked southerners who believed that the Republican party, as a Richmond, Virginia, newspaper asserted, was founded for one reason: “hatred of African slavery.” Former president John Tyler wrote that with Lincoln’s election the nation “had fallen on evil times” and that the “day of doom for the great model Republic is at hand.” False rumors that Lincoln planned to free the slaves raced across the South. One newspaper editorial called the ­president-​­elect a “bigoted, unscrupulous, and ­cold-​­blooded enemy of peace and equality of the slaveholding states.” Lincoln responded that southern fears were misguided. He stressed in a letter to a Georgia congressman that he was not a radical abolitionist and his administration would not interfere with slavery, either “directly or indirectly.” Lincoln, however, refused to provide such assurances in public, in part because he misread the depth of southern anger and concern over his election.

 south carolina secedes

P
 ­ ro-​­slavery ­fire-​­eaters in South Carolina viewed Lincoln’s election as the final signal to abandon the Union. After Lincoln’s victory, the state’s entire ­congressional delegation resigned and left Washington, D.C. The state legislature then appointed a convention to decide whether it should remain in the Union. South Carolina had a higher percentage of slaves in its population (60 percent) than any other state, and its political leadership was dominated by ­slave-​ ­owning hotheads. It had been a o ­ ne-​­party state (Democratic) for decades,

 632  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 and it was the only state that did not allow its citizens to vote in presidential elections; the legislature, controlled by white planters, did the balloting. Meeting in Charleston on December 20, 1860, the special convention unanimously voted to secede from the Union. David Jamison Rutledge, who presided over the convention, announced that “the Ordinance of Secession has been signed and ratified, and I proclaim the State of South Carolina an Independent Commonwealth.” (Rutledge would have four sons killed in the Civil War and see his house burned to the ground.) James L. Petigru, one of the few Unionists in Charles­ ton, quipped that his newly independent state was “too small to be a Republic and too large to be an insane asylum.” As the news of South Carolina’s secession spread through Charleston, church bells rang, and shops closed. Cadets at the Citadel, the state military college, fired artillery salutes, new flags were unfurled, and volunteers donned militia uniforms. “the union is dis“The Union Is Dissolved!” An 1860 newspaper headline announcing South solved!” screamed the Charleston Carolina’s secession from the Union. Mercury. One Unionist in Charleston kept a copy of the newspaper, scribbling on the bottom of it: “You’ll regret the day you ever done this. I preserve this to see how it ends.”

 president buchanan balks

 The nation needed a decisive president, but James Buchanan was not up to the task. The president blamed the crisis on fanatical northern abolitionists, then declared that secession was illegal, only to claim that he lacked the constitutional authority to force a state to rejoin the Union. In the face of Buchanan’s inaction, all the southerners in his cabinet resigned, and secessionists seized federal property, arsenals, and forts in the southern states.

The Response in the South  633


 Among those federal facilities was Fort Sumter, nestled on a tiny island at the mouth of Charleston Harbor. When South Carolina secessionists demanded that Major Robert Anderson, a Kentucky Unionist, surrender the undermanned fort, he refused, vowing to hold on at all costs. On January 5, 1861, Buchanan sent an unarmed ship, the Star of the West, to resupply Fort Sumter. As the ship approached Charleston Harbor on January 9, Confederate cannons opened fire and drove it away. It was an act of war, but Buchanan chose to ignore the challenge and try to ride out the remaining weeks of his term, hoping against hope that a compromise would be reached to avoid war. Many southerners, however, were not in a compromising mood. The crisis, said a southern senator, could only be defused when “northern people” agreed “to review and reverse their whole policy upon the subject of slavery.”

 secession of the lower south

By February 1, 1861, the
 states of the Lower S­ outh—​­South Carolina, Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and ­Texas—​­had seceded. Although the states’ secession ordinances mentioned various grievances against the federal government, including tariffs on imports, they made clear that the primary reason for leaving the Union was the preservation of slavery. Texas’s ordinance, stoutly opposed by Governor Sam Houston, explained that the purpose of secession and the formation of the Confederacy was to “secure the rights of the ­slave-​­holding States in their domestic institutions.” The Texas convention displayed the paternalistic racism at work in secession, calling Africans “an inferior and dependent race” for whom slavery was actually “beneficial.” An Alabama secessionist explained that the people in his state “are calmly and fully determined never to submit to Lincoln’s administration, or to any Compromise with the Northern States.” On February 4, 1861, fifty representatives of the seceding states, all but one of whom were slave owners, t­ wenty-​­one of them wealthy planters, met in Montgomery, Alabama, where they adopted a constitution for the Confederate States of America. The Confederate Constitution mandated that “the institution of negro slavery, as it now exists in the Confederate States, shall be recognized and protected.” Mississippi’s Jefferson Davis, a ­Kentucky-​­born West Point graduate who had served in the House of Representatives and the Senate, was elected president, with Alexander H. Stephens of Georgia as vice president. The tiny, sickly Stephens, weighing no more than ninety pounds, left no doubt about why the Confederacy was formed. “Our new government,” he declared, “is founded upon . . . the great truth that the negro is not equal to the white man; that slavery, subordination to the superior [white] race, is his natural and normal condition.”

 634  CHAPTER 14  The Gathering Storm 1848–1860

 In ­mid-​­February, Davis traveled from Mississippi to Montgomery, Alabama, the Confederate capital, for his installation. On February 18, William Yancey, an Alabama fi ­ re-​­eater, introduced Davis to the crowd by announcing that the “man and the hour have met.” In his remarks, Davis ominously claimed that “the time for compromise is now passed.”

 final efforts at compromise

 Members of Congress, however, desperately sought a compromise to avoid a civil war. On December 18, 1860, John J. Crittenden of Kentucky offered a series of resolutions that would allow the extension of slavery into the new western territories south of the Missouri Compromise line (36°30ʹ parallel) and guaranteed the preservation of slavery where it already existed. Lincoln, however, opposed any plan that would expand slavery westward, and the Senate defeated the Crittenden Compromise, 25 to 23. Several weeks later, in February 1861, t­ wenty-​­one states sent delegates to a peace conference in Washington, D.C. Former president John Tyler presided, but the peace convention’s proposal, substantially the same as the Crittenden Compromise, had little support in either house of Congress. (Tyler himself voted against it and urged Virginia to secede at once.) The only proposal that generated much interest was a constitutional amendment guaranteeing slavery where it existed. Many Republicans, including Lincoln, were prepared to go that far to save the Union, but no further. As it happened, after passing the House, the slavery amendment passed the Senate 24 to 12 on the morning of March 4, 1861, Lincoln’s inauguration day. It would have become the Thirteenth Amendment, and would have been the first time the word slavery had appeared in the Constitution, but the states never ratified it. When a Thirteenth Amendment was eventually ratified, in 1865, it did not protect ­slavery—​­it ended it.

 lincoln’s inauguration

 In ­mid-​­February 1861, Abraham Lincoln boarded a train in Springfield, Illinois, headed to Washington, D.C., for his inauguration. Along the way, he told the New Jersey legislature that he was “devoted to peace” but warned that “it may be necessary to put the foot down.” In his inaugural address on March 4, the ­ fifty-​­ two-​­ year-​­ old Lincoln repeated his pledge not “to interfere with the institution of slavery in the states where it exists.” But the immediate question facing the nation had shifted from slavery to secession. Lincoln insisted that “the Union of these States is perpetual.” No state, he stressed, “can lawfully get out of the Union.” He pledged

The Response in the South  635


 to defend “federal forts in the South,” but beyond that “there will be no invasion, no using of force against or among the people anywhere.” In closing, he appealed for the Union: We are not enemies, but friends. We must not be enemies. Though passion may have strained, it must not break our bonds of affection. The mystic chords of memory, stretching from every battlefield and patriot grave to every living heart and hearthstone all over this broad land, will yet swell the chorus of the Union, when again touched, as surely they will be, by the better angels of our nature. Southerners were not impressed. A North Carolina newspaper warned that Lincoln’s speech made civil war “inevitable.” On both sides, however, people assumed that any warfare would be over quickly and that their lives would then go on as usual.

 the end of the waiting game

 On March 5, 1861, his first day in office, President Lincoln found on his desk a letter from Major Anderson at Fort Sumter. Time was running out for the Union soldiers. Anderson reported that his men had enough food for only a few weeks, and that the Confederates were encircling the fort with a “ring of fire.” It would take thousands of federal soldiers to rescue them. On April 4, 1861, Lincoln ordered that unarmed ships take food and supplies to the ­sixty-​­nine soldiers at Fort Sumter. Jefferson Davis was equally determined to stop any effort to supply the fort, even if it meant using military force. The secretary of state for the new Confederacy, Richard Lathers, warned Davis that if the South fired first, it would unify northern opinion against the secessionists: “There will be no compromise with Secession if war is forced upon the north.” Davis ignored the warning. On April 11, Confederate general Pierre G. T. Beauregard, who had studied under Robert Anderson at West Point, urged his former professor to surrender Fort Sumter and sent him cases of whiskey and boxes of cigars to help convince him. Anderson refused the gifts and the request. At 4:30 a.m. on April 12, Confederate cannons began firing on Fort Sumter. The bright flashes and thundering boom of guns awakened the entire city; thousands rushed to the Battery to watch the incessant shelling. Finally, the outgunned Major Anderson, his ammunition and food gone, lowered the “stars and stripes.” A civil war of unimagined horrors had begun.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 Slavery in the Territories Representative David Wilmot’s Proviso, although it never became law, declared that since Mexican territories acquired by the United States had been free, they should remain so. Like the Wilmot Proviso, the new ­Free-​­Soil party demanded that slavery not be expanded in the territories. But it was the discovery of gold in California and the ensuing California gold rush of 1849 that escalated tensions. Californians wanted to enter the Union as a free state. Southerners feared that they would lose federal protection of their “peculiar institution” if there were more free states than slave states. It had been agreed that popular sovereignty would settle the status of the territories, but when the territories applied for statehood, the debate over slavery was renewed. Through the wildly celebrated Compromise of 1850, California entered the Union as a free state; the territories of Texas, New Mexico, and Utah were established without direct reference to slavery; the slave trade (but not slavery) was banned in Washington, D.C.; and a new Fugitive Slave Act was passed. Tensions turned violent with the passage of the ­Kansas-​­Nebraska Act, which overturned the Missouri Compromise by allowing slavery in the territories where the institution had been banned by Congress in 1821.

•


 The Republican Party’s Appeal ­The efforts of pro-​­slavery advocates in Kansas to force slavery on the territory enraged northern opinion, even though a­ nti-​­slavery settlers such as John Brown were equally violent in the events known as Bleeding Kansas. The Supreme Court’s Dred Scott v. Sandford decision, which ruled that Congress could not interfere with slavery in the territories, further fueled sectional conflict. Northern voters gravitated toward the Republican party as events unfolded. Republicans also advocated raising protective tariffs and funding the development of the nation’s infrastructure, which appealed to northern manufacturers and commercial farmers. Abraham Lincoln’s narrow failure to unseat Democrat Stephen A. Douglas in the 1858 Illinois Senate election, which included the famous ­Lincoln-​­Douglas debates, revealed the Republican party’s growing appeal. In 1860, Lincoln carried every free state and won a clear electoral college victory.

•


 The Secession of the Lower South and Civil War Following Lincoln’s election, South Carolina seceded. Six other Lower South states quickly followed. Together they formed the Confederate States of America, citing their belief that secession was necessary for the preservation of slavery. In his inaugural address, Lincoln made it clear that secession was unconstitutional but that the North would not invade the South. However, the Confederate states stood by their declarations of secession, and war came when South Carolinians fired on the “stars and stripes” at Fort Sumter.



Chronology
 1848	­Free-​­Soil party is organized











1860–1861




March 4, 1861
April 1861


 California gold rush begins Congress passes the ­Kansas-​­Nebraska Act The Republican party is founded A ­pro-​­slavery mob sacks Lawrence, Kansas; John Brown stages the Pottawatomie Massacre in retaliation Charles Sumner of Massachusetts is caned and seriously injured by a ­pro-​­slavery congressman in the U.S. Senate U.S. Supreme Court issues the Dred Scott decision Lecompton Constitution declares that slavery will be allowed in Kansas Abraham Lincoln debates Stephen A. Douglas during the 1858 Illinois Senate race John Brown and his followers stage a failed raid at Harpers Ferry, Virginia, in an attempt to incite a slave insurrection South Carolina and six other southern states secede from the Union Crittenden Compromise is proposed but fails Abraham Lincoln is inaugurated president Fort Sumter falls to Confederate forces, triggers Civil War

Key Terms
Wilmot Proviso (1846) p. 600


­Kansas-​­Nebraska Act (1854) p. 614


 popular sovereignty p. 601

Bleeding Kansas (1856) p. 616


 ­Free-​­Soil party p. 601

Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857) p. 622


 California gold rush (1849) p. 602

 ­Lincoln-​­Douglas debates (1858) p. 624

Compromise of 1850 p. 605
Fugitive Slave Act (1850) p. 611


IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




The War of
 the Union 1861–1865

 Lincoln’s Drive through Richmond (1866) Shortly after the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia, fell to Union forces in April 1865, President Abraham Lincoln visited the ­war-​­torn city. His carriage was swarmed by enslaved blacks who were freed by the war, as well as whites whose loyalties were with the Union.

T


 he fall of Fort Sumter started the war of the Union and triggered a wave of patriotic bluster on both sides. A southern woman prayed that God would “give us strength to conquer them, to exterminate them, to lay waste every Northern city, town and village, to destroy them utterly.” By contrast, the writer Nathaniel Hawthorne reported from Massachusetts that his transcendentalist friend Ralph Waldo Emerson was “breathing slaughter” as the Union army prepared for its first battle. The pacifist Emerson now said that “sometimes gunpowder smells good.” Many southerners, then and since, argued that the Civil War was not about slavery but about the South’s effort to defend states’ rights. Confederate president Jefferson Davis, for example, owner of a huge Mississippi plantation with 113 slaves, claimed that the war was fought on behalf of the South’s right to secede from the Union and its need to defend itself against a “tyrannical majority,” meaning those who had elected President Abraham Lincoln, the a­ nti-​­slavery Republican. For his part, Lincoln stressed repeatedly that the “paramount object in this struggle is to save the Union, and is not either to save or to destroy slavery. If I could save the Union without freeing any slave I would do it, and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves I would do it; and if I could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone I would also do that.” If the southern states returned to the Union, he promised, they could retain their slaves. None of the Confederate states accepted Lincoln’s offer, in large part because most white southerners were convinced that the new president was lying. The “Black Republican,” as they called the president, was determined to end slavery, no matter what he said.

 focus questions 1. What were the respective advantages of the North and South as the Civil War began? How did those advantages affect the military strategies of the Union and the Confederacy? 2. Why did Lincoln decide to issue the Emancipation Proclamation? How did it impact the war?

 3. In what ways did the war affect social and economic life in the North and South? 4. What were the military turning points in 1863 and 1864 that ultimately led to the Confederacy’s defeat?

 5. How did the Civil War change the nation?

