 750  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 the world, more than double that of its closest rival, Great Britain. By 1900, American industries and corporate farms dominated global markets in steel and oil, wheat and cotton. Such phenomenal growth caused profound social changes, the most visible of which was the sudden prospering of large industrial cities such as Pittsburgh, Chicago, and Cleveland. Millions of young adults left farms and villages to work in factories, mines, and mills and to revel in the energies of city life. In growing numbers, women left the “cult of domesticity” at home and entered the ­urban-​­industrial workplace as clerks, typists, secretaries, teachers, nurses, and seamstresses. While a few people made enormous fortunes, however, most laborers remained in unskilled, l­ ow-​­wage jobs. Big Business, a term commonly used to refer to the giant corporations that emerged after the Civil War, was as untamed and reckless as the cow towns and mining camps of the West. New technologies and business practices outpaced the ability of the outdated legal system to craft new laws and fashion rules of ethics to govern the rapidly changing economy. Business owners took advantage of this lawless environment to build fortunes, destroy reputations, exploit both workers and the environment, and gouge consumers. Yet out of the scramble for profits emerged an u ­ ndreamed-​ ­of prosperity and a rising standard of living that became the envy of the world. In the process of generating wealth, capitalism fosters inequality. People with different talents, opportunities, and resources receive unequal rewards from their labors and innovations. In a capitalist democracy like America, the tensions between equal political rights and unequal economic status produce inherent social instability. The overwhelming influence exercised by the ­business tycoons led to tensions that spurred the formation of labor unions and farm associations. Increasingly, those tensions erupted into violent clashes that demanded government intervention and produced class conflict.

Industrial and Agricultural Growth
 Several factors converged during the second half of the nineteenth century to accelerate the nation’s industrial development. Perhaps the most important was the creation of new transportation ­systems—​­canals, steamboats, railroads—​­ ­ along with instantaneous communication networks (telegraph and, later, telephone), which combined to create a truly national marketplace for the sale and distribution of goods and services. In addition, Americans enjoyed the benefits of vast and valuable natural ­resources—​­land, forests, minerals, oil, coal, water, and iron ore. At the same time, a rising tide of immigrants created an army of ­low-​­wage, ­high-​­energy

Industrial and Agricultural Growth  751


 workers while expanding the pool of consumers eager to buy new products. Between 1865 and 1900, more than 15 million newcomers arrived in the United States. A new generation of business leaders drove the transition to an u ­ rban-​­industrial society. Investment banker Jay Cooke marveled at the new breed of ­cold-​­blooded capitalists who emerged during and after the Civil War, most of them northerners and all of them driven by the “same ­all-​­pervading, ­all-​­engrossing anxiety to grow rich.” The uncommon men who spearheaded the postwar economic boom elicited both praise and scorn. Admirers called them “captains of industry,” while critics called them “robber barons” because they controlled the flow of money and commerce. Whatever the label, the p ­ ost–​­Civil War business tycoons were shrewd men determined to create large enterprises never before imagined. They were proponents of free enterprise and ­self-​­reliance who were convinced that what was good for their businesses was good for the country as a whole. Hated, feared, envied, or admired, the titans of the industrial era were the catalysts for a new America of cities and factories, prosperity amid poverty, and growing social strife and political corruption. Bigness was the driving goal of industrial capitalism. Mass, scale, and size were the watchwords of the day. Daring entrepreneurs took advantage of new money-​­making opportunities, technologies, and political lobbying (­ including bribery) to build gigantic corporations (called trusts) that ­dominated ­industries such as oil refining, steel, sugar, and meatpacking. The promoters of Big Business scrambled for wealth by ruthlessly improving efficiency and productivity, cutting costs, buying politicians, ­ and suppressing competition. These predatory ­men—​­Cornelius Vanderbilt, John D. R ­ ockefeller, Andrew Carnegie, and J. P. Morgan, among ­others—​ w ­ anted to dominate their industries. When Vanderbilt, a commodore first of ­steamboats and then r­ ailroads, learned that some rivals had tried to steal one of his ­properties while he was away, he penned a brief message: “Gentlemen: You have undertaken to cheat me. I will not sue you, for law takes too long. I will ruin you.” And he did.

Corporate Agriculture
 At the same time that the manufacturing sector was experiencing rapid growth, the agricultural sector was also shifting to a ­large-​­scale industrial model of operation. Giant ­corporate-​­owned “bonanza” farms spread across the West. They were run like factories by professional, ­college-​­educated managers, who during harvest season would hire hundreds of migrant workers to bring in the crops, usually wheat or corn destined for eastern or foreign markets.

 752  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 The farm sector stimulated the industrial s­ector—​­and vice versa. In the West, bonanza farms using the latest machinery and scientific techniques became internationally famous for their productivity. By 1870, the United States had become the world’s leading agricultural producer. And, with the growth of the commercial cattle industry, the process of slaughtering, ­packing, and shipping cattle, hogs, and sheep evolved into a major industry itself, ­especially in Chicago, the nation’s fastest growing city and the largest ­slaughterhouse in the world.

 Technological ­I nnovations America has always nurtured a culture of invention and innovation. Abraham Lincoln had often praised the nation’s peculiar talent for “discoveries and inventions,” which was especially evident in the decades after the Civil War. Inventors, scientists, research laboratories, and business owners developed ­labor-​­saving machinery and m ­ ass-​­production techniques (such as the use of interchangeable parts) that spurred dramatic advances in efficiency, productivity, and the size of industrial enterprises. Such innovations helped businesses turn out more products more cheaply while enabling more people to buy more of them. Technological advances created economies of scale, whereby larger business enterprises, including huge commercial farms, could afford expensive new machinery and large workforces that boosted their productivity. After the Civil War, technological improvements spurred phenomenal increases in industrial productivity. The U.S. Patent Office, which had recorded only 276 inventions during the 1790s, registered almost 235,000 new patents in the 1890s. The list of innovations was lengthy: barbed wire; mechanical harvesters, reapers, and New technologies Business executives combines; refrigerated railcars; air brakes watch Alexander Graham Bell at the for trains; steam turbines; typewriters; New York end of the first l­ ong-​­distance sewing machines; vacuum cleaners; electelephone call to Chicago, 1892. tric motors; and countless others.

Industrial and Agricultural Growth  753


 bell’s telephone

 Few, if any, inventions could rival the importance of the telephone. In 1875, t­ wenty-​­eight-​­year-​­old Alexander Graham Bell began experimenting with the concept of a “speaking telegraph,” or talking through wires. The following year, he developed a primitive “electric speaking telephone” that enabled him to send a famous message to his assistant in another room: “Mr. Watson, come here, I want to see you.” Bell then patented his device and started a company, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company (AT&T), to begin manufacturing telephones. Five years later, he perfected the ­long-​­distance telephone lines that revolutionized communication. By 1895, there were more than 300,000 telephones in use. Bell’s patent became the most valuable one ever issued.

 typewriters and sewing machines

 Other inventions changed the nature of work. Typewriters, for example, transformed the operations of business offices. Because women showed greater dexterity in their fingers, business owners hired them to operate typewriters, in part because they could be paid much less than men. Clerical positions soon became the ­fastest-​­growing job category for women. Likewise, the introduction of sewing machines for the mass production of clothing and linens opened new doors to w ­ omen—​­if not usually pleasant

 Office typists In new roles enabled by typewriters, women served as clerks or secretaries at many offices, such as the Remington Typewriter Company, pictured here.

 754  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 ones to walk through. S­ o-​­called sweatshops emerged in the major cities, where large numbers of mostly young women, often immigrants, worked long hours in cramped, stifling conditions.

 thomas edison

 No American inventor was more influential or prolific than Thomas Alva Edison. As a boy in Michigan, he could not sit still; he loved to “make things” and “do things.” His mother h ­ ome-​­schooled him and allowed him to explore the outdoors and perform chemical “experiments,” except when he “mussed things up.” Edison later said his mother “was the making of me. She understood me; she let me follow my bent.” His “bent” was toward telegraphy and electricity. He built his own telegraph set and dreamed of being a telegraph operator sending messages in Morse code. When Edison was twelve, he began working for the local railroad, selling newspapers, food, and candy to passengers. “Being poor,” he explained, “I already knew that money is a valuable thing.” One day he was late for the train and ran after it. A conductor reached down and lifted him into the train by his ears. Edison felt something snap in his head, and soon he was deaf. Despite losing his hearing, however, he said that his work as a trainboy “was the happiest time of my life.” It was in 1862, early in the Civil War, that the deaf, solitary Edison fastened on his real passion: being a telegraph operator first in Cincinnati, then in Louisville, then in Boston, since the clicking key enabled him to listen to others and tinker with the equipment. Despite having no formal scientific education, the s­elf-​­taught Edison developed an insatiable curiosity and mechanical genius. In January 1869, at the age of t­wenty-​­one, he announced that he would “hereafter devote his full time to bringing out his inventions.” He moved to New York City to be closer to the center of America’s financial district. He developed dozens of new machines, including a “stock market ticker” that would report the t­ ransactions on Wall Street in real time. Soon, job offers and “real money” flooded his way. Edison, however, had a different goal: he wanted to become a ­full-​­time inventor, an electrical engineer devoted to creating new products. In 1876, he moved into his “science village” in Menlo Park, New Jersey, ­twenty-​­five miles southwest of New York City. There, Edison became a ­mass-​ ­production inventor, promising to produce “a minor invention every ten days and a big thing every six months or so.” In the nation’s first industrial research laboratory, Edison and his ­assistants created the first phonograph in 1877 and a l­ong-​­lasting electric lightbulb in 1879. He also improved upon the telephone. By the ripe age of thirty, ­Edison was the nation’s foremost inventor. Altogether, he created or ­perfected

Industrial and Agricultural Growth  755


 hundreds of new devices and processes, including the storage battery, ­Dictaphone, mimeograph copier, electric motor, and motion picture camera and projector. Edison soon became world famous. A magazine saluted him as the “Wizard of Menlo Park” and called him one of the “wonders of the world.” President Rutherford B. Hayes invited him to the White House, and Congress honored him.

 george westinghouse and electric power

Until
 the 1880s, buildings and streets were lit mostly by kerosene or gas lamps. In 1882, the Edison Electric Illuminating Company, later renamed General Electric, supplied electrical current to e­ ighty-​­five customers in New York City, launching the electric utility industry. Several companies that made lightbulbs merged into the Edison General Electric Company in 1888. The use of direct electrical current, however, limited Edison’s lighting system to a radius of about two miles. To cover greater distances required an alternating current, which could be transmitted at high voltage and then stepped down by transformers. George Westinghouse, inventor of the railway air brake, developed the first a­ lternating-​­current electric system in 1886, and set up the Westinghouse Electric Company to manufacture the equipment. Edison resisted the new method as too risky, but the Westinghouse system of transmitting electricity over long distances won the “battle of the currents,” and the Edison companies had to switch over to AC (alternating current) from DC (direct current). After the invention in 1887 of the a­ lternating-​­current motor by a Croatian immigrant named Nikola Tesla, Westinghouse improved upon it, and the company began selling dynamos. The invention of dynamos, or electric motors, dramatically increased the power, speed, and efficiency of machinery. Electricity enabled factories to be located wherever the owners wished: factories and mills no longer had to cluster around waterfalls and coal deposits to have a ready supply of energy. Electricity also spurred urban growth by improving lighting, facilitating the development of trolley and subway systems, and stimulating the creation of elevators that enabled the construction of taller buildings.

The Railroad Revolution
 More than any other industry, the railroads symbolized the impact of innovative technologies on industrial development and the maturation of a truly national economy. No other form of transportation played so large a role in the development of the interconnected national marketplace.

 756  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 trains and time

 Railroads compressed time and distance. They moved masses of people and goods faster and farther than any other form of transportation. The railroad network prompted the creation of uniform national and international time zones and spurred the use of wristwatches, for the trains were scheduled to run on time. Towns that had rail stations thrived; those that did not died. A town’s connection to a railroad, observed Anthony Trollope, a celebrated British writer touring the United States, was “the first necessity of life, and gives the only hope of wealth.” Although the first great wave of railroad building occurred in the 1850s, the most spectacular growth took place during the quarter century after the Civil War. From about 35,000 miles of track in 1865, the national rail network grew to nearly 200,000 miles by 1897. Such a sprawling railroad system was expensive, and the ­long-​­term debt required to finance it would become a major cause of the financial panic of 1893 and the ensuing depression.

 trains and the industrial era

 Railroads were America’s first truly big business, the first beneficiary of the great financial market known

 Chinese railroad workers Using ­horse-​­drawn carts, picks, shovels, and dynamite, Chinese laborers played a large role in constructing the transcontinental Central Pacific Railroad track.

Industrial and Agricultural Growth  757


 as Wall Street in New York City, the first industry to have operations in several states, and the first to develop a ­large-​­scale management bureaucracy. The railroad boom was the essential catalyst for America’s transition to an ­urban-​­industrial economy. For a century, from the 1860s to the 1960s, most people entered or left a city through its railroad stations. Trains opened the West to economic development, enabled federal troops to suppress Indian resistance, ferried millions of European and Asian immigrants across the country, helped transform commercial agriculture into a major international industry, and transported raw materials to factories and finished goods to retailers. Railroads were expensive enterprises, however. Locomotives, railcars (called “rolling stock”), and the construction of track, trestles, and bridges required enormous investments. Railroads became the first industry to ­contract with “investment banks” to raise capital by selling shares of stock to investors around the world. They also stimulated other industries through their mammoth purchases of iron and steel, coal, timber, leather (for seats), and glass. In addition, railroad companies were the nation’s largest employers. By the 1870s, the Pennsylvania Railroad alone had 55,000 employees, as many as the entire federal government.

 the downside of the railroad boom

 Many developers, however, cared more about making money than building safe railroads. Companies often overlooked dangerous working conditions that caused thousands of laborers to be killed or injured. Too many unneeded railroads were built; by the 1880s, there were twice as many railroad companies as the economy could support. Some railroads were poorly or even criminally managed and went bankrupt. Those that succeeded often broke the rules. Railroad lobbyists helped to corrupt state and federal legislators by “buying” the votes of politicians with cash or shares of stock in the new railroad companies. Admitted Charles Francis Adams Jr., head of the Union Pacific Railroad, “Our method of doing business is founded upon lying, cheating, and ­stealing—​­all bad things.”

Building the Transcontinentals
 For decades, visionaries had dreamed of the United States being the first nation in the world to build a railroad spanning a continent. In the 1860s, the dream became reality as construction began on the first of four rail lines that would bridge the n ­ ation—​­and, as one promoter boasted, establish “our empire on the Pacific.”

 758  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 the “work of giants”

 The transcontinental railroads were, in the words of General William T. Sherman, the “work of giants.” Their construction required heroic feats by the surveyors, engineers, and laborers who laid the rails, built the bridges, and gouged out the tunnels through rugged mountains. The first transcontinental railroads were much more expensive to build than were the shorter “trunk” lines in the East. Because the western routes passed through vast stretches of unpopulated plains and deserts, construction materials as well as workers and their food and water had to be hauled long distances. Locomotives, railcars, rails, ties, spikes, and much more were often shipped from the East Coast to San Francisco and then moved by train to the remote construction sites. The construction process was like managing a moving army. Herds of cattle, horses, mules, and oxen had to be fed and tended. Huge mobile camps, called “Hell on Wheels,” had to be built to house the crews and then picked up and transported as the tracks progressed. The camps even included tents for dance halls, saloons, gambling, and prostitution. Nightlife in the construction camps was raucous. As a British reporter wrote, “Soldiers, herdsmen, teamsters, women, railroad men, are dancing, singing, or gambling. There are men here who would murder a ­fellow-​­creature for five dollars. Nay, there are men who have already done it. Not a day passes but a dead body is found somewhere in the vicinity with pockets rifled of their contents.”

 the pacific railway act (1862)

 Before the Civil War, construction of a transcontinental line had been delayed because northern and southern congressmen clashed over the choice of routes. Secession and the departure of southern congressmen for the Confederacy in 1861 finally ­permitted Republicans in Congress to pass the Pacific Railway Act in 1862. It authorized construction along a ­north-​­central route by two ­competing ­companies: the Union Pacific Railroad (UP) westward from Omaha, Nebraska, across the prairie, and the Central Pacific Railroad (CP) eastward from ­Sacramento, California, through the Sierra Nevada. Both companies began construction during the war, but most of the work was done after 1865. The risks were enormous. There was no guarantee that the CP could cross the Sierra Nevada, east of Sacramento. Collis Huntington, one of the CP owners, was so nervous about the undertaking that he refused to attend a ceremony celebrating the laying of the first rail. “If you want to jubilate over driving the first spike,” he wrote one of his partners, “go ahead and do it. I don’t. Those mountains over there look too ugly. We may fail, and if we do, I want as few people to know it as I can.”

Industrial and Agricultural Growth  759


 Constructing a railroad across the continent entailed feats of daring, engineering, and construction, often punctuated by heartbreak and heroism. Laying rail around and through the mountains required extensive use of gunpowder, dynamite, and costly tunnels and bridges; harsh weather caused frequent work disruptions. Many workers were killed or injured in the process. At times, some 15,000 people, mostly men, worked for each of the companies as they literally raced against each other to complete their tasks. The company that laid the most track in the shortest time would be awarded more money by Congress. The competition led both companies to cut corners. Collis Huntington, one of the CP owners, confessed that his goal was to build “the cheapest road that I could . . . ​so that it moves ahead fast.” If bridges or trestles collapsed under the weight of freight trains, they could be fixed later. Mark Hopkins, one of Huntington’s partners, agreed, noting that his goal was to build as “poor a road as we can.”

 railroad workers

 The UP crews were composed largely of young, unmarried former Civil War soldiers, both Union and Confederate, along with e­ x-​­slaves and Irish and German immigrants. The CP crews were mainly young Chinese workers lured to America by the California gold rush or by the railroad jobs. Most of these “coolie” laborers were single men eager to make money to take back to China, where they could then afford to marry and buy a parcel of land. Their temporary status and dreams of a good life made them more willing than American laborers to endure the low pay, dangerous working conditions, and intense racial prejudice. What distinguished the Chinese from other laborers was their disciplined ability to work together in accomplishing daunting tasks. Mark Twain described the Chinese as “quiet, peaceable, tractable, free from drunkenness, and they are as industrious as the day is long. A disorderly Chinaman is rare, and a lazy one does not exist. . . . ​He is a great convenience to e­ verybody—​­even to the worst class of white men, for he bears the most of their sins, suffering fines for their petty thefts, imprisonment for their robberies, and death for their murders.”

 laying track

 The process of building the rail lines involved a series of sequential tasks. First came the surveyors, who selected and mapped the routes and measured the grade changes. Engineers then designed the bridges, trestles, tunnels, and snowsheds. Tree cutters and graders followed by preparing the rail beds. Wooden cross ties were then placed in the ground and leveled before thirty-​­foot-​­long iron rails weighing 560 pounds were laid atop them. Next came spikers, who used special hammers to wallop t­wo-​­pound spikes attaching the rails to the ties. Finally, workers shoveled gravel between the ties to stabilize them against the weight of rolling trains. A journalist reported that “all this work is executed with great rapidity and mechanical regularity. ”

 760  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 Yet for all of its precision and efficiency, the process of building the lines faced constant interruptions: terrible weather, late deliveries of key items, accidents, epidemics, or Indian attacks. Arthur Ferguson, a supervisor who kept a daily journal, frequently noted the hazards of constructing the first transcontinental in 1868: May 17—Two more men drowned in the river yesterday. June 4—At about sunrise, were attacked by Indians and succeeded in shooting one. June 21—Indians killed two men. Both had been horribly mutilated about the face by cuts made by a knife or a tomahawk. June 30—Four men were killed and scalped today about two miles above camp. But it was not only Indians doing the killing. Workers often fought and killed each other. On June 7, Ferguson recorded that “two men were shot this evening in a drunken r­ ow—​­one was instantly killed, and the other is not expected to live.”

 the race to the finish

 The drama of constructing the first transcontinental railroad seized the nation’s imagination. Every major news-

 The Union Pacific meets the Central Pacific On May 10, 1869, the celebration of the first transcontinental railroad’s completion took place in Promontory, Utah.

Industrial and Agricultural Growth  761


 paper carried stories about the progress of the two competing companies. Finally, on May 10, 1869, former California governor Leland Stanford, one of the owners of the Central Pacific, drove a gold spike to complete the line at Promontory Summit in the Utah Territory north of the Great Salt Lake. The Union Pacific had built 1,086 miles of track compared with the Central Pacific’s 689. The railroad builders had changed the landscape and widened the horizons of American ambition. The golden spike used to connect the final rails symbolized the uniting of East and West just as Robert E. Lee’s surrender four years earlier had come to represent the reunion of North and South. Soon, the entire process would be repeated, as other companies constructed more lines across the continent.

TRANSCONTINENTAL RAILROAD LINES, 1880s C A N A D A
Gre at North ern 
MONTANA TERR.

Portland
Butte


IDAHO TERR.

De n


 CA

 ve

NE TERR.
Union Pacific 
 r&

CO TERR.

Ri
 o

G ra


 ci fi

San Diego


Atlantic & P


Santa Fe


 a c i fi c

ARIZONA TERR.

Albuquerque


 MO

D
 ZE

U


NM TERR.

So


St. Louis


 TN

NI GARR. R E NO T

El Paso


AR MS
Vicksburg 
Fort Worth


 LA

 TX u t h er n

Pacifi
 c

Houston


New Orleans


San Antonio


PACIFIC OCEAN

 IL

 KS

 peka & Sa nta F e To

At


Needles


Omaha


Kansas City
Kan sas Pa c i fic


 nde

 ch iso n,

Pa


Los Angeles


Chicago


 IA

Denver


Pueblo
 c

 MI

Milwaukee


Promontory
Ogden


UTAH TERR.

Superi or


 WI

WYOMING TERR.

 NEVADA

San
Francisco


 ke

St. Paul


Minneapolis


Te xa
 s

 l Pa c i fi c tra

 MN

 o u ri, K an sa s&

Ce
 n

 ern Sou th

Sacramento


DAKOTA TERR.

Miss


 OR

 a Duluth L

N o r t h ern Paci fi c


Lake Michigan


WA TERR.

Tacoma


M E X I C O


GULF OF MEXICO



300 Miles


300 Kilometers


 What was the route of the first transcontinental railroad, and why was it not in the South? WWN64 ■ Who built the railroads? How were they financed? ■

Figure M17_1
 First proof

 762  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

The Rise of Big Business
 The transcontinental railroads were the first of many i­ nvestor-​­owned, publicly traded corporations during the industrial era. The emergence of Big Business was one of the most significant developments in American history. Corporations grew much larger and more powerful, transacting business across the nation and abroad. They were also much more influential politically as they worked to influence governors, legislators, Congress, and presidents. Before the Civil War, most businesses had been small, local enterprises. After 1865, much of America suddenly got ­bigger—​­towns and cities, ships, locomotives, factories, machines, mines, and ­ mills—​­ and business ­organizations followed the same path. The rapid expansion in businesses, however, ­created problems. “The growing wealth and influence of our large corporations,” warned the New York Times, “is one of the most alarming phenomena of our time. Our public companies already wield gigantic power, and they use it like unscrupulous giants.”

The Growth of Corporations
 As businesses grew, they took one of several different forms. Some were owned by an individual, usually their founder; others were partnerships involving ­several owners. Increasingly, however, large companies that served national and international markets were converted into “corporations”—legal entities that separate the ownership of an enterprise from the management of its operations. Once a corporation is registered (“chartered” or “incorporated”) with a state government, it can raise money to operate (“capital”) by selling shares of ­stock—​­representing partial ownership of the ­company—​­to people not otherwise involved with it. Shareholders elect a board of directors who appoint and evaluate the corporation’s executives (“management”). One of the most important benefits of a corporation is “limited legal liability”: stockholders share in its profits but cannot be held liable for its debts if it fails.

Fighting Competition
 Competition is supposed to be the great virtue of capitalism, since it forces businesses to place a premium on efficiency and produce better products at the lowest cost. As many businesses became giant corporations, however, some business titans came to view competition as a burden rather than a blessing. Competition, many owners argued, created a chaotic and wasteful ­economic

The Rise of Big Business  763


 environment. Financier J. P. Morgan, for example, claimed that “bitter, destructive competition” always led to “destruction and ruin.” To eliminate cutthroat competition and thereby stabilize production, wages, and prices, rival companies selling similar products often formed “pools” whereby they secretly agreed to keep production and prices at specified levels. Such pools rarely lasted long, however, because they were unenforceable. One or more participants usually violated the agreement by cutting prices or increasing p ­ roduction—​­or both. The more effective strategy for the most aggressive companies was to get rid of weaker competitors by driving them out of business or buying them out. Strategies like these, as well as the methods used to carry them out, led critics to call the corporate titans “robber barons.” In the process of forming huge companies and eliminating competition, many business leaders cut corners, bribed politicians, ­double-​­crossed partners, exploited workers, hired strikebreakers, and broke laws. When asked how people might react to the shady methods he used to build his network of railroads, William Henry Vanderbilt famously replied: “The public be damned!”

The Barons of Business
 Most of the men (few women had such opportunities) who created big businesses in the late nineteenth century were driven by a compulsive desire to become rich and influential. Moreover, during and after the Civil War, becoming rich emerged as a national ideal sanctified by many religious leaders. “To secure wealth is an honorable ambition,” stressed Russell Conwell, a prominent Baptist minister who crisscrossed the nation preaching a sermon called “Acres of Diamonds,” in which he celebrated the benefits of hard work and its just rewards. “Money is power,” he explained, and “every good man and woman ought to strive for power, to do good with it when obtained. I say, get rich! get rich!” The industrial and financial giants personified the values that Conwell celebrated. They were men of grit and genius who found i­nnovative—​­and at times ­unethical—​­ways to increase production, create efficiencies, and eliminate competition. The captains of industry were also mercilessly adept at cutting costs and lowering prices. Several of the ­post–​­Civil War business barons stood out for their extraordinary accomplishments: John D. Rockefeller and Andrew Carnegie for their innovations in organization, J. Pierpont Morgan for his development of investment banking, and Richard Sears and Alvah Roebuck for their creation of ­mail-​­order retailing. In their different ways, each dealt a mortal blow to the s­ mall-​­scale economy of the early republic, fostering vast enterprises that

 764  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 f­orever altered the size and scope of business and industry.

 john d. rockefeller

Born
 in New York in 1839, John D. ­Rockefeller moved as a child to Cleveland, Ohio, nestled beside Lake Erie. Soon thereafter, his c­on-​­ man father abandoned the family. Raised by his mother, a devout Baptist, Rockefeller developed a ­ single-​­ minded passion for systematic organization. As a young man in the 1860s, he decided to bring order and rationality to the new b ­ oom-​­and-​­bust oil industry. He was ambitious, disciplined, and obsessed with precision, efficiency, ­tidiness—​­and money. (A childhood friend recalled that he was “mad about money, though sane about everything else.”) RockefelJohn D. Rockefeller Co-​­founder of the Standard Oil Company. ler said little, rarely smiled, and hardly ever laughed. The railroad and shipping connections around Cleveland made it a strategic location for serving the booming oil fields of nearby western Pennsylvania. The first oil well in the United States began producing in 1859 in Titusville, Pennsylvania, and led to the Pennsylvania oil rush of the 1860s. Because oil could be refined into kerosene, which was widely used for lighting, heating, and cooking, the economic importance of the oil rush soon outstripped that of the California gold rush ten years earlier. Well before the end of the Civil War, oil refineries sprang up in Pittsburgh and Cleveland. Of the two cities, Cleveland had better rail service, so Rockefeller focused his energies there. In 1870, Rockefeller teamed with his brother William and two other businessmen, Henry M. Flagler and Samuel Andrews (inventor of an inexpensive means of refining crude oil) to establish the Standard Oil Company of Ohio. Although the company quickly became the largest oil refiner in the nation, John Rockefeller wanted to eliminate his competitors and take control of the entire industry, in large part because he believed his competitors were inefficient and distracting. During the 1870s, Rockefeller used various schemes to eliminate his competitors. Early on, he pursued a strategy that came to be called horizontal

The Rise of Big Business  765


 integration, in which a dominant corporation buys or forces out most of its competitors. Rockefeller viewed competition as a form of warfare. In a few cases, he hired former competitors as executives, but only “the big ones,” he said, “those who have already proved they can do a big business. As for the others, unfortunately they will have to die.” By 1879, Standard Oil controlled more than 90 percent of the nation’s oil refining business. Still, Rockefeller intended “to secure the entire refining business of the world.” His goal was a monopoly, a business so large that it effectively controls an entire industry. Rockefeller was an innovative genius with the fierce focus of a shark and the pinched priorities of a bookkeeper obsessed with the smallest details. He methodically reduced expenses, incorporated the latest technologies, and eliminated any hint of waste while paying “nobody a profit.” Because he shipped so much oil by rail, he forced railroads to pay him secret “rebates” on the s­ hipments, enabling him to pay less for shipping than his competitors paid. Most important, instead of depending upon the products or services of other firms, known as middlemen, Standard Oil eventually owned everything it needed to produce, refine, and deliver ­oil—​­from wells to the finished product. The company had its own pipelines, built factories to make its own wagons and storage barrels, did its own hauling, owned its own storage tanks

 The rise of oil Crowding this Pennsylvania farm are wooden derricks that extracted crude oil.

 766  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 and tanker ships. In economic terms, this business strategy is called vertical integration. Rockefeller’s Standard Oil Company was both horizontally and vertically integrated. During the 1870s, Standard Oil bought so many of its competitors that it developed a virtual monopoly over the industry. Many state legislatures responded by outlawing the practice of one corporation owning stock in competing ones. In 1882, Rockefeller tried to get around such laws by organizing the Standard Oil Trust. A trust gives a person or corporation (the “trustee”) the legal power to manage another person’s money or another company. Instead of owning other companies outright, the Standard Oil Trust controlled more than thirty companies by having their stockholders transfer their shares “in trust” to Rockefeller and eight other trustees. In return, the stockholders received “trust certificates,” which paid them annual dividends from the trust’s earnings. The Standard Oil Trust was Rockefeller’s attempt to hide his virtual monopoly over the American oil industry. Soon, however, the formation of huge corporate trusts, a practice widely copied by other industries, generated intense criticism. In 1890, Congress responded by passing the Sherman A ­ nti-​­Trust Act with only one dissenting vote. It declared that corporate efforts to monopolize industries and thereby “restrain” competition were illegal. But the bill’s language was so vague that it proved to be virtually toothless. State laws against monopolies were initially more effective than the Sherman Act. In 1892, Ohio’s Supreme Court ordered the Standard Oil Trust dissolved. A furious Rockefeller then developed another way to maintain control of his numerous companies: a holding company, which is a huge corporation that controls other companies by “holding” most or all of their stock certificates. A holding company produces nothing itself; it simply owns a majority of the stock in other companies. Rockefeller was convinced that ending competition among companies was a good thing for the nation. Monopolies, he insisted, were the natural result of capitalism at work. “It is too late,” he declared in 1899, “to argue about the advantages of [huge] industrial combinations. They are a necessity. The day of individualism is gone. Never to return.” That year, Rockefeller brought his empire under the direction of the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey, a gigantic holding company. A Wall Street investor spoke for many business observers when he asked “How can you beat the Standard Oil party?” After all, “they have control of all the industries, are getting all the railroads and the street railways, and will in a few years own the whole country. I can see no stopping them.”

The Rise of Big Business  767


 andrew

 carnegie

Like
Rockefeller, Andrew Carnegie, who
 created the largest steel company in the world, rose to wealth from boyhood poverty. Born in Scotland, the son of weavers, he migrated with his family in 1848 to western Pennsylvania. At age thirteen, he went to work in a textile mill. In 1853, he became personal secretary to Thomas Scott, then district superintendent of the Pennsylvania Railroad and later its president. When Scott moved up, the shrewd and charming Carnegie became superin­ tendent in a region “teeming with treasure.” During the Civil War, when Scott became assistant secretary of war in charge of transportation, Carnegie went with him to Washington, D.C., and helped develop a military tele- Andrew Carnegie Established the Carnegie Steel Company and became graph system. the wealthiest man in the world. The ambitious Carnegie worked his way ­up—​­from telegraphy to railroading to bridge building, and then to steelmaking and investments. In the early 1870s, he decided “to concentrate on the manufacture of iron and steel and be master in that.” A tiny man (barely five feet tall), Carnegie wanted to tower over the steel industry, just as John D. Rockefeller was doing with oil. Like Rockefeller, Carnegie accumulated vast wealth, and he often treated his workers ruthlessly. Until the m ­ id–​­nineteenth century, steel, which is stronger and more flexible than iron, could be made only from wrought ­iron—​­itself expensive since it had to be imported from S­ weden—​­and could only be manufactured in small quantities. Bars of wrought iron were heated with charcoal over several days to add carbon and produce steel. It took three tons of coke, a ­high-​­burning fuel derived from coal, to produce one ton of steel. As a result, steel was too costly to make in large quantities. That changed in the 1850s, when England’s Sir Henry Bessemer invented the Bessemer converter, a process by which ­high-​­quality steel could be produced more quickly by blasting oxygen through the molten iron in a furnace. In the early 1870s, Carnegie decided to concentrate on steel, because

 768  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 ­ essemer’s process had made it so inexpensive to produce and the railroad B industry required massive amounts of it. As more steel was produced, its price dropped and its industrial uses soared. In 1860, the United States produced only 13,000 tons of steel. By 1880, production had reached 1.4 million tons annually. Between 1880 and 1900, Carnegie dominated the steel industry, acquiring competitors or driving them out of business by cutting prices and taking their customers. By 1900, the United States was producing more steel than Great Britain and Germany combined. Carnegie was a resilient promoter, salesman, and organizer. He insisted upon ­up-​­to-​­date machinery and equipment, expanded production quickly and cheaply by purchasing struggling companies, and preached a philosophy of continuous innovation to reduce operating costs. He also sought to expand his industry by vertical ­integration—​­gaining control of every phase of the steelmaking business. He owned coal mines in West Virginia, bought huge deposits of iron ore in Michigan and Wisconsin, and transported the ore in his own ships across the Great Lakes and then by rail to his steel mills in Pittsburgh. The result was phenomenal. By 1900, the Carnegie Steel Company, with 20,000 employees, was the largest industrial company in the world. And Carnegie worked his people hard. His mills operated nonstop, with two 12-hour shifts every day and night. Carnegie insisted that what he, Rockefeller, and other titans of industry were doing in forging dominant corporations was simply the wave of the future. Rockefeller agreed, saying that the formation of huge trusts was simply “the working out of a law of nature and a law of God.”

 j. pierpont morgan J. Pierpont Morgan Despite his privileged upbringing and financial success, he was s ­ elf-​­conscious about his deformed nose, caused by chronic skin diseases.

Unlike
Rockefeller and Carnegie, J. Pierpont
 Morgan was born to wealth in Connecticut. His father was a partner in a large English bank. After attending school in Switzerland and college in ­Germany, Morgan was sent in 1857

The Rise of Big Business  769


 to work in New York City for a new ­enterprise, J. Pierpont Morgan and ­Company. The firm, under various names, invested European money into American businesses. It grew into a financial power by helping competing corporations merge and by purchasing massive amounts of stock in American companies and selling them at a profit. Morgan took over poorly run companies, appointed new executives, and supervised operations. Like Rockefeller and Carnegie, he believed in capitalism but hated the chaos of competition. In his view, high profits required order and stability, and stability required consolidating competitors into trusts that he would own and manipulate. Morgan recognized early on the importance of railroads, and by the 1890s, he controlled a sixth of the nation’s railway system. But his crowning triumph was the consolidation of the steel industry. After a rapid series of mergers, he bought out Andrew Carnegie’s huge steel and iron holdings in 1901. Morgan added scores of related companies to form the United States Steel Corporation, the world’s first b ­ illion-​­dollar corporation, employing 168,000 people. It was the climactic event in the efforts of the great financial capitalists to reduce competition and form e­ ver-​­larger corporations capable of dominating their industries.

 sears and roebuck

 After the Civil War, American inventors helped manufacturers produce a vast number of new products. But the most important economic challenge was extending commerce to the millions who lived on isolated farms and in small towns. A traveling salesman from Chicago named Aaron Montgomery Ward decided that he could reach more people by mail than on foot and thus eliminate the middlemen whose services increased the retail price of goods. Beginning in the early 1870s, Montgomery Ward and Company began selling goods at a 40 percent discount through ­mail-​­order catalogs. By the end of the century, a new retailer had come to dominate the ­mail-​ ­order industry: Sears, Roebuck and Company, founded by two midwestern entrepreneurs, Richard Sears and Alvah Roebuck. The Sears, Roebuck catalog in 1897 was 786 pages long. It featured groceries, drugs, tools, furniture, household products, musical instruments, farm implements, shoes, clothes, books, and sporting goods. The company’s ability to buy goods in high volume from wholesalers enabled it to sell items at prices below those offered in rural general stores. By 1907, Sears, Roebuck and Company, headquartered in Chicago, had become one of the largest businesses in the nation. The Sears catalog helped create a national market and transformed the lives of millions of people. With the advent of free rural mail delivery in 1898 and the widespread distribution of the catalogs, families on farms and in small

 770  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 towns and villages could purchase by mail the products that heretofore were either prohibitively expensive or available only to city dwellers. By the turn of the century, 6 million Sears catalogs were being distributed each year, and the catalog had become the most widely read book in the nation after the Bible.

 the gospel of wealth

 However harsh the methods employed by the captains of industry, the men were convinced that they benefited the public by accelerating America’s transformation into an industrial colossus. In their eyes, it was a law of societal evolution that those most talented at producing wealth should accumulate Cover of the 1897 Sears, Roebuck and enormous personal fortunes. Company catalog Sears, Roebuck’s extensive ­mail-​­order business and Some of them, however, insisted discounted prices allowed its many that great wealth brought great responproducts to reach customers in cities sibilities. In his essay “The Gospel and in the backcountry. of Wealth” (1889), Andrew Carnegie argued that “not evil, but good, has come to the [­Anglo-​­Saxon] race from the accumulation of wealth by those who have the ability and energy that produces it.” But he also felt the need to justify his wealth and denounced the “worship of money.” He and John D. Rockefeller gave much of their money back to society. By 1900, Rockefeller had become the world’s leading philanthropist. “I have always regarded it as a religious duty,” he said late in life, “to get all I could honorably and to give all I could.” He donated more than $500 million during his lifetime, including tens of millions to Baptist causes and $35 million to found the University of Chicago. His philanthropic influence continues today through the Rockefeller Foundation. As for Carnegie, after retiring from business at age ­sixty-​­five, he declared that the “man who dies rich dies disgraced” and devoted himself to dispensing his $400 million fortune. Calling himself a “distributor” of wealth (he disliked the term philanthropy), he gave huge sums to numerous universities; built

The Alliance of Business and Politics  771


 Celebrating Big Business A lavish dinner celebrated the merger of the Carnegie and Morgan interests in 1901. The shape of the banquet table is meant to symbolize a rail.

 2,500 public libraries; and helped fund churches, hospitals, parks, and halls for meetings and concerts, including New York City’s Carnegie Hall.

The Alliance of Business and Politics
 The building of big businesses depended on more than just e­ ntrepreneurial energy. Most of the corporate titans developed cozy relationships with local, state, and federal officials, a process of buying influence (“lobbying”) that ­continues to this day. Big Business has legitimate political interests, but, because of its size and resources, it also at times exercises a corrupt influence on government. Nowhere was this conflicting role more evident than during the decades after the Civil War. The New York Times noted that the largest ­corporations “control the Legislatures.”

 republicans and big business

 During and after the Civil War, the Republican party and state and federal governments grew increasingly allied with Big Business. A key element of this alliance was tariff policy. Since 1789, the federal government had imposed ­tariffs—​­taxes on imported ­goods—​­to raise revenue and to benefit American manufacturers by

 772  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 ­ enalizing their foreign competitors. In 1861, as the Civil War was starting, p the ­Republican-​­dominated Congress enacted the Morrill Tariff, which doubled tax rates on hundreds of imported items as a means of raising money for the war and rewarding the businesses that supported the Republican party. After the war, President Ulysses S. Grant, and later, Republican presidents and Congresses, continued the party’s commitment to high tariffs despite complaints that the tariffs increased consumer prices at home by restricting foreign imports and thereby relieving American manufacturers of the need to keep their prices down. Farmers in the South and Midwest resented tariffs because, while they had to sell their crops in an open world market, they had to buy manufactured goods whose prices were artificially high because of tariffs. During the Civil War, Congress passed other key pieces of legislation related to the economy. The Legal Tender Act of 1862 authorized the federal government to issue paper money (“greenbacks”) to help pay for the war. Having a uniform paper currency was essential to a modern national economy. To that end, the National Banking Act (1863) created national banks authorized to issue greenbacks, which discouraged state banks from continuing to issue their own paper money. Congress also took steps to tie the new states and territories of the West into the national economy. In the Homestead Act of 1862, Congress provided free 160-acre (or even larger) homesteads to settlers in the West. By encouraging western settlement, the Homestead Act created new markets for goods and services and spurred railroad construction to connect frontier communities with major cities. The Morrill Land Grant Act of the same year transferred to each state 30,000 acres of federal land for each member of Congress the state had. The sale of those lands provided funds for states to create colleges of “agriculture and mechanic arts,” such as Iowa State University and Kansas State University. The “land grant” universities were created specifically to support economic growth by providing technical training needed by farmers and rapidly g­ rowing industries such as mining, steel, petroleum, transportation, forestry, and construction (engineering).

 ­laissez-​­faire

 Equally important in propelling the postwar economic boom was what government did not do. In 1870, historian Henry Adams expressed concern that there “was no authority” capable of restraining the ­leaders of the nation’s largest corporations. At the time, the federal government did not regulate the activities of big businesses, impose high corporate taxes, or provide any meaningful oversight of business operations or working conditions.

An Industrial Society  773


 Homesteaders An African American family poses outside their log and sod cabin in 1889.

 In general, both Congress and the presidents opposed government interference in the economy and accepted the economic doctrine of ­laissez-​­faire, a French phrase meaning “let them do as they will.” Business leaders spent ­time—​­and ­money—​­ensuring that government officials stayed out of their businesses. For their part, the politicians were usually eager to help the titans of industry in exchange for campaign c­ ontributions—​­or bribes for looking the other way.

An Industrial Society
 Industrialization transformed not only the economy and the workplace, but also the nation’s social life. Class divisions became more visible. The growing gap between rich and poor was like “social dynamite,” said the Reverend Josiah Strong in 1885. Massachusetts reformer Lydia Maria Child reported that the rich “do not intermarry with the middle classes; the middle classes do not intermarry with the laboring class,” nor did different classes “mix socially.”

 774  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 The Nouveaux Riches ­Upper-​­class members of New York City society pose for a photograph at the James Hazen Hyde Ball on January 31, 1905.

The Ways of the Wealthy
 The financiers and industrialists who dominated social, economic, and political life in ­post–​­Civil War America amassed so much fabulous wealth and showed it off so publicly that the period is still called the “Gilded Age.” The name derived from a popular novel by Mark Twain and Charles D ­ udley Warner, The Gilded Age: A Tale of Today, which mocked the crooked dealings of political leaders and the business elite. In 1861, there were only a few dozen millionaires in the United States. By 1900, there were more than 4,000. Most of them were white Protestants who voted Republican, except for a small number of wealthy southern Democrats. Many of the nouveaux riches (French for “newly rich”) indulged in what came to be called “conspicuous consumption,” competing to host the fanciest parties and live in the most extravagantly furnished houses. One tycoon gave a lavish dinner honoring his dog and presented it with a $15,000 diamond necklace. At a party at New York’s Delmonico’s restaurant, the guests smoked cigarettes wrapped in $100 bills. Mrs. Bradley Martin received such a torrent

An Industrial Society  775


 of criticism after spending $368,000 on a banquet that she and her husband fled to England. When they were not attending parties, the rich were relaxing in monumental mansions overlooking the cliffs at Newport, Rhode Island, atop Nob Hill in San Francisco, along Chicago’s Lake Shore Drive and New York City’s Fifth Avenue, and down the “Main Line” in suburban Philadelphia. “Who knows how to be rich in America?” asked E. L. Godkin, a magazine editor. “Plenty of people know how to get money, but . . . ​to be rich properly is, indeed, a fine art. It requires culture, imagination, and character.”

A
Growing Middle Class  It was left to the ­fast-​­growing middle class to display good “character” by practicing such traditional virtues as self-​­discipline and restraint, simplicity and frugality. The term middle class had first appeared in the 1830s and had become commonplace by the 1870s, as more and more Americans came to view themselves as members of a distinct social class between the ragged and the rich. The middle class, explained the Chicago writer George Ade in an 1895 essay, “The Advantage of Being ‘Middle Class,’ ” meant those people who “work either with hand or brain, who are neither poverty-stricken nor offensively rich.” Accompanying the spread of huge corporations after the Civil War was a rapidly growing middle class enjoying a rising standard of living. While the rich were getting richer, many other people were also becoming better off in terms of their income and quality of life. Most ­middle-​­class Americans working outside the home were salaried employees of large businesses who made up a new class of “­white-​­collar” professionals: editors, engineers, accountants, supervisors, managers, marketers, and realtors. Others, mostly unmarried women, were a growing share of the total: clerks, secretaries, salespeople, and government employees, including teachers and librarians. During the 1870s, the number of office clerks quadrupled, and the number of accountants and bookkeepers doubled. At the same time, the number of attorneys, physicians, professors, journalists, nurses, and social workers rose dramatically.

 ­middle-​­class women

 The growing presence of m ­ iddle-​­ class women in the workforce partly reflected the increasing number of women who were gaining access to higher education. Dozens of women’s colleges were founded after the Civil War, and many formerly a­ ll-​­male colleges began admitting women. By 1900, a third of college students were women. “After a struggle of many years,” a New York woman boasted, “it is now pretty generally admitted that women possess the capacity to swallow intellectual food that was formerly considered the diet of men exclusively.”

 776  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 To be sure, college women were often steered into home economics classes and “finishing” courses intended to perfect their housekeeping or social skills. Still, the doors of the p ­ rofessions—​­law, medicine, science, and the ­arts—​­were at least partially opened. In this context, then, the “woman question” that created so much public discussion and controversy in the second half of the nineteenth century involved far more than the issue of voting rights; it also concerned the liberation of at least some women from the home and from longstanding limits on their social roles and even character traits. ­Middle-​­class women also took advantage of other public venues for interaction: charitable associations, women’s clubs, literary societies, and church work. “If there is one thing that pervades and characterizes what is called the ‘woman’s movement,’” E. L. Youmans, a prominent science writer, remarked, “it is the spirit of revolt against the home, and the determination to escape from it into the outer spheres of activity.”

 neurasthenia

 Women who tried to escape the “cult of domesticity” and pursue careers outside the home often paid a high price. Many contracted

 College women By the end of the century, women made up more than a third of college students. Here, an astronomy class at New York’s Vassar College is underway in 1880.

An Industrial Society  777


 a peculiar affliction, which male physicians called neurasthenia, a draining psychological and physical disorder whose symptoms usually included insomnia, hysteria, headaches, depression, and a general state of fatigue. Although neurasthenia plagued both sexes, it most often affected ­college-​­educated m ­ iddle-​­class women. Some prominent doctors sought to use the prevalence of neurasthenia to force women back into the “cult of domesticity.” George M. Beard, a neurologist who popularized the term neurasthenia, ­concluded—​­incorrectly—​­that women were “more nervous, immeasurably, than men,” and that female neurasthenics tended to be “overly active” outside the home. This explanation led one doctor to insist that the malady provided the best “argument against higher education of women.” Many women objected to such ­self-​­serving male arguments. Charlotte Perkins Gilman, for instance, wrote her short story “The Yellow Wallpaper” to expose the horrors of the “rest cure” she was subjected to at age t­ wenty-​­seven. A doctor had ordered her to “live as domestic a life as possible; have your child with you all the time; lie down an hour after each meal; have but two hours intellectual life a day; and never touch pencil, brush, or pen as long as you live.” This regimen, Gilman explained, took her “as near lunacy as one can, and come back.”

 jane addams

 Social worker Jane Addams also struggled with neur­asthenia and the dominant male notions of women’s roles. After graduating in 1881 from Rockford College in Illinois, she found few opportunities to use her degree and lapsed into a state of depression during which she developed an intense “desire to live in a really living world.” ­Middle-​­class women, she charged, were “so besotted with our [sentimental] novel reading that we have lost the power of seeing certain aspects of life with any sense of reality because we are continually looking for the possible romance.” Addams’s desire to engage “real life” eventually led her to found Hull House

 Jane Addams She believed that social service requires a “scientific” observation of one’s community in order to “see the needs” and provide data for legislative reform.

 778  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 in Chicago. There, she and other social workers helped immigrants adapt to American life and mentored young women to “learn of life from life itself.” Addams and others helped convince many ­middle-​­class women to enter the “real” world. By 1890, a magazine called the Arena would urge ­progressive-​ ­minded people to recognize the traditional view of “women as homebodies” for what it was: “hollow, false, and unreal.”

 the ladies’ home journal

 Not all ­middle-​­class women, however, wanted to venture out into the world. Many of them identified more with the domestic life that was the focus of numerous ­mass-​­circulation magazines, the most popular of which was the Ladies’ Home Journal. By 1910, it had almost 2 million subscribers, the largest circulation of any magazine in the world. Edward Bok, a Dutch immigrant raised in Brooklyn, New York, became editor of Ladies’ Home Journal in 1889 at the age of ­ twenty-​­ six. Under his ­direction for the next thirty years, the magazine provided a “great ­ clearing house of information” to the large and rapidly growing urban middle class. The Journal included sections on ­sewing, cooking, religion, politics, and fiction. Bok was no feminist; “my idea,” he stressed, “is to keep women in the home.” There, he believed, they would maintain a high moral tone for society, for women were “better, purer, conscientious, and morally stronger than men.” Bok saw the ­middle-​­class woman as the crucial “steadying influence” Mennen’s Toilet Powder This between the “unrest among the lower advertisement appeared in the classes and [the] rottenness among the Independence Day edition of Ladies’ Home Journal in 1908, suggesting that upper classes.” a homemaker’s ability to protect her Bok’s view of the ideal life for a family from skin discomforts was her woman included “a healthful diet, own declaration of independence. simple, serviceable clothing, a clean,

An Industrial Society  779


 healthy ­dwelling-​­place, ­open-​­air exercise, and good reading.” He preached contentment rather than conspicuous consumption, a message directed not just to his ­middle-​­class readers but also to the working poor. In a Christmas editorial, though, Bok recognized that “it is a hard thing for those who have little to believe that the greatest happiness of life is with them: that it is not with those who have abundance.”

The Working Class
 The continuing demand for unskilled workers by railroads, factories, mills, mines, slaughterhouses, and sweatshops attracted new groups to the workforce: immigrants above all, but also growing numbers of women and children. In addition, millions of rural folk, especially young people, formed a migratory stream from the agricultural regions of the South and Midwest to cities and factories across the country. Although wage levels rose overall during the Gilded Age, there was a great disparity in pay for skilled and unskilled workers. During the recessions and depressions that occurred about every six years, unskilled workers were the first to be laid off or to have their wages slashed. In addition, working conditions were difficult and often dangerous for those at the bottom of the occupational scale. The average workweek was ­fifty-​­nine hours, or nearly six 10-hour days. American industry had the highest rate of workplace accidents and deaths in the world, and there were virtually no safety regulations or government ­inspections. Few machines had safety devices; few factories or mills had fire escapes. Respiratory diseases were common in mines and u ­ nventilated buildings, ­ ­ especially textile mills. Between 1888 and 1894, there were 16,000 railroad workers killed and 170,000 maimed in ­on-​­the-​­job accidents. The United States was also the only industrial nation with no insurance ­program to cover medical expenses for ­on-​­the-​­job injuries.

 working women

 Industrial development after the Civil War transformed the nature of the workplace. Mills, mines, factories, and large businesses needed far more unskilled workers than skilled ones. Employers often recruited women and children for the unskilled jobs because they were willing to work for lower wages than men received. In addition to operating sewing machines or tending to textile machines spinning yarn or thread, millions of women worked as maids, cooks, or nannies. In the manufacturing sector, women’s wages averaged $7 a week, compared to $10 for unskilled men.

 780  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 A social worker reported that it was widely assumed in many factories that a married woman would accept lower wages because she “has a man to support her,” which was not always the case. The number of women working outside the home tripled between 1870 and 1900, when 5 million women (17 percent of all women) held ­full-​­time jobs. In a letter to the editor of the Nation in 1867, a “working woman” described the changing nature of gender roles in American life. Most ­middle-​­class women, she acknowledged, still lived in a “world of love, of a sweet and guarded domesticity, of d ­ rawing-​­rooms and boudoirs, of dainty coquetries, of quiet graces, where they flourish like fair flowers in a south window.” But each year “thousands of women” were entering a different world “of mud, carts, ledgers, ­packing-​­boxes, ­counting-​­houses, paste, oils, leather, iron, boards, committees, big boots, and men who . . . ​meet women on a cool, business level of dollars and cents.”

 child labor

 Most young people had always worked in America; farms required everyone to pitch in. In the late nineteenth century, however, millions of children took up work outside the home, sorting coal, stitching clothes, shucking oysters, peeling shrimp, canning food, blowing glass, ­tending looms,

 Children in industry These four young boys performed the dangerous work of mine helpers in West Virginia around 1900.

The “Dreadful Chill of Change”  781


 and operating other kinds of machinery. Child labor increased as parents desperate for income felt forced to put their children to work. By 1880, one of every six children under age fourteen was working ­full-​­time; by 1900, the United States had almost 2 million child laborers. In Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and eastern Kentucky, ­soot-​­smeared boys worked in the coal mines. In New England and the South, children labored in dusty textile mills where, during the night shift, they had water thrown in their faces to keep them awake. In the southern mills, a fourth of the employees were below the age of fifteen, and children as young as eight worked alongside adults twelve hours a day, six days a week. As a result, they received little or no education. Factories, mills, mines, and canneries were especially dangerous places for children, who suffered three times as many accidents as adult workers and suffered higher rates of respiratory diseases. A child working in a southern textile mill was only half as likely to reach the age of twenty as a child who did not work in a mill.

The “Dreadful Chill of Change”
 When novelist Henry James returned to the United States in the early twentieth century after a long stay in England, he was shocked by the “dreadful chill of change.” U ­ rban-​­industrial development and western expansion had generated unparalleled prosperity, but the United States, he feared, had lost much of its social stability and cohesion. In 1885, another writer said that the working poor were unleashing “a seismic shock, a cyclonic violence” that threatened to tear society apart.

 organized labor

 The efforts of the working poor to form unions to improve their pay and working conditions faced formidable obstacles during the Gilded Age. Many executives fought against unions. They “blacklisted” union organizers by circulating their names to keep them from being hired, fired labor leaders, and often hired “scabs” (nonunion workers) to replace workers who went on strike. Another factor impeding the growth of unions was that much of the workforce was made up of immigrants who spoke ­different languages and often distrusted people from other ethnic groups. Nonetheless, with or without unions, workers began to stage strikes that often led to violence. Perhaps at no time before or since have class ­tensions—​­both social and ­cultural—​­been so bitter.

 782  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 the molly maguires

 During the early 1870s, violence erupted in the eastern Pennsylvania coalfields, when a secret Irish American group called the Molly Maguires took economic justice into their own hands. The Mollies took their name from an Irish patriot who had led the resistance against the British. Outraged by dangerous working conditions in the mines and the owners’ brutal efforts to suppress union activity, the Mollies used intimidation, beatings, and killings to avenge the wrongs done to Irish workers. Their terrorism reached its peak in 1874–1875, prompting mine ­owners to hire men from the Pinkerton Detective Agency (commonly referred to as “­ Pinkertons”) to stop the movement. One of the agents who infiltrated the ­Mollies uncovered enough evidence to have the leaders indicted for the coalfield murders. In 1876, ­twenty-​­four Molly Maguires were convicted by a non-Irish jury; ten were hanged.

 the great railroad strike (1877)

 After the financial panic of 1873, the major rail lines, fearful of a recession, had slashed workers’ wages. In 1877, the companies announced another 10 percent wage cut, which led most of the railroad workers at Martinsburg, West Virginia, to walk off the job and block the tracks to shut down all rail traffic. The strike spread to hundreds of other cities and towns. Tens of thousands of workers walked off the job, and the resulting violence left more than 100 people dead and millions of dollars in damaged property. In Pittsburgh, thousands of striking workers burned t­hirty-​­nine buildings and destroyed more than 1,000 railcars and locomotives. The violence was not directed solely at employers, either. Workers who refused to join the strike or participate in the riots were harassed and beaten. The Great Railroad Strike became one of the most spectacular incidents of widespread violence in American history and revealed how polarized the working poor and business elites had become. Local and state officials interpreted the growing insurgency as evidence of Communist ideology born in Europe. Governors mobilized state militia units to suppress the rioters. In Philadelphia, the militia dispersed a crowd at the cost of ­twenty-​­six lives, but looting and burning continued until President Rutherford B. Hayes dispatched federal troops finally to end it. A reporter described the scene as “the most horrible ever witnessed, except in the carnage of war. There were fifty miles of hot rails, ten tracks side by side, with as many miles of ties turned into glowing coals and tons on tons of iron car skeletons and wheels almost at white heat.” Eventually the disgruntled workers, lacking organized bargaining power, had little choice but to return to work. The strike had failed. For many Americans, the railroad strike raised the possibility of what a Pittsburgh newspaper saw as “a great civil war in this country between labor

The “Dreadful Chill of Change”  783


 and capital.” Many workers felt that violence was their only option. “The working people everywhere are with us,” a unionist told a reporter. “They know what it is to bring up a family on ninety cents a day, to live on beans and corn meal week in and week out, to run in debt at the [company] stores until you cannot get trusted any longer, to see the wife breaking down . . . ​and the children growing sharp and fierce like wolves day after day because they don’t get enough to eat.” Equally disturbing to those in positions of corporate and political power was the presence of many women among the protesters. A Baltimore journalist noted that the “singular part of the disturbances is the very active part taken by the women, who are the wives and mothers of the [railroad] firemen.” President Hayes knew that the army had suppressed the strikers but had not solved the underlying problems. “The strikes have been put down by force,” he wrote in his diary. “But now for the real remedy. Can’t something be done by education of the strikers, by judicious control of the capitalists, by wise general policy, to end or diminish the evil?” It was a fair question that largely went unanswered.

 the ­sand-​­lot incident

 In California, the national railroad strike indirectly gave rise to a w ­ orking-​­class political movement. In 1877, a

 “The Chinese Must Go” In this advertisement for the Missouri Steam Washer, the ­American-​­made washing machine drives a Chinese laundryman back to China, playing on the growing ­anti-​­Chinese sentiments in the 1880s.

 784  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 meeting held in a sandy San Francisco vacant lot to express sympathy for the railroad strikers ended with attacks on passing Chinese workers. In the aftermath of the ­so-​­called S­ and-​­Lot Incident, white mobs attacked Chinatown. The Chinese were handy scapegoats for frustrated white laborers who believed the Asians had taken their jobs. Soon an Irish immigrant, Denis Kearney, had organized the Workingmen’s Party of California, whose platform called for the United States to stop Chinese immigration. Kearney lectured the “­sand-​­lotters” about the “foreign peril” and blasted the railroad barons for exploiting the poor. The Workingmen’s movement peaked in 1879, when it elected a number of state legislators and the mayor of San Francisco. Although Kearney failed to build a lasting movement, his ­anti-​­Chinese theme became a national issue. In 1882, Congress voted to prohibit Chinese immigration for ten years.

 the national labor union

 As the size and power of corporations increased, efforts to build a national labor union movement gained momentum. During the Civil War, because of the increased demand for skilled labor, ­so-​­called “craft unions” made up of workers expert at a particular handicraft grew in strength and number. Yet there was no overall connection among such groups until 1866, when the National Labor Union (NLU) convened in Baltimore. The NLU was more interested in advocating for improved workplace conditions than in bargaining with employers about wages and hours. The group promoted an ­eight-​­hour workday, workers’ cooperatives (in which workers, collectively, would create and own their own l­arge-​­scale manufacturing and mining operations), “greenbackism” (the printing of paper money to inflate the currency and thereby relieve debtors), and equal voting rights for women and African Americans. Like most such organizations in the nineteenth century, however, the NLU did not allow women as members. As one official explained the attitude of male unionists, “Woman was created to be man’s companion,” not his competitor in the workplace who would cause his wages to fall. The NLU also discriminated against African American workers. They were forced to organize ­black-​­only unions of their own. W. E. B. DuBois, an outspoken black civil rights activist, charged that the “white worker did not want the Negro in his unions, did not believe in him as a man.” After the NLU’s head, William Sylvis, died suddenly in 1869, its support declined, and by 1872 the union had disbanded. The NLU was not a total failure, however. It was influential in persuading Congress to enact an e­ ight-​­hour workday for federal employees and to repeal the 1864 Contract Labor Act, which had been passed to encourage the importation of laborers by allowing

The “Dreadful Chill of Change”  785


 employers to pay for the passage of foreign workers to America. In exchange, the workers were committed to labor for a specified number of years. Employers had taken advantage of the Contract Labor Act to recruit foreign laborers willing to work for lower wages than their American counterparts.

 the knights of labor

 In 1869, another national labor group had emerged: the Noble Order of the Knights of Labor. The union grew slowly at first, but even as other unions collapsed during the depression of the 1870s, it spread more rapidly. The Knights of Labor endorsed most of the reforms advanced by previous workingmen’s groups, including the creation of bureaus of labor statistics and mechanics’ lien laws (to ensure payment of wages), the elimination of ­convict-​ ­labor competition, the establishment of the ­eight-​­hour day and worker cooperatives, and the use of paper currency. One reform the group advocated was far ahead of the times: equal pay for equal work by men and women. The Knights of Labor allowed as members all who had ever worked for wages, except lawyers, doctors, bankers, and those who sold liquor. Such inclusiveness was both a strength and a weakness. By recruiting all types of workers, the Knights grew very large, but they also struggled with internal tensions between skilled and unskilled workers.

 Knights of Labor This national union was the most egalitarian union during the Gilded Age.

 786  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 In 1879, Terence V. Powderly, the t­ hirty-​­year-​­old mayor of Scranton, Pennsylvania, became head of the Knights of Labor. Born of Irish immigrant parents, Powderly had started working for a railroad at age sixteen. Frail, sensitive to criticism, and indecisive, he was in many ways unsuited to the job. He was opposed to strikes, and when they did occur, he did not always support the groups involved. Yet the Knights owed their greatest growth to strikes that occurred under his leadership. In the early 1880s, the Knights increased their membership from about 100,000 to more than 700,000.

 mother jones

 One of the most colorful and beloved labor agitators at the end of the nineteenth century was a remarkable woman known simply as Mother Jones. White haired, pink cheeked, and dressed in matronly black dresses and hats, she was a tireless champion of the working poor who used fiery rhetoric to excite crowds and attract media attention. She led marches, dodged bullets, served jail terms, and confronted business titans and police with disarming courage. In 1913, a district attorney called her the “most dangerous woman in America.” Born in Cork, Ireland, in 1837, Mary Harris was the second of five ­children in a poor Catholic family that fled the Irish potato famine at midcentury and settled in Toronto. In 1861, she moved to Memphis, Tennessee, and began teaching. There, as the Civil War was erupting, she met and married George Jones, an iron molder and staunch union member. They had four children, and then disaster struck. In 1867 a yellow fever epidemic devastated Memphis, killing Mary Jones’s husband and four children. The g­ rief-​­stricken ­thirty-​­seven-​­year-​­old widow moved to Chicago and took up dressmaking, only to see her shop, home, and belongings destroyed in the great fire of 1871. Having lost her family and her finances, and angry at the social inequality and injustices she saw around her, Mary Jones drifted into the labor movement and soon emerged as its most passionate advocate. C ­ hicago was then the seedbed of labor radicalism, and the union culture ­nurtured in Mary Jones a lifelong dedication to the cause of wage workers and their families. The gritty woman who had lost her family now declared herself the “mother” of the fledgling labor movement. She joined the Knights of Labor as an organizer and public speaker. In the late 1880s she became an ardent speaker for the United Mine Workers (UMW), various other unions, and the Socialist party. For the next thirty years, she crisscrossed the nation, recruiting union members, supporting strikers (her “boys”), raising funds, walking picket lines, defying court injunctions, berating politicians, and spending time in prison.

The “Dreadful Chill of Change”  787


 Wherever Mother Jones went, she promoted higher wages, shorter hours, safer workplaces, and restrictions on child labor. Coal miners, said the UMW president, “have had no more staunch supporter, no more able defender than the one we all love to call Mother.” During a miners’ strike in West Virginia, Jones was arrested, convicted of “conspiracy that resulted in murder,” and sentenced to twenty years in prison. The outcry over her plight helped spur a Senate committee to investigate conditions in the coal mines; the governor set her free. Mother Jones was especially determined to end the exploitation of children in the workplace. In 1903, she organized a highly publicized weeklong march of child workers from Pennsylvania to the New York home of President Theodore Roosevelt. The children were physically stunted and mutilated, most of them missing fingers or hands from machinery accidents. President Roosevelt refused to see the ragtag children, but as Mother Jones explained, “Our march had done its work. We had drawn the attention of the nation to the crime of child labor.” Soon the Pennsylvania state legislature increased the legal working age to fourteen. Mother Jones lost most of the strikes she participated in, but over the course of her long life she saw average wages increase, working conditions improve, and child labor diminish. Her commitment to the cause of social justice never wavered. At age ­eighty-​­three, she was arrested after joining a miners’ strike in Colorado and jailed in solitary confinement. At her funeral, in 1930, one speaker urged people to remember her famous rallying cry: “Pray for the dead and fight like hell for the living.”

 anarchism

 One of the many challenges facing the labor union movement during the Gilded Age was growing hostility from m ­ iddle-​­class Americans who came to view unionized workers, especially those involved in clashes with police, as “radicals” or “anarchists.” Anarchists believed that ­government—​­any ­government—​­was a device used by powerful capitalists to oppress and exploit the working poor. They dreamed of the elimination of government altogether, and some were willing to use bombs and bullets to achieve their revolutionary goal. Many European anarchists immigrated to the United States during the last quarter of the nineteenth century. Although most of them disavowed violence, the terrorists among them ensured that the label “anarchist” provoked frightening images in the minds of many Americans. ­Labor-​­related violence increased during the 1880s as the gap between the rich and working poor widened. Between 1880 and 1900, some 6.6 million hourly workers participated in more than 23,000 strikes nationwide. Chicago

 788  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 was a hotbed of labor unrest and a magnet for immigrants, especially German and Irish laborers, some of whom were socialists or anarchists who endorsed violence. The Chicago labor movement’s foremost demand was for an e­ ight-​ ­hour workday, and what came to be called the Haymarket riot grew indirectly out of prolonged agitation for this goal.

 the haymarket riot (1886)

 In 1886, some 40,000 Chicago workers went on strike in support of an e­ ight-​­hour workday. On May 3, violent clashes between strikers and nonunion “scabs” hired to replace striking w ­ orkers erupted outside the McCormick Harvesting Machine Company plant. The police arrived, shots rang out, and two strikers were killed. The killings infuriated the leaders of the tiny but outspoken anarchist movement in Chicago. August Spies, a G ­ erman-​­born anarchist leader, printed leaflets in English and German demanding “Revenge!” and calling “Workingmen, to Arms!” A mass protest was planned for the following night at Haymarket Square. On the evening of May 4, after listening to speeches complaining about low wages and long working hours, the crowd of angry laborers was beginning to break up when police arrived and ordered them to disperse. At that point, someone threw a bomb that left dozens of maimed and dying policemen scattered in the street. The police then fired into the fleeing crowd, resulting in more casualties. Seven policemen were killed and sixty more wounded in what journalists called America’s first terrorist bombing. The next day, Chicago’s mayor banned all labor meetings in the city, and newspapers printed sensational headlines about anarchists terrorizing Chicago. One New York newspaper demanded stern punishment for “the few l­ ong-​­haired, ­wild-​­eyed, ­bad-​­smelling, atheistic, reckless foreign wretches” who promoted such unrest. During the summer of 1886, seven anarchist leaders, all but one of them German speakers, were sentenced to death despite the lack of evidence linking them to the bomb thrower, whose identity was never determined. After being sentenced to be hanged, Louis Lingg declared that he was innocent but was “in favor of using force” to end the abuses of the capitalist system. Lawyers for the anarchists appealed the convictions to the Illinois Supreme Court. Meanwhile, petitioners from around the world appealed for clemency. One of the petitioners was Samuel Gompers, the founding president of the American Federation of Labor (AFL). “I abhor anarchy,” Gompers stressed, “but I also abhor injustice when meted out even to the most despicable being on earth.” On November 10, 1887, Louis Lingg committed suicide in his cell. That same day, the governor commuted the sentences of two of the convicted con-

The “Dreadful Chill of Change”  789


 spirators to life imprisonment. The next day, as armed police and soldiers surrounded the Cook County Jail, the four remaining condemned men were hanged. Some 200,000 people lined the streets of Chicago as the caskets of those executed were taken for burial. To labor militants around the world, the executed anarchists were ­working-​­class martyrs; to the police and the economic elite in Chicago, they were demonic assassins.

 a backlash against unions

 After the Haymarket riot, tensions between workers and management reached a fever pitch. In 1886 alone, there were 1,400 strikes across the country involving 700,000 workers. But the violence in Chicago had also triggered widespread hostility to the Knights of Labor and labor groups in general. Despite his best efforts, union leader ­Terence Powderly could never separate in the public mind the Knights from the anarchists, since one of those convicted of conspiracy in the bombing was a member of the union. Powderly clung to leadership until 1893, but after that the union evaporated. Yet the Knights did attain some lasting achievements, among them an 1880 federal law providing for the arbitration of labor disputes, and the creation of the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics in 1884. Another of their successes was the Foran Act of 1885, which, though poorly enforced, penalized employers who imported immigrant workers. By their example, the Knights also spread the idea of unionism and initiated a new type of organization: the industrial union, which included all skilled and unskilled workers within a ­particular industry, such as railroad workers or miners.

 gompers and the afl

 The craft unions, representing skilled workers, generally opposed efforts to unite with industrial unionism.

 Samuel Gompers The head of the American Federation of Labor strikes an assertive pose.

 790  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 Leaders of the craft unions feared that joining with unskilled laborers would mean a loss of their identity and bargaining power. Thus, in 1886, delegates from ­twenty-​­five craft unions organized the American Federation of Labor (AFL). Its structure differed from that of the Knights of Labor in that it was a federation of many separate national unions, each of which was largely free to act on its own in dealing with business owners. Samuel Gompers served as president of the AFL from its founding until his death, in 1924, with only one year’s interruption. Born in England, Gompers came to the United States as a teenager, joined the Cigar Makers’ Union in 1864, and became president of his New York City local union in 1877. Unlike Terence Powderly and the Knights of Labor, Gompers focused on concrete ­economic g­ ains—​­higher wages, shorter hours, and better working conditions. The AFL at first grew slowly, but by the turn of the century, it claimed 500,000 members in affiliated unions. In 1914, on the eve of World War I, it had 2 million, and in 1920, it reached a peak of 4 million. But even then, the AFL embraced less than 15 percent of the nation’s nonagricultural workers. In fact, all unions, including the ­so-​­called railroad brotherhoods unaffiliated with the AFL, accounted for little more than 18 percent of those workers. Organized labor’s strongholds were in transportation and the building trades. Most of the larger manufacturing ­industries—​­including steel, textiles, tobacco, and ­ meatpacking—​­ remained almost untouched. Gompers never opposed industrial unions, and several became important affiliates of the AFL: the United Mine Workers, the International Ladies Garment Workers, and the Amalgamated Clothing Workers. But the AFL had its greatest success in organizing skilled workers. Two incidents in the 1890s stalled the emerging ­industrial-​­union movement: the Homestead Steel strike of 1892 and the Pullman strike of 1894. These violent labor conflicts were the climactic economic events of the Gilded Age and represented a test of strength for the organized labor movement. They also served to reshape the political landscape.

 the homestead steel strike

The Amalgamated Association
 of Iron and Steel Workers, founded in 1876, was the nation’s largest craft union. At the massive steel mill at Homestead, Pennsylvania, along the Monongahela River near Pittsburgh, the union had enjoyed friendly relations with Andrew Carnegie’s company until Henry Clay Frick became chief executive in 1889. A showdown was delayed until 1892, however, when the union contract came up for renewal. Carnegie, who had previously expressed sympathy for

The “Dreadful Chill of Change”  791


 the unions, went on a lengthy hunting trip in his native Scotland, intentionally leaving the rigid Frick to handle the difficult negotiations. Carnegie knew what was in the works: a ­cost-​­cutting reduction in the number of highly paid skilled workers through the use of l­abor-​­saving machinery, even though the corporation was enjoying high profits. It was a deliberate attempt to smash the union. “Am with you to the end,” Carnegie wrote to Frick after leaving for Scotland. William Jones, the mill manager, disagreed with his bosses. He opposed cutting wages because “our men are working hard and faithfully. . . . ​Now, mark what I tell you. Our labor is the cheapest in the country.” Jones’s protests did little good. As negotiations dragged on, the company announced on June 25 that it would stop negotiating with the 3,800 workers on June 29 unless an agreement was reached. A s­ trike—​­or, more properly, a lockout in which management closed down the mill to try to force the union to make c­ oncessions—​­would begin on that date. Frick told journalists that he was determined to have “absolute control of our plant and business.” Frick ordered construction of a ­twelve-​­foot-​­high fence around the plant and equipped it with watchtowers, searchlights, barbed wire, and ­high-​­pressure water cannons. He also hired a private army of 316 Pinkerton agents to protect what was soon dubbed Fort Frick. Before dawn on July 6, 1892, the “Pinkertons” floated up the Monongahela River on two barges pulled by a tugboat. Thousands of unionists and their supporters, many of them armed, were waiting on shore. A f­ourteen-​­hour battle broke out in which seven workers and three Pinkertons were killed, and dozens wounded. Hundreds of women on shore shouted, “Kill the Pinkertons!” In the end, the Pinkertons surrendered, having agreed to be tried for murder, and were marched away to taunts from crowds lining the streets. A week later, the Pennsylvania governor dispatched 4,000 state militiamen to Homestead, where they surrounded the steel mill and dispersed the picketing workers. Frick then hired strikebreakers to operate the mill. He refused to resume negotiations: “I will never recognize the union, never, never!” The strike dragged on until November, but by then the union was dead and its leaders had been charged with murder and treason. The union cause was not helped when Alexander Berkman, a Lithuanian anarchist, tried to assassinate Frick on July 23, shooting him twice in the neck and stabbing him three times. Despite his wounds, Frick fought back fiercely and, with the help of staff members, subdued the ­would-​­be assassin. Much of the local sympathy for the strikers evaporated. As a union leader explained, Berkman’s bullets “went straight through the heart of the ­Homestead

 792  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 strike.” Penniless and demoralized, the defeated workers ended their walkout on November 20 and accepted the company’s harsh wage cuts. Only a fifth of the strikers were hired back; the rest were “blacklisted” to prevent other steel mills from hiring them. Carnegie and Frick, with the support of local, state, and national government officials, had eliminated the union. After the Homestead strike, none of Carnegie’s steel plants employed unionized workers. Within a few years, Carnegie could confide to a friend that he was “ashamed to tell you” how large his profits were from the Homestead plant. With each passing year, Carnegie nursed regrets about how Frick handled the Homestead strike. In the end, an embittered Frick split with Carnegie after he learned that his boss had been telling lies about him and making “insults” about his character. Frick told Carnegie that he had grown “tired of your business methods, your absurd newspaper interviews and personal remarks and unwarranted interference in matters you know nothing about.” When Carnegie sought to reconcile with his former lieutenant, Frick told the messenger: “You can say to Andrew Carnegie that I will meet him in hell where we are both going.”

 the pullman strike

 The Pullman strike of 1894 was even more notable, as it paralyzed the economies of the ­twenty-​­seven states and territories in the western half of the nation. It involved a dispute at Pullman, Illinois, a “model” industrial suburb of Chicago owned by the Pullman Palace Car Company, which made passenger train cars (called “Pullmans” or “sleeping cars”). Employees were required to live in the town’s 1,400 cottages, which had been built to high standards, with gas heat and indoor plumbing. With 12,000 residents, the town also boasted a library, a theater, a school, parks and playgrounds, and a ­glass-​­roofed shopping mall owned by the company. There were no saloons, social clubs, newspapers, or private property not owned by the company. No political activities were allowed. As a “company town,” Pullman was of much higher quality than the villages in the South owned by textile mills, and the death rate was less than half of that in neighboring communities. Yet over time, many workers complained that they did not like living under the thumb of the company’s owner, George Pullman. During the depression of 1893, Pullman laid off 3,000 of his 5,800 employees and cut wages 25 to 40 percent for the rest, but did not lower rents for housing or the price of food in the company store. In the spring of 1894, desperate workers joined the American Railway Union, founded the previous year by Eugene V. Debs.

The “Dreadful Chill of Change”  793


 Eugene V. Debs Founder of the American Railway Union, and later the presidential candidate for the Socialist Party of America.

 The charismatic Debs was a child of ­working-​­class immigrants who had quit school at age fourteen to work for an Indiana railroad. By the early 1890s, he had become a tireless spokesman for labor radicalism, and he worked to organize all railway w ­ orkers—​­skilled or u ­ nskilled—​­into the American Railway Union, which soon became a powerful organization. He quickly turned his attention to the Pullman controversy, urging the workers to obey the laws and avoid violence. After George Pullman fired three members of a workers’ grievance committee, the workers went on strike on May 11, 1894. In June, after Pullman refused Debs’s plea for a negotiated settlement, the Railway Union workers stopped handling trains containing Pullman railcars. By the end of July, they had shut down most of the railroads in the Midwest and cut off all traffic through Chicago. To keep the trains running, railroad executives hired strikebreakers, and the U.S. attorney general, a former attorney for railroad companies, swore in 3,400 special deputies to protect them. Angry workers assaulted strikebreakers and destroyed property. Finally, on July 3, President Grover Cleveland sent 2,000 federal troops into the Chicago area, claiming it was his duty to ensure delivery of the mail. Meanwhile, the attorney general convinced a federal judge to sign an injunction (an official court decree) prohibiting the labor union from interfering.

 794  CHAPTER 17  Business and Labor in the Industrial Era 1860–1900

 The Pullman Strike Federal troops guarding the railroads, 1894.

 On July 13, the union called off the strike. A few days later, a court cited Debs for violating the injunction; he served six months in jail. The Supreme Court upheld the decree in the case of In re Debs (1895) on broad grounds of national sovereignty: “The strong arm of the national government may be put forth to brush away all obstructions to the freedom of interstate commerce or the transportation of the mails.” Debs emerged from jail a socialist who would later run for president. In 1897, George Pullman died of a heart attack, and the following year, the city of Chicago annexed the town of Pullman. A reporter for the Nation noted that despite the town’s attractive features, what the workers wanted most was the chance to own a house of their own. “Mr. Pullman,” he explained, “overlooked this peculiar American characteristic.”

Economic Success and Excess
 For all of the stress and strain caused by swift industrialization, American productivity soared in the late nineteenth century. By 1900, the United States was producing a third of the world’s goods, and millions of immigrants from around the world continued to risk all in hopes of chasing the American Dream. Corporate empires generated enormous fortunes for a few and real improvements in the quality of life for many. The majority of workers now labored in factories and mines rather than on farms. “One can hardly believe,” observed philosopher John Dewey, “there has been a revolution in history so rapid, so extensive, so complete.”

The “Dreadful Chill of Change”  795


 The ­urban-​­industrial revolution and the gigantic new corporations it created transformed the size, scope, and power of the American economy, for good and for ill. As the twentieth century dawned, an unregulated capitalist economy had grown corrupt and recklessly out of ­balance—​­and only government intervention could restore economic fairness and social stability.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 The Causes of Industrial Growth During the late nineteenth century, ­agricultural and industrial production increased sharply. The national railroad network grew to nearly 200,000 miles, the most extensive in the world. The surge of industrialization expanded use of electrical power and the application of scientific research to industrial processes. The Bessemer converter allowed for the mass production of steel, which was used to construct railroads, ships, bridges, and buildings.

•


 The Rise of Big Business Many businesses grew to enormous size and power, often ignoring ethics and the law in doing so. Entrepreneurs like John D. Rockefeller, Andrew Carnegie, and J. Pierpont Morgan were extraordinarily skilled at gaining control of particular industries. Companies such as Standard Oil and Carnegie Steel practiced both vertical integration, through which they controlled all the enterprises needed to produce and distribute their products, and horizontal integration, in which they absorbed or eliminated their competitors. To consolidate their holdings and sidestep laws prohibiting monopolies, they created trusts and eventually holding companies. J. Pierpont Morgan and Company, an investment bank, pioneered methods for consolidating corporations and eliminating competition, all in an effort to bring “order and stability” to the marketplace.

•


 The Alliance of Business and Politics The federal government encouraged economic growth after the Civil War by imposing high tariffs on imported products, granting public land to railroad companies and settlers in the West, establishing a stable currency, and encouraging the creation of universities to spur technical innovation and research. Equally important, local, state, and federal governments made little effort to regulate the activities of businesses. This ­laissez-​­faire policy allowed entrepreneurs to experiment with new methods of organization, but also created conditions for rampant corruption and abuse.

•


A
Changed Social Order While the business and financial elite showed off their new wealth with extravagant homes and parties, the urban and industrial workforce was largely composed of unskilled workers, including recent immigrants, former farmers, and growing numbers of women and children. Child labor sometimes involved children as young as eight working ­twelve-​­hour days. Business owners and managers showed little concern for workplace safety, and accidents and ­work-​ ­related diseases were common. With industrialization and the rise of Big Business also came an increase in the number of people who considered themselves middle class. Growing numbers of women went to college, took business and professional jobs, and participated in other public activities. 
•


 Organized Labor It was difficult for unskilled workers to organize effectively into unions, in part because of racial and ethnic tensions among laborers, language barriers, and the efforts of owners and supervisors to undermine unionizing efforts. Business owners often hired “strikebreakers,” usually desperate immigrant workers



 who were willing to take jobs at the prevailing wage. Nevertheless, several unions did advocate for workers’ rights at a national level. The National Labor Union and the Knights of Labor organized strikes and lobbied for workers in the 1870s and 1880s, but both groups eventually fell apart. After the violence associated with the Haymarket riot, the Homestead Steel strike, and the Pullman strike, many Americans grew fearful of unions and viewed them as politically radical. Craft unions made up solely of skilled workers became more successful at organizing, as the American Federation of Labor focused on better working conditions and avoided involvement in politics.

Chronology






 First oil well is struck in Titusville, Pennsylvania Congress creates the Morrill Tariff First transcontinental railroad is completed at Promontory Summit, Utah Alexander Graham Bell patents his telephone Great Railroad Strike Thomas A. Edison makes the first durable incandescent lightbulb John D. Rockefeller organizes the Standard Oil Trust Haymarket riot American Federation of Labor is organized Homestead Steel strike Pullman strike J. Pierpont Morgan creates the U.S. Steel Corporation

Key Terms
Standard Oil Company p. 764


 ­laissez-​­faire p. 773

 horizontal integration p. 764

 child labor p. 781

 monopoly p. 764

Great Railroad Strike of 1877 p. 782


 vertical integration p. 766

 National Labor Union (NLU) p. 784

 trust p. 766

Knights of Labor p. 785


 holding company p. 766

 Haymarket riot p. 788

 Bessemer converter p. 767 Carnegie Steel Company p. 768

 American Federation of Labor (AFL) p. 790

J.
Pierpont Morgan and Company  p. 769

 Pullman strike p. 790

 Homestead Steel strike p. 790

 tariff p. 771

IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




The New South
 and the New West 1865–1900

 Mining on the Comstock (1877) The Comstock Lode was one of the largest gold and silver mines in America, yielding more than $300 million over two decades. This illustration shows a cutaway of the Comstock Lode, revealing the complex network of shafts and supports, as well as the various tasks performed by miners within its tunnels.

A


 fter the Civil War, the devastated South and the untamed West provided enticing frontiers for economic enterprise. The South had to be rebuilt, while the sparsely settled territories and states west of the Mississippi River were ripe for the development of farms, businesses, railroads, and towns. Bankers and financiers in America and in Europe took advantage of these conditions to invest heavily in both regions, but especially in the far western region between the Mississippi River and California. The Great Plains had long been viewed as a barren landscape suitable only for Indians and animals. Half of Texas, for instance, was still not settled at the end of the Civil War. After 1865, however, the federal government encouraged western settlement and economic development in what was then called “Indian Country.” Two thirds of Native Americans in 1865 lived on the Great Plains, often warring with one another over rival “hunting rights” to the vast buffalo herds. The construction of transcontinental railroads, the military conquest of the Indians, and the policy of distributing g­ overnment-​­owned lands at low cost to settlers, ranchers, miners, and railroads combined to lure millions of pioneers and enterprising capitalists westward. Charles Goodnight, a Texas cattle rancher, recalled that “we were adventurers in a great land . . . ​fresh and

 focus questions 1. In what ways did a “New South” emerge economically in the late nineteenth century?

 2. What was the c­ rop-​­lien system that emerged in the South and how did it shape the region after the Civil War?

 3. How and why did white southerners take away African Americans’ right to vote and adopt “Jim Crow” segregation laws at the end of the nineteenth century?

 4. Who were the various groups of migrants to the West after the Civil War? Why did they move there?

 5. What were the experiences of miners, farmers, ranchers, and women in the West in the late nineteenth century?

 6. How did the federal government’s ­post–​­Civil War policies in the West affect Native Americans?

 7. How did the South and West change by 1900?



