 1260  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

Moderate Republicanism
 Dwight David Eisenhower dominated the political landscape during the 1950s. The military hero of the Second World War was a model of moderation, stability, and optimism. He was a soldier who hated war, a politician who hated politics. Committed to what he called moderate Republicanism, Eisenhower promised to restore the authority of state and local governments and restrain the federal government from engaging in political and social “engineering.” In the process, he sought to renew traditional virtues and inspire Americans with a vision of a brighter future.

 “time for a change”

 By 1952, the Truman administration was the target of growing public criticism. The conflict in Korea had stalled, the economy was sputtering, and Truman was put on the defensive by the disclosure that corrupt lobbyists had rigged military contracts. The scandal led Truman to fire nearly 250 employees of the Inter­­nal Revenue Service, but doubts lingered that he would ever finish the housecleaning. Critics charged that the slogan for his administration was “plunder at home, blunder abroad.” It was, Republicans claimed, “time for a change,” and public sentiment turned their way as the 1952 election ap­­ proached. Beginning in the late 1940s, both Republican and Democratic leaders, including Truman, recruited Eisenhower to be their presidential candidate. The affable Eisenhower, known as “Ike,” had displayed remarkable organizational and diplomatic skill in coordinating the Allied invasion of N ­ azi-​­controlled Europe. In 1952, after serving as president of Columbia University, he had moved to Paris to become supreme commander Dwight D. Eisenhower His many supporters wore “I Like Ike” hats, pins, of NATO forces in Europe. His deciand even nylon stockings, speaking to sion to run for president as a Republican the powerful consumer culture’s impact was wildly popular with voters. Bumper on politics. stickers announced simply: “I Like Ike.”

Moderate Republicanism  1261


 Eisenhower was nominated on the first ballot. Republican leaders then tried to reassure party conservatives by balancing the ticket with a youthful, fiercely ambitious running mate: Richard M. Nixon, a ­thirty-​­nine-​­year-​­old California senator distinctive for his shrewd opportunism and combative temperament. Nixon was an aggressive a­ nti-​­Communist focused on exposing l­ eft-​ ­wing “subversives” in the Truman administration. His dogged pursuit of the Alger Hiss spying case had brought him national prominence. The Republican platform declared that the Democratic emphasis on “containing” communism was “negative, futile, and misguided.” If elected, Eisenhower would roll back the Communist threat by bringing “genuine independence” to the “captive peoples” of Eastern Europe.

 the election of 1952

 The presidential campaign featured contrasting personalities. Eisenhower was an international figure and a man of readily acknowledged decency and integrity. His beaming smile and humble greatness won over the masses. Illinois governor Adlai Stevenson, the Democratic candidate, was hardly known outside his home state. Eisenhower pledged to clean up “the mess in Washington.” Then, late in the campaign, he promised to travel to Korea to secure “an early and honorable” end to the prolonged conflict. Stevenson was outmatched. Although brilliant and witty, he came across to most voters as more an “intellectual” than a “leader.” Republicans labeled him an “egghead” (meant to suggest a balding professor with more intellect than common sense). Even Truman grumbled that Stevenson “was too busy making up his mind whether he had to go to the bathroom or not.” On election night, Eisenhower triumphed in a landslide, gathering nearly 34 million votes to Stevenson’s 27 million. The electoral vote was much more lopsided: 442 to 89. Stevenson even failed to win his home state of Illinois. More important, by securing four southern states, Eisenhower had cracked the solidly Democratic South. Yet voters liked Eisenhower more than they liked other Republican candidates. In the 1952 election, Democrats kept control of most governorships, lost control in the House by only eight seats, and broke even in the Senate. Throughout his second presidential term, Eisenhower would have to work with a Democratic Congress.

 a “middle way” presidency

 Eisenhower was the first professional soldier elected president since Ulysses S. Grant in 1868. He promised to pursue a “middle way between untrammeled freedom of the individual and the demands of the welfare of the whole nation.” He saw no need to dismantle all New Deal and Fair Deal programs. Instead, he wanted to end the “excesses”

 1262  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

THE ELECTION OF 1952

WA OR

 CA

MT ID

 NV

 ND

WY UT

 AZ

 CO

 SD

KS OK

 NM

 WI

 MI

ME MA 16

 NY

 RI 4 CT 8 NJ 16 DE 3 MD 9

 IA

 NE

 TX

■


 MN

 NH 4 VT 3

PA OH IL IN 25 WV VA 27 13 MO 8 12 KY 10 NC TN 11 AR SC MS AL GA 8 11 LA FL

Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Dwight D. Eisenhower (Republican)




33,900,000


Adlai E. Stevenson (Democrat)




27,300,000


 Why was the contest between Adlai Stevenson and Dwight D. Eisenhower so

 lopsided? WWN64 ■ Why was Eisenhower’s victory in several southern states remarkable? Figure M28_1 First proof

 that had resulted from twenty years of Democratic control of the White House. He pledged to shrink the federal bureaucracy and make it more efficient while restoring the balance between the executive and legislative branches. Eisenhower also promised to reduce the national debt, cut military expenses, balance the federal budget, and trim taxes. At the same time, however, he insisted that workers had a right to form unions and bargain with management. He added that employees needed to be paid enough to afford the comforts of a good life. “We a­ ll—​­workers and farmers, foremen and financiers, technicians and b ­ uilders—​­all must produce, produce more, and produce yet more,” he said, to make the American Dream a reality and to ensure global stability. Peace would be maintained “not by weapons of war but by wheat and cotton,

Moderate Republicanism  1263


 by milk and wool, by meat and by timber and by rice.” He hated the growing arms race because “every gun that is made, every warship launched, every rocket fired signifies, in the final sense, a theft from those who hunger and are not fed, those who are cold and are not clothed.” Eisenhower’s cautious personality and genial public face fit the prevailing mood of most voters. He was a unifier, not a divider; he inspired trust, sought consensus, and avoided confrontation. He also championed the ­nineteenth-​ ­century view that Congress should make policy and the president should carry it out.

 “dynamic conservatism” at home

 Eisenhower labeled his domestic program “dynamic conservatism,” by which he meant being “conservative when it comes to money and liberal when it comes to human beings.” He kept intact the basic structure of the New Deal, even convincing Congress to establish a new federal Department of Health, Education and Welfare and working with Democrats in Congress to extend Social Security benefits to millions of workers formerly excluded: w ­ hite-​­collar professionals, maids and sales clerks, farmworkers, and members of the armed forces. Eisenhower also approved increases in the minimum wage and additional ­public-​­housing projects for ­low-​­income occupants. Conservative Republicans charged that he was being too liberal. He told his brother Edgar in 1954 that if the “stupid” right wing of the Republican party tried “to abolish Social Security and eliminate labor laws and farm programs, you would not hear of that party again in our political history.”

 transportation improvements

Under Eisenhower, the
 federal government launched two huge construction projects: the St. Lawrence Seaway and the Interstate Highway System, both of which resembled the huge public works projects constructed under the New Deal during the 1930s. The St. Lawrence Seaway project (in partnership with Canada) opened the Great Lakes to oceangoing ships. The Federal-​­Aid Highway Act (1956) created a national network of interstate highways to serve the needs of commerce and defense, as well as the public. The interstate highway system, funded largely by federal gasoline taxes, took ­twenty-​­five years to construct and was the largest federal project in history. It stretched for 47,000 miles and required 55,512 bridges. Highway construction generated what economists call “multiplier effects”: it created jobs; stimulated economic growth; and spurred the tourism, motor hotel (“motel”), billboard, ­ fast-​­ food, and ­ long-​­ haul trucking industries. Interstates transformed the way people traveled and where they lived, and it

 1264  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 even created a new form of m ­ iddle-​ c­ lass ­leisure—​­the family vacation by car. In 1956, writer Bernard De Voto exclaimed that “a new highway is not only a measure of progress, but a true index of our culture.”

 the car culture

“The Amer­
 ican,” the Mississippi writer William Faulkner observed in 1948, “really loves Drive in, cash in Founded by brothers nothing but his automobile.” Americans Maurice and Richard McDonald in had always cherished personal freedom southern California, this hugely successful fast food chain started and mobility, rugged individualism and as a carhop ­drive-​­in and did not have masculine force. Automobiles embodcustomer seating until the 1960s. ied these qualities and more. Thanks to the highway system, said President Eisenhower, cars would provide “greater convenience, greater happiness, and greater standards of living.” By 1958, 57 million Americans out of the national population of 175 million owned an automobile. Cars became much more than a form of transportation; they provided social status and personal freedom. They granted more people a wider range of ­choices—​­where to travel, where to work and live, where to seek pleasure and recreation. The “car culture” soon transformed social behavior, prompting the creation of “convenience stores,” ­drive-​­in movies, and ­fast-​­food restaurants.

 the end of mccarthyism

 Republicans thought their presidential victory in 1952 would curb the often unscrupulous efforts of Wisconsin senator Joseph R. McCarthy to ferret out Communist spies in the federal government. Instead, the p ­ ublicity-​­seeking senator’s behavior grew even more outlandish, in part because reporters were dazzled by his theatrics. President Eisenhower despised McCarthy but refused to criticize him in public, explaining that he did not want to “get into a pissing contest with that skunk.” In March 1954, the president indirectly chastised McCarthy when he told a press conference that “we are defeating ourselves if we use methods [in opposing communism] that do not conform to the American sense of justice.” McCarthy finally committed political suicide when he made the absurd charge that the U.S. Army itself was “soft” on communism. For ­thirty-​­six days in the spring of 1954, the ­Army-​­McCarthy hearings provided 80 million television viewers with a fantastic spectacle. McCarthy was at his worst, hounding witnesses, seeking publicity, and producing little evidence to back up his charges. He was finally outwitted by the deliberate, reasoned counterattacks of

A
People of Plenty 1265 

 the army’s legal counsel, Joseph Welch. When McCarthy tried to smear one of Welch’s associates, the attorney was outraged: “Until this moment, Senator, I think I never really gauged your cruelty or your recklessness. . . . ​Have you no sense of decency, sir, at long last?” When the audience burst into applause, the confused senator was reduced to whispering, “What did I do?” On December 2, 1954, the Senate voted 67 to 22 to “condemn” McCarthy. Soon thereafter, his political influence collapsed. His crusade against Communists in government had catapulted him into the limelight and captured the nation’s attention, but in the process he had trampled upon civil liberties. Now, with unexpected suddenness, his crusade was over. His rapid demise helped the Democrats capture control of both houses of Congress in the 1954 elections. In 1957, at the age of ­forty-​­eight, he died of liver inflammation brought on by years of alcohol abuse. His successor, William Proxmire, declared that McCarthy was “a disgrace to Wisconsin, to the Senate, and to America.”

A
People of Plenty  What most distinguished the United States from the rest of the world after the Second World War was what one journalist called America’s “screwball materialism.” After a brief postwar recession in 1945–1946, the economy soared to record heights as businesses shifted from wartime production to the construction of new housing and the manufacture of ­mass-​­produced consumer goods. In 1953, Eisenhower’s first year in office, the United States, with 6 percent of the world’s population, was producing ­two-​­thirds of the world’s manufactured goods. In 1957, U.S. News and World Report magazine declared that “never had so many people, anywhere, been so well off.”

Postwar Prosperity
 Several factors created the nation’s prosperity. First, huge federal expenditures during the Second World War and Korean War propelled the economy out of the Great Depression. High government spending continued in the 1950s, thanks to the relentless construction of highways, bridges, airports, and ports, and the global arms race. The military budget after 1945 represented the single most important stimulant to the economy. The superior productivity of American industries also contributed to economic growth. No sooner was the war over than the federal government turned over to civilian owners many ­war-​­related plants, giving them a boost as they retooled for peacetime manufacturing. ­Military-​­related research helped stimulate new glamour industries: chemicals (including plastics), electronics, and aviation. By 1957, the aircraft industry was the nation’s largest employer.

 1266  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 Postwar consumerism Booming chain stores, such as the Super Giant Supermarket shown above, began to dot the suburbs of 1950s America, offering an outlet for the ­pent-​­up consumerism of the postwar years.

 The economy also benefited from the emergence of new technologies, including the first generation of computers. Factories and industries became increasingly “automated.” At the same time, the oil boom in Texas, Wyoming, and Oklahoma continued to provide ­low-​­cost fuel to heat buildings and to power cars and trucks. Another reason for the r­ ecord-​­breaking economic growth was the lack of foreign competition. Most of the other major industrial ­nations—​­Great Britain, France, Germany, Japan, and the Soviet U ­ nion—​­had been physically devastated during the Second World War, leaving American manufacturers with a virtual monopoly on international trade that lasted well into the 1950s.

The Consumer Culture
 The major catalyst for economic expansion after 1945, however, was the unleashing of p ­ ent-​­up consumer demand from the Depression and the war years. What differentiated the postwar era from earlier periods of prosperity was the large number of people who shared in the rising standard of living. Between

A
People of Plenty 1267 

 1947 and 1960, the average income for the working class increased by as much as it had in the previous fifty years. More and more ­blue-​­collar Americans, especially automotive and steel workers, moved into the middle class. George Meany, the leading union spokesman during the 1950s, declared in 1955 that his members “never had it so good.” Americans had money to spend during the fifties, and they did so with gusto, becoming famous around the world for their carefree consumption. In 1955, a marketing consultant stressed that the nation had come to view “consumption a way of life.” The new economy required “that we convert the buying and use of goods into [religious] rituals, that we seek our spiritual satisfaction, our ego satisfaction, in consumption.”

 a buying spree

 Innovations in financing made it easier to buy things. The first credit card appeared in 1949; soon, “buying with plastic” had become the new norm for millions of people. Personal indebtedness doubled, in part because people were so confident about their economic future. Frugality became unpatriotic. As television personality Hugh Downs remembered, “those were exciting days . . . ​of hope and optimism . . . ​when the sky was the limit.” What most Americans wanted to buy after the Second World War was a new house. In 1945, only 40 percent of Americans owned homes; by 1960, the

 Family, modified The dynamics of American family life changed with the onslaught of new, affordable products. In this 1959 advertisement for TV dinners, the family eats out of disposable containers in front of the television.

 1268  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 number had increased to 60 percent. New homes featured the latest electrical ­appliances—​­refrigerators, dishwashers, washing machines, vacuum cleaners, electric mixers, carving knives, even shoe polishers. The use of electricity tripled, in part because of the popularity of television, which quickly displaced listening to the radio or going to the movies as the most popular way to spend free time. Between 1948 and 1952, the number of homes with TV sets jumped from 172,000 to 15.3 million. In 1954, grocery stores began selling frozen “TV dinners” to be heated and consumed while watching popular shows such as Father Knows Best, I Love Lucy, and The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet, all of which idealized the ­child-​­centered world of suburban white families. In 1955, U.S. News and World Report magazine noted that the “biggest of the new forces in American life today is television.” The popularity of television provided a powerful new medium for advertisers to promote a powerful new phase of the consumer culture that reshaped the contours of postwar life: the nature of work, where people lived and traveled, how they interacted, and what they valued. It also affected class structure, race relations, and gender roles. Jack Metzgar, the son of a Pennsylvania steelworker, remembered that in 1946 “we did not have a car, a television set, or a refrigerator. By 1952, we had all those things.”

 the gi bill of rights

 In 1944, as Americans grew confident of victory in the Second World War, fear that a sudden influx of veterans into the civilian workforce would produce widespread unemployment led Congress to pass the Servicemen’s Readjustment Act, also called the Veterans Act and nicknamed the GI Bill of Rights. (“GI” meant “government issue,” a phrase stamped on military uniforms and equipment that became slang for “serviceman.”) The GI Bill boosted upward social mobility in postwar America. Its package of benefits for veterans included unemployment pay for one year, preference to those applying for federal government jobs, loans for home construction or starting a business, access to government hospitals, and generous subsidies for education. Some 5 million veterans bought homes with the assistance of GI Bill mortgage loans, which required no down payment. Almost 8 million took advantage of $14.5 billion in GI Bill benefits to attend college or enroll in j­ob-​ t­ raining programs. Before the Second World War, about 160,000 Americans had graduated from college each year. By 1950, the figure had risen to 500,000. In 1949, veterans accounted for 40 percent of college enrollments, and the United States could boast the world’s ­best-​­educated workforce, largely because of the GI Bill. One example: Joe Shi, an army veteran from Macon, Georgia, was able to attend graduate school at the University of Pennsylvania thanks to the GI Bill.

A
People of Plenty 1269 

 Overall, the GI Bill was one of the most successful federal programs in history. For African American veterans, however, most colleges and universities remained racially segregated and refused to admit blacks. Those that did often discriminated against them. African Americans attending white colleges or universities were barred from playing on athletic teams, attending social events, and joining fraternities or sororities. Black veterans were also often prevented from buying homes in white neighborhoods. Although women veterans were eligible for GI Bill benefits, there were so few of them that the program had the unintended effect of widening the income gap between men and women.

 the suburban frontier

 The second half of the twentieth century brought a mass migration to a new ­frontier—​­the suburbs. The acute postwar housing shortage (98 percent of cities reported shortages of houses and apartments in 1945) sparked the suburban revolution. People were eager to escape from inner cities to the sprawling suburbs emerging in the countryside, just outside of city or town limits. Of the 13 million homes built between 1948 and 1958, there were 11 million constructed in the suburbs. Many among the exploding m ­ iddle-​­class white population moved to what were called the Sunbelt ­states—​­California, Arizona, Florida, Texas, and the southeast region, where rapid population growth and new highways generated an economic boom. As air conditioning became common in the Sunbelt, it greatly enhanced the appeal of living in warmer climates. California led the way. In 1940, it was the fifth most populous state; by 1963, it was first. Suburbia met an acute need (affordable housing) and fulfilled a common ­dream—​­personal freedom and family security within commuting distance of cities. In the half century after the Second World War, the suburban “good life” included a big home with a big yard on a big lot accessed by a big c­ ar—​­or two. During the 1950s, suburbs grew six times as fast as cities, and by 1970 more people lived in suburbs than in cities. A brassy New York real estate developer, William Levitt, led the suburban Levittown Identical ­mass-​­produced revolution. He had made a fortune houses in Levittown, New York, and other suburbs across the country during the war building housing units provided veterans and their families on new navy bases and around defense with affordable homes. plants, and after the war he put his

 1270  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 expertise to use in the suburbs. Between 1947 and 1951, on 6,000 acres of Long Island farmland forty miles east of New York City, he built 17,447 small (750 square feet), sturdy, ­two-​­bedroom homes to house more than 82,000 mostly ­lower-​­middle-​­class people. Levitt believed he was enabling the American Dream. “No man who owns his own lot and his own house can be a communist,” he said. The planned community, called Levittown, included schools, swimming pools, shopping centers, and playing fields. Levitt encouraged and even enforced uniformity and conformity. The lookalike houses came in different colors but only three s­ tyles—​­the Cape Cod, the Rancher, and the Colonial. All sold for the same low ­price—​­$6,990, with no down payments for ­veterans—​ ­and featured the same floor plan and accessories. Each had a living room with a picture window and a television set, a bathroom, two bedrooms, and a kitchen equipped with an electric refrigerator, oven, and washing machine. Trees were planted every t­ wenty-​­eight feet in the former potato fields; homeowners were required to cut their grass once a week and prohibited from hanging laundry on outside clothes lines during weekends. When the first houses in Levittown went on sale, people stood in long lines to buy one. In seven days, Levitt sold 707 houses. He soon built three more Levittowns in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Puerto Rico. They and other planned suburban communities benefited greatly from government assistance. Federal and state tax codes favored homeowners over renters, and local governments paid for the infrastructure the subdivisions required: roads, water and sewer lines, fire and police protection. By insuring loans for up to 95 percent of the value of a house, the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) made it easy for builders to construct ­low-​­cost homes and for people to purchase them. Levitt and other suburban developers created ­lily-​­white communities outside mostly ­black-​­populated cities. Initially, the contracts for houses in Levittown specifically excluded “members of other than the Caucasian race.” As Levitt explained, “We can solve a housing problem or we can try to solve a racial problem. But we can’t combine the two.” It wasn’t long, however, before the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Shelley v. Kraemer (1948) that such racial restrictions were illegal. The Court ruling, however, did not end segregated housing practices; it simply made them more discreet. In 1953, when Levittown’s population reached 70,000, it was the largest community in the nation without a single African American resident. Although Jewish himself, Levitt also discouraged Jews from living in his communities. “As a Jew,” he explained, “I have no room in my heart for racial prejudice. But the plain fact is that most whites prefer not to live in mixed communities. This attitude may be wrong morally, and someday it may change. I hope it will.” Other developers across the country soon mimicked Levitt’s efforts, building suburban communities with rustic names such as Lakewood, Streamwood,

A
People of Plenty 1271 

 The Second Great Migration African American families, such as the New ­Jersey–​ ­bound family pictured here, moved to northern urban centers in droves following the end of World War II.

Elmwood, Cedar Hill, Park Forest, and Deer Park. In 1955, House and Garden
 magazine could declare that suburbia had become the “national way of life.” By 1960, however, only 5 percent of African Americans lived in suburbs.

 minorities on the move

 The mass migration of rural southern blacks to the urban North, Midwest, and West after the Second World War was much larger than the migration that occurred after the First World War, and its social consequences were even more dramatic. After 1945, more than 5 million blacks left the South in search of better jobs, higher wages, decent housing, and greater civil rights. By 1960, for the first time in history, more African Americans were living in urban areas than in rural areas. As blacks moved into northern cities, many white residents moved to the suburbs, leaving behind racial ghettos. Between 1950 and 1960, some 3.6 million whites left the nation’s largest cities for suburban neighborhoods, while 4.5 million blacks moved into the cities. Deeply entrenched racial attitudes outside the South forced blacks to work to counter the hostility they confronted. Through organizations such as the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), and the National Urban League, they sought to change

 1272  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 the hearts and minds of their white neighbors. However, for all of the racism that black migrants encountered, most found their new lives preferable to the enforced segregation and often violent racism in the South. Southern blacks still faced voting discrimination and segregation in theaters, parks, schools, colleges, hospitals, buses, cinemas, libraries, restrooms, beaches, bars, and prisons. Just as African Americans were on the move, so, too, were Mexicans and Puerto Ricans. Congress renewed the bracero program, begun during the Second World War, which enabled Mexicans to work as wage laborers in the United States, often as migrant workers moving from farm to farm as needed. Mexicans streamed across the nation’s southwest border. By 1960, Los Angeles had the largest concentration of Mexican Americans in the nation. Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans, and other Hispanic/Latino minorities who served in the military also benefited from the GI Bill. Many of ­them—​­and their ­families—​­were able to relocate to the mainland United States because of the educational and housing programs provided veterans through the federal government. Between 1940 and 1960, nearly a million Puerto Ricans, mostly small farmers and agricultural workers, moved into American cities, especially New York City. By the late 1960s, more Puerto Ricans lived in New York City than in San Juan, the capital of Puerto Rico.

 shifting women’s roles

 During the Second World War, millions of women had assumed traditionally male jobs in factories and mills. After the war, those women were encouraged to return to their traditional roles as loving wives, caring mothers, and happy homemakers. A 1945 article in House Beautiful magazine informed women that the returning war veteran was “head man again. . . . ​Your part in the remaking of this man is to fit his home to him, understanding why he wants it this way, forgetting your own preferences.” Advertisements in popular magazines often targeted m ­ iddle-​­class women, depicting them happily bound to the house, at work in the kitchen in dresses adorned with jewelry (usually pearl necklaces) and high heel shoes, conversing with children, serving dinner, cleaning, and otherwise displaying the joy of a clean home or the latest kitchen appliance. The prevailing images of ­middle-​­class life featured ­tree-​­lined suburban streets, kids riding their bikes through beautiful neighborhoods, and women as devoted servants to their husbands. Idealized images of “the happy homemaker” and suburban life in popular television programs like The Donna Reed Show or Leave It to Beaver also supported the cold war campaign to portray the superiority of capitalism, democracy, freedom, and religion over communism. Russian women were depicted toiling in drudgery in drab factories or on government farms.

A
People of Plenty 1273 

 The new household A Tupperware party in a ­middle-​­class suburban home.

 During the fifties, the U.S. marriage rate reached an ­all-​­time high, and the average age of marriage for women plummeted to nineteen. There was enormous social pressure on teenaged girls to get married quickly; if a woman wasn’t engaged or married by her early twenties, she was in danger of becoming an “old maid.” In 1956, ­one-​­fourth of all white college women wed while still enrolled in school, and most dropped out before receiving a degree. A common joke was that women went to college to get an “M.R.S. degree”—that is, a husband. Female college students were encouraged to take such courses as home economics, interior decoration, and family finance. Lynn White, president of Mills College, argued that “the curriculum for female students should prepare women to foster the intellectual and emotional life of her family and community.” Despite this version of the nineteenth century’s “cult of domesticity,” many women did work outside the home, usually out of necessity. In 1950, women comprised 29 percent of the workforce, and that percentage rose steadily throughout the decade. Some 70 percent of employed women worked in clerical ­positions—​­as secretaries, bank tellers, or sales ­clerks—​­or on assembly lines or in the service industry (waitresses, laundresses, maids). Less than 15 percent were employed in a professional capacity (teachers, nurses, accountants, social workers). Women represented only 3.5 percent of attorneys and 6 percent of physicians. African American and other minority women had even fewer

 1274  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 vocational choices and were mostly delegated to ­low-​­paying service jobs such as maids and cooks.

 the c ­ hild-​­centered fifties With the war over, millions of

 Hollywood homemakers TV shows, movies, and plays in the fifties were outlets for homemakers’ anxieties and fantasies. Top: Father Knows Best was a popular comedy about a m ­ iddle-​­class family in the Midwest. Jane Wyatt portrayed the clan’s matriarch Margaret, the unflappable voice of reason who oversaw an idealized suburban home life. Bottom: Domestic bliss was never in reach for African American female characters. In the ­award-​­winning Broadway production of Porgy and Bess (1959), Dorothy Dandridge plays an addict so lost in the vice of New Orleans that even her s ­ elf-​­sacrificing disabled lover (Sidney Poitier) cannot save her.

 military veterans eagerly returned to schools, jobs, wives, and babies. The record number of Americans born during the postwar period (roughly 1941–1964) composed what came to be known as the “baby boom generation,” which would shape the nation’s social and cultural life throughout the second half of the twentieth century and after. The fifties was the ideal decade to be a child. The horrors of the Second World War were over, the economy was surging, and social life became centered on the needs of ­children—​­because there were so many of them. Between 1946 and 1964, the birth of 76 million Americans reversed a ­century-​­long decline in the nation’s birthrate and created a demographic upheaval whose repercussions are still being felt. The baby boom peaked in 1957, when a record 4.3 million births occurred, one every seven seconds. A majority of brides during the fifties were pregnant within seven months of their wedding, and they didn’t stop at one child. From 1940 to 1960, the number of families with three children doubled, and the number with four quadrupled. Dr. Benjamin Spock’s The Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care sold more than a million copies per year during the fifties. Postwar babies initially created a surge in demand for diapers, washing ma­­chines, and baby food, then required

A
People of Plenty 1275 

 the construction of thousands of new ­schools—​­and the hiring of teachers to staff them. Children’s needs drove much of the economy’s growth, creating a huge market for toys, candy, gum, records, clothes, and other items. In 1958, Life mag­­­­ azine reported that f­our-​­year-​­olds were causing a “backlog of business or­­ders that will take two decades to fulfill.” That so many women were having babies and raising children necessarily shaped societal attitudes toward ­them—​­and vice versa. A special issue of Life in 1956 featured the “ideal” ­middle-​­class woman: a ­thirty-​­two-​­year-​­old “pretty and popular” white suburban housewife, mother of four, who had married at age sixteen. She was described as an excellent wife, mother, volunteer, and “home manager” who preferred marriage and c­ hild-​­rearing to a career outside the home. She made her own clothes, hosted dozens of dinner parties each year, sang in her church choir, and was devoted to her husband. “In her daily round,” Life reported, “she attends club or charity meetings, drives the children to school, does the weekly grocery shopping, makes ceramics, and is planning to study French.” The soaring birthrate reinforced the notion that a woman’s place was in the home. “Of all the accomplishments of the American woman,” Life proclaimed, “the one she brings off with the most spectacular success is having babies.”

A
Religious Nation  After the Second World War, Americans joined churches and synagogues in record numbers. In 1940, less than half the adult population belonged to a church; by 1960, more than 65 percent were members of churches or synagogues. The cold war provided a direct stimulant to Christian evangelism. A godly nation, it was widely assumed, would better withstand the march of “godless” communism. President Eisenhower promoted a patriotic religious crusade. “Recognition of the Supreme Being,” he declared, “is the first, the most basic, expression of Americanism. Without God, there could be no American form of government, nor an American way of life.” In 1954, Congress added the phrase “[one nation] under God” to the Pledge of Allegiance. In 1956, it made the statement “In God We Trust” the nation’s official motto. Eisenhower ordered that the motto be displayed on all currency. “Today in the United States,” Time magazine claimed in 1954, “the Christian faith is back at the center of things.” The prevailing tone of the religious revival was upbeat and soothing. As the Protestant Council of New York City explained to its radio and television presenters, their o ­ n-​­air broadcasts “should project love, joy, courage, hope, faith, trust in God, goodwill. . . . ​In a very real sense we are ‘selling’ religion, the good news of the Gospel.”

 1276  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 Roadside service Drive-​­in churches offered their members the comfort of listening to Sunday Mass from their cars. Here, the pastor of New York’s Tremont Methodist Church greets a member of his ­car-​­centered congregation.

 The best salesman for this “good news” was the Reverend Norman Vincent Peale. No speaker was more in demand, and no writer was more widely read. Peale’s book The Power of Positive Thinking (1952) was a phenomenal best ­seller—​­and for good reason. It offered a simple h ­ ow-​­to course in personal happiness, which Peale called Practical Christianity. “Flush out all depressing, negative, and tired thoughts,” he advised. “Start thinking faith, enthusiasm, and joy.” By following this simple formula, he pledged, each American could become “a more popular, esteemed, and ­well-​­liked individual.” At the height of Peale’s popularity, he was reaching 30 million people each week through radio, television, and his weekly newspaper columns.

Cracks in the Picture Window
 In contrast to Peale’s ­feel-​­good religion, the fifties also experienced growing anxiety, dissent, and diversity. In The Affluent Society (1958), for example, economist John Kenneth Galbraith attacked the prevailing notion that sustained economic growth was solving social problems. He reminded readers that the nation had yet to eradicate poverty, especially among minorities in inner cities; f­ emale-​­led households; Mexican American migrant farmworkers; Native Americans; and rural southerners, both black and white.

 poverty amid prosperity

 Uncritical praise for the “throwaway” culture of consumption masked the chronic poverty amid America’s mythic plenty. In 1959, a quarter of the population had no financial assets, and more than half had no savings accounts or credit cards. Poverty afflicted nearly half of the African American population, compared to only a quarter of whites. Although by 1950 blacks were earning on average more than four times their 1940 wages, they and other minority groups lagged well behind whites in their rate of improvement. At least 40 million people remained “poor” during the 1950s, but their plight was largely ignored.

Cracks in the Picture Window  1277


 Family on relief Many black families who migrated from the South to the Midwest became a part of a marginalized population in Chicago, dependent on public housing and experiencing the North’s forms of racism.

 The “promised land” in the North was not perfect. Because those who left the South were often undereducated, poor, and black, they were regularly denied access to good jobs, good schools, and good housing. Although states in the North, Midwest, and Far West did not have the same blatant forms of racial discrimination as the South, African Americans still encountered prejudice and discrimination in workplace hiring, housing, schools, and social life.

 literature as social criticism

 One of the most striking aspects of the fifties was the sharp contrast between the happy public mood and the increasingly bitter social criticism from intellectuals, theologians, novelists, playwrights, poets, and artists who questioned the prevailing attitude about the superiority of the American way of life. Playwright Thornton Wilder labeled the young adults of the fifties the “Silent Generation” because of the smug complacency prevalent among ­upper-​­middle-​­class whites. Writer Norman Mailer was equally disdainful. He said the 1950s was “one of the worst decades in the history of man.” Mailer was one of many social critics who challenged what they viewed as the decade’s moral complacency and bland conformity. For all of America’s

 1278  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 mythic devotion to rugged individualism, the nation during the cold war celebrated conformity. As novelist John Updike observed, he and other writers felt estranged “from a government that extolled business and mediocrity.” The most enduring novels of the postwar period emphasized the individual’s struggle for survival amid the smothering forces of mass society. The characters in books such as James Jones’s From Here to Eternity (1951), Ralph Ellison’s ­ ellow’s Seize Invisible Man (1952), Saul B the Day (1956), J. D. Salinger’s Catcher in the Rye (1951), William Styron’s Lie Down in Darkness (1951), and John Updike’s Rabbit, Run (1961) are restRalph Ellison Ellison is best remem­ less, tormented souls who can find bered for his 1952 novel Invisible Man. neither contentment nor respect in an uninterested world. The ­upper-​­middle-​­class white suburbs and the culture of comfortable conformity they created were frequent literary targets. Writer John Cheever located most of his short stories in suburban n ­ eighborhoods—“cesspools of conformity” where democratic equality created a social life that was mindless and hollow. The typical suburban dweller, one critic charged in 1956, “buys the right car, keeps his lawn like his neighbor’s, eats crunchy breakfast cereal, and votes Republican.” In his vicious satire of affluent suburbia, The Crack in the Picture Window (1956), John Keats charged that “miles of identical boxes are spreading like gangrene” across the nation, producing a runaway consumerism, “haggard” businessmen, “tense and anxious” housewives, and “the gimme kids” who, after unwrapping the last Christmas gift, “look up and ask whether that is all.” He dismissed the Levittowns of America as residential “developments conceived in error, nurtured by greed, corroding everything they touch. They destroy established cities and trade patterns, pose dangerous problems for the areas they invade, and actually drive mad myriads of housewives shut up in them.”

 the beats

 A small but highly visible and controversial group of young writers, poets, painters, and musicians rejected the consumer culture and the traditional expectations and responsibilities of ­middle-​­class life. They were known as the Beats, a term with multiple meanings: to be “beat” was likened to

Cracks in the Picture Window  1279


 being “upbeat” and even “beatific,” as well as being “on the beat” in “real cool” jazz music. But the Beats also liked the name because it implied “weariness,” being “exhausted” or “beaten down,” qualities which none of them actually exhibited. Jack Kerouac, Allen Ginsberg, William Burroughs, Neal Cassady, Gary ­Snyder, and other Beats rebelled against conventional literary and artistic expression and excelled at outrageous, often purposeless and even criminal behavior, like stealing cars and cash or, in the case of Burroughs, shooting an apple off his wife’s ­head—​­for the fun of it, even though the woman was killed in the process. Intensely ­self-​­absorbed to the point of ruthlessness, the mostly male Beats celebrated, even embodied, lives of breathtaking risk, fueled by feverish spontaneity and raw energy. They pursued reckless ­alcohol-​­and ­drug-​­induced ecstasies and sexual excesses. (Many of them were gay or bisexual during an era when homosexuality was considered a form of deviance requiring psychotherapy.) The Beats viewed getting high as ­first-​­class trips and seducing women as s­econd-​­class accessories; they were serial misogynists. Carolyn Cassady said her husband Neal’s approach to making love was “rape.” She added that Neal and “the boys didn’t know where they were going. . . . ​They just knew they wanted to go.” The Beat hipsters emerged from the bohemian underground in New York City’s Greenwich Village. Enlivened by tequila, marijuana, amphetamines, and heroin, the male Beats were essentially apolitical and s­ elf-​­indulgent chauvinists, more interested in transforming themselves than in reforming the world. Kerouac and the other Beats wanted their art and literature to change consciousness rather than address social ills. During three feverish weeks, Kerouac typed nonstop (dictated by the Art ache The Beat community fostered “Holy Ghost”) the manuscript of his in its members a frenzied desire to remarkable novel On the Road (1957), experience life in all of its intensity, an account of a series of frenzied c­ ross-​ including the cultural realm. In this 1959 country trips he and others made photograph, poet Tex Kleen reads in ­ a bathtub at Venice Beach, California, between 1948 and 1950. Kerouac and while artist Mad Mike paints trash cans. the Beats were nomadic hipsters, restless

 1280  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 and tormented souls whose road to salvation lay in hallucinogenic drugs and lots of alcohol, casual sex, petty crime, gratuitous violence, a passion for ­up-​ ­tempo jazz (“bebop”), fast cars, the street life of urban ghettos, an affinity for Buddhism, and a vagabond spirit. At heart, the Beats were romantics searching for an authentic sense of self in a nation absorbed in consumerism, conformism, and a­ nti-​­communism. Their tortured rebelliousness set the stage for the more widespread youth revolt of the 1960s.

 rock ’n’ roll

 The millions of children making up the first wave of the baby boomers became adolescents in the 1950s. There were so many of them that people began calling them teenagers. A distinctive teen subculture began to emerge, as did a wave of juvenile delinquency. By 1956, more than a million teens were being arrested each year. One contributing factor was access to automobiles, which enabled teens to escape parental control and, in the words of one journalist, provided “a private lounge for drinking and for petting [embracing and kissing] or sex episodes.” Many blamed teen delinquency on rock ’n’ roll, a new form of music that emerged during the 1950s. Alan Freed, a Cleveland disc jockey known as “Moondog,” coined the term rock ’n’ roll in 1951. He had noticed that white teenagers buying rhythm and blues (R&B) records preferred the livelier recordings by African Americans and Hispanic Americans. Freed began playing R&B records on his radio show, but he called the music “rock ’n’ roll” (a phrase used in African American communities to refer to dancing and sex). By 1954, Freed had moved to New York City, where his popular program helped bridge the gap between “white” and “black” music. African American singers such as Chuck Berry, Little Richard, and Ray Charles, as well as Hispanic American performers such as Ritchie Valens (Richard Valenzuela), captivated young, white, ­middle-​­class audiences. At the same time, Sam Phillips, a radio disk jockey in Memphis, Tennessee, was searching for a particular type of pop singer. “If I could find a white man with a Negro sound,” Phillips said, “I could make a billion dollars.” He found his singer in Elvis Presley, the lanky son of poor Mississippi farmers. In 1956, the ­twenty-​­one-​­year-​­old Presley, by then a regional star famous for his long, unruly hair, sullen yet sensual sneer, and swiveling hips, released his ­smash-​­hit recording “Heartbreak Hotel.” Over the next two years, he emerged as the most popular musician in American history, carrying rock ’n’ roll across the race barrier and assaulting the bland conformity of fifties ­culture. Presley’s gyrating performances (his nickname was “Elvis the Pelvis”) and incomparably rich and raw baritone voice drove young people wild and earned him millions of fans around the world. His movements, said one music critic, “suggest, in a word, sex.”

The Civil Rights Movement  1281


 Cultural conservatives were outraged and urged parents to destroy Presley’s records because they promoted “a pagan concept of life.” A Roman Catholic official denounced Presley as a vile symptom of a teenage “creed of dishonesty, violence, lust and degeneration.” Patriotic groups claimed that rock ’n’ roll music was part of a Communist plot to corrupt America’s youth. Writing in the New York Times, a psychiatrist characterized rock ’n’ roll as a “communicable disease.” The U.S. Senate subcommittee tasked with investigating juvenile delinquency warned that Pres- Elvis Presley Hysterical girls grab at him from all angles, but the “King of Rock and ley was threatening “to ­rock-​­n-​­roll the Roll” stays cool, crooning into the camera juvenile world into open revolt against while performing in Miami in 1956. society. The gangster of tomorrow is the Elvis Presley type of today.” Yet rock ’n’ roll flourished in part because it was so controversial. It gave teenagers a ­self-​­conscious sense of belonging to a tribal social group. More important, it brought together, on equal terms, musicians (and their audiences) of varied races and backgrounds.

The Civil Rights Movement
 Soon after the cold war began, Soviet diplomats began to use America’s racial discrimination against African Americans as a propaganda tool to illustrate the defects of the American way of life. Under the Jim Crow system in the southern states, blacks still risked being lynched if they registered to vote. They were forced to use separate ­facilities—​­water fountains, restrooms, hotels, theaters, ­parks—​­and to attend segregated schools. In the North, discrimination was not as “official,” but it was equally real, especially in housing and employment. President Eisenhower had an opportunity to exercise transformational leadership in race relations; his unwillingness to do so was his greatest failure. As Time magazine noted in 1958, Eisenhower “overlooked the fact that the U.S. needed [his] moral leadership in fighting segregation.”

 eisenhower and race

 Eisenhower had entered the White House committed to civil rights in principle, and he pushed for improvements in

 1282  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 some areas. During his first three years, public facilities (parks, playgrounds, libraries, restaurants) in Washington, D.C., were desegregated, and he intervened to end discrimination at military bases in Virginia and South Carolina. He also appointed the first African American to an executive office: E. Frederic Morrow, who was named Administrative Officer for Special Projects. Beyond that, however, Eisenhower refused to make civil rights for African Americans a moral crusade. Pushing too hard, he believed, would “raise tempers and increase prejudices,” doing more harm than good. Two aspects of Eisenhower’s political philosophy limited his commitment to racial equality: his preference for state or local action over federal involvement and his doubt that laws could change attitudes. “I don’t believe you can change the hearts of men with laws or decisions,” he insisted. His passive attitude meant that governmental leadership on civil rights would come from the judiciary more than from the executive or legislative branches. In 1953, Eisenhower appointed former Republican governor Earl Warren of California as chief justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, a decision he later said was the “biggest damn fool mistake I ever made.” Warren, who had seemed safely conservative while in elected office, displayed a social conscience and a streak of libertarianism on the bench. Under Warren’s leadership (1953–1969), the Supreme Court became a powerful force for social and political change.

 african american activism

The m
 ­ ost-​­crucial leaders of the civil rights movement came from those whose rights were most often violated: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, Asian Americans, and other minorities. Courageous blacks led what would become the most important social movement in ­twentieth-​­century American history. With intelligence, bravery, and dignity, they fought in the courts, at the ballot box, and in the streets. Although many African Americans moved to the North and West during and after the Second World War, a majority remained in the South, where they still faced a rigidly segregated society. In the 1952 presidential election, for example, only 20 percent of eligible African Americans were registered to vote. In addition, the public schools, especially in the South, were supposedly racially separate but equal in quality. In fact, however, many a­ ll-​­black schools were underfunded, understaffed, and overcrowded. In the m ­ id-​­1930s, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) challenged the ­separate-​­but-​­equal judicial doctrine that had preserved racial segregation since the Plessy decision by the Supreme Court in 1896. It took almost fifteen years, however, to convince the courts that racial segregation must end. Finally, in Sweatt v. Painter (1950), the Supreme Court ruled that a separate black law school in Texas was not equal in quality to the

The Civil Rights Movement  1283


 Fountains of truth An Alabama motel offers its white patrons chilled water from a cooler, while its African American guests must use a simple drinking fountain.

 state’s ­whites-​­only schools. The Court ordered the state to remedy the situation. It was the first step toward dismantling America’s tradition of racial segregation.

 the brown decision

 By the early 1950s, people were challenging state laws mandating racial segregation in the public schools. Five such cases, from Kansas, Delaware, South Carolina, Virginia, and the District of ­Columbia—​­usually cited by reference to the first, Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, K ­ ansas—​­went to the Supreme Court in 1952. President Eisenhower told the attorney general that he hoped the justices would postpone dealing with the explosive case “until the next Administration took over.” When it became obvious that the Court was moving forward, Eisenhower urged Chief Justice Warren to side with segregationists. Warren was not swayed: “You mind your business,” he told the president, “and I’ll mind mine.” Warren wrote the pathbreaking opinion, delivered on May 17, 1954, in which the Court declared that “in the field of public education the doctrine of ‘separate but equal’ has no place.” The justices used a variety of sociological and psychological findings to show that even if racially separate schools were equal in quality, the very practice of separating students by race caused feelings of inferiority among black children. A year later, the Court directed that the process of racial integration should move “with all deliberate speed.” Eisenhower refused to endorse or enforce the Court’s ruling. Privately, he grumbled “that the Supreme Court decision set back progress in the South at

 1284  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 least fifteen years.” Anyone who thinks “you can do these things by force is just plain nuts,” he said. Eisenhower had “little faith in the ability of law to change the human heart or eliminate prejudice.” While token racial integration began as early as 1954 in Kentucky and Missouri, hostility mounted in the Lower South and Virginia. The Alabama State Senate and the Virginia legislature both passed resolutions “nullifying” the Supreme Court’s decision, arguing that racial integration was an issue of states’ rights. Arkansas governor Orval Faubus insisted that the “federal government is a creature of the states. . . . ​We must either choose to defend our rights or else surrender.” In 1954, Harry F. Byrd, a Virginia senator and former governor, supplied a rallying cry for diehard white racists when he called for “massive resistance” against federal efforts to enforce integration in the South. Senator James O. Eastland of Mississippi, a state where African Americans made up 45 percent of the population, pledged that “integration will never come to Mississippi” and denounced the Brown decision as an “illegal, immoral, and sinful doctrine.” He told the Senate that “the Negro race is an inferior race” and that the South was determined to maintain “white supremacy.” The grassroots opposition among southern whites to the Brown case was led by newly formed Citizens’ Councils, ­middle-​­class versions of the Ku Klux Klan

 Separate, but not equal African American children pose outside their segregated schoolhouse in Selma, Alabama, in 1965.

The Civil Rights Movement  1285


 that spread quickly and eventually enrolled 250,000 members. Instead of physical violence, the Councils used economic coercion against blacks who crossed racial boundaries. The Citizens’ Councils grew so powerful in some communities that membership became almost a necessity for an aspiring white politician. The opponents of ­court-​­ordered integration were militantly defiant. In 1956, a Declaration of Constitutional Principles (“Southern Manifesto”) was signed by 101 members of Congress, deploring the Brown decision as “a clear abuse of judicial power” that had created an “explosive and dangerous condition” in the South. Only three southern Democrats refused to sign. One of them, Senator Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas, would become president seven years later. In six southern states at the end of 1956, two years after the Brown ruling, no black children attended school with whites. Some southern politicians threatened to shut down white schools rather than allow racial integration.

 the montgomery bus boycott

 The Brown case did much more than mobilize white resistance. It inspired many blacks (and white activists) by suggesting that the federal government was finally beginning to confront racial discrimination. Yet the essential role played by the NAACP and the courts in the civil rights movement often overshadows the courageous contributions of individual African Americans who took great personal risks to challenge segregation. For example, in Montgomery, Alabama, on December 1, 1955, Mrs. Rosa Parks, a ­forty-​­two-​­year-​­old black seamstress who was a fiercely determined activist for racial justice, refused to give up her seat on a city bus to a white man. By doing so, she launched the modern civil rights movement. Like many southern communities, Montgomery, the “Cradle of the Confederacy,” required blacks to sit in the rear seats of buses or trains. They could sit in the front seats designated for whites only if there were empty seats. If a white rider asked a black to move, they were expected to go “to the back of the bus.” Parks, however, was “tired of giving in.” When the bus driver told her that “niggers must move back” or he would have her arrested, she replied, with quiet courage, “You may do that.” Police then arrested her. The next night, black community leaders met at Dexter Avenue Baptist Church to organize a ­long-​­planned boycott of the city’s bus system, most of whose riders were African Americans. Student and faculty volunteers from Alabama State University stayed up all night to distribute 35,000 flyers denouncing the arrest of Rosa Parks and urging support for the Montgomery bus boycott.

 martin luther king jr.

 In the Dexter Avenue church’s ­twenty-​ ­six-​­year-​­old pastor, Martin Luther King Jr., the boycott movement found a

 1286  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 Rosa Parks Parks is fingerprinted by a Montgomery policeman on February 22, 1956, along with about 100 others who joined the bus boycott.

 brave and charismatic leader. Born in Atlanta, the grandson of a slave and son of a prominent minister, King was intelligent, courageous, and an eloquent and passionate speaker. “We must use the weapon of love,” King told supporters. “We must realize so many people are taught to hate us that they are not totally responsible for their hate.” To his foes, King warned, “We will soon wear you down by our capacity to suffer, and in winning our freedom we will so appeal to your heart and conscience that we will win you in the process.” King preached nonviolent civil disobedience, the tactic of defying unjust laws through peaceful actions, but he also valued militancy, for without crisis and confrontation with those in power there would be no negotiation or progress. The Montgomery bus boycott was a stunning s­uccess—​­but it was not easy. For 381 days, African Americans, women and men, organized carpools, used ­black-​­owned taxis, hitchhiked, or simply walked. White supporters also provided rides. A few boycotters rode horses or mules to work. The unprecedented mass protest infuriated many whites; police harassed and ticketed black carpools, and white thugs attacked black pedestrians. Ku Klux Klan

The Civil Rights Movement  1287


 members burned black churches and bombed houses owned by King and other boycott leaders. King himself was arrested twice. In trying to calm an angry black crowd, he urged restraint: “Don’t get panicky. Don’t get your weapons. We want to love our enemies.” On December 20, 1956, the Montgomery boycotters won a federal case they had initiated against racial segregation on public buses. The Supreme Court affirmed that “the separate but equal doctrine can no longer be safely followed as a correct statement of the law.” The next day, King and other African Americans boarded the city buses. The success of the boycott showed that ­well-​ ­coordinated, nonviolent black activism could trigger major changes in public policy. Among African Americans, hope replaced resignation, and action supplanted passivity. The boycott also catapulted King into the national spotlight. And what of Rosa Parks? She and her husband lost their jobs, and hate mail as well as death threats and firebombings forced them to leave Alabama eight months after her arrest. They moved to Detroit, where they remained fully engaged in the evolving civil rights movement.

 the civil rights acts of 1957 and 1960

 President Eisenhower’s timidity in the area of race relations emerged again when he was asked to protect the right of African Americans to vote. In 1956, hoping to exploit

 Civil disobedience Martin Luther King Jr. is roughly arrested for “loitering” in 1958. He would be arrested thirty times in his life for defying racist laws.

 1288  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 divisions between northern and southern Democrats and reclaim some of the black vote for Republicans, congressional leaders agreed to support what became the Civil Rights Act of 1957. The first civil rights law passed since 1875, it finally got through the Senate, after a year’s delay, with the help of majority leader Lyndon B. Johnson, a Texas Democrat who knew that he could never be elected president if he was viewed as just another racist white southerner. The bill was intended to ensure that all Americans, regardless of race or ethnicity, were allowed to vote. Johnson won southern acceptance of the bill by watering down its enforcement provisions. Eisenhower reassured Johnson that the final version represented “the mildest civil rights bill possible.” The Civil Rights Act established the Civil Rights Commission and a new Civil Rights Division in the Justice Department intended to prevent interference with the right to vote. Yet by 1959, the law had not resulted in a single southern black voter being added to the rolls. Neither did the Civil Rights Act of 1960, which provided for federal courts to register African Americans to vote in districts where there was a “pattern and practice” of racial discrimination. This bill, too, lacked teeth and depended upon vigorous presidential enforcement to achieve any tangible results.

 desegregation in little rock

 A few weeks after the Civil Rights Act of 1957 was passed, Arkansas’s Democratic governor, Orval Eugene Faubus, a rabid segregationist eager to win a third term, called a special session of the state legislature to pass a series of bills designed to give him sweeping new powers to close public schools threatened with integration and to transfer funds from public schools facing federally enforced integration to private “segregation academies.” Faubus defied a federal court order by using the state’s National Guard to prevent nine black students from enrolling at Little Rock’s Central High School. The National Guard commander’s orders were explicit: “No niggers in the building.” When one of the students, fi ­ fteen-​­year-​­old Elizabeth Eckford, tried to enter the school, a surging mob of jeering whites shrieked, “Lynch her! Lynch her!” Local authorities removed the black students, and the mayor of Little Rock frantically called the White House to request federal troops, explaining that Faubus was creating “tensions where none existed.” At that point, Eisenhower, who had resisted all appeals for federal action, reluctantly dispatched 1,000 army paratroopers of the 101st Airborne Division to protect the brave black students as they entered the school. “Mob rule,” he told the nation, “cannot be allowed to overrule the decisions of our courts.” It was one of the nation’s most painful and momentous confrontations, the first time since the 1870s that federal troops had been sent to the South to protect

The Civil Rights Movement  1289


 “Lynch her!” Fifteen-​­year-​­old Elizabeth Eckford endures the hostile screams of future classmates as she enters Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas.

 the rights of African Americans. Dunbar Ogden, a Presbyterian minister in Little Rock, found a ray of hope in the ugly confrontation: “This may be looked back upon by future historians as the turning ­point—​­for g­ ood—​­of race relations in this country.” Faubus claimed that Arkansas was now “an occupied territory.” With television cameras sending images across the country, seasoned paratroopers used bayonets and rifle butts to disperse the angry crowd. Inside Central High School, the nine black students attended their first classes with soldiers patrolling the halls. During lunch hour, two white pupils saw a black student eating alone. They asked: “Would you like to come over to our table?” The grateful boy replied: “Gosh, I’d love to.” The soldiers stayed in Little Rock through the school year. To a man, unyielding southern governors and congressmen furiously lashed out at Eisenhower,

 1290  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 charging that he was violating states’ rights. Eisenhower had “lit the fires of hate,” claimed Senator James Eastland. A South Carolina moderate took a different tack: “Those who believed that integration could be accomplished gradually and peacefully are now convinced that Eisenhower will have to use force all the way.” Eisenhower was quick to stress that his use of federal troops had little to do with “the integration or segregation question” and everything to do with maintaining law and order. In his view, the gleaming bayonets in Little Rock showed that the United States was a government of law, that the Constitution remained the supreme law of the land, and that the U.S. Supreme Court was the final interpreter of the Constitution. Martin Luther King Jr., who had earlier criticized Eisenhower’s tepid support of civil rights, told the president that the “overwhelming majority of southerners, Negro and white, stand behind your resolute action to restore law and order in Little Rock.” Many southern politicians called for the president’s impeachment and removal. In the summer of 1958, Governor Faubus, supported by the state legislature, closed the Little Rock high schools rather than allow racial integration. The governor of Virginia did the same in his state. Their actions led Jonathan Daniels, editor of the Raleigh, North Carolina, News & Observer, to write that closing public schools is “something beyond secession from the Union; [it] is secession from civilization.” Court proceedings in Arkansas dragged into 1959 before the schools re­­ opened. Resistance to integration in Virginia collapsed when state and federal courts struck down state laws that had cut off funds to integrated public schools. Thereafter, massive resistance to racial integration was confined mostly to the Lower South, where five ­states—​­from South Carolina westward through ­Louisiana—​­still opposed even token integration. Faubus went on to serve six terms as governor of Arkansas.

 southern christian leadership conference

After
 Little Rock, progress toward greater civil rights seemed agonizingly slow. Frustrated African Americans began blaming the NAACP for relying too much on the courts. “The Negro masses are angry and restless, tired of prolonged legal battles that end in paper decrees,” reported black journalist Louis Lomax. The widespread sense of disappointment gave Martin Luther King’s nonviolent civil rights movement even greater visibility. As King explained, “We were confronted with blasted hopes, and the dark shadow of a deep disappointment settled upon us. So we had no alternative except that of preparing for direct action, whereby we would present our very bodies as a means of laying our case before the conscience of the local and national community.”

Foreign Policy in the Fifties  1291


 On January 10, 1957, Dr. King invited about sixty black ministers and leaders to Ebenezer Church in Atlanta. Their goal was to form an organization to coordinate and support nonviolent direct action as a method of desegregating bus systems across the South. After a f­ollow-​­up meeting in New Orleans on February 15, a new organization emerged: the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), with Dr. King as its president. Unlike the NAACP, which recruited individual members, SCLC coordinated activities on behalf of a cluster of organizations, mostly individual churches or community groups. Because Dr. King pushed for direct action against the segregated South, only a few African American ministers were initially willing to affiliate with SCLC, for fear of a white backlash. King persisted, however, and over time SCLC grew into a powerful organization. The activists knew that violence awaited them. Roy Wilkins, head of the NAACP, noted that “the Negro citizen has come to the point where he is not afraid of violence. He no longer shrinks back. He will assert himself, and if violence comes, so be it.” Thus began the second phase of the civil rights movement, a phase that would come to fruition in the 1960s as King and other African American activists showed the nation the courage to resist injustice, the power to love everyone, and the strength to endure discouragement and opposition.

Foreign Policy in the Fifties
 The Truman administration’s commitment to “contain” communism focused on the Soviet threat to Western Europe. During the 1950s, the Eisenhower administration, especially Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, expanded America’s objective in the cold war. “Containment” was no longer enough; the United States must develop a “dynamic” foreign policy that would “roll back” communism around the world. Dulles’s goal was to “liberate” those people under Communist rule rather than merely contain Communist expansion. As a cold warrior, Dulles expected every nation to choose sides. “For us,” he said, “there are two kinds of people in the world. There are those who are Christians and support free enterprise, and there are the others.” He soon discovered, however, that the complexities of world affairs and the realities of Soviet and Communist Chinese power made his moral commitment to manage the destiny of the world ­unrealistic—​­and costly.

 concluding an armistice

In Korea, Eisenhower, who had
 a unique understanding of the relationship between diplomacy and military force, faced three choices: increase the war effort, continue the military

 1292  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 stalemate, or pursue a negotiated settlement. Eisenhower chose the third option, but he first had to convince Dulles that negotiations were warranted. Dulles did not want peace until the Chinese had suffered “one hell of a licking” and the two Koreas had been reunited. In April 1953, Eisenhower told Dulles that he was not willing to prolong the military effort, but he was comfortable using the threat of nuclear weapons and other actions to break the impasse in the stalled negotiations. In May 1953, Eisenhower took the bold step of intensifying the aerial bombardment of North Korea. The president let it be known that he would “Don’t Be A ­ fraid—​­I Can Always Pull use nuclear weapons if a truce were You Back” Secretary of State John not forthcoming. Thereafter, negotiFoster Dulles pushes a reluctant America to the brink of war. ations moved quickly toward a c­ ease-​ ­fire agreement (called an armistice) on July 26, 1953. It ended “all acts of armed force” and reaffirmed the historical border between the two Koreas just above the 38th parallel until both sides could arrive at a “final peaceful settlement.” Other factors in bringing about the armistice were China’s rising military losses in the conflict and the spirit of uncertainty and caution felt by the Soviet Communists after the death of Josef Stalin on March 5, 1953, six weeks after Eisenhower’s inauguration. The Korean War had effects far beyond the divided nation’s borders. It was the first war in which helicopters were used in combat and it ushered in the era of jet fighters. The conflict transformed the United States into the world’s policeman by convincing American political and military leaders that communism was indeed a global threat. Within a few years, the United States would create scores of permanent military bases around the world and organize a permanent “national security” apparatus in Washington to manage its new responsibilities, not the least of which was a growing stockpile of nuclear weaponry.

 dulles and massive re­­taliation

Like Woodrow Wilson,
 Secretary of State Dulles was a Presbyterian minister’s son whose favorite hymn was “Onward, Christian Soldiers.” S­ elf-​­righteous and humorless, he believed

Foreign Policy in the Fifties  1293


 that the United States was “born with a sense of destiny and mission” to defeat communism. His British counterparts, however, were not im­pressed with his sermonizing monologues, calling them “dull, duller, Dulles.” Dulles insisted that the Democratic policy of “containing” communism was “immoral” because it did nothing to free people from oppression. America, he argued, should work toward the “liberation” of the “captive peoples” of Eastern Europe and China. When State Department analyst George F. Kennan, architect of the containment doctrine, dismissed Dulles’s rhetoric as lunacy, Dulles fired him. Eisenhower, however, understood Kennan’s objections. He was quick to explain that the “liberation” doctrine would not involve military force. Instead, he would promote the removal of Communist control “by every peaceful means, but only by peaceful means.” Yet he did nothing to temper Dulles’s rhetoric and praised his secretary of state’s moral fervor. Dulles and Eisenhower knew that the United States could not win a ground war against the Soviet Union or Communist China, whose armies had millions more soldiers than did the United States. Nor could the administration ­afford—​­politically or ­financially—​­to sustain military expenditures at the levels required during the Korean War. So Dulles and Eisenhower crafted a strategy that came to be called “massive retaliation,” which meant using the threat of nuclear warfare (“massive retaliatory power”) to prevent Communist aggression. The strategy, they argued, would provide a “maximum deterrent at bearable cost.” Massive retaliation had major weaknesses, however. By the ­mid-​­1950s, both the United States and the Soviet Union had developed hydrogen bombs, which were 750 times as powerful as the atomic bombs dropped on Japan in 1945. A single hydrogen bomb would have a devastating global impact, yet war planners envisioned using hundreds of them. “The necessary art,” Dulles explained, was in the brinkmanship, “the ability to get to the verge without getting into war. . . . ​If you are scared to go to the brink, you are lost.” The Milwaukee Journal found Dulles’s “brinkmanship” strategy terrifying: “It is like saying that the closer you get to war the better you serve peace. It is like saying that the destiny of the human race is something to gamble with.”

 the cia’s foreign interventions

While Eisenhower and
 Dulles were publicly promoting the “liberation” of Communist nations and massive retaliation as a strategy against the Soviets, they were secretly using the new Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to manipulate world politics in covert ways that produced unintended ­consequences—​­all of them bad. The a­nti-​­colonial independence movements unleashed by the Second World War placed the United States in the awkward position of watching

 1294  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 nationalist groups around the globe revolt against British and French rule. In Iran in May 1951, the parliament seized control of the nation’s B ­ ritish-​­run oil industry. The following year, a newly elected prime minister, Mohammed Mossadegh, cut all diplomatic ties with Great Britain and insisted that Iran, not Britain, should own, sell, and profit from Iranian oil. Dulles predicted that Iran was on the verge of falling under Communist control. The CIA and the British intelligence service, MI6, then launched Operation Ajax, designed, in the words of the agency’s head, Allen Dulles (the secretary of state’s brother), to “bring about the fall of Mossadegh.” In 1954, the CIA bribed Iranian army officers and hired Iranian agents to arrest Mossadegh, who was convicted of high treason. He was imprisoned for three years, then put under house arrest until his death in 1967. In return for access to Iranian oil, the U.S. government thereafter provided massive support for the ­anti-​­Communist and increasingly authoritarian regime of the shah (king) of Iran, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, who consolidated power after the removal of Mossadegh. In the end, Operation Ajax proved to be a disaster by reinstating the incompetent and indecisive shah. The success of the ­CIA-​­engineered coup in Iran emboldened Eisenhower to authorize other secret operations to undermine “unfriendly” government re­­gimes, even if it meant aligning with corrupt dictatorships. In 1954, the target was Guatemala, a desperately poor C ­ entral American country led by ­Colonel Jacobo Arbenz Guzman. Arbenz’s ­decision to take over U.S.-owned property and industries convinced Dulles that Guatemala was falling victim to “international communism.” Dulles per­­suaded Eisenhower to approve a CIA operation to organize a secret Guatemalan army in Honduras. On June 18, 1954, aided by ­CIA-​­piloted warplanes, 150 paid “liberators” crossed the border and forced Arbenz Guzman into exile in Mexico. The United States then installed a new ruler in Guatemala who eliminated all political opposition. By secretly overthrowing elected governments to ensure that they did not join the Soviet bloc, however, the CIA operations destabilized Iran and Guatemala and created problems in the Middle East and Central America that would eventually come back to haunt the United States.

 indochina

 During the 1950s, the United States also became embroiled in Southeast Asia. Indochina, created by French imperialists in the nineteenth century out of the old kingdoms of Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam, offered a distinctive case of a­ nti-​­colonial nationalism. During the Second World War, after Japanese troops occupied the region, the Viet Minh (League for the Independence of Vietnam) waged a guerrilla resistance movement led by Ho Chi Minh, a seasoned revolutionary and passionate nationalist.

Foreign Policy in the Fifties  1295


 “Uncle Ho,” a wispy man weighing barely 100 pounds, worked sixteen hours each day toward a single goal: independence for his country. At the end of the war against Japan, the Viet Minh controlled part of northern Vietnam. On September 2, 1945, Ho Chi Minh proclaimed the creation of a Democratic Republic of Vietnam, with its capital in Hanoi. The French, like the Americans would later, underestimated the determination of Ho and the Vietnamese nationalists to maintain their independence. In 1946, the First Indochina War began when Ho’s fighters resisted French efforts to restore the colonial regime. French forces quickly regained control of the cities, while the Viet Minh controlled the countryside. Ho predicted that his forces would absorb more losses, but the French would give Ho Chi Minh Though a ruthless leader, he cultivated a public image of himself in first. When the Korean War ended, as the humble, gentle Uncle Ho, a man the United States continued its efforts of the people. to strengthen French control of Vietnam. By the end of 1953, the Eisenhower administration was paying nearly 80 percent of the cost of the French military effort. In December 1953, some 12,000 French soldiers parachuted into Dien Bien Phu, a cluster of villages in a valley ringed by mountains in northwestern Vietnam. Their plan was to build a w ­ ell-​­fortified base to lure Viet Minh guerrillas into the open and then overwhelm them with superior firepower. The French assumed that the surrounding forested hills were impassable. But slowly, more than 55,000 Viet Minh fighters equipped with Chinese Communist weapons took up positions atop the ridges overlooking the French military base. They laboriously dismantled cannons and carried them in pieces up the hills, then dug trenches and tunnels down into the valley. By March 1954, the French paratroopers found themselves surrounded. As the weeks passed, the French government pleaded with the United States to relieve the pressure on Dien Bien Phu. The National Security ­Council—​ ­Dulles, Vice President Nixon, and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of ­Staff—​ ­urged Eisenhower to use atomic bombs to aid the trapped French force.

 1296  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 Dien Bien Phu Viet Minh soldiers march French captives to a prisoner camp in Dien Bien Phu on May 7, 1954.

 Eisenhower snapped back: “You boys must be crazy. We can’t use those awful things against Asians for the second time in less than ten years. My God!” The president opposed U.S. intervention unless the British joined the effort. When they refused, Eisenhower told the French that U.S. military action in Vietnam was “politically impossible.” On May 7, 1954, the Viet Minh fighters overwhelmed the last French resistance. The catastrophic defeat caused the collapse of the French government and signaled the end of French colonial rule in Asia. On July 20, 1954, representatives of France, Britain, the Soviet Union, the People’s Republic of China, and the Viet Minh signed the Geneva Accords, which gave Laos and Cambodia their independence and divided Vietnam in two at the 17th parallel. The Geneva Accords gave the Viet Minh Communists control in the North; the French would remain south of the line until nationwide

Foreign Policy in the Fifties  1297


POSTWAR ALLIANCES: THE FAR EAST USSR

SEA OF OKHOTSK

M O N G O L I A
 MANCHURIA









NORTH KOREA

1,000 Miles


1,000 Kilometers


SEA OF JAPAN

 JAPAN

SOUTH KOREA

C H I N A


BONIN ISLANDS

Hanoi


 PHILIPPINE

THAILAND CAMBODIA

 SEA

SOUTH CHINA SOUTH SEA VIETNAM

 PHILIPPINES

 MALAYSIA

M
RA AT

 BORNEO

I


N


GUAM (U.S.)

CAROLINE ISLANDS (U.S.
Trust) 
 SU

INDIAN OCEAN

MARIANA ISLANDS

D


NEW GUINEA

SULAWESI (CELEBES)

O


N


E


S


I


 JAVA

A


WEST IRIAN
To Indonesia 
 TIMOR

 Nations having bilateral defense treaties with the U.S. Members of SEATO Communist bloc

TRUST TERR. OF NEW GUINEA
(Aust.) TERR. OF PAPUA (Aust.) CORAL SEA 
A U S T R A L I A


 How did the United States become increasingly involved in Vietnam during the fifties? ■ Why did the installation of Ngo Dinh Diem by the French and the Americans backfire and generate more conflict in Vietnam? WWN64 Figure M28_2 First proof ■

N


NORTH VIETNAM BAY OF BENGAL

IWO JIMA

CEA IC O

 LAOS

REPUBLIC OF CHINA (TAIWAN)

 CIF

BURMA (MYANMAR) EAST PAKISTAN

 PA

HONG KONG (G.B.)

 INDIA

 1298  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 elections in 1956. American and South Vietnamese representatives refused to sign the Geneva Accords, arguing that the treaties legitimized the Communist victory. After 1954, Ho Chi Minh took complete control of the government in North Vietnam, executing thousands of Vietnamese he deemed opponents. In South Vietnam, power gravitated to a new premier chosen by the French at American urging: Ngo Dinh Diem, a Catholic nationalist who had opposed both the French and the Viet Minh. In 1954, Eisenhower began providing military and economic aid to Diem. Yet Diem’s autocratic efforts to eliminate all opposition played into the hands of the Communists, who found eager recruits among the discontented South Vietnamese. By 1957, Communist guerrillas known as the Viet Cong were launching attacks on the Diem government. As the warfare intensified, the Eisenhower administration concluded that its only option was to “sink or swim with Diem.” In 1954, Eisenhower had used what he called the “falling domino” theory to explain why the United States needed to fight communism in Vietnam: “You have a row of dominos set up, you knock over the first one, and what will happen to the last one is the certainty that it will go over very quickly.” If South Vietnam were to fall to communism, he predicted, the rest of Southeast Asia would soon follow. The domino analogy assumed that communism was a monolithic global movement directed by Soviet leaders in Moscow. Yet ­anti-​­colonial insurgencies such as those in Southeast Asia were animated as much by nationalist motives as by communist ideology. The domino analogy also meant that the United States was assuming that it must police the entire world to ensure that the dominoes, no matter how small, did not begin falling. As a consequence, every insurgency around the world mushroomed into a strategic crisis.

Reelection and Foreign Crises
 As a new presidential campaign unfolded in 1956, Dwight Eisenhower still enjoyed widespread public support. But his health was beginning to deteriorate. In September 1955, he suffered a heart attack, the first of three major illnesses that would affect the rest of his presidency. In 1956, the Republicans eagerly renominated Eisenhower and Vice President Richard Nixon. The party platform endorsed Eisenhower’s moderate Republicanism, meaning balanced budgets, reduced government intervention in the economy, and an internationalist foreign policy. The Democrats turned again to the liberal Illinois leader, Adlai Stevenson.

 repression in hungary

 During the last week of the presidential campaign, fighting erupted along the Suez Canal in Egypt and in the streets of

Foreign Policy in the Fifties  1299


 Budapest, Hungary. On October 23, 1956, Hungarian nationalists, encouraged by American propaganda broadcasts through Radio Free Europe, revolted against Communist troops in Budapest. The Soviets responded with a massive attack, killing 2,000 Hungarian “freedom fighters” and forcing nearly 200,000 more to flee before installing a new puppet government. The revolution had been smothered in twelve days. Eisenhower offered his sympathy for the Hungarian people, but nothing more. His strategy in dealing with such crises was, as he later said, “Take a hard l­ine—​­and bluff.” Although he avoided war over Hungary, Eisenhower had allowed administration officials, especially Dulles, to make reckless pledges about “rolling back” communism and “liberating” Eastern Europe. “To all those suffering under Communist slavery,” Dulles promised, “let us say you can count on us.” In Hungary, the Soviets called the Eisenhower administration’s bluff. The Hungarian freedom fighters, having been led to expect U.S. support, paid with their lives. As the Soviets crushed the uprising, Hungarian rebels asked, “When are the Americans coming?” Richard Nixon cynically reassured Eisenhower that the Soviet crackdown would be beneficial in showing the world the ruthlessness of communism. The president, however, felt guilty, telling Dulles that “we have excited Hungarians for all these years” and are “now turning our backs on them when they are in a jam.” Dulles showed little concern, reminding the president that “we always have been against violent rebellion.”

 the suez war

 Eisenhower was more successful in handling an unexpected international crisis in Egypt. In 1952, an Egyptian army officer, Gamal Abdel Nasser, had overthrown the monarchy of King Farouk and set out to become the leader of the Arab world. To do so, he promised to destroy the new Israeli nation, created in 1948, and vowed to end British and French imperialism in the region. Nasser, with Soviet support, first sought to take control of the Suez Canal, the internationally managed waterway in Egypt connecting the Mediterranean and Red Seas. The canal had opened in 1869 as a joint ­French–​­Egyptian venture. From 1882 on, British troops had protected the canal as the British Empire’s “lifeline” to oil in the Middle East and to India and its other Asian colonies. When Nasser’s regime pressed for the withdrawal of the British forces, Eisenhower and Dulles supported the demand. In 1954, an ­Anglo–​­Egyptian treaty provided for the withdrawal of British troops within twenty months. In 1955, Nasser, adept at playing both sides in the cold war, announced a huge arms deal with the Soviet Union. The United States countered by offering to help Egypt finance a massive hydroelectric dam at Aswan on the Nile River. In 1956, when Nasser increased trade with the Soviet bloc and recognized the People’s Republic of China, Dulles abruptly cancelled the Aswan Dam offer.

 1300  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 Unable to retaliate directly against the United States, Nasser seized control of the F ­ rench-​­based Suez Canal Company and denied I­ srael-​­bound ships access through the canal. The British and French were furious, but they needed a pretext for military action. Israel soon provided one. On September 30, 1956, Israeli, British, and French officials secretly hatched a plan: Israel would invade Egypt and race west to the Suez Canal. The French and British would then send troops to the canal zone, posing as peacekeepers to keep Egypt and Israel separated. On October 29, 1956, Israeli paratroopers dropped into Egypt. The British and French governments then issued an ultimatum demanding that the fighting cease. When Egypt rejected the ultimatum, British warplanes began bombing Egyptian airfields. On November 5, British and French soldiers invaded the canal zone. Nasser responded by sinking all forty of the international ships then in the Suez Canal. A few days later, ­Anglo-​­French commandos and paratroopers took control of the canal. Eisenhower was furious that the three nations had hatched their scheme and attacked Egypt without informing the American government. He bluntly told Anthony Eden, the British prime minister, that he “flatly reject[ed] the thought of using force” in Egypt. And he resolved to put a stop to the invasion. “How could we possibly support Britain and France,” he asked, “if in doing so we lose the whole Arab world?” Eisenhower demanded that the British and French withdraw and that the Israelis evacuate the Sinai ­Peninsula—​­or face severe economic sanctions. That the three aggressor nations grudgingly complied on November 7 testified to Eisenhower’s strength, influence, and savvy. The Suez debacle caused the downfall of the British government and hastened the process of independence among its remaining colonies. But perhaps its major result was that the British government realized that never again would it be able to act independently of the United States. Egypt reopened the Suez Canal, and, as Eisenhower had predicted, operated it in a professional, nonpolitical manner. The Suez crisis and the Hungarian revolt led Democrat Adlai Stevenson to declare the administration’s foreign policy “bankrupt.” Eleanor Roosevelt complained that Eisenhower’s opposition to “our oldest and strongest allies . . . ​ is an ironic, strange, and horrible situation.” Most Americans, however, reasoned that the crises actually affirmed the nation’s status as the global superpower. Voters handed Eisenhower an even more lopsided victory than the one in 1952. In carrying Louisiana, Eisenhower became the first Republican to win a Lower South state since Reconstruction; nationally, he carried all but seven states and won the electoral vote 457 to 73. Eisenhower’s decisive victory, however, failed to swing a congressional majority for his party in either house.

Foreign Policy in the Fifties  1301


POSTWAR ALLIANCES: EUROPE, NORTH AFRICA, THE MIDDLE EAST FINLAND

NORWAY SWEDEN SE

NETH. LUX.

E.
 GER.

 POLAND

 CZE

 Communist bloc (Warsaw Pact)

 CH.

AUST. HUNG.

 SWITZ.

 ROMANIA

 FRANCE

 ALBANIA

 IRAQ

 RS

KUWAIT AN BAHRAIN GU LF QATAR I

U.A.R.
 (EGYPT) D

SAUDI ARABIA

A
 SE

 MALI

 NIGER



 CHAD



1,000 Miles


1,000 Kilometers


 IRAN

JORDAN PE

 LIBYA

 SYRIA

 RE

M AUR
 ITANIA

CYPRUS LEBANON ISRAEL
Suez Canal 


■


SE A

TA N

ME DITE RRAN EAN

 ALGERIA

■


 TURKEY

GREECE TUNISIA

 SEA

 SPAIN

 MOROCCO

■


BLACK SEA

 BULGARIA

 ITALY

IAN SP CA

YUGOSLAVIA PORTUGAL

 Members of METO Arab League

U S S R


A NIS


ATLANTIC OCEAN

W.
 GER.

TI C

 GH

 BEL.

L
 BA

 AF

 IRELAND

 DENMARK

GREAT BRITAIN

 Members of NATO

A


NORTH SEA

 SUDAN

WEST PAKISTAN TRUCIAL STATES

MUSCAT AND OMAN

YEMEN HADHRAMAUT

FRENCH TERR. OF AFARS AND ISSAS

 ETHIOPIA

ARABIAN SEA SOMALIA

 How did General Abdel Nasser play the United States and the Soviet Union against each other in pursuing Egypt’s goals? Why did the Israelis, French, and British attack Egypt? How was the Suez War resolved?

WWN64
Figure M28_3 First proof 
 sputnik

 On October 4, 1957, the Soviets shocked the United States by launching the first communications satellite, called Sputnik, a polished aluminum sphere the size of a beach ball. Americans panicked at the news, believing that if the Soviets could put a satellite in orbit, they could also fire a rocket with a nuclear warhead across the Pacific Ocean and detonate it on the West Coast. “It was a frightful blow,” said a radio commentator. America had grown “soft and complacent,” assuming that it was “Number One in everything.” Yet now the United States had been bested in space by its Soviet rival. Senator Lyndon B. Johnson warned that the Russians would soon be “dropping bombs on us from space like kids dropping rocks on cars from freeway overpasses.”

 1302  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 The Soviet success in space dealt a severe blow to the prestige of American science and technology, which had seemed unquestionably preeminent since the Second World War. It also changed the military balance of power. If the Soviets were so advanced in rocketry, many people reasoned, then perhaps they could hit U.S. cities with nuclear missiles. Democrats charged that the Soviets had “humiliated” the United States and launched a congressional investigation to assess the new threat to the nation’s security. “­Sputnik-​­mania” led the United States to increase defense spending and establish a crash program to enhance science education. In 1958, Congress created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) to coordinate research and development related to outer space. The same year, Congress, with Eisenhower’s support, enacted the National Defense Education Act (NDEA), which authorized large federal grants to colleges and universities to enhance education and research in mathematics, science, and modern languages, as well as for student loans and fellowships. The NDEA provided more financial aid to higher education than any other previous legislation.

 the eisenhower doctrine

 In the aftermath of the Suez crisis, Eisenhower decided that the United States must replace Great Britain and France as the guarantor of Western interests in the Middle East. In 1958, Congress approved what came to be called the Eisenhower Doctrine, a resolution that promised to extend economic and military aid to Arab nations and to use armed force if necessary to assist any such nation against Communist aggression. When Lebanon appealed to the United States to help fend off an insurgency, Eisenhower ordered 5,000 marines into the country. In October 1958, once the situation had stabilized, U.S. forces (up to 15,000 at one point) withdrew.

 crisis in berlin

 Since the Second World War, West Berlin had become an oasis of Western democracy and prosperity in Communist East Germany, while East Berlin continued to be administered by the Soviet Union. West Berlin also served as an enticing alternative to life behind the “iron curtain.” Each year, thousands of East Germans escaped to West Berlin. Nikita Khrushchev, the unpredictable Soviet leader, called West Berlin a “bone in my throat.” On November 10, 1958, Khrushchev threatened to give East Germany control of East Berlin and of the air lanes into West Berlin. After the deadline he set (May 27, 1959), Western authorities would have to deal with the S­ oviet-​ ­controlled East German government, in effect officially recognizing it, or face the possibility of another blockade of the city.

Foreign Policy in the Fifties  1303


 Nikita Khruschev A fiery speaker, the Soviet premier addresses journalists at a press conference in 1959.

 Eisenhower told Khrushchev that he “would hit the Russians” with every weapon in the American arsenal if they persisted in their efforts to intimidate West Berlin. At the same time, however, Eisenhower also sought a settlement. There was little hope of resolving the conflicting views on Berlin, but the negotiations distracted attention from the May 27 deadline, which passed almost unnoticed. In September 1959, Khrushchev and Eisenhower agreed that the time was ripe for a summit meeting.

 the ­u-​­2 summit

 The summit meeting literally crashed and burned, however, when on Sunday morning, May 1, 1960, a Soviet rocket brought down a U.S. spy plane (called the U ­ -​­2) flying over the Soviet Union. Khrushchev, embarrassed by the ability of American spy planes to enter Soviet airspace, then sprang a trap on Eisenhower. The Soviets announced only that the plane had been shot down. The U.S. government, not realizing that the Soviets had captured the pilot, said it was missing a weather plane over Turkey. It was a lie. Khrushchev announced that the Soviets had American pilot Francis Gary Powers “alive and kicking” and also had the photographs Powers had taken of Soviet military installations. On May 11, Eisenhower abandoned U.S. efforts to cover up the incident. Rather than blame others, he took personal responsibility for the spying

 1304  CHAPTER 28  Cold War America 1950–1959

 ­rogram, explaining that such illep gally obtained intelligence information was crucial to national security. At the testy summit meeting in Paris five days later, Khrushchev lectured Eisenhower for ­forty-​­five minutes before walking out. The ­U-​­2 incident set back efforts to reduce cold war tensions. Later, in 1962, Francis Gary Powers would be exchanged for a captured Soviet spy.

 communist cuba

Of all of
 Eisenhower’s crises in foreign affairs, the greatest embarrassment was Fidel Castro’s new Communist regime in Cuba, which came to power on January 1, 1959, after two years of guerrilla warfare against the corrupt U.S.-supported Fidel Castro Castro (center) became dictator, Fulgencio Batista. Castro, a Cuba’s Communist premier in 1959 after fiery young lawyer, readily embraced three years of guerrilla warfare that Soviet support, leading a CIA agent overthrew the Batista regime. to predict, “We’re going to take care of Castro just like we took care of Arbenz [in Guatemala].” The Soviets warned that any American intervention in Cuba would trigger a military response. One of Eisenhower’s last acts as president, on January 3, 1961, was to suspend diplomatic relations with Castro’s Cuba. Eisenhower also set in motion a secret CIA operation to train a force of Cuban refugees to oust Castro. It would be up to Eisenhower’s successor, John F. Kennedy, to launch the invasion.

Evaluating the Eisenhower Presidency
 During President Eisenhower’s second term, Congress added Alaska and Hawaii as the ­forty-​­ninth and fiftieth states (1959), while the nation experienced its worst economic slump since the Great Depression. Volatile issues such as civil rights, defense policy, and corrupt aides, including White House chief of staff Sherman Adams, compounded the administration’s troubles. The president’s desire to avoid divisive issues and maintain public goodwill led him at times to value harmony and popularity over justice. One observer called the Eisenhower years “the time of the great postponement” during which

Foreign Policy in the Fifties  1305


 the president left domestic and foreign policies “about where he found them in 1953.” Opinion of Eisenhower’s presidency has improved with time, however. He presided with steady ­self-​­confidence over a prosperous nation. In dealing with crises, he displayed unusually good judgment and firmness of purpose. He fulfilled his pledge to end the war in Korea, refused to intervene militarily in Indochina, and maintained the peace in the face of explosive global tensions. Eisenhower’s greatest decisions were the wars he chose to avoid. After the truce in Korea, not a single American soldier died in combat during his two administrations, something no president since has achieved. For the most part, he acted with poise, restraint, and intelligence in managing an increasingly complex cold war. If Eisenhower refused to take the lead in addressing social and racial problems, he did balance the budget while sustaining the major reforms of the New Deal. If he tolerated unemployment of as much as 7 percent, he saw to it that inflation remained minimal. Even Adlai Stevenson admitted that Ike’s victory in 1952 had been good for America. “I like Ike, too,” he said. Eisenhower’s January 17, 1961, farewell address focused on the threat posed to government integrity by “an immense military establishment and a large arms industry.” It was all the more striking for Eisenhower, a celebrated military leader, to highlight the dangers of a large “­military-​­industrial complex” exerting “unwarranted influence” in Congress and the White House. “The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist,” he warned. Eisenhower confessed that his greatest disappointment was that he could affirm only that “war has been avoided,” not that “a lasting peace is in sight.” Despite the combative language of Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, Eisenhower never promoted warfare as an instrument of foreign policy. Instead, he pledged to “do anything to achieve peace within honorable means. I’ll travel anywhere. I’ll talk to anyone.” His successors were not as successful in keeping war at bay.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 Eisenhower’s Dynamic Conservatism President Eisenhower promoted ­moderate Republicanism, or “dynamic conservatism.” While critical of excessive government spending on social programs, he expanded Social Security coverage and launched ambitious public works programs, such as the ­Federal-​­Aid Highway Act that constructed the Interstate Highway System.

•


 Growth of the U.S. Economy High levels of federal government spending continued during the postwar period. The GI Bill of Rights boosted home buying and helped many veterans attend college and enter the middle class. Consumer demand for homes, cars, and household goods fueled the economy.

•


 Critics of Mainstream Culture The Beats and many other writers and artists rebelled against what they claimed was the suffocating conformity of m ­ iddle-​­class life. Adolescents rebelled through acts of juvenile delinquency and a new form of sexually provocative music called rock ’n’ roll. Pockets of chronic poverty persisted despite ­record-​­breaking economic growth, and minorities did not prosper to the extent that white Americans did.

•


 Civil Rights Movement During the early 1950s, the NAACP mounted legal challenges in federal courts to states requiring racially segregated public schools. In Brown v. Board of Education (1954), the U.S. Supreme Court nullified the ­separate-​­but-​­equal doctrine. Many white southerners adopted a strategy of “massive resistance” against ­court-​­ordered desegregation. In response, civil rights activists used nonviolent civil disobedience to force local and state officials to allow integration, as demonstrated in the Montgomery bus boycott in Alabama and the forced desegregation of public schools in Little Rock, Arkansas. Martin Luther King organized the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) after white violence against activists in Little Rock. In 1957, the U.S. Congress passed a Civil Rights Act intended to stop discrimination against black voters in the South, but it was rarely enforced.

•


 American Foreign Policy in the 1950s Eisenhower’s first major ­foreign-​­policy accomplishment was to end the fighting in Korea. Thereafter, he kept the United States out of war and relied on secret Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) intervention, financial and military aid, and threats of massive retaliation to stem the spread of communism. Though American aid was not enough to save the French at Dien Bien Phu, Eisenhower’s belief in the “falling domino” theory deepened U.S. support for the government in South Vietnam in its war with North Vietnam and the Communist Viet Cong insurgents.



Foreign Policy in the Fifties  1307


Chronology
 Congress passes the Servicemen’s Readjustment Act (GI Bill of Rights) Alan Freed coins the term rock ’n’ roll Eisenhower wins the presidency July 1953 Armistice is reached in Korea Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas July 1954 Geneva Accords adopted December 1955 Montgomery, Alabama, bus boycott begins Congress passes the ­Federal-​­Aid Highway Act

 Soviets suppress Hungarian revolt

 In Suez War, Israel, Britain, and France attack Egypt Federal troops sent to protect students attempting to integrate Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas

 Soviet Union launches Sputnik 1 satellite 1960	­U-​­2 incident reveals that the United States is flying spy planes over the Soviet Union

Key Terms


 moderate Republicanism p. 1260

 Montgomery bus boycott p. 1285

­Federal-​­Aid Highway Act (1956)
 p. 1263

 nonviolent civil disobedience p. 1286

GI
Bill of Rights (1944) p. 1268 
Southern Christian Leadership
 Conference (SCLC) p. 1291

 suburbia p. 1269

 massive retaliation p. 1293

 baby boom p. 1274

Central Intelligence Agency
 (CIA) p. 1293

Beats p. 1278
 ­separate-​­but-​­equal p. 1282

Dien Bien Phu p. 1295


Brown v. Board of Education
(1954) p. 1283


Viet Cong p. 1298
 “falling domino” theory p. 1298

 massive resistance p. 1284

 Suez crisis p. 1300

IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




A
New ­Frontier  and a Great ­Society 1960–1968

 The Dove (1964) African American artist Romare Bearden’s collage presents a disjointed vision of a contemporary urban street scene: fragments of black bodies appear in a surreal clash of flesh and pavement, reflecting the upheaval and violence of African American life in the 1960s. At the same time, though, the titular dove presides over the scene, suggesting that a life of peace could still be in reach.

F


 or those who considered the social and political climate of the fifties dull, the following decade provided a striking contrast. The sixties were years of extraordinary social turbulence and liberal activism, tragic assassinations and painful trauma, cultural conflict and youth rebellion. Assassins killed four of the most important leaders of the time: John F. Kennedy, Malcolm X, Martin Luther King Jr., and Robert F. Kennedy. The “politics of expectation” that a British journalist said shone brightly in Kennedy’s short tenure as president did not die with him in November 1963. Instead, Kennedy’s idealistic commitment to improving America’s quality of ­life—​­for e­ veryone—​­was given new meaning and momentum by his successor, Texan Lyndon B. Johnson, whose war on poverty and Great Society programs outstripped Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal in their scope and promises. Johnson’s energy and legislative savvy resulted in a blizzard of new federal programs as many social issues that had been ignored or postponed for ­decades—​­civil rights for minorities, equality for women, gay rights, medical insurance, federal aid to the p ­ oor—​­forced their way to the forefront of national concerns. In the end, however, Johnson promised too much. The Great Society programs fell victim to unrealistic hopes, poor execution, and the nation’s deepening involvement in Vietnam. The deeply entrenched assumptions of the cold war led the nation into the longest, most controversial, and least successful war in its history to that point.

 focus questions 1. What were President John F. Kennedy’s efforts to contain communism abroad and pursue civil rights and other social programs at home?

 2. What were the strategies and achievements of the civil rights movement in the 1960s? What divisions emerged among its activists during the decade?

 3. What were Lyndon B. Johnson’s major war on poverty and Great Society initiatives? How did they impact American society?

 4. What were Presidents Kennedy and Johnson’s motivations for deepening America’s military involvement in the Vietnam War?

 5. What were the issues that propelled Richard Nixon to victory in the 1968 presidential election?



