 304  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 At the end of the Revolutionary War, George Washington predicted that Americans would move westward across the mountains into the Ohio Valley “faster than any other ever did, or any one would imagine.” By 1840, more than 40 percent of the population lived west of the Appalachian Mountains in eight new states. “The woods are full of new settlers,” marveled a traveler in upstate New York in 1805. Thomas Jefferson described the United States in the early nineteenth century as an “empire of liberty” spreading westward. In 1800, people eager to own their own farms bought 67,000 acres of ­government-​­owned land; the next year, they bought 498,000 acres. Native Americans fiercely resisted the invasion of their ancestral lands but ultimately succumbed to a federal government (and army) determined to relocate them. Most whites, however, were less concerned about taking land owned by Indians and Hispanics than they were about seizing their own economic opportunities. Isaac Weld, a British visitor, remarked that the Americans at the beginning of the nineteenth century were a “restless people, always on the lookout for something better or more profitable.” Restless mobility and impatient striving soon came to define the American way of life.

Jeffersonian Republicanism
 On March 4, 1801, the ­fifty-​­seven-​­year-​­old Thomas Jefferson was inaugurated without incident, leading some people to call his fiercely contested election “the peaceful revolution.” It was the first democratic election in modern history that saw the orderly transfer of power from one political party to another. Jefferson’s installation marked the start of a long period of supremacy of the nation’s political life by ­Republicans—​­and Virginians. “Virginia literally dominates” the government, one Federalist claimed. The nation’s most populous state, Virginia supplied a quarter of the Republican congressmen in the House of Representatives that convened in early 1801. Politics in the young republic was becoming increasingly sectional. Another Federalist, former secretary of state Timothy Pickering of Massachusetts, acknowledged that the northeastern states, where Federalism was centered, could no longer “reconcile their habits, views, and interests with those of the South and West,” two f­ ast-​­growing regions that were beginning to rule the nation with “a rod of iron.” Jefferson was the first president inaugurated in the new national capital of Washington, District of Columbia. The unfinished city of barely 3,000 people was crisscrossed with muddy avenues connecting a few buildings clustered around two centers, Capitol Hill and the “President’s Palace.”

Jeffersonian Republicanism  305


 The new federal city Plan of Washington, D.C., from 1792.

 the “people’s president”

 During his inauguration, Jefferson emphasized his connection to the “plain and simple” ways of the “common” people. Instead of wearing a ceremonial sword and riding in an elegant h ­ orse-​ ­drawn carriage, as George Washington and John Adams had done at their inaugurations, Jefferson, a widower, left his boardinghouse on New Jersey Avenue and walked to the Capitol building, escorted by members of Congress and Virginia militiamen. He read his inaugural address in a “femininely soft,” ­high-​­pitched voice, then took the presidential oath administered by Chief Justice John Marshall, his Virginia cousin, with whom he shared a cordial hatred. Jefferson’s deliberate display of republican simplicity set the tone for his administration. He wanted Americans to notice the difference between the monarchical style of the Federalists and the ­down-​­to-​­earth simplicity and frugality of the Republicans. As president, he did not wear fancy clothes or host elegant parties. Jefferson often answered the door of the President’s House himself, wearing a robe and slippers. A French official reported that the president “greets guests in slovenly clothes and without the least formality.” Charming and brilliant, Jefferson was trained as an attorney, read Greek and Latin, and was head of the American Philosophical Society. He was also an

 306  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 inventive genius of wide learning and many s­ elf-​­taught abilities, including “my delight,” architecture. Jefferson helped design the state capitol in Richmond, Virginia, the new University of Virginia, and his t­ hirty-​­three-​­room mountaintop mansion called Monticello (“Little Mountain”), near Charlottesville. In his eloquent inaugural address, the tall, thin Jefferson, his red hair now streaked with grey, imagined America as “a rising nation, spread over a wide and fruitful land, traversing all the seas with the productions of their industry, engaged in commerce with nations” across the globe. Although determined to overturn many Federalist policies and programs, he urged Americans to work together. “We are all R ­ epublicans—​­we are all Federalists,” Jefferson stressed, noting that “every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle.” It was a splendid message, but Jefferson’s appeal for a united nation proved illusory, in part because he retained his own fierce partisanship and bitter a­ nti-​ ­Federalist prejudices. In a letter to a British friend, Jefferson described the Federalists as “insane” men: “Their leaders are a hospital of incurables.” He still feared that Federalists were determined to destroy “the liberties of the people” and convert the republic into a monarchy (he called them “monocrats”).

 a more democratic america

 The inauguration of Thomas Jefferson ushered in a more democratic political culture in which common people played a much larger role. During and after the Revolutionary War, an increasing proportion of white males, especially small farmers and wage laborers, artisans, mechanics, and apprentices, gained the right to vote or hold office as states reduced or eliminated requirements that voters and candidates own a specified amount of property. An enlarged and more engaged citizenry of white male voters, many of them landless and illiterate, was not universally welcomed, however. “Since the war,” a Massachusetts Federalist complained, “blustering ignorant men . . . ​ have been attempting to push themselves into office.” A Virginian was greatly worried by the rising evidence of the “turbulence and follies of democracy.” Of all the states, South Carolina steadfastly resisted efforts to shift political power away from the slaveholding planter elite to the working poor. Many among the founding generation of political leaders, especially Federalists but some Republicans as well, became openly ­anti-​­democratic, worried that men of humble origins, some of whom were uneducated and illiterate, were replacing the social and political elite (“natural aristocracy”) in the state legislatures. As the nineteenth century unfolded, voters were not content to be governed solely by “their betters”; they wanted to do the governing themselves. George Cabot, a Boston Federalist, called unchecked democracy “the govern-

Jeffersonian Republicanism  307


 ment of the worst.” He was convinced that Jefferson was going to unleash “the terrible evils of democracy.” When the “pot boils,” another Federalist noted, the “scum will rise.” Over half of the members of the ­Republican-​­controlled Congress elected in 1800 were ­first-​­time legislators little known outside their districts. Before long, Federalist John Adams grumbled, even the poorest men “will demand an equal voice with any other.” Adams so detested the democratic forces transforming politics and social life that he despaired for the nation’s future: “Oh my Country,” he moaned, “how I mourn over . . . ​thy contempt of Wisdom and Virtue and overweening admiration of fools and knaves! the never failing effects of democracy!”

 a contradictory genius

 Thomas Jefferson, who owned hundreds of slaves, was a bundle of contradictions and inconsistencies. He was progressive and enlightened in some areas, ­self-​­serving and hypocritical in others. Jefferson, who had written in the Declaration of Independence that “all men are created equal,” also bought, bred, flogged, and sold slaves while calling slavery “an abominable crime” and “unremitting despotism.” He never freed his slaves for the simple reason that he was too dependent on their forced

 The Capitol building This 1806 watercolor was painted by the building’s architect, Benjamin Henry Latrobe, and inscribed to Thomas Jefferson. A prominent dome would be added later, after the building was damaged in the War of 1812.

 308  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 labor. “We have the wolf by the ear,” he confessed, “and we can neither hold him nor safely let him go.” Jefferson was also a man of expensive tastes who repeatedly condemned national indebtedness while deepening his own indebtedness. Although he celebrated the ideal of republican simplicity, he actually lived in an elegant mansion (Monticello) in Virginia where he indulged expensive tastes in food, wine, books, artwork, silverware, and ­furnishings—​­all of which eventually bankrupted him. As president, Jefferson, the foremost defender of states’ rights and the greatest critic of executive power, would display his peculiarly divided nature by exercising extraordinary presidential authority in negotiating the Louisiana Purchase and in enforcing a nationwide embargo shutting off all trade with warring Europe. Such inconsistencies led Federalists in the Massachusetts legislature to put Jefferson on trial for hypocrisy in 1805.

 jefferson in office The imperfect Thomas Jefferson was a consistently hardworking new president, spending ten to thirteen hours each day on his executive duties, often engaged in lobbying congressmen to support his legislation. In Jefferson’s cabinet, the leading figures were Secretary of State James Madison, his best friend, Virginia neighbor, and political ally, and Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin, a Pennsylvania Republican congressman whose financial skills had won him the respect of Federalists and Republicans alike. In filling lesser offices, however, Jefferson often succumbed to pressure from the Republicans to remove Federalists, only to discover that there were few qualified candidates to replace some of them. When Gallatin asked if he might appoint able women to some posts, Jefferson revealed the limits of his liberalism: “The appointment of a woman to office is an innovation for which the public is not prepared, nor am I.” marbury v. madison

 In one a­ rea—​­the federal j­ udiciary—​­the new president decided to remove most of the offices altogether, in part because the court system was the only branch of the government still controlled by Federalists. In 1802, at Jefferson’s urging, the ­Republican-​­controlled Congress repealed the Judiciary Act of 1801, which the Federalists had passed just before the transfer of power to the Jeffersonian Republicans. The Judiciary Act was intended to ensure Federalist control of the judicial system by creating sixteen federal circuit courts and ­appointing—​­for ­life—​­a new Federalist judge for each. Jefferson’s controversial effort to repeal the judgeships sparked the pathbreaking case of Marbury v. Madison (1803).

Jeffersonian Republicanism  309


 The case went to the Supreme Court, which was presided over by Chief Justice John Marshall, a gifted Virginia Federalist. Marshall served at Valley Forge during the Revolutionary War, attended law school at the College of William and Mary, and became a respected Richmond attorney. In 1788, he helped Madison convince Virginians to ratify the U.S. Constitution. He also later served in Congress and became secretary of state under President Adams, who appointed him chief justice early in 1801. Blessed with a keen intellect and an analytical mind, Marshall was a fierce critic and lifelong enemy of his cousin Thomas Jefferson, whom he considered a w ­ ar-​­shirking aristocrat posing as a democrat. During the 1790s, John Jay, the first chief justice, admitted that the Supreme Court did not have “the energy, weight, and dignity” necessary to serve its role in balancing the powers of Congress and the presidency. Marshall set out to fix the problem. By the time he completed t­hirty-​­five years of service on the Supreme Court (1801–1835), spanning the terms of five presidents, he had made it the most powerful court in the world. The Marbury case involved the appointment of the Maryland Federalist William Marbury, a prominent land speculator, as justice of the peace in the District of Columbia. Marbury’s letter of appointment, called a commission, signed by President Adams two days before he left office, was still undelivered when James Madison took office as secretary of state, and Jefferson directed him to withhold it. Marbury then sued for a court order directing Madison to deliver his commission. In the unanimous Marbury v. Madison ruling, Marshall and the Court held that Marbury deserved to be awarded his judgeship. Then, however, ­Marshall denied that the Court had jurisdiction in the case. The Federal Judiciary Act of 1789, which gave the Court authority in such proceedings, was unconstitutional, Marshall ruled, because the Constitution specified that the Court should have original jurisdiction only in cases involving foreign ambassadors or nations. The Court, therefore, could issue no order in the case. With one bold stroke, Marshall had remarkably elevated the stature of the Court by reprimanding Jefferson while avoiding an awkward confrontation with an administration that might have defied his order. More important, the ruling subtly struck down a federal law, the Judiciary Act of 1789, on the grounds that it violated provisions of the Constitution, the “fundamental and paramount law of the nation.” Marshall stressed that the Supreme Court was “emphatically” empowered “to say what the law is,” even if it meant overruling both Congress and the president. The Marbury decision granted to the Supreme Court a power not mentioned in the Constitution: the right of what came to be called judicial review,

 310  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 or deciding whether acts of Congress (and the presidency) are constitutional. Marshall established that the Supreme Court was the final authority in all constitutional interpretations. President Jefferson fumed over what he called Marshall’s “irregular” ruling. Giving judges “the right to decide which laws are constitutional, and what not,” he wrote Abigail Adams, “would make the judiciary a despotic branch.” Jefferson, however, would lose that argument. Although the Court did not declare another federal law unconstitutional for fi ­ fty-​­four years, it has since struck down more than 150 acts of Congress and more than 1,100 “unconstitutional” acts of state legislatures, all in an effort to protect individual liberties and civil rights.

 jefferson’s economic policies

Although John Marshall got
 the better of Thomas Jefferson in court, the president’s first term did include a series of triumphs. Surprisingly, he did not dismantle Alexander Hamilton’s Federalist economic program, despite his harsh criticism of it and his ongoing feud with Hamilton. Instead, following the advice of Treasury secretary Albert Gallatin, Jefferson learned to accept the national bank as essential to economic growth. Jefferson, however, did reject Hamilton’s argument that a federal debt was a national “blessing.” If the debt were not eliminated, Jefferson told Treasury secretary Gallatin, “we shall be committed to the English career of debt, corruption, and rottenness, closing with revolution.” To pay down the government debt, Jefferson slashed the federal budget. In his first message to Congress in 1801, he criticized the national government as being “too complicated, too expensive.” He fired all federal tax collectors and cut the military budget in half, saying that state militias and small navy gunboats provided the nation with adequate protection against foreign enemies. Jefferson’s was the first national government in history to reduce its own scope and power. Jefferson also repealed the whiskey tax that Hamilton and George Washington had implemented in 1791. In doing so, he admitted that he had a peculiar affection for the “men from the Western side of the mountains”—grain farmers and backwoods distillers for whom whiskey was often the primary source of income. The prosperous economy helped the federal budget absorb the loss of the whiskey taxes. In addition, revenues from federal tariffs on imports rose with rising European trade, and the sale of g­ overnment-​­owned western lands soared as Americans streamed westward. Ohio’s admission to the Union in 1803 increased the number of states to seventeen.

Jeffersonian Republicanism  311


 Burning of the Frigate Philadelphia Lieutenant William Decatur set fire to the captured Philadelphia during the United States’ standoff with Tripoli over the enslavement of American sailors in north Africa.

 ending the slave trade

 While shrinking the federal budget and reducing the national debt, Jefferson in 1807 signed a landmark bill that outlawed the importation of enslaved Africans into the United States, in part because southerners had come to believe that A ­ frican-​­born slaves were more prone to revolt. The new law took effect on January 1, 1808, the earliest date possible under the Constitution. At the time, South Carolina was the only state that still permitted the purchase of enslaved Africans. For years to come, however, illegal traffic in African slaves would continue; as many as 300,000 were smuggled into the United States between 1808 and 1861.

 the barbary pirates

 Upon assuming the presidency, Jefferson promised “peace, commerce, and honest friendship with all nations,” but some nations preferred war. On the Barbary Coast of North Africa, the Islamic rulers of Morocco, Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli had for years engaged in piracy and extortion, preying upon unarmed European and American merchant ships. The U.S. government made numerous blackmail payments to these Barbary pirates in exchange for captured American ships and crews.

 312  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 In 1801, however, the ruler of Tripoli upped his blackmail demands and declared war on the United States. Jefferson sent warships to blockade Tripoli. “Nothing will stop these pirates,” he wrote, “but the presence of an armed force.” A sporadic naval war dragged on until 1805, punctuated in 1804 by the notable exploit of Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, who slipped into Tripoli Harbor by night and set fire to the frigate Philadelphia, which had been captured after it ran aground. The Tripoli ruler finally settled for a $60,000 ransom and released the Philadelphia’s crew. It was still blackmail (called “tribute” in the nineteenth century), but less than the $300,000 the pirates had demanded and much less than the cost of an outright war.

Western Expansion
 Thomas Jefferson often looked to the West for his inspiration, across the Appalachian Mountains and even across the Mississippi River, areas that he himself never visited. Only by expanding westward, he believed, could America avoid becoming overcrowded along the Atlantic coast. Westward expansion, however, meant invading areas long inhabited by Native A ­ mericans—​­and the Spanish and French.

 the louisiana purchase

 In 1801, American diplomats in Europe heard rumors that Spain had been forced to transfer its huge Louisiana province to its domineering ally, France, now led by the brilliant Napoléon Bonaparte. Short of stature but a giant on the battlefield, Napoléon was a ­war-​­loving military genius who had become the most feared ruler in the world: the conqueror of Egypt and Italy. After taking control of the French government, the ambitious Napoléon set out to restore his country’s North American empire (Canada and Louisiana) that had been lost to Great Britain in 1763. President Jefferson referred to Napoléon as both a “scoundrel” and “a gigantic force” threatening the future of the United States. A weak Spain in control of the territory west of the Mississippi River could have been tolerated, Jefferson explained, but Napoleonic France in control of the Mississippi Valley would lead to “eternal friction” and eventually war with the United States. To prevent France from seizing control of the Mississippi River (the “greatest of evils”), Jefferson sent New Yorker Robert R. Livingston to Paris in 1801 to serve as the U.S. ambassador to France. The president told Livingston that his primary objective should be to acquire the port city of New ­Orleans, strategically situated at the mouth of the Mississippi, the magisterial river that begins in northern Minnesota and flows 2,552 miles south to the Gulf of M ­ exico. Jefferson told Livingston that purchasing New Orleans and West Florida (the territory along the Gulf coast from Pensacola, Florida, to New

Jeffersonian Republicanism  313


 Orleans) was of absolute importance, for “the day that France takes possession of New ­Orleans, . . . ​we must marry ourselves to the British fleet and nation” for protection against Napoleonic France. Over the years, New Orleans under Spanish and then French rule had become a prosperous port city and a dynamic crossroads where people of all races and classes intermingled. For years, Americans living in Tennessee and Kentucky had begged the American government to ensure that they could send their crops and goods down the river to New Orleans. In early 1803, Jefferson grew so concerned about the stalled negotiations in Paris over New Orleans that he sent James Monroe, his trusted friend and Virginia neighbor, to undertake “an extraordinary mission” to assist the ­sixty-​ ­six-​­year-​­old Livingston in Paris. “All eyes, all hopes, are now fixed on you,” Jefferson told him as he prepared to depart for France. No sooner had Monroe arrived than the French made a startling proposal: Napoléon offered to sell not just New Orleans but all of the immense, unmapped Louisiana Territory, from the Mississippi River west to the Rocky Mountains and from the Canadian border south to the Gulf of Mexico. The unpredictable Napoléon had reversed himself because the large French army on the Caribbean island of ­Saint-​­Domingue (Haiti) had been decimated by epidemics of malaria and yellow fever and by a massive slave revolt led by Touissant L’Ouverture, who had proclaimed the Republic of Haiti. It was the first successful slave rebellion in history, and it panicked slaveholders in the southern states who feared that news of the Haitian revolt would spread to America. Napoléon had tried to regain control of ­Saint-​­Domingue because it was a phenomenally profitable source of coffee and sugar. He also had hoped to connect New Orleans and Haiti as a first step in expanding France’s North American trading empire. But after losing more than 50,000 soldiers to disease and warfare, Napoléon decided to cut his losses by selling the Louisiana Territory to the United States and using the proceeds to finance his “inevitable” next war with Great Britain. By the Treaty of Cession, dated May 2, 1803, the United States agreed to pay $15 million for the entire Louisiana Territory. When Livingston and Monroe asked Charles-Maurice de Talleyrand, Napoléon’s negotiator, about the precise extent of the territory they were buying, the Frenchman replied: “I can give you no direction. You have made a noble bargain for yourselves. I suppose you will make the most of it.” A delighted Livingston, the U.S. negotiator, said that “from this day the United States take their place among the powers of the first rank.” The arrival of the signed treaty in Washington, D.C., presented Jefferson, who for years had harshly criticized the Federalists for stretching the ­meaning of the Constitution, with a frustrating political dilemma. Nowhere did the Constitution mention the purchase of territory. Was such an action even legal?

 314  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 Jefferson admitted that the purchase was “not authorized by the Constitution,” but in the end, his desire to double the size of the American republic trumped his concerns about an unconstitutional exercise of executive power. Acquiring the Louisiana Territory, the president explained, would serve “the immediate interests of our Western citizens” and promote “the peace and security of the nation in general” by removing the French threat and creating a protective buffer separating the United States from the rest of the world. Jefferson also imagined that the region might be a place to relocate Indian nations or freed slaves, since he feared a multiracial society. Besides, Jefferson and his Republican supporters argued, if the nation waited to pass a constitutional amendment to enable the acquisition, Napoléon might change his mind. New England Federalists strongly opposed the purchase, however. Fisher Ames of Massachusetts argued that the Louisiana Territory was a waste of money, a howling “wilderness unpeopled with any beings except wolves and wandering Indians.” Ames feared that adding a vast new empire in the West would weaken New England and the Federalist party, since the new western states were likely to vote Republican. New England Federalists also worried that new territories would likely be settled by southern slaveholders who were Jeffersonian Republicans. As a newspaper editorialized, “Will [Jefferson and the] Republicans, who glory in their sacred regard to the rights of human nature, purchase an immense wilderness for the purpose of cultivating it with the labor of slaves?” In a reversal of traditional stances, Federalists found themselves arguing for strict construction of the Constitution in opposing the Louisiana Purchase. “We are to give money of which we have too little for land of which we already have too much,” argued a Bostonian in the Columbian Centinel. A Pennsylvania Federalist declared that Jefferson and the Republicans in Congress had “done more to strengthen the executive [branch] than Federalists dared think of even in [George] Washington’s day.” Eager to close the deal, Jefferson called a special session of Congress on October 17, 1803, at which the Senate ratified the treaty with the French by an overwhelming vote of 26–6. On December 20, 1803, U.S. officials took formal possession of the sprawling Louisiana Territory (the Indians living there were not consulted). The purchase included 875,000 square miles of land (529,402,880 acres). Six states in their entirety, and most or part of nine more, would eventually be carved out of the Louisiana Purchase, from Louisiana north to Minnesota and west to Montana. The Louisiana Purchase was the most significant event of Jefferson’s presidency and one of the most important developments in American history. It spurred western exploration and expansion, and especially enticed

Jeffersonian Republicanism  315


 cotton growers to settle in the Old S­ outhwest—​­Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana. Andrew Jackson, a slaveholding planter in Tennessee, congratulated Jefferson on acquiring the Louisiana Territory. “Every face wears a smile, and every heart leaps with joy.”

 lewis and clark

 To learn more about the Louisiana Territory’s geography, plants, and animals, as well as its prospects for trade and agriculture, Jefferson asked Congress to fund a scientific expedition. The president then appointed two army officers, Virginians Meriwether Lewis and William Clark, to lead what came to be known as the Lewis and Clark expedition. The ­twenty-​­nine-​­year-​­old Lewis was Jefferson’s private secretary. Jefferson admired his “boldness, enterprise, and discretion.” Clark was also an accomplished frontiersman. He was, it was said, “a youth of solid and promising parts, and as brave as Caesar.” On a rainy May morning in 1804, Lewis and Clark’s “Corps of Discovery,” numbering nearly fifty men, set out from a small village near the former French town of St. Louis in several large canoes (called pirogues) and one large ­flat-​­bottomed keelboat filled with food, weapons, medicine, and gifts to share with Indians. They traveled up the Missouri River through some of the most rugged wilderness in North America. Unsure of where they were going and what or whom they might encounter, they were eager to discover if the Missouri, the longest river in North America, made its way to the Pacific Ocean.

 One of Lewis and Clark’s maps In their journals, Lewis and Clark sketched detailed maps of unexplored regions in the Far West.

 316  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 Six months later, near the Mandan Sioux villages in what would become North Dakota, the Corps of Discovery built Fort Mandan and wintered in relative comfort, sending downriver a barge loaded with maps, soil samples, the skins and skeletons of weasels, wolves and antelope, and live specimens of prairie dogs and magpies, previously unknown in America. In the spring of 1805, the Corps of Discovery added two guides: a French fur trader and his remarkable wife, a young Shoshone woman named Sacagawea. In appreciation for Lewis and Clark’s help in delivering her baby,

EXPLORATIONS OF THE LOUISIANA PURCHASE, 1804–1807 C A N A D A
w i s , 1806 
Fort
Mandan


 COUNTRY

 NA



 TE



 RRI



T O RY


 so u Mis

 r

 IA

 ar

Rive


D


,1


Cl


 k,

R i v er


 ri

LOUISIANA
Pikes Peak 
 r ive Colorado R

A I N S
U N T
M O


H
I S
A N
S P


Great
Salt
Lake


Pl
 at te

 uperior ke S

 IN

 k ar

 er

Y
C K
R O


Riv


La


Cl


 ak Sn

 e

Lemhi
Pass


 nd L e wis a

 iv Yellowstone R rk, 18 Cla

Lewis and


 bia R i v e r

St. Louis


 PURCHASE

Santa Fe


P


O
S
S


E


G ra


S


 nd

 e

I O


San Antonio


 TN

MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY

GULF OF MEXICO

M E X I C O


 KY

ORLEANS TERRITORY
New Orleans 
S


Lewis and Clark,
1804–1806


Rive
 r

River


N


 OCEAN

Ri


 o

S


PA C I F I C

Red


Ar
 ka ns as

Miss
 issi ppi River

 lu m

 er

Co


Le


Salmon
River


Lake Michigan


 Le OREGON rk w i s an d Cla

Fort
Clatsop






Mobile


WEST FLORIDA 300
Miles 
300 Kilometers


 ■ How did the United States acquire the Louisiana Purchase? ■ What was the mission of Lewis and Clark’s expedition? WWN64 ■ What were the consequences of Lewis and Clark’s widely circulated reports about Figure M7_1 the western territory? First proof 31p0 x 28p0

Jeffersonian Republicanism  317


 Sacagawea provided crucial assistance as a guide, translator, and negotiator as they explored the Upper Missouri and encountered various Native Americans, most of whom were “hospitable, honest, and sincere people.” The Lewis and Clark expedition crossed the Rocky Mountains on foot and on horseback and used canoes to descend the Snake and Columbia Rivers to the Pacific Ocean, where they arrived in November 1805. Near the future site of Astoria, Oregon, at the mouth of the Columbia River, they built Fort Clatsop, where they spent a cold, rainy winter. The following spring they headed back, having been forced to eat their dogs and horses, and having weathered blizzards, broiling ­ sun, fierce rapids, raging grizzly bears, numerous injuries and illnesses, and swarms of mosquitoes. The expedition returned to St. Louis in 1806, having been gone nearly 28 months and covered some 8,000 miles. Lewis and Clark brought back extensive journals describing their experiences and observations while detailing some 180 plants and 125 animals. Their maps attracted traders and trappers to the region and led the United States to claim the Oregon Country by right of discovery and exploration.

 political schemes

 Sacagawea Of the many memorials devoted to Sacagawea, this statue by artist Alice Cooper was unveiled at the 1905 Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition.

 The Lewis and Clark expedition and the Louisiana Purchase strengthened Jefferson’s already solid support in the South and West. In New England, however, Federalists panicked because they assumed that new states carved out of the Louisiana Territory would be dominated by Jeffersonian Republicans. To protect their interests, Federalists hatched a

 318  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 c­ omplicated scheme to link New York politically to New England by trying to elect Vice President Aaron Burr, Jefferson’s ambitious Republican rival, as governor of New York. The cunning Burr chose to drop his Republican affiliation and run for governor as an independent candidate. Several leading Federalists opposed the scheme, however. Alexander Hamilton urged Federalists not to vote for Burr, calling him “a dangerous man, and one who ought not to be trusted with the reins of government.” Burr ended up losing the election to the Republican candidate, who had been endorsed by Jefferson. A furious Burr blamed Hamilton for his defeat and challenged him to a duel. At dawn on July 11, 1804, the two met near Weehawken, New Jersey on the Hudson River above New York City. Hamilton, whose son had been killed in a duel at the same location, fired first but intentionally missed as a demonstration of his religious and moral principles. Burr showed no such scruples. He shot Hamilton in the hip; the bullet ripped through his liver and lodged in his spine. He died the next day. Burr, who was still the vice president, was charged with murder by New Jersey authorities. He fled to South Carolina, where his daughter lived, hoping to ride out the storm.

 jefferson reelected

 In the meantime, the presidential campaign of 1804 began. A congressional caucus of Republicans renominated Jefferson and chose George Clinton of New York as the vice presidential candidate. To avoid the problems associated with parties running multiple candidates for the presidency, in 1803 Congress had ratified the Twelfth Amendment to the Constitution, stipulating that the members of the Electoral College must use separate ballots to vote for the president and vice president. Given Jefferson’s ­first-​­term achievements, the Federalist candidates, South Carolinian Charles C. Pinckney and New Yorker Rufus King, never had a chance, for Jefferson had accomplished much: the Louisiana Purchase, a prosperous economy, and a reduced federal government budget and national debt. A Massachusetts Republican claimed that the United States was “never more respected abroad. The people were never more happy at home.” Jefferson and Clinton won 162 of 176 electoral votes, carrying every state but Delaware and Connecticut.

 divisions in the republican party

 Jefferson’s landslide victory, however, created problems within his own party. Freed from strong ­opposition—​­Federalists made up only a quarter of the new Congress in 1805—the Republican majority began to divide into two warring factions, one

Jeffersonian Republicanism  319


 calling itself the Jeffersonian or Nationalist Republicans, and the other, the ­anti-​­Jeffersonian southern Republicans, choosing the name Old Republicans. Fiery young Virginian John Randolph was initially a loyal Jeffersonian, but over time he emerged as the most colorful of the radically conservative “Old Republicans”—a group formed mostly of southern agrarian political purists for whom protecting states’ rights was more important than the need for a strong national government. Randolph, for example, detested Madison for his role in drafting and winning approval of the U.S. Constitution and broke with Jefferson over the Louisiana Purchase. The imperious Randolph, another Jefferson cousin, stood out as the Senate’s most colorful character. He often entered the chamber wearing a long, white coat and white boots with spurs, carrying a horsewhip, and trailed by a hunting hound that would sleep under his desk. He lubricated his speeches with gulps of whiskey. Randolph quickly became the wittiest insulter in Congress, famously ordering opponents to sit down and shut up (he and Henry Clay would engage in a duel in 1826). He accurately described himself as an ­old-​­fashioned “aristocrat. I love liberty. I hate equality.” Randolph and other Old Republicans were best known for what they opposed: any compromise with the Federalists, any expansion of federal authority at the expense of states’ rights, any new taxes or tariffs, and any change in the South’s agrarian way of life rooted in slavery. The Jeffersonian Republicans, on the other hand, were more moderate, pragmatic, and nationalistic. They were willing to compromise their states’ rights principles to maintain national tariffs on imports, preserve a national bank, and stretch the “implied powers” of the Constitution to accommodate the Louisiana Purchase. Such compromises, said Randolph, were catastrophic. “The old republican party,” he claimed, “is already ruined, past redemption.”

 the burr conspiracy

 Meanwhile, Aaron Burr continued to plot and scheme. After the controversy over his duel with Alexander Hamilton subsided, he tried to carve out his own personal empire in the West. What came to be known as the Burr Conspiracy was hatched when Burr and General James Wilkinson, an old friend then serving as senior general of the U.S. Army and secretly being paid by the Spanish for spying, plotted to use a w ­ ell-​­armed force of volunteers to separate part of the Louisiana Territory from the Union and declare it an independent republic, with New Orleans as its capital and Burr as its ruler. Burr claimed that “the people of the western country were ready for revolt.”

 320  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 In late 1806, Burr floated down the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers toward New Orleans with 100 volunteers, only to have Wilkinson turn on him and alert Jefferson to the scheme. The president ordered that Burr be arrested. ­ Militiamen captured Burr in ­ February 1807 and took him to ­Richmond, Virginia, where, in August, he was tried for treason before Chief Justice John Marshall. Jefferson declared that Burr was guilty of trying to separate “the western states from us, of adding Mexico to them, and of placing himself at their head.” In the end, however, Burr was acquitted because John Marshall instructed the jury that a verdict of treason required an “act of war” against the United States confirmed by at least two witnesses. Aaron Burr Burr graduated from what Again, Jefferson was disgusted with is now Princeton University, where Marshall’s ruling. “It now appears we he changed his course of study from have no law but the will of the judge,” theology to law. he wrote a friend. The president ­considered proposing a constitutional amendment to limit the power of the judiciary and even thought about asking Congress to impeach the chief justice. In the end, however, he did nothing. With further charges pending, the slippery Burr, deeply in debt, skipped bail and took refuge first in England, then in France. He returned to America in 1812 and resumed practicing law in New York.

War in Europe
 In the spring of 1803, soon after completing the sale of Louisiana to America, Napoléon Bonaparte declared war on Great Britain. The massive conflict would last eleven years and eventually involve all of Europe. Most Americans wanted to remain neutral and trade with both sides in the war, but the British and French were determined to keep that from happening.

War in Europe  321


 naval harassment

During
 1805, the spreading war in Europe reached a stalemate: The French army controlled most of Europe and the British navy dominated the seas. In May 1806, Britain issued a series of official declarations called Orders in Council which imposed a naval blockade of the entire European coast to prevent merchant ships from other nations, including the United States, from making port in France. Soon, British warships began seizing American merchant ships bound for France. An angry Congress responded Preparation for War to Defend by passing the N ­ on-​­Importation Act, Commerce Shipbuilders, like those which banned the importation of Brit- pictured here constructing the ish goods. In early 1807, Napoléon Philadelphia, played an important role in announced that French warships America’s early wars. would blockade the ports of Great Britain. The British responded that they would no longer allow any foreign ships to trade with the ­French-​­controlled islands in the Caribbean. Soon thereafter, British warships appeared along the American coast, stopping and searching U.S. merchant vessels as they headed for the Caribbean or Europe. The tense situation posed a terrible dilemma for American shippers. If they agreed to British demands to stop trading with the French, the French would retaliate by seizing U.S. vessels headed to and from Great Britain, and if they agreed to French demands that they stop trading with the British, the British would seize American ships headed to and from France. Lured by high profits, many American merchants decided to risk becoming victims of the A ­ nglo-​ ­French war. Many of them paid a high price for their pursuit of overseas profits. During 1807, hundreds of American ships and their cargoes were captured by British and French warships.

 impressment

 For American sailors, the danger on the high seas was heightened by the practice of impressment, whereby British warships stopped U.S. vessels, boarded them, and kidnapped sailors they claimed were British citizens. American merchant ships attracted British deserters because they paid seamen more than twice as much as did the Royal Navy; fully half of all sailors on American ships, about 9,000 men, had been born in Britain.

 322  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 When the British stopped and searched American ships, they often did not bother to determine the citizenship of those they “impressed” into service. As a British naval captain explained, “It is my duty to keep my ship manned, & I will do so wherever I find men that speak the same language with me.” Between 1803 and 1811, some 6,200 American sailors were “impressed” into the British navy.

 the chesapeake incident (1807)

 The crisis boiled over on June 22, 1807, when the powerful British warship HMS Leopard stopped a smaller U.S. vessel, the Chesapeake, only eight miles off the Virginia coast. After the Chesapeake’s captain refused to allow the British to search his ship for English deserters, the Leopard opened fire without warning, killing three Americans and wounding eighteen. A British search party then boarded the damaged Chesapeake and seized four men, one of whom, an English deserter, was hanged. The attack on the Chesapeake was both an act of war and a national insult. The Washington Federalist screamed: “We have never, on any occasion, witnessed . . . ​such a thirst for revenge.” In early July, Jefferson demanded an apology, banned all British warships from U.S. waters, and called on state governors to mobilize their militias. Like John Adams before him, however, Jefferson resisted war fever, in part because the undersized American army and navy were not prepared to fight. His caution infuriated his critics. Federalist congressman Josiah Quincy of Massachusetts called Jefferson a “dish of skim milk curdling at the head of our nation.”

 the embargo

 President Jefferson decided on a strategy of “peaceable coercion” to force Britain and France to stop violating American rights. Late in 1807, he somehow convinced enough Republicans in Congress to cut off all American foreign trade. As Jefferson said, his choices were “war, embargo, or nothing.” The unprecedented Embargo Act (December 1807) stopped all exports of American ­goods—​­wheat, flour, pork, fish, and cattle, among other ­items—​­by prohibiting U.S. ships from sailing to foreign ports to “keep our ships and seamen out of harm’s way.” Jefferson and his secretary of state, James Madison, mistakenly assumed that the embargo would quickly force the warring European nations to quit violating American rights. They were wrong. Neither Britain nor France yielded. With each passing month, the ­ill-​­conceived embargo devastated the Republicans and the economy while reviving the political appeal of the Federalists, especially in New England, where merchants howled because the embargo cut off their primary industry: oceangoing commerce. The value of U.S. exports

War in Europe  323


 ­Anti-​­Jefferson sentiment This 1807 Federalist cartoon compares George Washington (left, flanked by a British lion and American eagle) and Thomas Jefferson (right, with a snake and a lizard). Below Jefferson are volumes of French philosophy while Washington’s volumes simply read: Law, Order, and Religion.

 plummeted from $48 million in 1807 to $9 million a year later, and federal revenue from tariffs plunged from $18 million to $8 million. Shipbuilding declined by ­two-​­thirds, and prices for exported farm crops were cut in half. New England’s o ­ nce-​­thriving port cities became ghost towns, as thousands of ships and sailors were out of work. Meanwhile, smuggling soared, especially along the border with Canada. Americans raged at what critics called “Jefferson’s embargo.” A Bostonian accused the president of being “one of the greatest tyrants in the whole world.” Another letter writer told the president that he had paid four friends “to shoot you if you don’t take off the embargo,” while still another addressed the president as “you ­red-​­headed son of a bitch.” The embargo turned American politics upside down. To enforce it, Jefferson, the nation’s leading spokesman for reducing the power of the federal government, now found himself expanding federal power into every aspect of the nation’s economic life. In effect, the United States used its own warships to blockade its own ports. Jefferson even activated the New York state militia in an effort to stop smuggling across the Canadian border. The outrage over “Jefferson’s embargo” eventually demoralized the president and other Republicans and helped revive the Federalist party in New England.

 324  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 At the same time, farmers and planters in the South and West also suffered; they needed to sell their surplus grain, cotton, and tobacco abroad. Yet Jefferson stubbornly refused to admit defeat. As a critic noted, the president was determined to “hug the Embargo and die in its embrace.” Congress finally rebuked the president by voting 70–0 to end the ­ill-​ ­conceived embargo effective March 4, 1809, the day that the “splendid misery” of Jefferson’s second presidential term ended. The dejected president left the White House feeling like a freed prisoner, eager to retire “to my family, my books, and my farms” in Virginia. No one, he said, could be more relieved “on shaking off the shackles of power.” His fellow Virginian and stern critic, Congressman John Randolph, declared that never had a president “left the nation in a state so deplorable and calamitous.” Jefferson learned a hard lesson that many of his successors would also confront: a second term is rarely as successful as the first. As he admitted, “No man will ever carry out of that office [the presidency] the reputation which carried him into it.” In the election of 1808, the presidency passed to another prominent Virginian, Secretary of State James Madison. The Federalists, again backing Charles C. Pinckney of South Carolina and Rufus King of New York, won only 47 electoral votes to Madison’s 122.

 james madison and the drift to war

 In his inaugural address, President Madison confessed that he inherited a situation “full of difficulties.” He soon made a bad situation worse. Although Madison had been a talented legislator and the “Father of the Constitution,” he proved to be a weak, indecisive chief executive. When members of Congress questioned several of his cabinet appointments, he backed down and ended up naming s­ econd-​­rate men to key positions. Madison’s sparkling wife, Dolley, was the only truly excellent member of the president’s inner circle. Seventeen years younger than her husband, she was a superb First Lady who excelled at using the White House to entertain political leaders and foreign dignitaries. Journalists called her the “Queen of Washington City.” From the beginning, Madison’s presidency was entangled in foreign affairs and crippled by his lack of executive experience. Like Jefferson, Madison and his advisers repeatedly overestimated the young republic’s diplomatic leverage and military strength in shaping foreign policy. The result was international humiliation. Madison insisted on upholding the principle of freedom of the seas for the United States and other neutral nations, but he was unwilling to create a navy

The War of 1812  325


 strong enough to enforce it. He continued the policy of “peaceable coercion” against the European nations, which was as ineffective for Madison as it had been for Jefferson. In place of the failed embargo, Congress passed the N ­ on-​­Intercourse Act (1809), which reopened trade with all countries except France and Great Britain and their colonies. It also authorized the president to reopen trade with either France or Great Britain if it stopped violating American rights on the high seas. In December 1810, France issued a vague promise to restore America’s neutral rights, whereupon Madison gave Great Britain three months to do the same. The British refused, and the Royal Navy continued to seize American vessels and their cargoes and crews. A reluctant Madison asked Congress to declare war against Great Britain on June 1, 1812. If the United States did not defend its rights as a neutral nation, he explained, then Americans were “not independent people, but colonists and vassals.” Thomas Jefferson sent a letter of support to the president: “Heaven help you through all your difficulties.” On June 5, the House of Representatives voted for war 79–49. Two weeks later, the Senate followed suit, 19–13. Every Federalist in Congress opposed what they called “Mr. Madison’s War,” while 80 percent of Republicans supported it. The southern and western states wanted war; the New England states opposed it. By declaring war, Republicans hoped to unite the nation, discredit the Federalists, and put an end to B ­ ritish-​­led Indian attacks along the Great Lakes and in the Ohio Valley by conquering British Canada. To generate popular support, Thomas Jefferson advised Madison that he needed, above all, “to stop Indian barbarities. The conquest of Canada will do this.” Jefferson presumed that the French Canadians were eager to rise up against their British rulers. With their help, the Republicans predicted, American armies would easily conquer Britain’s vast northern colony. It did not work out that way.

The War of 1812
 The War of 1812 marked the first time that Congress had declared war. Great Britain did not expect or want the war; it was preoccupied with defeating Napoléon in Europe. In fact, on June 16, 1812, the British government promised to quit interfering with American shipping. President Madison and the Republicans, however, were not satisfied; only war, they believed, would put an end to the British practice of impressment and stop B ­ ritish-​­inspired Indian attacks along the western frontier.

 326  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 shipping rights and national honor

Why the United
 States chose to start the war remains a puzzle still debated among historians. The main cause of the ­war—​­the repeated British violations of American shipping rights and the practice of “impressing” sailors dominated President Madison’s war message. Most of the votes in Congress for war came from legislators representing rural regions, from Pennsylvania southward and westward, where farmers and planters grew surpluses for export to Europe. Their economic interests were being hurt by the raids on American merchant ships. However, the representatives from the New England states, which bore the brunt of British attacks on U.S. shipping, voted against the declaration of war, 20–12. As a New England minister roared, let the “southern Heroes fight their own battles.” One explanation for this seeming inconsistency is that many Americans in the South and West, especially Tennessee, Kentucky, and South Carolina, voted for war because they believed America’s national honor was at stake. Andrew Jackson, a proud ­anti-​­British Tennessean who was the new state’s first congressman, declared that he was eager to fight “for the ­re-​­establishment of our national character.” In the popular phrase of the time, the war was needed to protect “Free Trade and Sailors’ Rights!”

 native american conflicts Another factor leading to

 Tecumseh The Shawnee leader, who tried to unite Native American peoples across the United States in defense of their lands, was later killed in 1813 at the Battle of the Thames.

 war was the growing number of Indian attacks, supported by the British, in the Ohio Valley. The story took a new turn with the rise of two remarkable Shawnee leaders, Tecumseh and his brother, Tenskwatawa, who lived in a large village called Prophetstown on the Tippecanoe River in northern Indiana. Tecumseh (“Shooting Star”) knew that the fate of the native peoples depended on their being unified. He

The War of 1812  327


 hoped to create a single Indian nation powerful enough, with British assistance, to fend off further American expansion. His half brother Tenskwatawa (the “Open Door”), a o ­ ne-​­eyed recovering alcoholic with a fierce temper who was known as “the Prophet,” gained a large following among Native Americans for his predictions that white Americans (“children of the devil”) were on the verge of collapse. He demanded that the indigenous peoples abandon all things European: clothing, customs, Christianity, and especially liquor. If they did so, the Great Spirit would reward them by turning the whites’ gunpowder to sand.

 a “trail of blood” Inspired by his brother’s spiritual message, Tecumseh in 1811 made heroic efforts to form alliances with other Native American nations throughout m ­ id-​­America. In Alabama, he told a gathering of 5,000 Indians that they should “let the white race perish” because “they seize your land; they corrupt your women; they trample on the ashes of your dead!” The native peoples must join together to drive out the whites on a “trail of blood.” The whites “have driven us from the sea to the lakes,” he declared. “We can go no further.” Tecumseh disavowed the many treaties whereby indigenous peoples had “sold” ancient Indian lands. “No tribe,” he declared, “has the right to sell [land], even to each other, much less to strangers. . . . ​Sell a country!? Why not sell the air, the great sea, as well as the earth? Didn’t the Great Spirit make them all for the use of his children?” William Henry Harrison, governor of the Indiana Territory, learned of Tecumseh’s bold plans, met with him twice, and described him as “one of those uncommon geniuses who spring up occasionally to produce revolutions and overturn the established order of things.” Yet Harrison vowed to eliminate Tecumseh. In the fall of 1811, he gathered 1,000 troops and advanced on Prophetstown while the Indian leader was away. Tenskwatawa was lured into making a foolish attack on Harrison’s encampment. What became the Battle of Tippecanoe was a disastrous defeat for the Native Americans, as Harrison’s troops burned the village and destroyed its supplies. Tecumseh’s Indian Confederacy went up in smoke, and he fled to Canada. the lust for canada and florida

Some Americans
 wanted war with Great Britain in 1812 because they wanted to seize control of Canada. That there were nearly 8 million Americans and only 300,000 Canadians led many to believe that conquering Canada would be quick and easy. Jefferson, for instance, wrote President Madison that the “acquisition of Canada” was simply a “matter of marching” north with a military force.

 328  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 The British were also vulnerable far to the south. East Florida, which the British had returned to Spain’s control in 1783, posed a threat to the Americans because Spain was too weak, or simply unwilling, to prevent Indian attacks across the border with Georgia. Also, in the absence of a strong Spanish presence, British agents and traders remained in East Florida, smuggling goods and conspiring with Indians against Americans. Spanish Florida had also long been a haven for runaway slaves from Georgia and South Carolina. Many Americans living along the ­Florida-​­Georgia border hoped that the war against Great Britain would enable them to oust the British and the Spanish from Florida.

 war hawks

 In the Congress that assembled in late 1811, new young ­anti-​­British representatives from southern and western districts shouted for war to defend “national honor” and rid the Northwest of the “Indian problem.” Among the most vocal “war hawks” were Henry Clay of Kentucky and John C. Calhoun of South Carolina. Clay, the brash young Speaker of the House of Representatives, was a tall, rawboned man who was “for resistance by the sword.” He boasted that the Kentucky militia alone could conquer Canada. His bravado inspired others. “I don’t like Henry Clay,” Calhoun said. “He is a bad man, an imposter, a creator of wicked schemes. I wouldn’t speak to him, but, by God, I love him” for wanting war against Britain. When Calhoun learned that President Madison had finally decided on war, he threw his arms around Clay’s neck and led his ­war-​­hawk colleagues in an Indian war dance. In New England and much of New York, however, there was little enthusiasm for war. It threatened to cripple the region’s dominant industry, shipping, since Great Britain remained the region’s largest trading partner. Federalists actively undermined the war effort. Both Massachusetts and Connecticut refused to send soldiers to fight in the war, and merchants openly sold supplies to British troops in Canada.

 war preparations

 As it turned out, the United States was woefully unprepared for war, both financially and militarily, and the short, ­soft-​ ­spoken James Madison lacked the leadership ability and physical stature to inspire public confidence and military resolve. He was no George Washington. The national economy was weak too. In 1811, Republicans had let the charter of the Bank of the United States expire. Many Republican Congressmen owned shares in state banks and wanted the B.U.S. dissolved because it both competed with and regulated their local banks. Once the B.U.S. shut down, however, the number of unregulated state banks mushroomed, all with their own forms of currency, creating commercial chaos. Treasury Secretary Albert

The War of 1812  329


 Gallatin was so upset by the loss of the B.U.S. that he wrote a scathing letter of resignation. President Madison begged him to reconsider, which he did, but the problems of waging a war with Britain without adequate financial resources did not go away. Once war began, it did not go well for the Americans. The mighty British navy blockaded American ports, which caused federal tariff revenues to tumble. In March 1813, Albert Gallatin U.S. Naval victories John Bull (the warned Madison that the U.S. Trea- personification of England as Uncle sury had “hardly enough money to Sam was to America) “stung to agony” last till the end of the month.” Fur- by Wasp and Hornet, two American warships that clinched early victories in thermore, Republicans in Congress the War of 1812. were so afraid of public criticism that they delayed approving tax increases needed to finance the war. The military situation was almost as bad. In 1812, the British had 250,000 professional soldiers and the most powerful navy in the world. By contrast, the U.S. Army numbered only 3,287 ­ill-​­trained and poorly equipped men, led by mostly incompetent officers with little combat experience. In January 1812, Congress authorized an army of 35,000 men, but a year later, just 18,500 had been ­recruited—​­many of them Irish American immigrants who hated the ­English—​ ­and then only by enticing them with promises of land and cash bounties. President Madison, who refused to allow free blacks or slaves to serve in the army, was forced to plead with the state governors to provide militiamen, only to have the Federalist governors in ­anti-​­war New England decline. The British, on the other hand, had thousands of soldiers stationed in Canada and the West Indies. And, as was true during the Revolutionary War, the British, offering food, guns, and ammunition, recruited more Native American allies than did the Americans. The U.S. Navy was in better shape than the Army, with able officers and ­well-​­trained seamen, but it had only sixteen tiny gunboats compared to Britain’s 600 warships. The lopsided military strength of the British led Madison to mutter that the United States was in “an embarrassing situation.”

 a continental war For these reasons and more, the War of 1812 was one of the strangest wars in history. In fact, it was three wars fought on three

 330  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 separate fronts. One theatre of conflict was the Chesapeake Bay along the coast of Maryland and Virginia, including Washington, D.C. The second theatre was in the ­South—​­Alabama, Mississippi, and West and East ­Florida—​­where American forces led by General Andrew Jackson invaded lands owned by the Creeks and the Spanish. The third front might be more accurately called the ­Canadian-​­American War. It began in what is now northern Indiana and Ohio, southeastern Michigan, and the contested border regions around the Great Lakes. The fighting raged back and forth across the border as the United States repeatedly invaded British Canada, only to be embarrassingly repulsed.

 the war in the north

Like the American Revolution, the War
 of 1812, often called America’s second war for independence, was very much a civil war. The Canadians, thousands of whom were former American Loyalists who had fled north after the Revolutionary War, remained loyal to the British Empire, while the Americans and a few French Canadians and Irish Canadians sought to push Britain out of North America and annex Canada. In some cases, Americans fought former Americans, including families that were divided in their allegiances. Siblings even shot each other. Once, after killing an American militiaman, a Canadian soldier began taking the clothes off the corpse, only to realize that it was his brother. He grumbled that it served him right to have died for a bad cause. Indians armed by the British dominated the heavily wooded borderlands around the Great Lakes. Michigan’s governor recognized that the British and their Indian allies were dependent on each other: “The British cannot hold Upper Canada [Ontario] without the assistance of the Indians,” but the “Indians cannot conduct a war without the assistance of a civilized nation [Great Britain].” So the American assault on Canada involved attacking Indians, Canadians, and British soldiers.

 invading canada

 President James Madison approved a t­hree-​ ­pronged plan for the invasion of British Canada. It called for one army to move north through upstate New York, along Lake Champlain, to take Montreal, while another was to advance into Upper Canada by crossing the Niagara River between Lakes Ontario and Erie. The third attack would come from the west, with an American force moving east into Upper Canada from Detroit, Michigan. The plan was to have all three attacks begin at the same time to force the British troops in Canada to split up. The complicated plan of invasion, however, was a disaster. The underfunded and undermanned Americans could barely field one army, let alone three, and communications among the separated commanders was spotty at best.

The War of 1812  331


MAJOR NORTHERN CAMPAIGNS OF THE WAR OF 1812
Quebec e 
200 Kilometers


Dearborn,
Nov. 1812


 Put-in-Bay

NEW YORK

Van Rensselaer,
Oct. 1812


Presque Isle


 er

NH MA CT

Susquehanna
River


 PENNSYLVANIA

Riv




Harr
 ison Oct. 1 ,

 g. 18

Hull, Au


 KENTUCKY

Fort Niagara


Perry, Sept. 1813


 OHIO

Ohio


 American forces British forces Battle site

 ta Lake On

 NJ

Baltimore
 Fort McHenry Washington, D.C. Potomac River

 VIRGINIA

DE MD
Chesapeake Bay Aug. 
 ■WWN64 How did

 the War of 1812 begin? the American strategy in regard to British Canada? proof the battle that inspired Francis Scott Key to write “The ­Star-​ ■First Describe 31p0 x 28p0 ­Spangled Banner.” ■Figure WhatM7_2 was

 In July 1812, ­fifty-​­nine-​­year-​­old General William Hull, a Revolutionary War veteran and governor of the Michigan Territory, marched his disorganized and poorly supplied army across the Detroit River into Canada. He told the Canadians that he was there to free them from “tyranny and oppression.” The Canadians, however, did not want to be liberated, and the Americans were soon pushed back to Detroit by British troops, Canadian militiamen, and their Indian allies. Hull was tricked by the British commander’s threats to unleash thousands of Indian warriors. Fearing a massacre by “savages,” Hull did the unthinkable:

 OCKADE

July


Detroit


INDIANA TERRITORY

 rie L. E

 VT

 rio

York (Toronto)


Thames


Macdonough,
Sept. 1814


Hudson River


Lake Mic
 higa n

Lake
Champlain


Queenston
Heights


Fort
Dearborn


Plattsburgh


 CANADA

 ron Hu ke La

ILLINOIS TERRITORY

Fort
Michilimackinac


 R iver ash ab W

Aug.–Sept.


Montreal


INDIANA TERR.

MICHIGAN TERRITORY

 e nc r ve

ITISH BL



 wr

 BR



200 Miles


Ri




La




S t.


Lake Super
 ior

 332  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 he surrendered his entire force of 2,500 troops without firing a shot. His capitulation shocked the nation and opened the entire western frontier to raids by British troops and Canadian militiamen and their Indian allies. President Madison and the Republicans felt humiliated. In Kentucky, a Republican said General Hull must be a “traitor” or “nearly an idiot” or “part of both.” Hull was eventually put on trial and sentenced to death. Although pardoned by Madison, he was dismissed from the army for his cowardice. The second prong of the American invasion plan, the assault on Montreal, never got off the ground. The third prong began at dawn on October 13, 1812, when U.S. troops led by General Stephen Van Rensselaer rowed across the Niagara River from Lewiston, New York, to the Canadian village of ­Queenston, where they suffered a crushing defeat in the Battle of Queenston Heights. The shameful losses in Canada led many Americans to lose hope that they could win the war. In early 1813, a Kentuckian warned that any more military disasters would result in “disunion,” and the “cause of Republicanism will be lost.” Then there was a glimmer of good news. In April 1813, an American force led by General Zebulon Pike attacked York (later renamed Toronto), the provincial capital of Upper Canada. The British and Canadian militiamen surrendered, and over the next several days, in part because Pike had been killed in the battle, the U.S. soldiers rampaged out of control, plundering the city and burning government buildings. The destruction of York outraged the British and Canadians and would lead them later to seek revenge on the American capital of Washington, D.C. After the burning of York, the Americans sought to gain naval control of the Great Lakes and other inland waterways along the Canadian border. If they could break the British naval supply line and secure Lake Erie, they could divide the British from their Indian allies. In 1813, at Presque Isle, Pennsylvania, near Erie, t­wenty-​­eight-​­year-​­old Oliver Hazard Perry supervised the construction of warships from timber cut in nearby forests. By the end of the summer, Commodore Perry’s new warships set out in search of the British and some “warm fighting,” finally finding them at Lake Erie’s ­Put-​­in-​­Bay on September 10. Two British warships used their superior weapons to pound the Lawrence, Perry’s flagship. After four hours of intense shelling, none of the Lawrence’s guns was working, and most of the crew were dead or wounded. Perry refused to quit, however. He switched to another vessel, kept fighting, and, miraculously, ended up accepting the surrender of the entire British squadron. Hatless and bloodied, Perry reported that “we have met the enemy and they are ours.”

The War of 1812  333


 American naval control of Lake Erie forced the British to evacuate Upper Canada. They gave up Detroit and were defeated at the Battle of the Thames in southern Canada on October 5, 1813. During the battle, the British fled, leaving the great chief Tecumseh and 500 warriors to face the wrath of the Americans. When Tecumseh was killed, the remaining Indians retreated. Perry’s victory and the defeat of Tecumseh enabled the Americans to recover control of most of Michigan and seize the Western District of Upper Canada. Thereafter, the war in the north lapsed into a military stalemate along the Canadian border, with neither side able to dislodge the other.

 the creek war

 In the South, too, the war flared up in 1813. The Creek Indians in western Georgia and Alabama had split into two factions: the Upper Creeks (called Red Sticks because of their ­bright-​­red war clubs), who opposed American expansion and sided with the British during the war, and the Lower Creeks, who wanted to remain on good terms with the Americans. On August 30, Red Sticks attacked Fort Mims on the Alabama River, thirty miles above the Gulf coast town of Mobile, and massacred 553 men, women, and children, butchering and scalping half of them. Americans were incensed. Thirsting for revenge, Andrew Jackson, commanding general of the Army of West Tennessee, recruited about 2,500 volunteer militiamen and headed south. With him were David Crockett, a famous sharpshooter, and Sam Houston, a ­nineteen-​­year-​­old Virginia frontiersman who would later lead the Texas War for Independence against Mexico. Jackson was a natural warrior and gifted commander who was both feared and respected. His soldiers nicknamed him “Old Hickory” in recognition of his toughness. From a young age, he had embraced violence, gloried in it, and prospered by it. He told all “brave Tennesseans” that their “frontier [was] threatened with invasion by the savage foe” and that the Indians were advancing “with scalping knives unsheathed, to butcher your wives, your children, and your helpless babes. Time is not to be lost.” Jackson’s expedition across Alabama was not easy. It was difficult to keep his men fed and supplied so far from Tennessee and with no connecting roads. Some of the men went home once their enlistment period ended. A few deserted or rebelled. When a s­ eventeen-​­year-​­old soldier threatened an officer, he was tried and sentenced to death. Jackson refused pleas for mercy and had the young man shot in front of the rest of the army to provide a harsh example of the general’s steely determination. Jackson’s grizzled volunteers crushed the Red Sticks in a series of lopsided bloodbaths in Alabama. The decisive battle occurred on March 27, 1814, at

 334  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

MAJOR SOUTHERN CAMPAIGNS OF THE WAR OF 1812 TENNESSEE

Miss
 iss ipp iR ive

MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY

 r rio ar W r k e a c R iv Bl

Jackso n , 1813


Huntsville


 r

MISSOURI TERRITORY

 GEORGIA

Horseshoe Bend
 r ve Ri

Jack
 s

 A laba m a

 b ig b e e R iv e r

 r ve Ri

Tom


 LOUISIANA

Pear
 l

Tuscaloosa


, 18
 on

Fort Mims
, 1814
 kson Jac Mobile

New Orleans


 American forces British forces Battle site

Pensacola


 FLORIDA (Spanish)

Perdido River
Pa
 ke nh am ,1

GULF OF MEXICO



100 Miles


100 Kilometers


 Why did Andrew Jackson march his army into Florida on his way to New Orleans? ■ What advantages did the American defenders have in the Battle of New Orleans? WWN50 ■ Why was the Battle of New Orleans important to the Treaty of Ghent? Figure M7_3 ■

 Fourth proof

 Horseshoe Bend on the Tallapoosa River. Jackson’s soldiers, with crucial help from their Cherokee and Creek allies, surrounded a Red Stick fort, set fire to it, and shot the Indians as they tried to escape. Nine hundred of them were killed, including 300 who drowned in a desperate effort to cross the river. Jackson reported to his wife that the “carnage was dreadful.” His men had “regained all the scalps taken from Fort Mims.” Fewer than fifty of Jackson’s soldiers were killed.

The War of 1812  335


 The Battle of Horseshoe Bend was the worst defeat ever inflicted upon Native Americans, and it effectively ended the Creeks’ ability to wage war. With the Treaty of Fort Jackson, signed in August 1814, the Red Stick Creeks gave up ­two-​­thirds of their ­land—​­some 23 million ­acres—​­including southwest Georgia and much of Alabama. Red Eagle, chief of the Red Sticks, told Jackson: “I am in your power. . . . ​My people are all gone. I can do no more but weep over the misfortunes of my nation.” President Madison rewarded Jackson by naming him a major general in the regular U.S. Army. Soon after the Battle of Horseshoe Bend, events in Europe took a dramatic turn when the British, Spanish, and Portuguese armies repelled French emperor Napoléon’s effort to conquer Spain and Portugal. Now free to focus on the American war, the British sent 16,000 veteran soldiers to try yet again to invade America from Canada. The British navy off the American coast also received reinforcement, enabling it to extend its blockade to New England ports and to bombard coastal towns from Delaware to Florida. The final piece of the British plan was to seize New Orleans and thereby sever American access to the Mississippi River, lifeline of the West.

 fighting along the chesapeake bay

Throughout the
 war, the pitifully small U.S. Navy was unable to protect the nation’s long coastline. In February 1813, the British had more warships in the Chesapeake Bay than were in the entire American navy, and they frequently captured and burned American merchant vessels. The British fleet also launched numerous raids along the Virginia and Maryland shore, in effect mocking the Madison administration’s ability to defend the nation. One British officer dismissed the United States as “a country of Infants in War.” The presence of British ships on the coast and inland rivers led many slaves to escape or revolt. As had happened during the Revolutionary War, British naval commanders promised freedom to slaves who aided or fought with them. More than 3,000 slaves in Maryland and Virginia stole boats or canoes that took them to the safety of British ships. In September 1813, the British organized some 400 former slaves into an ­all-​­black military unit, called the Colonial Marines. The recruits were provided uniforms, meals, and $6 a month in wages. News of the ­all-​­black Colonial Marines panicked whites living along the vast Chesapeake Bay, who feared that the former slaves would “have no mercy on them.” Virginia’s John Randolph spoke for many southern planters when he insisted that the “question of slavery, as it is called, is to us a question of life and death.” Fearing “our worst enemy,” the mayor of Richmond claimed that the “Slaves of this City . . . ​have conspired and are conspiring to burn the City.”

 336  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 the burning of washington During the late summer of 1814, U.S. forces suffered their most humiliating experience of the war when British troops captured and burned Washington, D.C. In August, 4,000 British soldiers landed at Benedict, Maryland, routed the American militia at Bladensburg, and headed for the nation’s capital, only a few miles away. Thousands fled the city. President Madison frantically called out the poorly led and untrained militia, then left the White House to help rally the troops. His efforts failed, however, as the American defense disintegrated in the face of the British attack. On August 24, British redcoats marched unopposed into the American capital. Madison and his wife, Dolley, had fled just in time (“Where I shall be tomorrow, I cannot tell!”), after first saving a portrait of George Washington and a copy of the Declaration of Independence. The vengeful British, aware that American troops had burned York, the Canadian capital, torched the White House, the Capitol, the Library of Congress, and other government buildings. A tornado the next day compounded the damage, but a violent thunderstorm dampened both the fires and the enthusiasm of the British forces, who headed north to assault Baltimore. The destruction of Washington, D.C., shocked, embarrassed, and infuriated Americans. Even worse, people had lost confidence in the government

 The Burning of the Capitol This 1817 etching of the damaged Capitol shows shackled slaves (bottom right) and angels overhead. It appeared in a book arguing that the British effort to destroy “the temple of freedom” was a sign that God disapproved of slavery.

The War of 1812  337


 and the military. David Campbell, a Virginia congressman, told his brother that America was “ruled by fools and the administration opposed by knaves.” John Armstrong, the secretary of war, resigned because of the embarrassing sack of the nation’s capital. Madison replaced him with James Monroe, who was also serving as secretary of state. A desperate Monroe soon proposed enlisting free blacks into the army. But many worried that such changes were too few and too late. A Virginia official noted that without a miracle, “This union is inevitably dissolved.” President Madison was “heartbroken” by the turn of events. He called an emergency session of Congress and appealed to Americans to “expel the invaders.” A Baltimore newspaper reported that the “spirit of the nation is roused.” That determination showed itself when fifty British warships sailed into Baltimore Harbor on September 13 while 4,200 British soldiers, including the a­ ll-​­black Colonial Marines, assaulted the city by land. About 1,000 Americans held Fort McHenry on an island in the harbor. During the night of September 13, the British unleashed a thunderous bombardment of Fort McHenry. “The portals of hell appeared to have been thrown open,” a Baltimore resident reported. Yet the Americans refused to surrender. At daybreak on the 14th, the soldiers in the battered fort stood defiant, guns at the ready. The frustrated British fleet sailed away. Francis Scott Key, a lawyer and occasional poet, watched the bombardment of Fort McHenry from a ship, having been sent to negotiate the release of a captured American. The sight of the U.S. flag still flying over the fort at dawn meant that the city had survived the onslaught. The dramatic scene inspired Key to scribble the verses of what came to be called “The S­ tar-​­Spangled Banner,” which began, “Oh, say can you see, by the dawn’s early light?” Later revised and set to the tune of a popular English drinking song, it eventually became America’s national anthem.

 the battle of lake champlain

 The British failure to conquer Baltimore nixed their hopes of a quick victory in the war while giving the Americans a desperately needed morale boost. More good news soon arrived from upstate New York, where the outnumbered Americans at Plattsburgh, along Lake Champlain, were saved by the superb ability of Commodore Thomas Macdonough, commander of the U.S. naval squadron. On September 11, 1814, just days after the burning of Washington, D.C., British soldiers attacked at Plattsburgh while their navy engaged Macdonough’s warships in a battle that ended with the entire British fleet either destroyed or captured. The Battle of Lake Champlain (also called the Battle of Plattsburgh) forced the British to abandon the northern ­campaign—​­their main military push in

 338  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 the ­war—​­and retreat back into Canada. When the British officers came to surrender themselves and their swords, Macdonough said, “Gentlemen, return your swords to your scabbards; you are worthy of them.” In Florida in November, an army led by Andrew Jackson seized ­Spanish-​ ­controlled Pensacola, on the Gulf coast, thereby preventing another British army from landing and pushing northward into the southern states. The American victories in New York and Florida convinced Congress not to abandon Washington, D.C. Instead, the members voted to rebuild the Capitol and the White House.

The Aftermath of the War
 While the fighting raged, U.S. diplomats, including Henry Clay and John Quincy Adams, son of the former president, had begun meetings with British officials in Ghent, near Brussels in ­present-​­day Belgium, to discuss ending the war. The negotiations were at a standstill when news arrived of the American victory at the Battle of Lake Champlain and the failure of the British invasion of Baltimore. The news made the British more flexible, but negotiations still dragged on for weeks. Finally, on Christmas Eve, 1814, the diplomats reached an agreement to stop the fighting.

 the treaty of ghent

 The weary British decided to end the war in part because of military setbacks but also because London merchants were eager to renew the extensive trade with America. The British government had also concluded that the war was not worth the cost. By the Treaty of Ghent (1814), the two countries agreed to end the war, return each side’s prisoners, and restore the previous boundaries. This was a godsend for the Americans, since British forces at the time still controlled eastern Maine, northern Michigan, a portion of western New York, and several islands off the coast of Georgia. The British also pledged to stop supporting Indian attacks along the Great Lakes. What had begun as an American effort to protect its honor, end British impressment, and conquer Canada had turned into a second war of independence. At the end of the treaty negotiations, John Quincy Adams wrote to his wife from Ghent that he had had the honor of “redeeming our union.” Although the Americans lost the war for Canada and saw their national capital destroyed, they won the southern war to defeat the Indians and take their lands. More important, the Treaty of Ghent saved the splintered republic from possible civil war and financial ruin.

The Aftermath of the War  339


 the battle of new orleans

 Because it took six weeks for news of the Treaty of Ghent to reach the United States, fighting continued in America at the end of 1814. On December 1, Andrew Jackson arrived in New Orleans to prepare for a British invasion of the strategic city. He announced that he “would drive the British into the sea, or perish in the effort.” Jackson declared martial law, taking control of the governance of the city, which enabled him to transform New Orleans into a large armed camp. On December 12, a British fleet with some 8,000 seasoned soldiers took up positions on the coast of Louisiana. The British hoped to capture New Orleans and thereby gain control of the Mississippi River. British general Sir Edward Pakenham’s painfully careful preparation for an assault against the Americans gave Jackson time to organize hundreds of slaves “loaned” by planters to dig trenches, build ramparts, and stack cotton bales and barrels of sugar to protect the defenders from British fire. The Americans built an ­almost-​­invulnerable position, but Pakenham, cocky and careless, rashly ordered a frontal assault at dawn on Sunday, January 8, 1815. His professional redcoats, including ­all-​­black units from the Caribbean islands, marched into a murderous hail of artillery shells and rifle fire. Line after line of advancing redcoats crumpled and fell, often on top of one another. When the smoke cleared, a Kentucky militiaman said that the battlefield looked first like “a sea of blood. It was not blood itself, but the red coats in which the British soldiers were dressed.” Before the devastated British withdrew, some 2,100 had been wounded or killed, including Pakenham, two other generals, and more than 80 officers.

 Jackson’s army defends New Orleans Andrew Jackson’s defeat of the British at New Orleans, January 1815.

 340  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 Only thirteen Americans had lost their lives. A British naval officer wrote that there “never was a more complete failure.” Although the Battle of New Orleans occurred after the Treaty of Ghent had been signed, it was still a vitally important psychological victory, as the treaty had yet to be officially ratified by either the United States or Great Britain. Had the British won at New Orleans, they might have tried to revise the treaty in their favor. Jackson’s lopsided victory ensured that both governments would act quickly to approve the treaty. The unexpected American triumph at New Orleans also generated a wave of patriotic nationalism. As a Washington, D.C. newspaper crowed, “almost incredible victory!” Such pride in the Battle of New Orleans would later help transform the heroic Andrew Jackson into a dynamic presidential candidate eager to move the nation into an even more democratic era in which the “common man” would be celebrated and empowered. The ­rough-​­hewn Jackson, wrote a southerner in April 1815, “is everywhere hailed as the savior of the country. . . . ​He has been feasted, caressed, & I may say idolised.”

 the hartford convention

 A few weeks before the Battle of New Orleans, many New England Federalists, frustrated by the rising expense of a war they had opposed, tried to take matters into their own hands at a meeting in Hartford, Connecticut. The Hartford Convention was the climax of New England’s disgust with “Mr. Madison’s War.” On December 15, 1814, the Hartford Convention assembled with delegates from Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, Vermont, and New Hampshire. The convention proposed seven constitutional amendments designed to limit Republican (and southern) influence. The amendments included abolishing the counting of slaves in determining a state’s representation in Congress, requiring a t­ wo-​­thirds supermajority rather than a simple majority vote to declare war or admit new states, prohibiting trade embargoes lasting more than sixty days, excluding immigrants from holding federal office, limiting the president to one term, and barring successive presidents from the same state (a provision clearly directed at Virginia). Delegates at the Hartford Convention also discussed the possibility that some of the New England states might “secede” from the United States if their demands were dismissed in Washington. Yet the secessionist threat quickly evaporated. In February 1815, when messengers from the Hartford Convention reached Washington, D.C., they found the battered and burned capital celebrating the good news from New Orleans. “Their position,” according to a French diplomat, was “awkward, embarrassing, and lent itself to cruel ridicule.”

The Aftermath of the War  341


 Ignored by Congress and the president, the Hartford delegates turned tail for home. The whole sorry episode proved fatal to the Federalist party, which never recovered from the shame of disloyalty stamped on it by the Hartford Convention. The victory at New Orleans and the arrival of the peace treaty from Europe transformed the national mood. Almost overnight, President Madison went from being denounced and possibly impeached to being hailed a national hero.

 the war’s legacies

 There was no clear military victor in the War of 1812, nor much clarification about the issues that had ignited a war that cost 7,000 killed and wounded Americans. The Treaty of Ghent ended the fighting but failed to address the reasons why President Madison had declared war in the first place: the disputes about U.S. maritime rights and the British practice of impressment. For all the clumsiness with which the war was managed, however, in the end it generated an intense patriotism across much of the nation and reaffirmed American independence. The young republic was at last secure from British or European threats. As James Monroe said, “we have acquired a character and a rank among the other nations, which we did not enjoy before.” Forgetting their many military disasters, Americans soon decided that the war was a glorious triumph for republican values. The people, observed Treasury Secretary Albert Gallatin, “are more American; they feel and act more as a nation; and I hope that the permanency of the Union is thereby better secured.” Soon after the official copy of the Treaty of Ghent arrived in Washington, D.C., in ­mid-​­February 1815, Virginian William H. Cabell wrote his brother that the “glorious peace for America . . . ​has come exactly when we least expected but when we most wanted it.” Another Virginian, Colonel John Taylor, recognized the happy outcome as largely resulting from “a succession of lucky accidents” that “enabled the administration to get the nation out of the war.” Had the conflict dragged on, he predicted, “the Republican party and our form of government would have been blown up.” The war also propelled the United States toward economic independence, as the wartime interruption of trade with Europe forced America to expand its manufacturing sector and become more s­ elf-​­sufficient. The British blockade of the coast created a shortage of cotton cloth in the United States, leading to the creation of the nation’s first ­cotton-​­manufacturing industry, in Waltham, Massachusetts. By the end of the war, there were more than 100 cotton mills in New England and 64 more in Pennsylvania. Even Thomas Jefferson admitted in

 342  CHAPTER 7  The Early Republic 1800–1815

 1815 that his beloved agricultural republic had been transformed: “We must now place the manufacturer by the agriculturalist.” After nearly forty years of independence, the new American republic was emerging as an agricultural, commercial, and industrial world power. Perhaps the strangest result of the War of 1812 was the reversal of attitudes among Republicans and Federalists. The wartime experience taught James Madison and the Republicans some lessons in nationalism. First, the British invasion of Washington, D.C., convinced Madison of the necessity of a strong army and navy. Second, the lack of a national bank had hurt the federal government’s efforts to finance the war; state banks were so unstable that it was difficult to raise the funds needed to pay military expenses. In 1816, Madison, who had opposed a national bank, changed his mind and created the Second Bank of the United States. Third, the rise of new industries during the war prompted manufacturers to call for increased tariffs on imports to protect American companies from unfair foreign competition. Madison went along, despite his criticism of tariffs in the 1790s. While Madison reversed himself by embracing nationalism and a broader interpretation of the Constitution, the Federalists similarly pivoted by embracing Madison’s and Jefferson’s earlier emphasis on states’ rights and strict construction of the Constitution as they tried to defend the special economic interests of their regional stronghold, New England. It was the first great reversal of partisan political roles in constitutional interpretation. It would not be the last. The War of 1812 proved devastating to all of the eastern Indian nations, most of which had fought with the British. The war accelerated westward settlement by Americans, and Native American resistance was greatly diminished after the death of Tecumseh and his Indian Confederacy. The British essentially abandoned their Indian allies. None of their former lands were returned to them, and the British vacated the frontier forts that had long served as supply centers for Indians. Lakota chief Little Crow expressed the betrayal felt by Native Americans after the war when he rejected the consolation gifts from the local British commander: “After we have fought for you, endured many hardships, lost some of our people, and awakened the vengeance of our powerful neighbors, you make peace for yourselves. . . . ​You no longer need our service; you offer us these goods to pay us for [your] having deserted us. But no, we will not take them; we hold them and yourselves in equal contempt.” In the years after the war, the United States negotiated more than 200 treaties with native peoples that transferred Indian lands to the federal government and created isolated reservations for them west of the Mississippi River.

The Aftermath of the War  343


 As the Indians were pushed out, tens of thousands of Americans moved west into the Great Lakes region and southwest into Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi, occupying more territory in a single generation than had been settled in the 150 years of colonial history. The federal government hastened western migration by providing war veterans with 160 acres of land between the Illinois and Mississippi Rivers. The ­ trans-​­ Appalachian population soared from 300,000 to 2 million between 1800 and 1820. By 1840, more than 40 percent of Americans lived west of the Appalachians in eight new states. At the same time, the growing dispute over slavery and its expansion into new western territories set in motion an explosive national debate that would test again the grand experiment in republican government.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 Jefferson’s Administration The Jeffersonian Republicans did not dismantle much of Hamilton’s economic program, but they did repeal the whiskey tax, cut government expenditures, and usher in a republican simplicity that championed the virtues of smaller government and plain living. While Republicans idealized the agricultural world that had existed prior to 1800, the first decades of the nineteenth century were a period of transformational economic and population growth in the United States. Commercial agriculture and exports to Europe flourished; Americans moved to the West in huge numbers. The Louisiana Purchase, which resulted from negotiations with French emperor Napoléon Bonaparte following French setbacks in Haiti, dramatically expanded the boundaries of the United States. Jefferson’s Lewis and Clark expedition explored the new region and spurred interest in the Far West. In Marbury v. Madison (1803), the Federalist chief justice of the Supreme Court, John Marshall, declared a federal act unconstitutional for the first time. With that decision, the Court assumed the right of judicial review over acts of Congress and established the constitutional supremacy of the federal government over state governments.

•


 War in Europe Thomas Jefferson sent warships to subdue the Barbary pirates and negotiated with the Spanish and French to ensure that the Mississippi River remained open to American commerce. Renewal of war between Britain and France in 1803 complicated matters for American commerce. Neither country wanted its enemy to purchase U.S. goods, so both declared blockades. In retaliation, Jefferson convinced Congress to pass the Embargo Act, which prohibited all foreign trade.

•


 Aftermath of the War of 1812 The Treaty of Ghent (1814) ended the war by essentially declaring it a draw. A smashing American victory in January 1815 at the Battle of New Orleans helped to ensure that the treaty would be ratified and enforced. The conflict established the economic independence of the United States, as many goods previously purchased from Britain were now manufactured at home. During and after the war, Federalists and Republicans seemed to exchange roles: delegates from the waning Federalist party met at the Hartford Convention (1815) to defend states’ rights and threaten secession, while Republicans now promoted nationalism and a broad interpretation of the Constitution.



Chronology






1804–1806


1813–1814








 U.S. population surpasses 5 million Thomas Jefferson inaugurated as president in Washington, D.C. Barbary pirates harass U.S. shipping The pasha of Tripoli declares war on the United States Supreme Court issues Marbury v. Madison decision Louisiana Purchase Lewis and Clark expedition Jefferson overwhelmingly reelected British interference with U.S. shipping increases International slave trade ended in the United States Defeat of Tecumseh Indian Confederacy at the Battle of Tippecanoe Congress declares war on Britain U.S. invasion of Canada “Creek War” British capture and burn Washington, D.C. Hartford Convention Battle of New Orleans News of the Treaty of Ghent reaches the United States

Key Terms
 republican simplicity p. 305

War of 1812 p. 325


Marbury v. Madison p. 308


 Tecumseh’s Indian Confederacy p. 327

 Barbary pirates p. 311 Louisiana Purchase (1803) p. 314 Lewis and Clark expedition p. 315 Embargo Act (1807) p. 322

Treaty of Ghent (1814) p. 338
Battle of New Orleans (1815) p. 340
Hartford Convention (1815) p. 340


IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 


•


 pa r t thre e

AN EXPANDING NATION
During the nineteenth century, the United States experienced a wrenching change from being a predominantly agrarian society to having a more diverse economy and urban society, with factories and cities emerging alongside farms and towns. The pace of life quickened with industrialization, and the possibilities for better living conditions rose. Between 1790 and 1820, the nation’s boundaries expanded and its ­population—​­both white and ­black—​­soared while the number of Native Americans continued its long decline. Immigrants from Ireland, Germany, 
 Scandinavia, and China thereafter poured into the United States seeking land, jobs, and freedom. By the early 1820s, the number of enslaved Americans was more than two and a half times greater than in 1790, and the number of free blacks doubled. The white population of the United States grew just as rapidly. Accompanying the emergence of an industrial e­ conomy in the Northeast during the first half of the nineteenth century was the relentless expansion of the United States westward. Until the nineteenth century, most of the American population was clustered near the seacoast and along rivers flowing into the Atlantic Ocean or the Gulf of Mexico. That changed dramatically after 1800. The great theme of ­nineteenth-​­century American history was the migration of millions of people across the Allegheny and Appalachian Mountains into the Ohio Valley and the Middle West. Waves of adventurous Americans then crossed the Mississippi River and spread out across the Great Plains. By the 1840s, American settlers had reached the Pacific Ocean. These ­developments—​­the emergence of a ­market-​­based economy, the impact of industrial development, and dramatic territorial ­expansion—​­made the second quarter of the nineteenth century a time of restless optimism and rapid change. As a German visitor noted, “Ten years in America are like a century elsewhere.” Americans in the early Republic were nothing if not brash and s­ elf-​­assured. In 1845, an editorial in the United States Journal claimed that “we, the American people, are the most independent, intelligent, moral, and happy people on the face of the earth.” The republic governed by highly educated “natural aristocrats” such as Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, James Monroe, and John Quincy Adams gave way to the frontier democracy promoted by Andrew Jackson and Henry Clay. Americans began to demand government of, by, and for the people. During the first half of the nineteenth century, two very different s­ ocieties—​ ­North and S­ outh—​­grew increasingly competitive with one another. The North,

﻿  349


 the more dynamic and ­ faster-​ ­growing region, embraced industrial growth, large cities, foreign immigrants, and the ideal of “free labor” as opposed to the system of slavery in the southern states. The South remained rural, agricultural, and increasingly committed to enslaved labor as the backbone of its economy. Two great underlying fears worried southerners: the threat of mass slave uprisings and the possibility that a n ­ orthern-​­controlled Congress might one day abolish slavery. The planter elite’s aggressive efforts to preserve and expand slavery stifled change and reform in the South and ignited a prolonged political controversy with the North that would eventually lead to civil war.





The Emergence
 of a Market Economy 1815–1850

 Lackawanna Valley (1855) Often hailed as the father of American landscape painting, George Inness was commissioned by a railroad company to capture its trains coursing through the lush Lackawanna Valley in northeastern Pennsylvania. New inventions and industrial development would continue to invade and transform the rural landscape.

A


 mid the postwar celebrations in 1815, Americans set about transforming their victorious young nation. Soon after the war’s end, prosperity returned as British and European markets again welcomed American ships and commerce. During the war, the loss of trade with Britain and Europe had forced the United States to develop more factories and mills of its own, spurring the development of the more diverse economy that Alexander Hamilton had envisioned in the 1790s. Between 1815 and 1850, the United States also became a transcontinental power, expanding all the way to the Pacific coast. Hundreds of thousands of l­ and-​ ­hungry people streamed westward toward the Mississippi River and beyond. In just six years following the end of the war in 1815, six states were added to the Union (Alabama, Illinois, Indiana, Mississippi, Missouri, and Maine). ­Nineteenth-​­century Americans were a restless, ambitious people seeking new ways to get ahead in life by using their ingenuity, skill, faith, and tenacity. The country’s energy and mobility was dizzying. A Boston newspaper commented that the whole American “population is in motion.” Everywhere, it seemed, people were moving to the next town, the next farm, the next opportunity. In many cities, half of the entire population moved every ten years. In 1826, the newspaper editor in Rochester, New York, reported that 120 people left Rochester every day while 130 moved into the growing city. Frances Trollope, an English traveler, said that Americans were “a busy, bustling, industrious population, hacking and hewing their way” westward in the pursuit of happiness. The lure of cheap land and plentiful jobs, as well as the promise of political and religious freedom, attracted millions of hardworking immigrants in the

 focus questions 1. How did changes in transportation and communication alter the economic landscape during the first half of the nineteenth century?

 2. How did industrial development impact the way people worked and lived?

 3. In what ways did immigration alter the nation’s population and shape its politics?

 4. How did the expanding “­market-​­based economy” impact the lives of workers, professionals, and women?



