 1364  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

“Forever Young”: The Youth Revolt
 The Greensboro ­sit-​­ins in 1960 not only launched a decade of civil rights activism but also signaled an end to the carefree complacency that had characterized the fifties. Rennie Davis, a sophomore at Ohio’s Oberlin College in 1960, remembered that the Greensboro student activists inspired him and many others to work for social reform and political change: “Here were four students from Greensboro who were suddenly all over Life magazine. There was a feeling that they were us and we were them, and a recognition that they were expressing something we were feeling as well.” The ­sit-​­ins, marches, protests, ideals, and sacrifices associated with the civil rights movement inspired other minority g­ roups—​­women, Native Americans, Hispanics, gays, and the d ­ isabled—​­to demand justice, freedom, and equality. Many idealistic young people decided that they could no longer turn a blind eye to the growing evidence of injustice and inequality staining the American dream. A ­full-​­fledged youth revolt erupted during the m ­ id-​­sixties. “Your sons and your daughters are beyond your command,” sang Bob Dylan in “The Times They Are a­ -​­Changin’. ” By 1970, more than half of Americans were under thirty years of age, and almost 8 million of them were attending college. The baby boomers, who unlike their parents had experienced neither an economic depression nor a major war during their young lifetimes, were now attending colleges and universities in record numbers; enrollment quadrupled between 1945 and 1970. Many universities had become gigantic institutions dependent upon huge research contracts from corporations and the federal government, especially the Defense Department. As these “multiversities” grew larger and more bureaucratic, they became targets for a generation of students wary of involvement in what President Dwight D. Eisenhower had labeled “the m ­ ilitary-​ ­industrial complex.” As criticism of U.S. military involvement in Vietnam mounted, young people disillusioned with the government and “authority” of all kinds flowed into two distinct yet frequently overlapping movements: the New Left and the counterculture.

 the new left

 The political arm of the youth revolt originated when Tom Hayden and Alan Haber, two University of Michigan students, formed Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), a ­campus-​­based organization influenced by the tactics and successes of the civil rights movement. In 1962, Hayden and Haber called a meeting of sixty young men and women activists at Port Huron, Michigan. Their goal was to remake the United States into a

“Forever Young”: The Youth Revolt  1365


 more democratic society. Several of the participants were the children of former leftists or Communists; even more were Jewish. Hayden drafted an impassioned document known as the Port Huron Statement. It began: “We are the people of this generation, bred in at least moderate comfort, housed in universities, looking uncomfortably to the world we inherit.” Only by giving power to “the people,” the manifesto insisted, could America restore its founding principles. Hayden called for political reforms, racial equality, and workers’ rights. Inspired by the example of African American civil rights activists, Hayden declared that college students should engage in “participatory democracy” by snatching “control of the educational process from the administrative bureaucracy.” Hayden and others adopted the term New Left to distinguish their efforts at grassroots democracy from those of the “Old Left” of the thirties, which had embraced an orthodox Marxism. SDS grew quickly, forming chapters on more than 1,000 campuses. In the fall of 1964, students at the University of California at Berkeley took Hayden’s New Left program to heart. Several had spent the summer working with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee’s (SNCC) ­voter-​ ­registration project in Mississippi, where three volunteers had been killed and

 The ­free-​­speech movement Mario Savio, a founder of the f­ ree-​­speech movement, speaks at a rally at the University of California at Berkeley.

 1366  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 many others arrested or harassed. They were eager to bring changes to campus life. When the university’s chancellor announced that political demonstrations would no longer be allowed on campus, thousands of students staged a ­sit-​­in. After a tense t­hirty-​­two-​­hour standoff, the administration relented. Student groups then formed the ­free-​­speech movement (FSM). Led by Mario Savio, who had participated in Freedom Summer in Mississippi, the FSM became the first major student revolt of the sixties. The FSM initially protested on behalf of students’ rights, but it quickly mounted more general criticisms of the university and what Savio called the “depersonalized, unresponsive bureaucracy” smothering American life. In 1964, Savio led hundreds of students into Sproul Hall, UC Berkeley’s administration building, and organized another s­ it-​­in. At 4 a.m., 600 state police arrested the protesters. But their example lived on. Some 7,000 students filled Sproul Plaza that morning, circulating leaflets and joining folk singer Joan Baez in singing “We Shall Overcome.” Finally, the university’s president gave in and revoked the ban on political demonstrations. The FSM succeeded, Savio explained, because “it was so obvious to everybody that it was right.”

 anti-war protests

 All that rises must converge This protester’s sign at a Washington, D.C., demonstration bridged the civil rights and anti-war movements, which pursued many of the same racial and political goals.

 The goals and tactics of FSM and SDS soon spread across the country. By 1965, however, the growing U.S. ­involvement in Vietnam had changed the ­rebellious students’ agenda. Millions of young men suddenly faced the grim ­prospect of being drafted to fight in the increasingly unpopular conflict. The Vietnam War was primarily a poor man’s fight. Most college students were able to postpone military service until they received their degree or reached the age of ­twenty-​­four; in 1965–1966, college students made up only 2 percent of military inductees. African Americans and Hispanics were twice as likely to be drafted as whites.

“Forever Young”: The Youth Revolt  1367


 As the war dragged on, Americans divided into “hawks” and “doves,” those who supported the war and those who opposed it. Some 200,000 young men ignored their draft notices, and some 4,000 served prison sentences for doing so. Another 56,000 qualified for conscientious objector status. Others ceremoniously burned their draft cards in front of television cameras while shouting “Hell No, We Won’t Go!” Still others fled to Canada or Sweden to avoid military service. The most popular means of escaping the draft was to find a way to flunk the physical examination. Whatever the method, many college students succeeded in avoiding military service. Of the 1,200 men in Harvard’s class of 1970, only 56 served in the military, and just 2 of them went to Vietnam.

 rising violence

 Throughout 1967 and 1968, the ­anti-​­war movement grew more violent as ­inner-​­city ghettos in Cleveland, Detroit, Newark, and other large cities were exploding in flames fanned by racial injustice. Frustration over deeply entrenched patterns of discrimination in employment and housing, as well as staggering rates of joblessness among ­inner-​­city African American youths, ignited the rage. “There was a sense everywhere, in 1968,” journalist Garry Wills wrote, “that things were giving way. That man had not only lost control of his history, but might never regain it.” During the eventful spring of 1968—when Lyndon Johnson announced that he would not run for reelection and Martin Luther King Jr. and ­Robert F. ­Kennedy were ­assassinated—​­campus unrest boiled over. The turmoil reached a climax at Columbia University, where SDS student radicals and black militants occupied the president’s office and classroom buildings. They renamed the administration building Malcolm X Hall. Mark Rudd, the campus SDS leader, called his parents to report that “we took a building.” His father, Jacob Rudd, a retired army officer and a real estate investor, replied: “Well, give it back.” He did not, and, after a failed attempt by professors to negotiate an end to the takeover, the university’s president cancelled classes and called in the New York City police. More than 100 students were injured, 700 were arrested, and the leaders of the uprising were expelled. Part of the problem with SDS and other militant organizations is that they were much more effective at criticizing the status quo than they were at creating a blueprint for an alternative future. “If there is a road to power,” SDS president Todd Gitlin acknowledged, “we have no map for it.” The events at Columbia inspired similar clashes at Harvard, Cornell, and San Francisco State, among dozens of other universities. Student radicals adopted a tough, macho style, dismissing traditional approaches to reform and protest as “wimpy” and rooted in “white skin privilege.”

 1368  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 Columbia riots Mark Rudd, leader of SDS at Columbia University, speaks to the media during student protests on campus in April 1968.

 Most Americans viewed the student radicals with fear and loathing. Vice President Spiro Agnew dismissed them as “impudent snobs who characterize themselves as intellectuals.” Richard Nixon declared that the campus unrest represented “the first major skirmish in a revolutionary struggle to seize the universities.”

 the weather underground

 A small group of radical militants called the Revolutionary Youth Movement (RYM) surged into prominence during the summer of 1969. They wanted to move political radicalism from “protest to resistance.” At the SDS convention in Chicago on June 18, 1969, RYM members distributed a position paper titled “You don’t need a weatherman / To know which way the wind blows,” a line from Bob Dylan’s song “Subterranean Homesick Blues” (1965). The document called for a “white fighting force” to ally with the Black ­Panthers and other radical movements to pursue “the destruction of U.S. imperialism and achieve a classless world: world communism.” By embracing revolutionary violence, however, the ­so-​­called Weathermen essentially ­committed revolutionary suicide. They killed SDS by abandoning the pacifist principles

“Forever Young”: The Youth Revolt  1369


 that had originally inspired participants and given the movement moral legitimacy. Members of the Weather Underground took to the streets of Chicago in October 1969 to assault police and trash the city. Their goal was “to lead white kids into armed revolution.” Almost 300 were arrested. During the ­so-​­called Days of Rage between September 1969 and May 1970, there were 250 bombings of draft board offices, ROTC buildings providing military training on university campuses, federal government facilities, and corporate headquarters. In March 1970, three members of the Weather Underground in New York City died when a bomb they were making exploded prematurely. The Weathermen and other radical groups were forced underground by the aggressive efforts of federal law enforcement agencies, and their energy diminished as Nixon ended the draft and withdrew U.S. troops from Vietnam. Mark Rudd, one of the organizers of the Weather Underground, later confessed that their “totally failed strategy” was designed to destroy SDS “because it wasn’t revolutionary enough for us. I am not proud of this history.” His own conversion to revolutionary violence, he explained, “had something to do with an exaggerated sense of my own importance. I wanted to prove myself as a ­man—​­a motive exploited by all armies and terrorist groups.” Rudd called the intentional destruction of SDS by the Weathermen a “crime.” Their “­hyper-​­militancy” and bombings weakened “the larger a­ nti-​­war movement and demoralized many good people.” Blowing things up “got us isolated” by the media and “smashed” by the FBI.

 the counterculture

 Looking back over the 1960s, Tom Hayden, the founder of SDS, recalled that most rebellious young Americans “were not narrowly political. Most were not so interested in attaining [elected] office but in changing lifestyles. They were not interested in being opinion makers as in changing the climate of opinion.” Hayden acknowledged that the shocking events of 1968 led disaffected young ­rebels—​­so-​­called h ­ ippies—​­to embrace the counterculture, an unorganized rebellion against mainstream institutions, values, and behavior that focused more on cultural change than political activism. Hippies rejected the pursuit of wealth and careers and embraced plain living, authenticity, friendship, peace, and, especially, freedom. In a 1967 cover story, the editors of Time magazine suggested that “in their independence of material possessions and their emphasis on peacefulness and honesty, hippies lead considerably more virtuous lives than the great majority of their fellow citizens. . . . ​In the end, it may be that the hippies have not so much dropped out of American society as given it something to think about.”

 1370  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 Flower power Hippies let loose at a 1967 ­love-​­in, one of many such gatherings that celebrated peace, free love, and nontheological spirituality, often as a gesture of protest.

 Both the counterculture and the New Left fiercely rejected the status quo, but most hippies preferred to “drop out” of mainstream society rather than try to change the political system. Their preferred slogan was “Make Love, Not War.” Like the Beats of the fifties, hippies created their own subculture that promoted personal freedom from virtually all traditional constraints. They were at once defiant, innocent, egalitarian, optimistic, and indulgent as they rejected the authority of the nation’s core institutions: the family, government, political parties, corporations, the military, and colleges and universities. The “idea was to liberate yourself from the confining conventions of life and to celebrate the irrational side of your nature, kind of let yourself go,” explained a student at the University of Chicago. “Do Your Own Thing” became the unofficial motto of the counterculture. The counterculture lifestyle included an array of popular ideals and activities: peace, love, harmony, rock music, mystical religions, ­mind-​­altering drugs, casual sex, and communal living. Hippie fashion featured defiantly long hair for both women and men and clothing that was striking, unusual, or, God forbid, comfortable: flowing cotton dresses, granny gowns, ragged ­bell-​­bottom blue jeans, t­ie-​­dyed T ­ -​­shirts, love beads, Tibetan bells, peace symbols, black

“Forever Young”: The Youth Revolt  1371


 Flower power Author Ken Kesey and his posse, the Merry Pranksters, held Acid Test Graduation parties throughout the San Francisco area that celebrated the psychedelic drug LSD (also known as “acid”).

 boots, or sandals. Young men grew beards, and women stopped wearing makeup. Underground newspapers celebrating the counterculture appeared in every large city, many of them with defiant names such as Fuck You: A Magazine of the Arts. A hippie magazine published in Boston in 1967–1968 called Avatar asked, “Who is the underground?” Its answer was “You are, if you think, dream, work, and build towards the improvements and changes in your life, your social and personal environments, towards the expectations of a better existence. . . . ​Think, look around, maybe in a mirror, maybe inside.”

 do your own thing

 The countercultural rebels were primarily ­middle-​­class whites deeply alienated by the Vietnam War, racism, political corruption, and parental authority. They were determined to break away from conventional behavior. For many, the preferred pathway to freedom was that recommended by former Harvard psychology professor Timothy Leary: “Tune in, turn on, drop out.” He added that “your only hope is dope.” If it had not been for marijuana, said one hippie, “I’d still be wearing a crew cut and saluting the flag.”

 1372  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 “eight miles high”

 Illegal ­drugs—​­marijuana, amphetamines, cocaine, peyote, hashish, heroin, and LSD, the “Acid Test”—were common within the counterculture. Said Todd Gitlin, a former SDS president, “More and more, to get access to youth culture” in the late 1960s, “you had to get high.” The Byrds sang about getting “Eight Miles High,” and Bob Dylan proclaimed that “everybody must get stoned!” In fact, getting stoned was one of the favorite activities of the millions who participated in the 1967 “Summer of Love,” a series of events protesting the Vietnam War and celebrating the youth revolt. The initial event was actually held April 15, when a peace march in New York City attracted 300,000 participants, the most ever assembled for a single event up to that time. Perhaps the most publicized activity of the “Summer of Love” occurred in San Francisco, where more than 100,000 hippies (“flower children”) converged. The loosely organized “Council for the Summer of Love” intended the gathering to be the first step in a grassroots revolution opposing the war by celebrating alternative ­lifestyles—​­listening to rock music, experimenting with ­mind-​­altering drugs, wearing “psychedelic” clothing, and indulging in casual sex.

 the yippies

 The countercultural alternative to SDS and the New Left was the zany Youth International party, better known as the Yippies, founded by two irreverent pranksters, Jerry Rubin and Abbie Hoffman. Often calling themselves Groucho Marxists, the Yippies were bent on thumbing their noses at conventional laws and behavior and mocking capitalism and the consumer culture. Abbie Hoffman explained that their “conception of revolution is that it’s fun.” They wanted to form an alliance between hippies and Weathermen, a “blending of pot and politics,” and to overthrow the power structure. Rubin claimed that “the first part of the Yippie program is to kill your parents,” since they are “our first oppressors.” He added that the widespread use of “psychedelic” drugs among young Americans “signifies the total end of the Protestant ethic: screw work, we want to know ourselves.” The Yippie platform called for peace in Vietnam, absolute personal freedom, free birth control and abortions, and legalization of marijuana and LSD. Hoffman had no interest in making the Yippies a traditional political organization. “We shall not defeat Amerika by organizing a political party,” he declared. “We shall do it by building a new ­nation—​­a nation as rugged as the marijuana leaf.” The anarchistic Yippies organized marijuana “­smoke-​ ­ins,” threw pies in the faces of political figures, nominated a squealing pig for the presidency, urged voters to cast their ballots for “None of the Above,” and

“Forever Young”: The Youth Revolt  1373


 threatened to put LSD in the city of Chicago’s water supply during the 1968 Democratic National Convention.

 communes

 For some, the counterculture involved experimenting with alternative living arrangements, especially “intentional communities” or “communes.” Communal living in urban areas such as San Francisco’s H ­ aight-​­Ashbury district, New York’s Greenwich Village, Chicago’s Uptown, and Atlanta’s 14th Street neighborhood were popular for a time, as were rural communes. Thousands of hippie romantics flocked to the countryside, eager to liberate themselves from parental and institutional restraints, live in harmony with nature, and coexist in love and openness. The participants in the ­back-​­to-​­the-​ Little house on the commune This ­land movement, as it became known, photograph of the members of the were seeking to deepen their sense of Family of the Mystic Arts commune in Oregon was featured on the cover of Life self and forge authentic community magazine’s July 18, 1969, edition. ties. “Out here,” one of the rural communalists reflected, “we’ve got the earth and ourselves and God above. . . . ​We came for simplicity and to rediscover God.” Yet all but a handful of the ­back-​­to-​­the-​­land experiments collapsed within a few months or years. Almost none of those attracted by rural life actually knew how to farm, and many were not willing to do the hard work that living off the land required. “The hippies will not change America,” a journalist predicted, “because change means pain, and the hippie subculture is rooted in the pleasure principle.” Newsweek magazine reported “Trouble in Hippieland” in 1968, noting that most of the flower children were “seriously disturbed youngsters” incapable of sustaining an alternative to mainstream life. In a candid reflection, a young hippie confessed that “we are so stupid, so unable to cope with anything practical.” A resident of Paper Farm in northern California, which started in 1968 and collapsed a year later, said of its participants: “They had no commitment to the ­land—​­a big problem. All would take food from the land, but

 1374  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 few would tend it. . . . ​We were entirely open. We did not say no [to anyone]. We felt this would make for a more dynamic group. But we got a lot of sick people.”

 woodstock

 The sixties counterculture thrived on ­music—​­initially folk “protest” songs and later psychedelic rock music. During the early sixties, Pete Seeger, Joan Baez, Peter, Paul, and Mary, and Bob Dylan, among others, produced powerful songs intended to spur social reform. In Dylan’s “The Times They Are a­ -​­Changin’,” first sung in 1963, he warns: “There’s a battle outside and it’s ragin’ / It’ll soon shake your windows and rattle your walls / For the times, they are ­a-​­changin’.” Within a few years, however, the hippies’ favorite performers were those under the influence of m ­ ind-​­altering drugs, especially the San F ­ rancisco–​ ­based “acid rock” bands: Jefferson Airplane, Big Brother and the Holding Company, and the Grateful Dead. Huge outdoor concerts were wildly popular. The largest was the ­sprawling Woodstock Music and Art Fair (“Aquarian Exposition”). In ­mid-​­August 1969, more than 400,000 mostly young ­people converged on a 600-acre farm near the tiny rural town of Bethel, New York, for what was called the world’s “largest happening,” three days “of peace and music.” The festival boasted an a­ll-​­ star cast of musicians, among them Jimi Hendrix, the Jefferson Airplane, Janis Joplin, Santana, the Who, Joan Baez, and Crosby, Stills & Nash. For three days amid heat, rain storms, and rivers of mud, the assembled “flower children” “grooved” on good music, beer and booze, cheap marijuana, and casual sex. There were overdoses (“bad trips”), but no robberies, assaults, or rapes. Baez said that Woodstock was a “technicolor, ­mud-​­splattered reflection Bob Dylan Born Robert Allen Zimmerman in northern Minnesota, of the 1960s.” Dylan helped transform the New York Woodstock’s carefree “spirit of folk music scene, penning the a ­ nti-​ love” was s­hort-​­ lived, however. Just ­war movement anthem “Blowin’ in the four months later, when other conWind.” cert promoters tried to replicate the

Social Activism Spreads  1375


 “Woodstock Nation” experience at the Altamont Speedway Free Festival near San Francisco, the counterculture fell victim to the criminal culture. The Rolling Stones hired the Hells Angels motorcycle gang to provide “security” for their show. During the band’s performance of “Under My Thumb,” a drunken Hells Angel stabbed to death an ­eighteen-​­year-​­old African American man wielding a gun in front of the stage. Three other spectators were accidentally killed. Much of the vitality and innocence of the counterculture died with them. After 1969, the hippie phenomenon began to fade as the spirit of liberation ran up against the hard realities of growing poverty, drug addiction, crime, and mental and physical illness among the “flower children.”

Social Activism Spreads
 The same liberationist ideals that prompted young people to revolt against mainstream values and to protest against the Vietnam War also led many of them to embrace other causes. The success of the civil rights movement inspired other g­ roups—​­women; Mexican Americans and Native Americans; gays; the elderly; and the physically and mentally d ­ isabled—​­to demand equal opportunities and equal rights. Still others joined the emerging environmental movement or groups working on behalf of consumers.

The New Feminism
 The women’s movement in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries had focused on gaining the right to vote. The feminist movement of the sixties and seventies aimed to challenge the conventional ideal of female domesticity and ensure that women were treated equally in the workplace. Most women in the early sixties, however, did not view gender equality as possible or even desirable. In 1962, more than ­two-​­thirds of women surveyed agreed that the most important family decisions “should be made by the man of the house.” Although the Equal Pay Act of 1963 had made it illegal to pay women less than men for doing the same job, discrimination and harassment continued in the workplace and throughout society. Women, who were 51 percent of the nation’s population and held 37 percent of the jobs, were paid 42 percent less than men. Betty Friedan, a ­forty-​­two-​­year-​­old journalist and mother of three from Peoria, Illinois, emerged as the leader of the women’s movement. Her i­ nfluential book The Feminine Mystique (1963) helped launch the new phase of female protest. Friedan claimed that “something was very wrong with the way American women are trying to live their lives today.” Her generation

 1376  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 of white, college-​­ educated women (she did not discuss ­ working-​­ class or African American women) had actually lost ground after the Second World War, when many left wartime employment and settled in ­suburbia as f­ull-​­time wives and mothers, only to suffer from the “happy homemaker” s­yndrome which undermined their intellectual capacity and public a­ spirations. ­College-​­educated women, she observed, “seemed ­suddenly incapable of any ambition, any vision, any passion, except the pursuit of a w ­ edding ring.” Friedan blamed a massive propaganda campaign by advertisers and women’s magazines for brainwashing Betty Friedan Author of The Feminine women to embrace the “feminine mysMystique and the first president of NOW. tique” of blissful domesticity in which fulfillment came only with marriage and motherhood. Women, Friedan claimed, “were being duped into believing homemaking was their natural destiny.” The Feminine Mystique, an immediate best seller, forever changed American society by defining “the problem that has no name.” Friedan’s analysis of the “feminine mystique” inspired many w ­ ell-​­educated, unfulfilled m ­ iddle-​­and ­upper-​­class white women who felt trapped by a suffocating suburban ideal of household drudgery. Moreover, Friedan discovered that there were far more women working outside the home than she had assumed. Many of them were frustrated by the demands of holding “two ­full-​­time jobs instead of just ­one—​­underpaid clerical worker and unpaid housekeeper.” Perhaps most important, Friedan helped empower women to achieve their “full human capacities”—in the home, in schools, in offices, on college campuses, and in politics. In 1966, Friedan and other activists founded the National Organization for Women (NOW). They chose the acronym NOW because it was part of a popular civil rights chant: “What do you want?” protesters yelled. “FREEDOM!” “When do you want it?” “NOW!” NOW was formed to promote “true equality for all women in America . . . ​ as part of the w ­ orld-​­wide revolution of human rights now taking place.” It

Social Activism Spreads  1377


 sought to end gender discrimination in the workplace and spearheaded efforts to legalize abortion and obtain federal and state support for c­ hild-​­care centers. Change came slowly, however. By 1970, there was still only one woman in the U.S. Senate, ten in the House of Representatives, and none on the Supreme Court or in the president’s cabinet. In the early seventies, members of Congress, the Supreme Court, and NOW advanced the cause of gender equality. Title IX of the Educational Amendments of 1972 barred discrimination on the basis of sex in any “education program or activity receiving federal financial assistance.” Most notably applied to athletics, Title IX has enabled female participation in high school sports to increase nearly tenfold and almost double at the college level. Congress also overwhelmingly approved an e­qual-​­ rights amendment (ERA) to the U.S. Constitution, which, if ratified by the states, would have required equal treatment for women throughout society and politics. By ­mid-​­1973, ­twenty-​­eight states had approved the amendment, ten short of the t­ hirty-​­eight needed for approval. In 1973, the Supreme Court, in its Roe v. Wade decision, made history by striking down state laws forbidding abortions during the first three months of pregnancy. The Court ruled that women have a fundamental “right to choose” whether to bear a child or not, since pregnancy necessarily affects a woman’s health and w ­ ell-​­being. The Roe v. Wade decision and the ensuing success of NOW’s efforts to liberalize local and state abortion laws generated a powerful conservative backlash, especially among Roman Catholics and evangelical Protestants, who mounted a potent “­right-​­to-​­life” crusade that helped fuel the conservative political resurgence in the seventies and thereafter.

 radical feminism

 During the late sixties, a new wave of younger and more radical feminists emerged. They sought “women’s liberation” from all forms of “sexism” (also called “male chauvinism” or “male oppression”). The new feminists, often called “women’s libbers,” were more militant than those who had established NOW. Many were veterans of the civil rights movement and the a­ nti-​­war crusade who had come to realize that male revolutionaries could be sexists, too. The women began meeting in small groups to discuss their opposition to the war and racism, only to discover at such “­consciousness-​­raising” sessions that what bound them together was their shared grievances as women in a “man’s world.” To gain true liberation, many of them decided, required exercising “sexual politics” whereby women would organize into a political movement based on their common problems and goals. Writer Robin Morgan captured this newly politicized feminism in the slogan, “The personal is political,” a radical

 1378  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 notion that Betty Friedan rejected. When lesbians demanded a public role in the women’s movement, Friedan deplored the “lavender menace” of lesbianism as a divisive distraction that would only enrage their opponents. By 1973, however, NOW had endorsed gay rights. Friedan could not dampen or deflect the younger generation of women activists, just as Martin Luther King Jr. had failed to control the Black Power movement. The goal of the women’s liberation movement, said Susan Brownmiller, was to “go beyond a simple concept of equality. NOW’s emphasis on legislative change left the radicals cold.” For women to be truly equal, Brownmiller and others believed, required transforming every aspect of society: child rearing, entertainment, domestic duties, business, and the arts. Feminists demanded that their “hidden history,” the story of women’s rights advocates over the centuries, be taught in schools and colleges. They also took direct action, such as picketing the 1968 Miss America Pageant, burning copies of Playboy and other men’s magazines, and tossing their bras and ­high-​­heeled shoes into “freedom cans.” They also formed militant organizations like WITCH (Women’s International Terrorist Conspiracy from Hell), WRAP (Women’s Radical Action Project), Keep on Truckin’ Sisters, and the Redstockings, whose manifesto proclaimed that they were tired of being exploited by men “as sex objects, breeders, domestic servants, and cheap labor.” Members sported buttons proclaiming their collective nickname: “Uppity Women.”

 fractured feminism

 What women want The Women’s Strike for Equality brought tens of thousands of women together on August 26, 1970, to march for gender equality and celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the Nineteenth Amendment.

By
 the end of the seventies, sharp disputes between moderate and radical feminists had fractured the women’s movement in ways similar to the fragmentation experienced by civil rights organizations a decade earlier. The movement’s failure to broaden its appeal much beyond the confines of the white middle class also caused reform efforts to stall. Ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment, which had once seemed

Social Activism Spreads  1379


 a straightforward assertion of equal opportunity (“Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex”), was stymied in several state legislatures by conservative groups. By 1982, it had died, three states short of ratification. Yet the successes of the women’s movement endured. The women fighting for equal rights focused on several basic issues: gender discrimination in the workplace; equal pay for equal Conservative women speak The work; an equal chance at jobs tradition- antifeminist campaign, STOP ERA ally reserved for men; the availability of (“Stop Taking Our Privileges, Equal h ­ igh-​­quality, ­government-​­subsidized Rights Amendment”), found its most child-​­ ­ care centers; and easier access outspoken activist in Phyllis Schlafly, a constitutional lawyer and staunch to ­birth-​­control devices, prenatal care, conservative. and abortion. Feminists also helped win improvements in divorce laws. Feminists called attention to issues long hidden or ignored. In 1970, for example, 36 percent of the nation’s “poor” families were headed by women, as were most urban families dependent on federal welfare services. Nearly 3 million poor children needed access to ­day-​­care centers, but there were places for only 530,000. The feminist movement helped women achieve mass entry into the labor market and enjoy steady improvements toward equal pay and treatment. In 1960, some 38 percent of women were working outside the home; by 1980, some 52 percent were doing so. Their growing presence in the labor force brought women a greater share of economic and political influence. By 1976, more than half of married women, and nine of ten female college graduates, were employed outside the home, a development that one economist called “the single most outstanding phenomenon of this century.” Women also enrolled in graduate and professional schools in record numbers. During the 1970s, women began winning elected offices at the local, state, and national levels.

 the sexual revolution and the pill

 The feminist movement coincided with the ­so-​­called sexual revolution. Americans became more tolerant of premarital sex, and women became more sexually active. Between

 1380  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 1960 and 1975, the number of college women engaging in sexual intercourse doubled, to 50 percent. Enabling this change, in large part, was a scientific breakthrough: the b ­ irth-​­control pill, approved for public use by the Food and Drug Administration in 1960. Widespread access to the pill gave women a greater sense of sexual freedom and led to m ­ ore-​­open discussion of birth control, reproduction, and Birth control To spread the word sexuality in general. By 1990, the world about ­birth- ​­control options, Planned would have 400 million fewer people as Parenthood in 1967 displayed posters a result of the pill. like this one in New York City buses. Although the ­birth-​­control pill contributed to a rise in sexually transmitted diseases, many women viewed it as an inexpensive, nonintrusive way to gain better control over their bodies and their futures. “It was a savior,” recalled Eleanor Smeal, president of the Feminist Majority Foundation.

Hispanic Rights
 The activism of student revolts, the civil rights movement, and the crusade for women’s rights soon spread to various ethnic minority groups. The word Hispanic, referring to people who trace their ancestry to ­Spanish-​­speaking Latin America or Spain, came into increasing use after 1945 in conjunction with growing efforts to promote economic and social justice. (Although frequently used as a synonym for Hispanic, the term Latino technically refers only to people of Latin American descent.) Labor shortages during the Second World War had led defense industries to offer Hispanic Americans their first significant access to ­skilled-​­labor jobs. And as with African Americans, service in the military helped to heighten an American identity among Hispanic Americans and increase their desire for equal rights and social opportunities. Social equality, however, remained elusive. After the Second World War, Hispanic Americans still faced widespread discrimination in hiring, housing, and education, and in 1960, the median income of a Mexican American family was only 62 percent of the national average. Hispanic American activists denounced segregation, called for improved public schools, and struggled to increase Hispanic political influence, economic opportunities, and visibility in the curricula of schools and colleges.

Social Activism Spreads  1381


 Hispanic civil rights leaders also faced an awkward dilemma: What should they do about the continuing stream of undocumented Mexican immigrants flowing across the border into the United States? Many Mexican Americans argued that their hopes for economic advancement and social equality were threatened by the influx of Mexican laborers willing to accept l­ow-​­paying jobs. Mexican American leaders thus helped end the bracero program in 1964 (which trucked in contract ­day-​­laborers from Mexico during harvest season).

 the united farm workers

 In the early sixties, Mexican American workers formed their own civil rights organization, the United Farm Workers (UFW). Its founder was the charismatic Cesar Chavez. Born in 1927 in Yuma, Arizona, the son of Mexican immigrants, Chavez served in the U.S. Navy during the Second World War, and afterward worked as a migrant laborer and community organizer focused on registering Latinos to vote. Then, along with Dolores Huerta, he created the UFW, a union for migrant lettuce workers and grape pickers, many of them undocumented immigrants who could be deported at any time. Up and down California, Chavez led nonviolent protest marches that had the energy of religious pilgrimages. He staged hunger strikes and managed nationwide boycotts.

 Cesar Chavez The usually energetic Chavez is visibly weakened from what would be a twenty-five-day hunger strike in support of the United Farm Workers Union in March 1968. Robert F. Kennedy, a great admirer of Chavez, is seated to his right.

 1382  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 The United Farm Workers gained national attention in September 1965 when the union organized a strike (la huelga) against the corporate grape growers in California’s San Joaquin Valley. As Huerta explained, “We have to get farmworkers the same type of benefits, the same type of wages, and the respect that they deserve because they do the most sacred work of all. They feed our nation every day.” Chavez’s relentless energy and deep Catholic faith, his insistence upon ­nonviolent tactics, his reliance upon ­college-​­student volunteers, his skillful alliance with organized labor and religious groups, and the life of poverty he chose for ­himself—​­all combined to attract media interest and popular support. However, the chief strength of the Hispanic rights movement lay less in the tactics of ­sit-​­ins and protest marches than in the rapid growth of the Hispanic American population. In 1970, Hispanics in the United States numbered 9 million (4.8 percent of the total population); by 2000 their numbers had increased to 35 million (12.5 percent); and in 2015, they numbered 55 million, making them the nation’s largest minority group (17 percent). The voting power of Hispanics and their concentration in states with key electoral votes has helped give the Hispanic point of view significant political clout.

Native American Rights
 American ­Indians—​­many of whom had begun calling themselves Native ­Americans—​­also emerged as a political force in the late sixties. Two conditions combined to make Indian rights a priority. First, many whites felt guilty for the destructive actions of their ancestors toward a people who had, after all, been here first. Second, Native Americans faced desperate times: Indian unemployment was ten times the national rate, life expectancy was twenty years lower than the national average, and the suicide rate was a hundred times higher than the rate for whites. Although President Lyndon Johnson attempted to funnel federal ­anti-​ ­poverty-​­program funds to reservations, militants within the Indian community grew impatient with the pace of change. Those promoting “Red Power” organized protests and demonstrations against local, state, and federal agencies. On November 20, 1969, fourteen Red Power activists occupied Alcatraz Island near San Francisco, which until 1963 had hosted a federal prison. Over the next several months, they were joined by hundreds of others, mostly students. The Nixon administration responded by cutting off electrical service and telephone lines. Stranded without electrical power and fresh water, most

Social Activism Spreads  1383


 of the protesters left the island. Finally, on June 11, 1971, the government removed the remaining fifteen Native Americans from the island. In 1968, the year before the Alcatraz occupation, two Chippewas (or Ojibwas) living in Minneapolis, George Mitchell and Dennis Banks, founded the American Indian Movement (AIM). In October 1972, AIM organized the Trail of Broken Treaties caravan, which traveled by bus and car from the West Coast to Washington, D.C., drawing attention to the federal government’s broken promises. When Nixon administration officials refused to meet with them, the protesters occupied the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs. The s­ it-​­in ended when government negotiators agreed to renew discussions of Native American grievances about the government programs intended to improve their quality of life. In 1973, AIM led 200 Sioux in the occupation of the tiny South Dakota village of Wounded Knee, where the U.S. Seventh Cavalry had massacred a Sioux village in 1890. Outraged by the light sentences given a group of local whites who had killed a Sioux in 1972, the organizers sought to draw attention to the plight of the Indians. After the militants took eleven hostages, federal marshals and FBI agents surrounded the encampment. When AIM leaders tried to bring in food and supplies, a s­ hoot-​­out erupted, with one Indian killed and another wounded. The confrontation ended with a government promise to reexamine Indian treaty rights.

 Standoff at Wounded Knee After occupying Wounded Knee and taking eleven hostages, members of the American Indian Movement and the Oglala Sioux stand guard outside of the town’s Sacred Heart Catholic Church.

 1384  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 Indian protesters subsequently discovered a more effective tactic: they went into federal courts armed with copies of old treaties and demanded that the documents become the basis for financial restitution for the lands taken from them. In Alaska, Maine, South Carolina, and Massachusetts, they won substantial settlements that officially recognized their tribal rights and awarded monetary compensation at levels that upgraded the standard of living on several reservations.

Gay Rights
 The liberationist impulses of the sixties also encouraged homosexuals to assert their right to equal treatment. Throughout the sixties, gay men and lesbians were treated with disgust, cruelty, and violence. On Saturday night, June 28, 1969, New York City vice police raided the Stonewall Inn, a popular gay bar in Greenwich Village. Instead of dispersing, the patrons fought back, and the struggle spilled into the streets. Hundreds of other gays and their supporters joined the fracas. The Stonewall riots lasted throughout the weekend, during which the Stonewall Inn burned down. When the turmoil ended, gays had forged a sense

 Gay Pride in the Seventies Gay rights activists march in the Fifth Annual Gay Pride Day demonstration, commemorating the fifth anniversary of the Stonewall riots which jumpstarted the modern gay rights movement in the United States.

Nixon and the Revival of Conservatism  1385


 of solidarity embodied in two new organizations, the Gay Liberation Front and the Gay Activists’ Alliance, both of which focused on ending discrimination and harassment against gay and transgender people. “Gay is good for all of us,” proclaimed one of its members. “The artificial categories ‘heterosexual’ and ‘homosexual’ have been laid on us by a sexist society.” As news of the Stonewall rebellion spread, the gay rights movement grew. By 1973, almost 800 gay organizations had been formed across the country. That year, the American Psychiatric Association removed homosexuality from its official manual of “mental illnesses.” Colleges and universities began offering courses and majors in “Gay Studies” (also called Queer Studies), and groups began pushing for official government recognition of ­same-​­sex marriages. As with the civil rights and women’s movements, however, the campaign for gay rights soon suffered from internal divisions and a conservative counterattack.

Nixon and the Revival
 of Conservatism The turmoil of the sixties spawned a cultural backlash among what Richard Nixon called the “great silent majority” of m ­ iddle-​­class Americans that propelled him to a narrow election victory in 1968. He had been elected president as the representative of middle ­America—​­voters fed up with liberal politics, hippies, radical feminism, and ­affirmative-​­action programs giving preferential treatment to minorities and women to atone for past injustices.

 the conservative backlash

 Alabama’s Democratic governor, George Wallace, led the conservative counterattack. He was a fierce champion of states’ rights and the voice of the white backlash against civil rights and cultural rebellion. “Liberals, intellectuals, and long hairs,” he shouted, “have run the country for too long.” Wallace repeatedly lashed out at “welfare queens,” unmarried women he claimed “were breeding children as a cash crop” to receive federal c­ hild-​­support checks. Wallace became the voice for many ­working-​­class whites fed up with political liberalism and social radicalism. All in the Family, the most popular television show in the 1970s, was created to showcase the decade’s cultural wars. In the m ­ ­ uch-​­ celebrated ­situation comedy, the Bunker family lived in a state of perpetual conflict in a ­working-​­class suburb of New York City. ­Semi-​­literate Archie Bunker (played by ­Carroll O’Connor), a P ­ olish-​­American ­loading-​­dock worker, was the gruff but l­ovable head of the family, a proud Republican, Nixon supporter, and

 1386  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 t­ alkative ­member of the “silent majority” who was a bundle of racial, ethnic, and political prejudices. Enthroned in his easy chair, Archie railed against blacks, Jews, Italians, gays, feminists, hippies, and liberals (including his ­live-​­in daughter and her hippie husband). At one point, he says: “I ain’t no bigot. I’m the first guy to say, ‘It ain’t your fault that youse are colored.’” The producer of the series, Norman Lear, sought to provoke viewers to question their own prejudices. In fact, however, many of the 50 million people watching each Saturday night identified with Archie’s ­narrow-​­minded values.

 richard nixon

 Richard Nixon appealed to the ­working-​­and m ­ iddle-​ ­class whites who feared that America was being corrupted by permissiveness, anarchy, and the tyranny of the rebellious minority. He explicitly appealed to voters “who did not break the law, people who pay their taxes and go to work, people who send their children to school, who go to their churches, people who are not haters, people who love this country.” Above all, he promised to restore “law and order.” In 1952, Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio, known as “Mr. Republican,” had characterized young Senator Nixon as a “little man in a big hurry” with “a mean and vindictive streak.” A grocer’s son from Whittier, California, Nixon was a humorless man of fierce ambition and extraordinary perseverance. Raised in a family that struggled with poverty, he had to claw and struggle to the top, and he nursed a deep resentment of people who had an easier time of it (the “moneyed class”). Nixon was smart, shrewd, cunning, and doggedly determined to succeed in politics. He was also famously hard to get to know. Republican senator Barry Goldwater described Nixon as “the most complete loner I’ve ever known.” Throughout his career, Nixon displayed violent mood swings punctuated by raging temper tantrums, profanity, and ­anti-​­Semitic outbursts. He was driven as much by anger and resentment as by civic duty. Critics nicknamed him “Tricky Dick” because he was a good liar. In his speech accepting the Republican nomination in 1968, Nixon pledged “to find the truth, to speak the truth, and live with the truth.” In fact, however, he often did the opposite. One of his presidential aides admitted that “we did often lie, mislead, deceive, try to use [the media], and to con them.”

 nixon’s appointments

 In his first term, Nixon selected for his cabinet and staff only white men who would blindly carry out his orders. John Mitchell, the gruff attorney general who had been a senior partner in Nixon’s

Nixon and the Revival of Conservatism   1387


 New York law firm, was his closest confidant. H. R. (Bob) Haldeman, a former advertising executive, served as chief of staff. As Haldeman explained, “Every President needs a son of a bitch, and I’m Nixon’s.” John Ehrlichman, a Seattle attorney and college schoolmate of Haldeman, was chief ­domestic-​­policy adviser. John W. Dean III, an associate deputy in the office of the U.S. Attorney General, became the White House legal counsel. Nixon tapped as secretary of state his old friend William Rogers, who had served as attorney general under Dwight D. Eisenhower. Nixon, however, had no intention of making Rogers the nation’s chief diplomat. Instead, the president virtually ignored Rogers while forging an unlikely partnership with Dr. Henry Kissinger, a brilliant ­German-​­born Harvard political scientist who had become the nation’s leading ­foreign-​­policy expert. Kissinger’s thick accent, owlish appearance, and outsized ego had helped to make him an international celebrity, courted by presidents of both parties. In 1969, Nixon named Kissinger his National Security Adviser, and in 1973 Kissinger became secretary of state. Nixon and Kissinger formed an odd but effective diplomatic team. Both were outsiders who preferred operating in secret; both were insecure and even paranoid at times; and both mistrusted and envied the other’s power and prestige. Nixon would eventually grow tired of Kissinger’s efforts at ­self-​­promotion and his frequent threats to resign if he did not get his way. For his part, Kissinger lavished praise on Nixon in public, while in private dismissing the president’s “meatball mind” and criticizing his excessive drinking. Yet for all of their differences, they worked well together, in part because they both loved intrigue, power politics, and diplomatic flexibility, and in part because of their shared vision of a multipolar world order beginning to replace the bipolar cold war as the United States slowly withdrew from Vietnam.

 the southern strategy

 A major reason for Nixon’s election victories in 1968 and 1972 was his shrewd southern strategy, designed to win over white southern Democrats upset by the civil rights revolution. Of all the nation’s regions, the South had long been the most conservative. The majority of white southern voters were religious and patriotic, fervently a­ nti-​ C ­ ommunist and a­ nti-​­union, and skeptical of s­ ocial-​­welfare programs. For a century, whites in the “Solid South” had steadfastly voted for Democrats. This trend reflected lingering resentments, dating to the Civil War and Reconstruction, against Abraham Lincoln and his Republican successors for imposing northern ways of life on the South, including racial integration. During the late sixties and seventies, however, a surging economy and a spurt of population growth transformed the South.

 1388  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 Between 1970 and 1990, the South’s population grew by 40 percent, more than twice the national average. The region’s warm climate, low cost of living, absence of labor unions, low taxes, and government incentives for economic development convinced waves of businesses to relocate there. During the seventies, job growth in the South was seven times greater than in New York and Pennsylvania. Southern “redneck” culture suddenly became all the rage, as the nation embraced stock car racing, cowboy boots, pickup trucks, barbecue, and country music. Rapid population g­ rowth—​­and the continuing spread of a­ ir-​ ­conditioning—​­brought the sunbelt states of the South, the Southwest, and California more congressional seats and more electoral votes. Every president elected between 1964 and 2008 had roots in the sunbelt. Nixon’s favorite singer, country star Merle Haggard, crooned in his smash hit, “Okie from Muskogee”: “We don’t smoke marijuana in Muskogee / We don’t take our trips on LSD / We don’t burn our draft cards down on Main Street / We like livin’ right and bein’ free.” Haggard’s conservative ­working-​ ­class fans bristled at ­anti-​­war protesters, hippies, rising taxes, ­social-​­welfare programs, and civil rights activism. The alienation of many ­ blue-​­ collar whites from the Democratic party, the demographic changes transforming sunbelt states, and the white backlash against ­court-​­ordered integration created an opportunity to gain southern votes that the Republican party eagerly exploited. In the 1968 presidential campaign, Nixon’s southern strategy won over traditionally Democratic white voters. He shrewdly “played the race card,” assuring white conservatives that he would appoint justices to the Supreme Court who would undermine federal enforcement of civil rights laws, such as mandatory school busing to achieve racial integration and ­affirmative-​­action programs that gave minorities priority in hiring decisions and the awarding of government contracts. Nixon also appealed to the economic concerns of ­middle-​­class southern whites by promising lower tax rates and less government regulation. In the 1972 election, Nixon carried every southern state by whopping majorities. The Republican takeover of the once “solid” Democratic South was the greatest realignment in American politics since Franklin D. Roosevelt’s election in 1932.

 nixon’s domestic agenda

 As president, Richard Nixon shared with his predecessors John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson an urge to increase presidential power. They believed that the presidency had become the central source of governmental action, that foreign policy should be managed from

Nixon and the Revival of Conservatism   1389


 the White House rather than the State Department, and that the president had the authority to wage war without a congressional declaration of war. Nixon was less a rigid conservative ideologue than a crafty politician. Forced to deal with a Congress controlled by Democrats, he chose his battles carefully and showed surprising flexibility, leading journalist Tom Wicker to describe him as “at once liberal and conservative, generous and begrudging, cynical and idealistic, choleric and calm, resentful and forgiving.” Nixon’s focus during his first term was developing policies and programs that would help him be reelected. To please Republicans and recruit conservative Democrats, he touted his New Federalism, whereby he sent federal monies to state and local governments to spend as they saw fit. He also disbanded the core agency of Lyndon Johnson’s war on p ­ overty—​­the Office of Economic ­Opportunity—​­and cut funding to several Great Society programs. At the same time, the Democrats in Congress passed significant legislation that Nixon signed: the right of ­eighteen-​­year-​­olds to vote in national elections (1970) and in all elections under the ­Twenty-​­Sixth Amendment (1971); increases in Social Security benefits and ­food-​­stamp funding; the Occupational Safety and Health Act (1970) to ensure safer workplace environments; and the Federal Election Campaign Act (1971), which modified the rules governing corporate financial donations to political campaigns.

 nixon and civil rights

 During his first term, President Nixon followed through on campaign pledges to blunt the momentum of the civil rights movement. He appointed no African Americans to his cabinet and refused to meet with the ­all-​­Democratic Congressional Black Caucus. “We’ve had enough social programs: forced integration, education, housing,” he told his chief of staff. “People don’t want more [people] on welfare. They don’t want to help the working poor, and our mood needs to be harder on this, not softer.” Nixon also launched a concerted effort to block congressional renewal of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 and to delay implementation of federal court orders requiring the racial desegregation of school districts in Mississippi. ­Sixty-​­five lawyers in the Justice Department signed a letter protesting Nixon’s stance. The D ­ emocratic-​­controlled Congress then extended the Voting Rights Act over Nixon’s veto. The Supreme Court also thwarted Nixon’s efforts to slow desegregation. In its first decision under the new chief justice, Warren B ­ urger—​­a Nixon ­appointee—​­the Court ordered the racial integration of the Mississippi public schools in Alexander v. Holmes County Board of Education (1969). During Nixon’s first term, more schools were desegregated under court order than

 1390  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 Off to school Because of violent protests by whites against forced desegregation, school buses in South Boston are escorted by police in October 1974.

 in all the K ­ennedy–​­ Johnson years combined. Nixon’s efforts to block desegregation in urban areas also failed. The Burger Court ruled unanimously in Swann v. ­Charlotte-​­Mecklenburg Board of Education (1971) that school systems must bus students out of their neighborhoods if necessary to achieve racially integrated schools. Protests over busing erupted in the North, the Midwest, and the Southwest, as white families denounced the destruction of “the neighborhood school.” Angry white parents in Pontiac, Michigan, were so determined to stop mandatory busing that they firebombed empty school buses.

 nixon and environmental protection During the

 seventies, dramatic increases in the price of oil and gasoline fueled a major energy crisis in the United States. Natural resources grew l­imited—​­and increasingly precious. Nixon recognized that the public mood had shifted in favor of greater federal environmental protections, especially after two widely publicized environmental events in 1969. The first was a massive oil spill off the coast of Santa Barbara, California, when an enormous slick of crude oil contaminated 200 miles of California beaches, killing thousands of sea birds and marine animals. Six months later, on June 22, 1969, the Cuyahoga River, an ­eighty-​­mile-​­long stream that slices through Cleveland, Ohio, spontaneously caught fire. Fouled with oil and grease, bubbling with subsurface gases, and littered with debris, the river burned for five days, its flames leaping fifty feet into the air. As with the Santa Barbara oil spill, the images of the burning river helped raise environmental awareness. A 1969 survey of college campuses by the New York Times revealed that many young people were transferring their attention and ­idealism from the ­anti-​­war m ­ ovement to the environmental movement.

Nixon and the Revival of Conservatism   1391


 Nixon knew that if he vetoed legislative efforts to improve environmental quality, the Democratic majorities in Congress would overrule him, so he chose not to stand in the way. In late 1969, he signed the amended Endangered Species Preservation Act and the National Environmental Policy Act. The latter became effective on January 1, 1970, the year that environmental groups established an annual Earth Day celebration. In 1970, Nixon by executive order created two new federal environmental agencies, the Environmental Protec- Environmental awareness An Earth Day demonstration dramatizing the tion Agency (EPA) and the National dangers of air pollution, April 1972. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The same year, he signed the Clean Air Act. Two years later, he vetoed a new clean water act, only to see Congress override his effort. He also undermined many of the new environmental laws by refusing to spend money appropriated by Congress to fund them.

 “stagflation”

 The major domestic development during the Nixon administration was a floundering economy. The accumulated expense of the Vietnam War and the Great Society programs helped quadruple the annual inflation rate from 3 percent in 1967 to 12 percent in 1974. Meanwhile, unemployment, at 3.3 percent when Nixon took office, nearly doubled to 6 percent by the end of 1970. Economists coined the term “stagflation” to describe the simultaneous problems of stalled economic growth (stagnation), rising inflation, and high unemployment. Consumer prices usually rose with a rapidly growing economy and rising employment. Now it was just the reverse, and there were no easy ways to fight the unusual combination of recession and inflation. Stagflation had at least three d ­eep-​­ rooted causes. First, the Johnson administration had financed both the Great Society ­social-​­welfare programs and the Vietnam War without a major tax increase, thereby generating larger federal deficits, a major expansion of the money supply, and price inflation. Second, U.S. companies were now facing stiff international competition from West Germany, Japan, and other emerging international industrial p ­ owers. The

 1392  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 technological and economic s­ uperiority that the United States had enjoyed since the Second World War was no longer unchallenged. Third, America’s ­prosperity since 1945 had resulted in part from the ready ­availability of cheap sources of energy. No other nation was more dependent upon the automobile and the automobile industry, and no other nation was more wasteful in its use of fossil fuels. During the seventies, however, oil and gasoline became scarcer and costlier. High energy prices and oil shortages took their toll on the economy. Oil crisis, 1973 The scarcity of Just as domestic petroleum reserves imported Arab oil forced the rationing began to dwindle and dependence of gasoline. Gas stations, such as this upon foreign sources increased, the one in Colorado, closed on Sundays to Organization of Petroleum Exportconserve supplies. ing Countries (OPEC) decided to use its huge oil supplies as a political and economic weapon. In 1973, the United States sent massive aid to Israel after ad ­ evastating ­Syrian-​­Egyptian attack launched on Yom Kippur, the holiest day on the Jewish calendar. OPEC responded by announcing that it would not sell oil to nations supporting Israel and that it was raising its oil prices by 400 percent. The Arab oil embargo caused gasoline shortages and skyrocketing prices. American motorists suddenly faced m ­ ile-​­long lines at gas stations, and factories cut production because of spiking fuel costs. Another condition leading to stagflation was the flood of new ­workers—​ ­mainly baby boomers and women. From 1965 to 1980, the workforce grew by almost 30 million, a number greater than the total labor force of France or West Germany. The number of new jobs could not keep up with the growth of the workforce, leaving many unemployed. The Nixon administration responded erratically and ineffectively to stagflation. First, the president sought to reduce the federal deficit by raising taxes and cutting the budget. When the Democratic Congress refused to cooperate, he encouraged the Federal Reserve Board to reduce the nation’s money supply by raising interest rates. The stock market immediately n ­ ose-​­dived, and the economy plunged into the “Nixon recession.”

 “Peace with Honor”: Ending the ­Vietnam War  1393

 “Peace with Honor”: Ending the ­Vietnam War By the time Richard Nixon entered the White House in January 1969, he and Henry Kissinger had developed a comprehensive vision of a new world order. The result was a dramatic transformation of U.S. foreign policy. Since 1945, the United States had lost its monopoly on nuclear weapons, its overwhelming economic dominance, and much of its geopolitical influence. The rapid rise of competing power centers in Europe, China, and Japan further complicated the cold war as well as international relations in general. Nixon and Kissinger envisioned defusing the cold war by pursuing peaceful coexistence with the Soviets and Chinese. After a “period of confrontation,” Nixon explained in his 1969 inaugural address, “we are entering an era of negotiation.” Preoccupied with secrecy, Nixon and Kissinger bypassed the State Department and Congress in their efforts to take advantage of shifting world events. Their immediate task was ending the war in Vietnam. Until all troops had returned home, the nation would find it difficult to achieve the social harmony that Nixon had promised. Privately, he had decided “there’s no way to win the war,” so he sought what he called “peace with honor.” That is, the United States needed to withdraw in a way that upheld the credibility of its military alliances around the world. Peace, however, was long in coming, not very honorable, and shockingly brief.

 gradual withdrawal

 The Vietnam policy implemented by President Nixon and Henry Kissinger moved along three fronts. First, U.S. negotiators in Paris demanded the withdrawal of Viet Cong forces from South Vietnam and the preservation of the U.S.-backed government of President Nguyen Van Thieu. The North Vietnamese and Viet Cong negotiators, for their part, insisted on retaining a Communist military presence in the south and reunifying the Vietnamese people under a government dominated by the Communists. Hidden from public awareness and from America’s South Vietnamese allies were secret meetings between Kissinger and the North Vietnamese. On the second front, Nixon sought to defuse the ­anti-​­war movement by reducing the number of U.S. troops in Vietnam, justifying the reduction as the natural result of “Vietnamization”—the equipping and training of South Vietnamese soldiers and pilots to assume the burden of combat. The president began withdrawing troops while expanding the American bombing of North Vietnam to buy time for the transition. From a peak of 560,000 troops in January 1969, only 50,000 remained in Vietnam by 1973.

 1394  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 In 1969, Nixon also established a draft lottery whereby the birthdates of ­nineteen-​­year-​­old men were randomly selected and assigned a number between 1 and 366. Those with low lottery numbers would be the first drafted into military service. The lottery system eliminated many inequities and clarified the likelihood of being drafted. Four years later, in 1973, the president did away with the draft altogether by creating an ­all-​­volunteer military. These initiatives, coupled with the troop withdrawals, defused the ­anti-​ ­war movement. Opinion polls showed strong support for Nixon’s war policies. “We’ve got those liberal bastards on the run now,” the president gloated, “and we’re going to keep them on the run.” On the third front, Nixon and Kissinger greatly expanded the bombing of North Vietnam in hopes of pressuring the Communist leaders to end the war. Kissinger felt that “a ­fourth-​­rate power” like North Vietnam must have a “breaking point.” Nixon agreed, suggesting that they let the North Vietnamese leaders know that he was so “obsessed about Communism” that he might use the “nuclear button” if necessary. In March 1969, the United States began a f­ourteen-​­month-​­long bombing campaign aimed at Communist forces using neighboring Cambodia as a base for raids into South Vietnam. The total tonnage of bombs dropped was four times that dropped on Japan during the Second World War. Still, Hanoi’s leaders did not flinch. Then, on April 30, 1970, Nixon announced an “incursion” into “neutral” Cambodia to “clean out” hidden Communist military bases. Privately, Nixon told Kissinger, who strongly endorsed the decision, “If this doesn’t work, it’ll be your ass, Henry.” Nixon knew that sending troops into Cambodia would reignite the ­anti-​­war movement. Secretary of State William Rogers predicted that “this will make the [­anti-​­war] students puke.”

 divisions at home

 Strident public opposition to the war and Nixon’s slow withdrawal of combat forces had a devastating effect on the military’s morale and reputation. “No one wants to be the last grunt to die in this lousy war,” said one soldier. Between 1969 and 1971, there were 730 reported fragging incidents (efforts by troops to kill or injure their own officers). Drug abuse became a major problem; in 1971, four times as many troops were hospitalized for drug overdoses as for ­combat-​­related wounds. Revelations of atrocities committed by U.S. soldiers caused even the staunchest supporters of the war to wince. Late in 1969, the story of the My Lai Massacre plunged the country into two years of exposure to the tale of William L. “Rusty” Calley, a t­ wenty-​­six-​­year-​­old army lieutenant who ordered the murder of 347 Vietnamese civilians in the village of My Lai in 1968. One

 “Peace with Honor”: Ending the ­Vietnam War  1395

 soldier described it as “­point-​­blank murder, and I was standing there watching it.” As newsmagazines published gruesome photos of the massacre, Americans debated the issues it raised. A father in northern California grumbled that Calley “would have been a hero” in the Second World War. His son shot back: “Yeah, if you were a Nazi.” ­Twenty-​­five army officers were charged with complicity in the massacre and subsequent c­ over-​­up, but only Calley was convicted. Nixon later granted him parole. Just as Nixon had expected, the escalation of the air war in Vietnam and the extension of the war into Cambodia triggered widespread a­ nti-​­war demonstrations. The president, however, was unmoved. “As far as this kind of activity is concerned,” he gruffly explained, “we expect it; however, under no circumstances will I be affected whatever by it.” In the spring of 1970, news of the secret Cambodian “incursion” by U.S. forces set off explosive demonstrations on college campuses. At Kent State University, the Ohio National Guard was called in to control rioting on May 4. As radicals hurled insults and rocks at the soldiers, the poorly trained guardsmen panicked and opened fire. Thirteen students were hit, and four of them, all bystanders, were killed. The killings at Kent State added new fury to the ­anti-​­war and ­anti-​­Nixon movements. That spring, demonstrations occurred on more than 350 campuses. A presidential commission charged with investigating the Kent State shootings concluded that they were “unnecessary and unwarranted.” Not all agreed. A resident of Kent told a reporter that “anyone who appears on the streets of a city like Kent with long hair, dirty clothes, or barefooted deserves to be shot. . . . ​It would have been better if the Guard had shot the whole lot of them.” Singer Neil Young had a different view. Shortly after the killings, he composed a song called “Ohio”: Tin soldiers and Nixon’s coming. We’re finally on our own. This summer I hear the drumming. Four dead in Ohio. The Ohio governor banned radio stations from playing the song, which only made it more popular. America again seemed at war with itself. Eleven days after the Kent State tragedy, on May 15, Mississippi highway patrolmen riddled a dormitory at Jackson State College with bullets, killing two students who were protesting the war. In New York City, a­ nti-​­war demonstrators who gathered to protest the student deaths and the invasion of Cambodia were attacked by conservative “­hard-​­hat” construction workers shouting “America, Love It or Leave It,”

 1396  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 Shooting at Kent State Mary Ann Vecchio, a teenage runaway participating in the ­anti-​­war demonstration, decries the murder of a Kent State student after the National Guard fired into the crowd.

 who forced the protesters to disperse, and then marched on City Hall to raise the U.S. flag, which had been lowered to ­half-​­staff in mourning for the Kent State victims. “Thank God for the hard hats,” Nixon exclaimed. The following year, in June 1971, the New York Times began publishing excerpts from The History of the U.S. ­Decision-​­Making Process of Vietnam Policy, a secret Defense Department study commissioned by Robert McNamara before his resignation as secretary of defense in 1968. The ­so-​­called Pentagon Papers, leaked to the press by Daniel Ellsberg, a former Defense Department official who had been one of Henry Kissinger’s students at Harvard, confirmed what many critics of the war had long suspected: Congress and the public had not received the full story about the Gulf of Tonkin incident of 1964, and contingency plans for U.S. entry into the war were being drawn up even as President Johnson was promising that combat troops would never be sent to Vietnam. Although the Pentagon Papers dealt with events only up to 1965, the Nixon administration blocked their publication, arguing that their release would endanger national security and prolong the war. By a vote of 6 to 3, the Supreme Court ruled against the government. Newspapers throughout the country began publishing the documents the next day. Nixon was furious. He

 “Peace with Honor”: Ending the ­Vietnam War  1397

 ordered the FBI to find out who had leaked the Pentagon Papers to the media. When the agency identified Ellsberg as the culprit, the president launched a crusade to destroy him, including a botched effort to break in to his psychiatrist’s office.

 war without end

 In the summer of 1972, Henry Kissinger renewed private meetings with the North Vietnamese negotiators in Paris. He now dropped his insistence upon the removal of all North Vietnamese troops from South Vietnam before the withdrawal of the remaining U.S. troops. On October 26, only a week before the U.S. presidential election, Kissinger announced that “Peace is at hand.” As it turned out, however, this was a cynical ploy to win votes. Several days earlier, the Thieu regime in South Vietnam had rejected the Kissinger plan for a ­cease-​­fire, fearful that allowing North Vietnamese troops to remain in the south would virtually guarantee a Communist victory. The peace talks broke off on December 16, and two days later the newly reelected Nixon ordered massive bombings of Hanoi and Haiphong, the two largest cities in North Vietnam. Nixon told Kissinger that he now would “stop at nothing to bring the enemy to his knees. . . . ​We have the power. The only question is whether we have the will to use that power. What distinguishes me from Johnson is that I have the will in spades.” The ­so-​­called Christmas bombings and the simultaneous U.S. mining of North Vietnamese harbors aroused worldwide protest. Yet the talks in Paris soon resumed, and on January 27, 1973, the United States, North and South Vietnam, and the Viet Cong signed an “agreement on ending the war and restoring peace in Vietnam,” known as the Paris Peace Accords. In fact, it was a carefully disguised surrender that enabled the United States to end its combat role. While Nixon and Kissinger claimed that the bombings had brought North Vietnam to its senses, in truth the North Vietnamese never altered their basic stance; they kept 150,000 troops in South Vietnam and remained committed to the reunification of Vietnam under one government. What had changed was the willingness of the South Vietnamese, who were never allowed to participate in the negotiations, to accept the agreement on the basis of Nixon’s promise that the United States would respond “with full force” to any Communist violation of the agreement. By the time the Paris Peace Accords were signed in 1973, another 20,000 Americans had died since Nixon had taken office in 1969, the morale of the U.S. military had been shattered, and millions of Southeast Asians had been killed or wounded. Fighting soon broke out again in both Vietnam and Cambodia. In the end, Nixon and Kissinger’s diplomatic efforts gained noth-

 1398  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 ing the president could not have accomplished in 1969 by ending the war on similar terms.

 the collapse of south vietnam On March 29, 1973, the

 last U.S. combat troops left Vietnam. The same day, almost 600 American prisoners of war, most of them downed pilots, were released from Hanoi. Within months, however, the ­cease-​­fire collapsed, the war between North and South resumed, and Communist forces gained the upper hand. In Cambodia (renamed the Khmer Republic after a 1970 military coup) and Laos, where fighting had been sporadic, a Communist victory also seemed inevitable. In 1975, the North Vietnamese launched a ­full-​­scale invasion of South Vietnam, sending the South Vietnamese army and civilians into headlong panic. President Thieu desperately appealed to Washington for the U.S. assistance promised in the Paris Peace Accords. But Congress, weary of spending dollars and lives in Vietnam, refused. On April 21, Thieu resigned and flew to Taiwan. In the end, “peace with honor” had given the United States just enough time to remove itself before the collapse of the South Vietnamese government. On April 30, 1975, Americans watched on television as North Vietnamese tanks rolled into Saigon, soon to be renamed Ho Chi Minh City, and military helicopters lifted desperate U.S. embassy and South Vietnamese officials and their families to warships waiting offshore. The longest, most controversial, and least successful war in American history to that point was finally over. It left a bitter legacy. During the period of U.S. involvement, the combined death count for combatants and civilians reached nearly 2 million. North Vietnam absorbed incredible ­losses—​ ­some 600,000 soldiers and countless civilians. South Vietnam lost 240,000 soldiers, and more than 500,000 Vietnamese became refugees in the United States. More than 58,000 Americans died in Vietnam; another 300,000 were wounded, 2,500 were declared missing, and almost 100,000 returned missing one or more limbs. The United States spent more than $699 billion on the war. The Vietnam War was the defining life event for the baby boomers, the generation that provided most of the U.S. troops as well as most of the ­anti-​ ­war protesters. The controversial war divided them in ways that would be felt for years. The “loss” of the war, combined with news of atrocities committed by American soldiers, eroded respect for the military so thoroughly that many young people came to regard military service as corrupting and dishonorable. Vietnam combat veterans (average age nineteen, compared to ­twenty-​ ­six among servicemen in the Second World War) had “lost” a war in which their country had lost interest. When they returned, many found that even their families were unwilling to talk about what the soldiers had experienced,

 “Peace with Honor”: Ending the ­Vietnam War  1399

 Leave with honor Hundreds of thousands of terrified South Vietnamese tried to flee the Communist forces with evacuating Americans. Here, a U.S. official punches a Vietnamese man trying to join his family in an overflowing airplane at Nha Trang.

 or were embarrassed about their involvement in the war. “I went over there thinking I was doing something right and came back a bum,” said Larry Langowski from Illinois. “I came back decked with medals on my uniform, and I got spit on by a hippie girl.” The Vietnam War, initially described as a crusade for democratic ideals, revealed that democracy was not easily transferable to regions of the world that lacked any historical experience with democratic government. Fought to contain the spread of communism, the war instead fragmented the national consensus that had governed foreign affairs since 1947, when President Truman developed policies to “contain” communism around the world. As opposition to the war undermined Lyndon B. Johnson’s presidency, it also created enduring fractures within the Democratic party. Said George McGovern, the ­anti-​­war senator and 1972 Democratic presidential nominee, “The Vietnam tragedy is at the root of the confusion and division of the Democratic party. It tore up our souls.” Not only had a decade of American effort in Vietnam proved futile, but the Khmer Rouge, the insurgent Cambodian Communist movement, had also

 1400  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 won a resounding victory over the government of the U.S.-backed Khmer Republic, plunging that country into a bloodbath. The maniacal Khmer Rouge leaders renamed the country Kampuchea and organized a genocidal campaign to destroy all of their opponents, killing almost a third of the total population.

The Nixon Doctrine and a Thawing
Cold War
 Despite the frustrations associated with his efforts to end the Vietnam War, Richard Nixon, like John F. Kennedy, greatly preferred foreign policy over domestic policy (which he compared to building “sewer projects”), and his greatest successes were in international relations. Nixon was an expert in foreign affairs and had traveled abroad frequently as Dwight Eisenhower’s vice president during the 1950s. As president, Nixon benefited greatly from the expertise and strategic vision of Henry Kissinger. Their grand design for U.S. foreign policy after the Vietnam War centered on developing friendly relations with the Soviet Union and Communist China. Nixon envisioned a ­post–​­cold war world, “an era of negotiation rather than confrontation.” He and Kissinger pressed for a return to an E ­ isenhower-​­era approach that entailed reducing l­arge-​­scale military interventions around the world and using the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to pursue America’s strategic interests covertly.

 the cia in chile

 Ever since Fidel Castro and his supporters gained control of Cuba in 1959, American presidents had been determined to prevent any more Communist insurgencies in the Western Hemisphere. In 1970, Salvador Allende, a Marxist, Socialist party leader, and friend of Castro, was a leading presidential candidate in Chile, on the southwest coast of South America. President Nixon and Henry Kissinger knew that, if elected, Allende planned to “nationalize” Chilean industries, including those owned by U.S. corporations. They did not want “another Castro” in Latin America. In September 1970, Nixon urged the CIA to do anything to prevent an Allende presidency. Although CIA agents provided campaign funds to his opponents, Allende was elected on October 24, 1970. The CIA then encouraged Chilean military leaders to oust him. In September 1973, the army took control, Allende either committed suicide or was murdered, and General Augusto Pinochet, a ruthless military dictator supposedly friendly to the United States, declared himself head of the government. In consolidating control over Chile, Pinochet executed thousands. It was yet another example of the United States being so obsessed by ­anti-​­communism

The Nixon Doctrine and a Thawing Cold War  1401


 and protecting American business interests that it was willing to interfere in the democratic process of other nations.

 the nixon doctrine

 In July 1969, while announcing the first troop withdrawals from Vietnam, President Nixon unveiled what came to be called the Nixon Doctrine, a new approach to America’s handling of international crises. Unlike John F. Kennedy, who had declared that the United States would “pay any price, bear any burden” to win the cold war, Nixon explained that “America ­cannot—​­and will n ­ ot—​­conceive all the plans, design all the programs, execute all the decisions, and undertake all the defense of the free nations of the world.” Those nations experiencing Communist insurgencies must in the future assume primary responsibility for their own defense. The United States would provide weapons and money but not soldiers. At the same time, Nixon announced that the United States would pursue partnerships with Communist countries in areas of mutual interest. That Nixon, a Republican with a history of rabid a­ nti-​­communism, would pursue such a policy of détente (a French word meaning “easing of relations”) with America’s Communist archenemies shocked many and demonstrated yet again his pragmatic flexibility.

 the people’s republic of china

 Richard Nixon had a genius for surprise. In 1971, without informing Secretary of State William Rogers, Nixon told Henry Kissinger to make a secret trip to Beijing to explore the possibility of U.S. recognition of Communist China, the most populous nation in the world, with over 800 million people. Kissinger was flabbergasted. He had earlier told his staff that “our leader has taken leave of reality. He thinks this is the moment to establish normal relations with Communist China.” Since 1949, when Mao Zedong’s revolutionary movement established control, the United States, with Richard Nixon’s hearty support, had refused even to recognize the People’s Republic of China, preferring to regard Chiang ­Kai-​­shek’s exiled regime on Taiwan as the legitimate Chinese government. Now, however, the time seemed ripe to Nixon for a bold renewal of ties. Both the United States and Communist China were exhausted from intense domestic strife (­anti-​­war protests in America, the Cultural Revolution in China), and both were eager to resist Soviet expansionism. Nixon also relished the shock effect of his action. His reaching out to Communist China, he told aide John Ehrlichman, would “discombobulate” the “­god-​­damned liberals.” It would “just kill them” for him to be the one reaching out to a Communist enemy. Nixon’s bombshell announcement on July 15, 1971, that Kissinger had just returned from Beijing and that the president himself would be going to China

 1402  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 the following year sent shock waves around the world. Nixon became the first U.S. president to use the term People’s Republic of China, an important symbolic step in normalizing relations. The Nationalist Chinese on Taiwan felt betrayed, and the Japanese, historic enemies of China, were furious. In October 1971, the United Nations voted to admit the People’s Republic of China and expel Taiwan. On February 21, 1972, during the “week that changed the world,” President Nixon arrived in Beijing with Nixon goes to China President Nixon almost a hundred journalists to report and Chinese premier Zhou Enlai toast on his dramatic visit to Communist each other at the lavish farewell banquet China. Americans watched on televiin Shanghai celebrating the historic sion as the president shook hands and visit. drank toasts with Prime Minister Zhou Enlai and Communist party Chairman Mao Zedong. In one simple but astonishing stroke, Nixon and Kissinger had ended two decades of diplomatic isolation of the People’s Republic of China. During the president’s w ­ eek-​­long visit, the two nations agreed to s­ cientific and cultural exchanges, steps toward resuming trade, and the eventual reunification of Taiwan with the mainland. A year after Nixon’s visit, “liaison offices” that served as ­unofficial embassies were established in Washington and Beijing. In 1979, diplomatic recognition was formalized. As a conservative ­anti-​­Communist, Nixon had accomplished a diplomatic feat that his Democratic predecessors could not have attempted for fear of being branded “soft” on communism. Nixon and Kissinger’s bold move had the added benefit of giving them leverage with the Soviet Union, which was understandably nervous about a U.S.–Chinese alliance.

 embracing the soviet union

 In truth, China welcomed the breakthrough in relations because of tensions with the Soviet Union, with which it shared a long but contested border. By 1972, the Chinese leadership had become more fearful of the Soviet Union than the United States. The Soviets, troubled by the agreements between China and the United States, were also eager to ease tensions with the Americans. Once again, President Nixon surprised the world by announcing that he would visit Moscow in

The Nixon Doctrine and a Thawing Cold War  1403


 1972 for ­discussions with Leonid Brezhnev, the Soviet premier. The high drama of the China visit was repeated in Moscow, with toasts and elegant dinners attended by world leaders who had previously regarded each other as incarnations of evil. What became known as détente with the Soviets offered the promise of less intense competition between the superpowers. Nixon and Brezhnev signed the pathbreaking Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT I), which negotiators had been working on since 1969. The SALT agreement did not end the nuclear arms race, but it did limit the number of missiles with nuclear warheads and prohibited the construction of m ­ issile-​­defense systems. The Moscow summit also produced new trade agreements, including an arrangement whereby the United States sold almost a quarter of its wheat crop to the Soviets at a favorable price. (Critics called it the Great Grain Robbery.) The summit resulted in the dramatic easing of tensions between the two superpowers. As Nixon told Congress upon his return, “never before have two adversaries, so deeply divided by conflicting ideologies and political rivalries, been able to limit the armaments upon which their survival depends.” For Nixon and Kissinger, the agreements with China and the Soviet Union represented monumental changes in the global order. Over time, détente with the Soviet Union would help end the cold war altogether by lowering Soviet hostility to Western influences, which in turn slowly eroded Communist rule from the inside.

 shuttle diplomacy

 The ­Nixon–​­Kissinger initiatives in the Middle East were less dramatic and less conclusive than those in China and the Soviet Union, but they did show that the United States at last recognized the legitimacy of Arab interests in the region and its own dependence upon Middle Eastern oil. In the ­Six-​­Day War of 1967, Israeli forces had routed the armies of Egypt, Syria, and Jordan, and seized territory from all three nations. Moreover, the number of Palestinian refugees, many of them homeless since the creation of Israel in 1948, increased after the Israeli victory. The Middle East remained a tinderbox of tensions. On October 6, 1973, the Jewish holy day of Yom Kippur, Syria and Egypt, backed by Saudi A ­ rabia and armed with Soviet weapons, attacked Israel, igniting what became the Yom Kippur War. It created the most dangerous confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union since the Cuban missile crisis. When the Israeli army, with weapons supplied by the United States, launched a fierce counterattack that appeared likely to overwhelm Egypt, the Soviets threatened to intervene militarily. Nixon, whose presidency was at risk because of the ongoing Watergate investigations, was bedridden because he

 1404  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 was drunk, according to Henry Kissinger and other aides, so Kissinger, as secretary of state, presided over a National Security Council meeting that placed America’s military forces on full alert. On October 20, Kissinger flew to Moscow to meet with Soviet premier Brezhnev. Kissinger skillfully negotiated a ­cease-​­fire agreement and exerted pressure on the Israelis to prevent them from taking additional Arab territory. In an attempt to broker a lasting settlement, Kissinger made numerous flights among the capitals of the Middle East. His “shuttle diplomacy” won acclaim from all sides, though he failed to find a comprehensive formula for peace. He did, however, lay the groundwork for an important treaty between Israel and Egypt in 1977.

Watergate
 Nixon’s foreign policy achievements allowed him to stage the presidential ­campaign of 1972 as a triumphal procession. Early on, the main threat to his reelection came from George Wallace, who had the potential as a t­hird-​­party candidate to deprive the Republicans of conservative southern votes and thereby throw the election to the Democrats. That threat ended, however, on May 15, 1972, when Wallace was shot in an assassination attempt. Although he survived, he was left paralyzed below the waist and had to withdraw from the campaign. Meanwhile, the Democrats nominated Senator George McGovern of South Dakota, an ­anti-​­war liberal who had been a decorated bomber pilot during the Second World War. Bobby Kennedy once called McGovern “the most decent man in the Senate.” Yet he was a poor campaigner. One journalist mused that the Democratic campaign was so inept that it must have been planned by the Republicans. A growing number of voters viewed McGovern as a ­left-​­wing extremist whose campaign speeches seemed lifeless. His high school debate coach acknowledged that “George’s colorfulness was his colorlessness.” On Election Day, McGovern was trounced. Nixon won the greatest victory of any Republican presidential candidate in history, capturing 520 electoral votes to only 17 for McGovern. The popular vote was equally decisive: 46 million to 28 million, a proportion of the total vote (60.8 percent) that was second only to Lyndon Johnson’s victory over Barry Goldwater in 1964. For all of his abilities and accomplishments, however, Nixon was chronically insecure. He nursed grudges and took politics personally, and he could be ruthless in attacking his opponents. As president, he began keeping a secret “enemies list” and launched numerous efforts to embarrass and punish those on the list. Little did he know that such behavior would bring him crashing down.

Watergate  1405


 “dirty tricks”

 By the spring of 1972, senior Nixon aide John Ehrlichman was overseeing a secret team of agents who performed various acts of sabotage against Democrats, such as falsely accusing Democratic senators Hubert H. Humphrey and Henry Jackson of sexual improprieties, forging press releases, setting off stink bombs at Democratic campaign events, and planting spies on George McGovern’s campaign plane. Charles “Chuck” Colson, one of the most active “dirty tricksters,” admitted that “we did a hell of a lot of things and never got caught.” During the campaign, McGovern had complained about the “dirty tricks” orchestrated by members of the Nixon administration. Nixon, it turned out, had ordered illegal wiretaps on his opponents (as well as on his own aides), tried to coerce the Internal Revenue Service to intimidate Democrats, and told his chief of staff, Bob Haldeman, to break into the safe at the Brookings Institution, a Washington research center with Democratic ties. McGovern was especially disturbed by an incident on June 17, 1972, when five men were caught breaking into the Democratic National Committee headquarters in the exclusive Watergate apartment and office complex in Washington, D.C. Four of the burglars were ­right-​­wing Cuban exiles who had worked for the CIA, and one, James W. McCord, worked for Nixon’s campaign. At the time, McGovern’s complaints about the ­break-​­in seemed like sour grapes from a candidate running far behind in the polls. Few people paid any attention to the burglary. Nixon denied any involvement in this “very bizarre incident.” Privately, however, he and his senior aides began feverish efforts to cover up the Watergate affair. The president told Alexander Haig, his chief of staff, that “we will cover up until hell freezes over.” They secretly provided $400,000 to the jailed burglars to buy their silence and tried to keep the FBI out of the investigation. They also discussed using the CIA to derail the Justice Department’s investigation. They lied to journalists and destroyed evidence related to the case. Bob Haldeman, Nixon’s chief of staff, developed a plan for the jailed Cubans to take the fall, suggesting that they claim they acted solely on their own. He also told the FBI to quit investigating the incident because it involved a ­super-​­secret CIA operation (a lie). Nixon encouraged such efforts, stressing that “the main concern is to keep the White House out of it.” What Nixon and his aides failed to account for was the dogged efforts of two Washington Post reporters, Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward, to uncover the facts of the Watergate ­break-​­in. On September 16, 1972, they reported that a grand jury was about to indict the Watergate burglars along with two other men, Gordon Liddy and Howard Hunt, who had been connected to the scheme. Liddy would be the first White House aide ever indicted. Then, on October 10, Bernstein and Woodward revealed that the FBI had discovered a

 1406  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 direct connection between the Watergate burglary and the Committee to R ­ e-​ ­Elect the President. Seventeen days later, CBS’s Walter Cronkite, the nation’s most popular news reporter, announced that “Watergate has escalated into charges of a ­high-​­level campaign of political sabotage and espionage apparently unparalleled in American history.”

 uncovering the ­cover-​­up

 During the trial of the accused Watergate burglars in January 1973, relentless questioning by federal judge John J. Sirica led one of the accused to tell the full story of the Nixon administration’s involvement. James W. McCord, security chief of the Committee to ­Re-​­Elect the President (CREEP), was the first in what would become a long line of informers to reveal the systematic efforts of Nixon and his aides to create an “imperial presidency.” By the time of the Watergate b ­ reak-​­in, money to finance “dirty tricks” was being illegally collected through CREEP and controlled by the White House staff. The trail of evidence pursued first by Sirica, then by a grand jury, and then by a Senate committee headed by Democrat Samuel J. Ervin Jr. of North Carolina, led directly to what White House legal counsel John Dean called a “cancer close to the Presidency.” Nixon was personally involved in the cover-up, using his power to discredit and block the investigation. He ordered the CIA to keep the FBI off the case and even coached his aides how to lie under oath. Most alarming, as it turned out, the Watergate burglary was merely part of a larger pattern of corruption and criminality sanctioned by the Nixon White House. The ­cover-​­up unraveled further later that year when L. Patrick Gray, acting director of the FBI, resigned after confessing that he had destroyed several incriminating documents. On April 30, 1973, Ehrlichman and Haldeman resigned (they would later serve time in prison), as did Attorney General Richard Kleindienst. A few days later, Nixon nervously assured the public in a television address, “I am not a crook.” Then Dean, whom Nixon had dismissed because of his cooperation with prosecutors, shocked the nation by testifying before the Ervin committee that there had been a ­cover-​­up approved by the president. Nixon thereafter became preoccupied with legal ­self-​­defense and political survival. He refused to provide Ervin’s committee with documents it requested, citing “executive privilege” to protect national security. In another shocking disclosure, a White House aide told the committee that Nixon had installed a secret taping system in the White House, and that many of the conversations about the Watergate burglary and ­cover-​­up had been recorded. The bombshell news set off a legal battle for the “Nixon tapes.” Harvard law professor Archibald Cox, whom Nixon’s new attorney general, Elliot Richardson, had appointed as special prosecutor to investigate the Watergate case, took

Watergate  1407


 the president to court in October 1973 to obtain the tapes. Nixon refused to release the recordings and ordered Cox fired. On October 20, in what became known as the “Saturday Night Massacre,” Richardson and Deputy Attorney General William Ruckelshaus resigned rather than fire Cox. (Solicitor General Robert Bork finally fired him.) Cox’s dismissal produced a firestorm of pub- John Ehrlichman Ehrlichman, aide to President Nixon, addresses the Senate lic indignation. Numerous newspaper Watergate committee on July 24, 1973. and magazine editorials, as well as a growing chorus of legislators, called for the president to be impeached for obstructing justice. A Gallup poll revealed that Nixon’s approval rating had plunged to 17 percent, the lowest level any president had ever received. The new special prosecutor, Leon Jaworski, also took the president to court. In March 1974, the Watergate grand jury indicted Ehrlichman, Haldeman, and former attorney general John Mitchell for obstruction of justice and named Nixon an “unindicted ­co-​­conspirator.” On April 30, Nixon, still refusing to turn over the actual tapes, released 1,254 pages of transcribed recordings that he had edited himself, often substituting the phrase “expletive deleted” for his vulgar language and a­ nti-​­Semitic rants. The transcripts revealed a president whose Oval Office conversations were so petty, s­ elf-​­serving, bigoted, and profane that they degraded the stature of the office and fueled growing demands for Nixon to resign. By the summer of 1974, Nixon was in full retreat. He became alternately combative, melancholy, and petty. Henry Kissinger found him increasingly unstable and drinking heavily. Nixon’s efforts to orchestrate the c­over-​­up obsessed, unbalanced, and unhinged him. After meeting with the president, Senator Barry Goldwater reported that Nixon “jabbered incessantly, often incoherently.” He seemed “to be cracking.” Americans watched the Ervin committee hearings as if they were episodes in a soap opera. On July 24, 1974, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously, in United States v. Richard M. Nixon, that the president must surrender all of the tape recordings. A few days later, the House Judiciary Committee voted to recommend three articles of impeachment: obstruction of justice through the payment of “hush money” to witnesses and the withholding of evidence; abuse of power through the use of federal agencies to deprive citizens of their constitutional rights; and defiance of Congress by withholding the tapes.

 1408  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 Before the House of Representatives could vote on impeachment, Nixon grudgingly handed over the complete set of White House tapes. The drama continued, however, when investigators learned that sections of certain key recordings were missing, including eighteen minutes of a conversation in June 1972 during which Nixon first mentioned the Watergate burglary. The president’s loyal secretary took the blame for the erasure, claiming that she had accidentally pushed the wrong button, but technical experts later V for “Victory” Before boarding the concluded that the missing segments White House helicopter following his had been intentionally deleted. The resignation, Nixon flashes a bright smile other recordings, however, provided and his trademark ­V-​­for-​­Victory sign to more than enough evidence of Nixon’s the world on August 9, 1974. involvement in the ­cover-​­up. At one point, he had yelled at aides who were asking what they and others should say to Watergate investigators: “I don’t give a shit what happens. I want you all to stonewall it, let them plead the Fifth Amendment, cover up or anything else.” The recordings led Republican leaders to urge Nixon to quit rather than face an impeachment trial in the Senate. On August 9, 1974, the embattled president resigned from office, the only president to do so. In 1969, he had begun his presidency hoping to heal America, to “bring people together.” Now he left the White House for a s­ elf-​­imposed exile at his home in San Clemente, California, having deeply wounded the nation. Nixon was one of the strangest, most complicated, and most interesting political figures in American history. He never understood why the Watergate affair could have ended his presidency; in his view, his only mistake was getting caught. Nixon claimed that a president’s actions could not be “illegal.” He was wrong. The Watergate affair’s clearest lesson was that not even a president is above the law. But the fact that the system worked by calling a president to justice did not prevent many Americans from losing faith in the credibility of elected officials. The New York Times reported that people across the country “think and feel differently from what they once did” as a result of the Watergate crisis. “They ask questions, they reject assumptions, they doubt what they are told.”

Watergate  1409


 watergate and the presidency

 If there was a silver lining in the dark cloud of Watergate, it was the vigor and resilience of the institutions that had brought a rogue president to j­ustice—​­the press, Congress, the courts, and public opinion. In the aftermath of the scandal, Congress passed several pieces of legislation designed to curb executive power. Nervous about possible efforts to renew military assistance to South Vietnam, the Democratic Congress passed the War Powers Act (1973), which requires a president to inform Congress within ­forty-​­eight hours if U.S. troops are deployed in combat abroad and to withdraw troops after sixty days unless Congress specifically approves their stay. To correct abuses in the use of campaign funds, Congress enacted legislation in 1974 that set new ceilings on political contributions and expenditures. And in reaction to the Nixon claim of “executive privilege” as a means of withholding evidence, Congress strengthened the 1966 Freedom of Information Act to require prompt responses to requests for information from government files and to place on government agencies the burden of proof for classifying information as secret.

 an unelected president

 During Richard Nixon’s last year in office, the Watergate crisis so dominated national politics that major domestic and foreign problems received little attention. Vice President Spiro Agnew had himself been forced to resign in October 1973 for accepting bribes from contractors before and during his term in office. The vice president at the time of Nixon’s resignation was Gerald Rudolph Ford, a s­ quare-​­jawed, ­plain-​­speaking former House minority leader from Michigan whom Nixon had appointed to succeed Agnew under the provisions of the ­Twenty-​­Fifth Amendment. An honest, decent man, Ford had played football at the University of Michigan before getting a law degree at Yale. But none of his accomplishments had prepared him for his unexpected role as an accidental president called upon to restore stability to a nation reeling from one crisis after another. On August 9, 1974, Ford was sworn in as the nation’s first politically appointed chief executive, the only person in history to serve as both vice president and president without having been elected to those offices. “I am acutely aware that you have not elected me as your President by your ballots,” Ford said in a nationally televised address. “So I ask you to confirm me as your President with your prayers.” He then assured the people that “our long national nightmare [Watergate] is over.” But it wasn’t. Restoring public confidence in elected leaders was not easy. Less than a month after taking office, Ford reopened the wounds of Watergate by issuing Nixon a “full, free, and absolute pardon” for any crimes he may have committed while in office. Many Americans were not in a forgiving mood, and

 1410  CHAPTER 30  Rebellion and Reaction 1960s and 1970s

 Ford’s pardon unleashed a storm of controversy. He was grilled by a House subcommittee wanting to know whether Nixon had made a secret deal for the pardon. Ford vigorously denied the charge, but the pardon hobbled his presidency. Doing what he had thought was the right thing made him suspect in the eyes of many voters. His approval rating plummeted from 71 percent to 49 percent in one day, the steepest drop ever recorded. Even his press secretary resigned in protest of the “Nixon pardon.”

 the ford years

 As president, Gerald Ford soon adopted the posture he had developed as the minority leader in the House of Representatives: naysaying head of the opposition who believed that the federal government exercised too much power. In his first fifteen months as president, he vetoed ­thirty-​­nine bills passed by the ­Democratic-​­controlled Congress, outstripping Herbert Hoover’s ­all-​­time veto record in less than half the time. By far the most important development during Ford’s brief presidency was the struggling economy. During the fall of 1974, the nation had entered its deepest recession since the Great Depression. Unemployment jumped to 9 percent in 1975, the annual rate of inflation reached double digits, and the federal budget deficit soon hit a record. Ford announced that inflation had become “Public Enemy No. 1,” but instead of taking bold action, he launched a timid public relations campaign featuring lapel buttons that simply read WIN, symbolizing the administration’s determination to “Whip Inflation Now.” The WIN buttons became a national joke and a symbol of Ford’s ineffectiveness. He later admitted that they were a failed “gimmick.” Ford initially supported increasing taxes to fight inflation, then reversed himself. By 1975, when he delivered his State of the Union address, he lamely conceded that “the state of the union is not good.” In March 1975, Ford signed a tax reduction bill that failed to stimulate economic growth. The federal budget deficit grew from $53 billion in Gerald Ford The 38th president listens 1975 to $74 billion in 1976. apprehensively to news of rising rates of In foreign policy, Ford retained unemployment and inflation in 1974. Henry Kissinger as secretary of state

Watergate  1411


 (while stripping him of his dual role as national security adviser) and pursued Nixon’s goals of stability in the Middle East, friendly relations with China, and détente with the Soviet Union. Kissinger’s tireless Middle East diplomacy produced an important agreement: Israel promised to return to Egypt most of the Sinai territory captured in the 1967 war, and the two nations agreed to rely on negotiations rather than force to settle future disagreements. These limited but significant achievements should have enhanced Ford’s image, but they were drowned in the criticism over the collapse of the South Vietnamese government in the face of the North Vietnamese invasion. At the same time, conservative Republicans led by Ronald Reagan lambasted Ford and Kissinger for their policy of détente toward the Soviet Union. Reagan argued that the efforts of Nixon, Kissinger, and Ford were helping to ensure the continued existence of the Soviet Union rather than accelerating its s­ elf-​­destruction.

 the election of 1976

 Both political parties were in disarray as they prepared for the 1976 presidential election. At the Republican convention, Gerald Ford had to fend off a powerful challenge from the darling of the party’s growing conservative wing, Ronald Reagan, a former ­two-​­term California governor and Hollywood actor. The Democrats chose James Earl Carter Jr., who had served one term as governor of Georgia. A former naval officer and engineer turned peanut farmer, Carter was one of several Democratic southern governors who sought to move their party away from its traditional “tax and spend” liberalism. Carter capitalized on ­post-​­Watergate cynicism by promising that he would “never tell a lie to the American people.” He also trumpeted his status as a political “outsider” whose inexperience in Washington politics would be an asset. Carter was certainly different from conventional candidates. Reporters covering the campaign marveled at a Southern Baptist candidate who was a “born again” Christian. To the surprise of many, Carter revived the New Deal voting alliance of southern whites, blacks, urban labor unionists, and ethnic groups like Jews and Hispanics to eke out a narrow win, receiving 41 million votes to Ford’s 39 million. A heavy turnout of African Americans in the South enabled Carter to sweep every state in the region except Virginia. He also benefited from the appeal of Walter F. Mondale, his liberal running mate and a favorite among ­blue-​­collar workers and the urban poor. The most significant story of the election, however, was the low voter turnout. Almost half of eligible voters, apparently alienated by Watergate, the stagnant economy, and the two lackluster candidates, chose to sit out the election. It was not a good omen for the incoming Democratic president.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 Youth Revolt Civil rights activism inspired a heightened interest in social causes during the sixties, especially among the young. Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) embodied the New Left ideology, and their ideas and tactics spread to many other campuses. By 1970, a distinctive counterculture had emerged among disaffected youth, and attracted young people (“hippies”) alienated by mainstream American values and institutions.

•


 The Inspirational Effects of the Civil Rights Movement The energy, ideals, tactics, and courage of the civil rights movement inspired many other social reform movements during the sixties and seventies, including the women’s movement, the Red Power movement among Native Americans, and the United Farm Workers (UFW). The Stonewall riots in New York City in 1969 marked a militant new era for gay rights.

•


 Reaction and Domestic Agenda Richard Nixon’s “southern strategy” drew conservative southern white Democrats into the Republican party. As president, he sought to slow the momentum of the civil rights movement, including affirmative action programs giving special treatment to minorities, and vetoed the extension of the Voting Rights Act of 1968, but Congress overrode his veto. Nixon did grudgingly support new federal environmental policies such as the creation of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

•


 End of the Vietnam War In 1968, Nixon campaigned for the presidency pledging to secure “peace with honor” in Vietnam, but years would pass before the war ended. Nixon implemented what was called the Vietnamization of the war, which involved increasing economic and military aid to the South Vietnamese, reducing U.S. ground forces, and escalating the bombing of North Vietnam (and Cambodia), while attempting to negotiate a ­cease-​­fire agreement. The publication of the Pentagon Papers in 1971 and the intense bombing of North Vietnam in December 1972 aroused more protests, but a month after the bombings began, North and South Vietnam agreed to a ­cease-​­fire called the Paris Peace Accords.

•


 Détente Nixon’s greatest accomplishments were in foreign policy. He opened diplomatic relations with Communist China and pursued détente with the Soviet Union. He and Henry Kissinger also helped ease tensions in the Middle East.

•


 Watergate During the 1972 presidential campaign, burglars were caught breaking into the Democratic party’s national campaign headquarters at the Watergate complex in Washington, D.C. Nixon tried to block congressional investigations, which eventually led to calls for his impeachment for obstruction of justice. Nixon resigned in 1974 to avoid being impeached. He was succeeded by Vice President Gerald Ford, whose presidency was undermined by economic struggles, international incidents, and his controversial decision to pardon Nixon.



Chronology
 Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) founded United Farm Workers (UFW) established Vietnam War expands National Organization for Women (NOW) founded 1967	­Six-​­Day War in Middle East Richard M. Nixon elected president June 1969 Stonewall riots in New York City August 1969 Woodstock music festival attracts 400,000 people EPA created and Clean Air Bill passed

 Shooting of students at Kent State University Ratification of the ­Twenty-​­Sixth Amendment

 Nixon ends draft, begins withdrawing troops from Vietnam Nixon wins reelection and visits Communist China

 Nixon visits USSR and signs SALT I treaty 1972–1974 Watergate scandal unfolds January 1973 The United States, North and South Vietnam, and the Viet Cong agree to a ­cease-​­fire Supreme Court overturns a­ nti-​­abortion laws in Roe v. Wade Gerald Ford becomes president after Nixon’s resignation April 1975 Saigon falls to the North Vietnamese

Key Terms
New Left p. 1365
 counterculture p. 1369 women’s movement p. 1375 Roe v. Wade p. 1377 United Farm Workers (UFW) p. 1381 Red Power p. 1382 Stonewall riots p. 1384 affirmative action p. 1385

Environmental Protection Agency
 (EPA) p. 1391 stagflation p. 1391 Vietnamization p. 1393 détente p. 1401 Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT I) p. 1403 Watergate (1972–1974) p. 1405 War Powers Act (1973) p. 1409

IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




Conservative
Revival
1977–1990


 Feels good to be Right This proud Republican and Reagan supporter lets his cowboy hat adorned with campaign buttons speak for him at the 1980 Republican National Convention. Held in Detroit, Michigan, the convention nominated former California governor Ronald Reagan, who promised to “make America great again.”

D


 uring the seventies, the United States lost much of its s­elf-​ ­confidence as it confronted difficult lessons about its power and resources and the pitfalls of greed and corruption. The Vietnam War, the Watergate scandal, and the spike in world oil prices, interest rates, and consumer prices revealed the limits of American power, prosperity, and virtue. For a nation accustomed to economic growth and spreading prosperity, the frustrating persistence of stagflation and gasoline shortages undermined national optimism. In July 1976, as the United States celebrated the bicentennial of its independence, many people were downsizing their expectations of the American Dream. Jimmy Carter, the first president from the Lower South, took office in 1977 promising a government that would be “competent” as well as “decent, open, fair, and compassionate.” But after four years as president, Carter had little to show for his efforts. The economy remained sluggish, consumer prices continued to increase at historic levels, and failed efforts to free Americans held hostage in Iran prompted critics, including Democrats, to denounce the administration as indecisive and inept. In the end, Carter’s inability to mobilize national support for an ­ill-​­fated energy program and his call for “a time of national austerity” revealed both his ineffective legislative skills and his misreading of the public mood. The Republicans capitalized by electing Ronald Reagan president in 1980. Where Carter had denounced the evils of unregulated capitalism, Reagan

 focus questions 1. Why did Jimmy Carter have such limited success as America’s ­thirty-​ ­ninth president? 2. What were the factors that led to the election of Ronald Reagan, the rise of the conservative movement, and the resurgence of the Republican party?

 3. What is “Reaganomics”? What were its effects on American society and economy?

 4. How did Reagan’s Soviet strategy help end the cold war? 5. What were the social and economic issues and innovations that emerged during the 1980s?

 6. What was the impact of the end of the cold war and the efforts of President George H. W. Bush to create a p ­ ost–​­cold war foreign policy?



