 1106  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 Yet that is exactly what Franklin Delano Roosevelt sought to do in 1932 as he assumed the presidency. He would save capitalism by transforming it. Like his hero, his cousin Theodore Roosevelt, he believed that the basic problem of ­twentieth-​­century life was the excessive power of large corporations. Only the federal government could regulate corporate capitalism for the public benefit. Few leaders have taken office in more dire circumstances. Yet within days of becoming president, Roosevelt took dramatic steps that forever changed the scope and role of the federal government. He believed that America’s democratic form of government had the ultimate responsibility to help people who were in distress, not out of a sense of charity but out of a sense of obligation. Along with a supportive Congress, he set about enacting dozens of bold measures to relieve human suffering and promote economic recovery. Roosevelt was an inspiring personality, overflowing with cheerful strength, strong convictions, and an unshakeable confidence in himself and in the resilience of the American people. He was also a pragmatist willing to try different approaches. His program for recovery, the New Deal, was therefore a series of ­trial-​­and-​­error actions rather than a comprehensive scheme. None of the ­well-​ ­intentioned but often poorly planned initiatives worked perfectly, and some failed miserably. Yet their combined effect was to restore hope and energy to the nation.

From Hooverism to the New Deal
 The Great Depression revealed Herbert Hoover to be a brilliant mediocrity. His initial response to the economic disaster was denial: there was no crisis, he insisted. All that was needed, he and others in his administration argued, was to let the economy cure itself. The best policy, Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon advised, would be to “liquidate labor, liquidate stocks, liquidate the farmers, liquidate real estate.” Letting events run their course, he claimed, would “purge the rottenness out of the [capitalist] system.” But Mellon’s d ­ o-​­nothing approach did not work. Falling wages and declining land and home values made it even harder for struggling farmers, businesses, and households to pay their bills. With so many people losing jobs and income, consumers and businesses simply could not buy enough goods and services to reenergize the economy.

 Hoover’s Efforts at Recovery As the months passed, President Hoover proved less willing than Andrew Mellon to sit by and let events take their course. As the “Great Engineer,” he in fact did more than any previous president in addressing such calamitous economic

From Hooverism to the New Deal  1107


 circumstances. He invited business, labor, government, and agricultural leaders to a series of White House conferences in which he urged companies to maintain employment and wage levels, asked union leaders to end strikes, and pleaded with state governors to accelerate planned construction projects so as to keep people working. He also formed committees and commissions to study various aspects of the economic calamity, and he cut the income tax. Yet nothing worked. Unemployment continued to rise, and wage levels continued to fall.

 upbeat messages

 In speech after speech, Hoover became an ineffective cheerleader for American capitalism. In early May 1930, the president told the U.S. Chamber of Commerce that he was “convinced we have passed the worst and with continued effort we shall rapidly recover.” A few weeks later, Hoover assured a group of bankers that the “depression is over.” The Hoover administration also circulated upbeat slogans such as “Business IS Better” and “Keep Smiling.” But uplifting words were not enough. More and more people kept losing their jobs and homes. Hoover never felt comfortable giving comfort to a desperate

 Hooverville Of the many Hoovervilles set up in Seattle, Washington, alone, this particular shantytown near the shipyards was the largest. It lasted nine years.

 1108  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 nation. His recurring ­statement—“No one has yet starved”—was hardly reassuring, or, as it turned out, accurate.

 ­short-​­sighted tax in­­creases

The Great Depression was the
 greatest national emergency since the Civil War, and the nation was woefully unprepared to deal with it. As personal income plummeted, so did government tax revenues. Despite the Depression, President Hoover insisted on trying to balance the federal budget by raising taxes and cutting b ­ udgets—​­precisely the wrong prescription for a sick economy. He pushed through Congress the ­Revenue Act of 1932, the ­largest—​­and most poorly ­timed—​­peacetime tax increase in American history. By taking money out of consumers’ pockets, the higher taxes accelerated the economic slowdown. People had less money to spend when what the struggling economy most needed was increased consumer spending.

 hoover’s reaction to the social crisis

 By the fall of 1930, many cities were buckling under the strain of lost revenue and human distress. The federal government had no programs to deal with homelessness and joblessness. State and local governments cut spending, worsening the economic situation. All across the country, shantytowns sprouted in vacant lots. People erected shacks out of cardboard and scrap wood and metal. They called their makeshift villages Hoovervilles to mock the president. To keep warm, they wrapped themselves in newspapers, calling them Hoover blankets. As their numbers rose, more and more homeless and jobless people called for government to step in. Frustrated by his critics, Hoover dismissed the concerns of “calamity mongers and weeping men.” Hoover feared that the nation would be “plunged into socialism” if the government provided direct supYoung and hungry A toddler begs for port to the poor. His governing phichange in one of the homeless camps. losophy, rooted in America’s mythic

From Hooverism to the New Deal  1109


 commitment to rugged individualism and free enterprise, set firm limits on emergency government action. The president still trumpeted the virtues of “­self-​­reliance” and individual initiative, claiming that government assistance would rob people of the desire to help themselves. Hoover hoped that the “natural generosity” of the American people and charitable organizations would be sufficient, and he believed that volunteers (the backbone of local charity organizations) would relieve the social distress caused by the Depression. But his faith in traditional “voluntarism” was misplaced. Local and state relief agencies were overwhelmed by the magnitude of the social crisis, as were churches and charitable organizations like the Salvation Army and the Red Cross.

Rising Criticism of Hoover
 That the economic collapse was so unexpected made people all the more insecure and anxious, and President Hoover increasingly became the target of their frustration. The Democrats shrewdly exploited his predicament. In November 1930, they gained their first national election victory since 1916, winning a majority in the House and a near majority in the Senate. Hoover refused to see the elections as a warning. Instead, he grew more resistant to calls for federal intervention in the struggling economy. By 1932,​ ­15 million p ­ eople were unemployed. The New York Times concluded that ­Hoover had “failed as a party leader. He has failed as an economist. . . . ​He has failed as a business leader. . . . ​He has failed as a personality because of [his] awkwardness of manner and speech and lack of mass magnetism.” When Hoover asked Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon for a nickel to phone a friend, the secretary replied: “Here are two ­nickels—​­call all of them.”

 congressional initiatives

 With a new Congress in session in 1932, demands for federal action forced Hoover to do more. That year, Congress set up the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) to make emergency loans to banks, ­life-​­insurance companies, and railroads. But if the federal government could help huge banks and railroads, asked New York Democratic senator Robert F. Wagner, why not “extend a helping hand to that forlorn American, in every village and every city of the United States, who has been without wages since 1929?” Hoover, however, held back and signed only the Emergency Relief Act (1932), which authorized the RFC to make loans to the states for construction projects. Critics called the RFC a “breadline” for businesses while the unemployed went hungry.

 1110  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 Anger and frustration Unemployed military veterans, members of the Bonus Expeditionary Force that served during the Great War, clash with Washington, D.C., police at Anacostia Flats in July 1932.

 farmers and veterans in protest

 Meanwhile, the average annual income of families working the land during the early 1930s was $240. Prices for agricultural products fell so low that farmers lost money if they took them to market. Thousands of midwestern farmers protested the low prices by dumping milk, vegetables, and fruits on the highways. Fears of organized revolt arose when thousands of unemployed military veterans converged on the nation’s capital in the spring of 1932. The “Bonus Expeditionary Force,” made up of veterans of the American Expeditionary Force (AEF) that fought in Europe in the Great War, pressed Congress to pay the cash bonuses owed to nearly 4 million veterans. The House passed a bonus bill, but the Senate voted it down because it would have forced a tax increase. Most of the disappointed veterans went home. The rest, along with their wives and children, having no place to go, camped in vacant federal buildings and in a shantytown within sight of the Capitol. Eager to remove the homeless veterans, Hoover persuaded Congress to pay for their train tickets home. More left, but others stayed even after Congress adjourned, hoping to meet with the president. Late in July, Hoover ordered the government buildings cleared. In doing so, a policeman panicked, fired into the crowd, and killed two veterans. The secretary of war then dispatched 700

From Hooverism to the New Deal  1111


 soldiers to remove the “Bonus Army.” The soldiers, commanded by army chief of staff General Douglas MacArthur, used horses and tanks to disperse the unarmed veterans and their families. Then, exceeding orders, the soldiers burned the makeshift camp. ­Fifty-​­five veterans were injured and 135 arrested. Widespread news coverage of the assault on the unemployed veterans led even more people to view Hoover and the Republicans as heartless. The Democratic governor of New York was horrified as he read newspaper accounts of the army’s violent assault on the Bonus Army. “Well,” Franklin Roosevelt told an aide, “this elects me” as the next president. (The veterans were finally paid their “bonus” in 1936.) The disheartened, angry mood of the Bonus Army matched that of the country and of President Hoover himself. He worked hard, but the stress sapped his health and morale. “I am so tired,” he said, “that every bone in my body aches.” When aides urged him to be more of a public leader, he replied, “I have no Wilsonian qualities.” He hated giving speeches, and when he did his tone came across as cold and uncaring. He also got along badly with journalists, who often highlighted his sour demeanor and dull, monotone voice. A sculptor claimed that “if you put a rose in Hoover’s hand, it would wilt.” The man who, in 1928, had promised Americans “permanent prosperity” was now a laughingstock. In the end, Hoover failed because he never understood or acknowledged the seriousness of the nation’s economic problems.

 the 1932 election

 In June 1932, glum Republicans gathered in Chicago to nominate President Hoover for a second term. By contrast, the Democrats arrived in Chicago for their convention a few weeks later confident that they would nominate the next president. ­Fifty-​­year-​­old New York governor Franklin Delano Roosevelt won on the fourth ballot. Roosevelt broke precedent by traveling to Chicago to accept the nomination in person. The stakes were high, he said, because Hoover and the Republicans had failed to address the economic disaster. “I pledge you, I pledge myself to a new deal for the American people” that would “break foolish traditions” and create a new, enlightened administration “of competence and courage.” Roosevelt first had to defeat Hoover, however. The race, he said, would be “more than a political campaign; it is a call to arms.” It was a vague but uplifting message of hope at a time when many people were slipping into despair. Roosevelt exuded energy and confidence. His campaign song was “Happy Days Are Here Again.” Throughout the campaign, Roosevelt attacked Hoover for his “extravagant government spending” and repeatedly promised a “New Deal” for the American people, stressing that a revitalized economy required new ideas and aggressive

 1112  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 action. “The country needs, and, unless I mistake its temper, the country demands bold, persistent experimentation,” he said. “Above all, try something.” In contrast to Roosevelt, Hoover lacked vitality and vision. Roosevelt’s proposals for unprecedented government action, he warned, “would destroy the very foundations of our American system.” The election was more than a contest between two men and two political parties; it was a battle “between two philosophies of government” that would decide “the direction our nation will take over a century to come.” Hoover lost decisively. Americans swept Roosevelt into office with 23 million votes to Hoover’s 16 million. In 1928, Hoover had carried 40 states; four years later, he won but six. THE ELECTION OF 1932

WA OR

 CA

MT ID

 NV

 ND

WY UT

 AZ

 CO

■
■


 WI

 IA

NE KS OK TX

■


 MN

 SD

 NM

 NH 4 VT 3

MO AR LA

 IL

 NY

MI IN

 OH 26 WV

 PA

VA NC TN 11 SC GA 8 MS AL KY 11



ME MA 17 RI 5 CT 8 NJ 16 DE 3 MD 8

 FL

Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Franklin D. Roosevelt (Democratic)




22,800,000


Herbert Hoover (Republican)




15,800,000


 Why did Franklin Roosevelt win over so many voters struggling during the Depression? WWN64 What were Herbert Hoover’s criticisms of Roosevelt’s New Deal? Figure M25_01 During the 1932 presidential campaign, what did Roosevelt pledge to fight the First proof Depression?

 Roosevelt’s New Deal  1113

 Roosevelt’s New Deal Franklin Roosevelt promised voters a “New Deal,” and within hours of being inaugurated, he and his aides set about creating a “new order of competence and courage.” For better or worse, the federal government assumed responsibility for national economic planning and for restoring prosperity and ensuring social ­security—​­for all. What Roosevelt called the “forgotten man” would no longer be forgotten.

 roosevelt’s rise

 Born in 1882, the adored only child of wealthy, aristocratic parents, young Franklin Roosevelt had enjoyed a pampered life that freed him from worrying about a job or a paycheck. He was educated by tutors at Springwood, his father’s Hudson River estate near Hyde Park, north of New York City. He attended Harvard College and Columbia University Law School. (He did not graduate.) While a law student in 1905, he married Anna Eleanor Roosevelt, the favorite niece of Theodore Roosevelt, then president of the United States, who was also Franklin’s distant cousin. In 1910, Franklin Roosevelt won a Democratic seat in the New York State Senate. Tall, handsome, athletic, and blessed with a sparkling personality and infectious smile, he seemed destined for greatness. In 1913, Woodrow Wilson appointed him assistant secretary of the navy. In 1920, Roosevelt became James Cox’s vice presidential running mate on the Democratic ticket.

 “trial by fire”

 Then a tragedy occurred. In 1921, at age ­thirty-​ ­ ine, Roosevelt, who loved to swim and sail, play tennis and golf, contracted n polio, an infectious neuromuscular disease that left him permanently disabled and forced him to use cumbersome leg braces to stand or walk. But Roosevelt fought back. For seven years, aided by his remarkable wife, Eleanor, he strengthened his body to compensate for his disability. The exhausting daily regimen of physical therapy transformed Roosevelt. Polio crippled his legs but expanded his sympathies. He became less pompous, more considerate, more focused, and more able to identify with the problems of people facing hard times. Roosevelt had a remarkable ability to make people feel at ease and express concern about their troubles. The aristocrat had developed the common touch as well as a great talent for public relations, but he also was vain and calculating and a clever manipulator. In other words, he was a consummate politician.

 a people’s president

 Roosevelt was neither a masterful administrator nor a deep thinker. One of his closest aides said the president never

 1114  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 “read a serious book.” But Roosevelt had many virtues: courage, good instincts, unrelenting optimism, and a charming personality. He loved talking to people, and he was determined to help those who could not help themselves. Colonel Edward House, the veteran Democratic counselor, explained that his former boss, Woodrow Wilson, “liked humanity as a whole and disliked people individually.” Roosevelt, by contrast, was “genuinely fond of people and shows it.” What truly set Roosevelt apart was his willingness to experiment with different ways of using government power and resources to address pressing problems. He embraced the orthodoxy of a balanced budget and complained about a “bloated bureaucracy,” for example, only to incur more budget deficits than all his predecessors combined as he dramatically expanded the scope of federal government. His inconsistencies reflected his distinctive personality as he launched his presidency and the New Deal.

 the 1933 inauguration

Inaugurated in March 1933, Franklin
 Delano Roosevelt assumed leadership during a crisis that threatened the very fabric of American capitalism. “The situation is critical, Franklin,” the prominent journalist Walter Lippmann warned. “You may have to assume dictatorial powers”—as had already happened in Germany, Italy, and the Soviet Union. Roosevelt did not become a dictator, but he did take extraordinary steps while assuring Americans “that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself.” He confessed in his inaugural address that he did not have all the answers, but he did know that “this nation asks for action, and action now.” He asked Congress for “a broad Executive power to wage a war against the emergency” just as “if we were in fact invaded by a foreign foe.” Roosevelt’s uplifting speech won rave reviews. Nearly 500,000 Americans wrote letters to the new president, and even the p ­ ro-​­Republican Chicago Tribune praised his “courageous confidence.”

 the first hundred days

In March 1933, President Roosevelt
 confronted four major challenges: reviving the industrial economy, relieving the widespread human misery, rescuing the ravaged farm sector, and reforming those aspects of the capitalist system that had helped cause the Depression. He quickly addressed all of those ­challenges—​­and more. The new president admitted that he would try several different “experiments.” Some would succeed, and others would fail, but the important thing was to do something ­bold—​­and fast. It was no time for timid leadership or paralyzing doubts. The defining characteristic of Roosevelt’s approach to pres­ thers—​­even when idential leadership was action. He had a genius for leading o he did not know for sure where he was taking them. To advise him, Roosevelt assembled a “brain trust” of brilliant specialists who feverishly developed fresh

 Roosevelt’s New Deal  1115

 ideas to address the nation’s urgent problems. Roosevelt and his advisers initially settled on a ­three-​­pronged strategy to revive the economy. First, they addressed the immediate banking crisis and provided ­short-​­term emergency relief for the jobless. Second, the New D ­ ealers—​­men and women (professors, journalists, economists, social work­ers, and political appointees) who swarmed to Washington during the winter of 1933—encouraged agreements between management and unions. Third, they attempted to raise depressed commodity prices (corn, cotton, wheat, beef, pork, etc.) by paying farmers “subsidies” to reduce the sizes of their crops Franklin Delano Roosevelt Preparing and herds so that prices would rise and to deliver the first of his popular thereby increase farm income. “fireside chats” to a national radio The new Congress was as ready audience. This message focused on to take action as was the new presi- measures to reform the American banking system. dent. From March 9 to June 16, the so-​­ ­ called First Hundred Days, Congress approved fifteen major pieces of legislation proposed by Roosevelt. Several of these programs comprised what came to be called the First New Deal (1933–1935).

Shoring Up the Financial System
 Money is the lubricant of capitalism, and money was fast disappearing from circulation by 1933. Ever since the stock market crash of 1929, panicky depositors had been withdrawing their money from banks and the stock market. Taking so much money out of circulation worsened the Depression and brought the banking system to the brink of collapse. Throughout the twenties, an average of almost 700 banks a year failed. After 1929, that number doubled and then tripled.

 banking regulation

 On his second day in office, March 9, 1933, Roosevelt called Congress into special session to pass the Emergency Banking Relief Act, which declared a f­ our-​­day bank holiday to allow the financial panic

 1116  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 to subside. (Herbert Hoover criticized the move as a step toward “gigantic socialism.”) For the first time in history, all U.S. banks closed their doors. Roosevelt’s financial experts worked all night drafting a bill to restore confidence in the banks. On March 12, in the first of his r­ adio-​­broadcast “fireside chats” to the nation, the president assured the 60 million listeners that it was safer to “keep your money in a reopened bank than under the mattress.” The following day, people took their money back to the banks. “Capitalism was saved in eight days,” said one of Roosevelt’s advisers. A few weeks later, on June 16, Roosevelt signed the G ­ lass-​­Steagall Banking Act of 1933, part of which created the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), which guaranteed customer accounts in banks up to $2,500,

 The galloping snail A vigorous Roosevelt drives Congress to action in this Detroit News cartoon from March 1933.

 Roosevelt’s New Deal  1117

 thus reducing the likelihood of future panics. In addition to insuring savings accounts, the ­Glass-​­Steagall Act called for the separation of commercial banking from investment banking to prevent conventional banks from investing the savings of depositors in the risky stock market; only banks that specialized in investment could trade shares in the stock market after 1933. In addition, the Federal Reserve Board was given more authority to intervene in future financial emergencies. The banking crisis had ended, and the administration was ready to pursue a broader program of economic recovery.

 regulating wall street

 Before the Great Crash in 1929, there was little government oversight of the securities (stocks and bonds) industry. In 1933, the Roosevelt administration developed two important pieces of legislation intended to regulate the operations of the stock market and eliminate fraud and abuses. The first, the Securities Exchange Act of 1933, was the first major federal legislation to regulate the sale of stocks and bonds. It required corporations that issued stock for public sale to “disclose” all relevant information about the operations and management of the company so that purchasers could know what they were buying. The second bill, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, established the Securities and Exchange Commission, a federal agency to enforce the new laws and regulations governing the issuance and trading of stocks and bonds.

 the federal budget

 Roosevelt next convinced Congress to pass an Economy Act (1933) allowing him to cut government workers’ salaries, reduce payments to military veterans for n ­ on-​­service-​­connected disabilities, and reorganize federal agencies to help reduce government expenses. He then took the dramatic step of ending Prohibition, in part because it was being so widely violated, in part because most Democrats wanted it ended, and in part because he wanted to regain the federal tax revenues from the sale of alcoholic beverages. The ­Twenty-​­First Amendment, ratified on December 5, 1933, ended the “noble experiment” of Prohibition.

Helping the Unemployed and Homeless
 Another urgent priority in 1933 was relieving the widespread human distress. Herbert Hoover had stubbornly refused to help the unemployed and homeless, since he assumed that individual ­self-​­reliance, acts of charity, and the efforts of local organizations (the Red Cross, churches, and “city missions”) would be sufficient. The Roosevelt administration, however, knew that the numbers of people in need far exceeded the capacity of charitable organizations and local agencies. As Harry L. Hopkins, an aide to Roosevelt, said, “Hunger is not debatable.”

 1118  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 The new president pushed through a series of programs that created what came to be called the “welfare state.” He did not believe that the government should give people cash (called a “dole”), but he insisted that the federal government help the unemployed and homeless by getting them jobs. For the first time, the federal government took primary responsibility for assisting the most desperate Americans.

 putting people to work

 The Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA), headed by Harry L. Hopkins, was Roosevelt’s first major effort to deal with unemployment. It sent grants to the states to spend on the unemployed and homeless. After the ­state-​­sponsored programs funded by the FERA proved inadequate, Congress created the Civil Works Administration (CWA) in November 1933. It marked the first l­arge-​­scale federal experiment with work relief by putting people directly on the government payroll at competitive wages: 40¢ an hour for unskilled workers, $1 for skilled. The CWA provided 4 million federal jobs during the winter of 1933–1934 and organized a variety of useful projects: repairing 500,000 miles of roads, laying sewer lines, constructing or improving more than 1,000 airports and 40,000 public schools, and providing 50,000 teaching jobs that helped keep small rural public schools open. As the number of people employed by the CWA soared, however, the program’s costs skyrocketed to more than $1 billion. Roosevelt balked at such high costs and worried that the people hired would become dependent upon federal jobs. So in the spring of 1934, he ordered the CWA dissolved. By April, some 4 million workers were again unemployed.

 the ccc

 The most successful of the New Deal jobs programs was the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), managed by the War Department. It built 2,500 camps to house up to half a million unemployed, unmarried young men ages seventeen to ­twenty-​­seven. They worked as “soil soldiers” in national forests, parks, and recreational areas, and on ­soil-​­conservation projects. The CCC also recruited 150,000 unemployed military veterans and 85,000 Native Americans, housing them in separate camps. CCC workers had to be between 60 and 78 inches tall, weigh more than 107 pounds, and have at least six teeth. They were to be paid $1 a day for no more than nine months so as to make room for others. Critics charged that the CCC would undermine wage gains made by the labor union movement, but Roosevelt responded that the young men selected for the program would be those who “have no chance to get a job.” Congress passed the bill only after Oscar De Priest, an African American legislator from Illinois, introduced an amendment requiring that the agency not discriminate on account of race, color, or creed.

 Roosevelt’s New Deal  1119

 Federal relief programs Civilian Conservation Corps enrollees in 1933, on a break from work. Directed by army officers and foresters, the CCC camps were operated like military bases.

 CCC workers cleared brush; built trails, roads, bridges, campgrounds, fire towers, fish hatcheries, and 800 parks; planted 3 billion trees; taught farmers how to control soil erosion; and fought fires. The enrollees, supervised by soldiers, were given shelter, clothing, and food, and took classes to learn to read and earn h ­ igh-​­school diplomas. Women were excluded from the CCC, and African Americans and Native Americans were housed in segregated facilities. Roosevelt loved to visit the CCC camps. After sharing a meal with one group, he said: “I wish I could spend a couple of months here myself.” By 1942, when the CCC was dismantled, some 3 million young men had passed through the program.

 saving homes

 During 1933, a thousand homes or farms were being foreclosed upon each day because people could not afford to pay their mortgages. To address the problem, Roosevelt convinced Congress to create the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation, which helped people refinance their mortgages at lower interest rates so as to avoid bankruptcy. In 1934, Roosevelt

 1120  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 c­ reated the Federal Housing Administration (FHA), which offered Americans much longer home mortgages (twenty years) in order to reduce their monthly payments. Up to that point, most mortgages were for less than ten years duration and covered only a portion of the purchase price.

 reviving the industrial sector

 The centerpiece of the New Deal’s efforts to revive the industrial economy was the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA) of 1933. One of its two major sections created massive ­public-​­works construction projects funded by the federal government as a means of creating jobs. The NIRA started the Public Works Administration (PWA), granting $3.3 billion for the construction of government buildings, highways, bridges, dams, port facilities, and sewage plants. The second, and more controversial, part of the NIRA created the National Recovery Administration (NRA), headed by Hugh S. Johnson, a ­hard-​­drinking retired army general known for his administrative expertise, a “blustering, dictatorial, and appealing” bureaucrat. The NRA represented a radical shift in the federal government’s role in the economy. Never before in peacetime had Washington bureaucrats taken charge of setting prices, wages, and standards for working conditions. The primary purpose of the NRA was to promote economic growth by ignoring a­ nti-​­trust laws and allowing executives of competing businesses to negotiate among themselves and with labor unions to create “codes of fair competition” that would set prices, production levels, minimum wages, and maximum hours within each industry, no matter how small. In New York City, for example, women who made their living as burlesque show strippers agreed to an NRA code limiting the number of performers on stage and the number of performances they could provide each night. In exchange for allowing companies to “cooperate” rather than compete, the NRA codes included “fair labor” policies long sought by unions and social progressives: a national ­forty-​­hour work week, minimum weekly wages of $13 ($12 in the South, where living costs were lower), and a ban on the employment of children under the age of sixteen. The NRA also included a provision that guaranteed the right of workers to organize unions. These were landmark changes, and, for a time, the downward spiral of wages and prices subsided. But as soon as economic recovery began, small business owners complained that the larger corporations dominated the NRA, whose ­price-​­fixing robbed small producers of the chance to compete. And because the NRA wage codes excluded agricultural and domestic workers (at the insistence of southern Democrats), most African Americans derived no direct benefit from the program. When the Supreme Court declared the NRA unconstitutional in May 1935, few regretted its demise.

 Roosevelt’s New Deal  1121

 The NRA experiment did, however, have lasting effects. It set new workplace standards, such as the f­ orty-​­hour work week, created a national minimum wage, and helped end the abuse of child labor. Its endorsement of collective bargaining between workers and owners spurred the growth of unions. Yet, as 1934 ended, industrial recovery was still nowhere in sight.

 agricultural assistance

 In addition to rescuing the banks and providing jobs to the unemployed, Roosevelt created the Farm Credit Administration to help farmers deal with their crushing debts and lower their mortgage payments to avoid bankruptcy. The Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1933 created a new federal agency, the Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA), which sought to raise prices for crops and herds by paying farmers to cut back production. The money for such payments came from a tax levied on the “processors” of certain basic c­ ommodities—​­cotton gins, flour mills, and slaughterhouses. By the time the AAA was created, however, the spring growing season was already under way. The prospect of another bumper cotton crop forced the AAA to organize a “­plow-​­under” program in which farmers were paid to kill the sprouting seeds in their fields. To destroy a growing crop was a “shocking commentary on our civilization,” Agriculture Secretary Henry A. Wallace admitted. “I could tolerate it only as a cleaning up of the wreckage from the old days of unbalanced production.” Moreover, in an effort to raise pork prices, some 6 million baby pigs were slaughtered and buried. By the end of 1934, the AAA efforts had worked: wheat, cotton, and corn production had declined and prices for those commodities had risen. Farm income increased by 58 percent between 1932 and 1935. At the end of the First Hundred Days of Roosevelt’s presidency, the principle of an activist federal government had been established. While journalists characterized the AAA, NRA, CCC, CWA, and other new programs as “alphabet soup,” and conservative critics warned that Roosevelt was leading America toward fascism or communism, the president had become the most popular man in the nation.

 dust bowl migrants

 At the same time that the agricultural economy was struggling, a terrible drought created an ecological catastrophe known as the Dust Bowl. Colorado, New Mexico, Kansas, Nebraska, Texas, Arkansas, and Oklahoma were hardest hit. Crops withered, and income plummeted. Strong winds swept across the treeless plains, scooping up tons of parched topsoil into billowing dark clouds, called black blizzards, which engulfed farms and towns. By 1938, topsoil had disappeared from more than 25 million acres of prairie land.

 1122  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 Okies on the run A sharecropping family reaches its destination of Bakersfield, California, in 1935, after “we got blowed out in Oklahoma.”

 Parched farmers could not pay their debts, and banks foreclosed on family farms. Suicides soared, and millions of people abandoned their farms. Many uprooted farmers and their families from the South and the Midwest headed toward California, where jobs were said to be plentiful. Frequently lumped ­to­­gether as “Okies” or “Arkies,” most of the Dust Bowl refugees were from cotton belt communities in Arkansas, Texas, Missouri, and Oklahoma. During the 1930s and 1940s, some 800,000 people, mostly whites, headed to the Far West. Without money to pay rent or a mortgage, homeless migrants set up squatter camps, often called “Little Oklahomas” alongside highways or close to towns where they could get food and supplies. When one crop was harvested, the migrants moved on to the next, carrying their belongings with them. Most people uprooted by the Dust Bowl went to California’s urban a­ reas—​ ­Los Angeles, San Diego, or San Francisco. Others moved into the San Joaquin Valley, the state’s agricultural heartland. There they discovered that California was no paradise. Only a few could afford to buy land. Most had to work as farm laborers. Living in tents or crude cabins, migrant workers suffered from exposure to the elements, poor sanitation, and social abuse. As an Okie reported, when

 Roosevelt’s New Deal  1123

 the big farmers “need us they call us migrants, and when we’ve picked their crop, we’re bums and we got to get out.”

 the tennessee valley authority Early in his pres-

 idency, Franklin Roosevelt declared that the “South is the nation’s No. 1 economic problem.” Indeed, since the end of the Civil War, the economy and quality of life in the southern states had lagged far behind the rest of the nation. That gap only widened during the Depression. To help the blighted South, Roosevelt created one of the most innovative programs of the First New Deal: the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), Norris Dam The massive dam in which would bring electrical power, Tennessee, completed in 1936, was flood control efforts, and jobs to Appa- essential in creating jobs and expanding lachia, the desperately poor mountain- electricity under the TVA. ous region that stretched from West Virginia through western Virginia and North Carolina, Kentucky, eastern Tennessee, and northern Georgia and Alabama. By 1940, the TVA, a multipurpose public corporation, had constructed ­twenty-​­one hydroelectric dams which created the “Great Lakes of the South” and produced enough electricity to power the entire region, at about half the average national rate. The TVA also dredged rivers to allow for boat and barge traffic, promoted soil conservation and forestry management, drew new industries to the region, encouraged the formation of labor unions, and improved schools and libraries. It gave 1.5 million farms access to electricity and indoor plumbing for the first time. Progress is rarely without its burdens or inconsistencies. Many New Deal programs helped some people and hurt others. Tough choices had to be made. Building all of those huge dams in Appalachia and the resulting lakes meant displacing thousands of hardscrabble people from homes and villages that were destroyed to make way for progress. “I don’t want to move,” said an elderly east Tennessee woman. “I want to sit here and look out over these hills where I was born. My folks are buried down the road a piece, and our babies are over there on the hill under the cedars.”

 1124  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

Holston River


K E N TU C K Y
Powell River


Paducah
 er T ennessee Riv

 iR ipp

 u

C


 iver

 MISSOURI

R
 hio ive

 r

O


THE TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY

 m b erla

 nd R i v er

Nashville


Oak Ridge
Knoxville


 iss

TEN N E SSEE

 ss

Clinch
River


Mi


Asheville


NORTH CAROLINA

Corinth


 es

 se

Huntsville


 e

Ri


 ver

Memphis


Te


Tupelo


 nn

Muscle
Shoals


French
Broad River


Chattanooga
Little
Tennessee
River


SOUTH CAROLINA

GEORGIA ALABAMA

MI S S I S S I P P I

Atlanta


Birmingham




■




100 Miles
100 Kilometers


 Principal TVA dams Area served by TVA electric power

Area of map


What was the Tennessee Valley Authority?


 WWN64 ■ Why did Congress create it? Figure M25_2 ■ How did it transform the Tennessee Valley? First proof

 During Roosevelt’s first year in office, his programs and his personal charm generated widespread support. The First New Deal p ­ rograms—​­as well as Roosevelt’s ­leadership—​­had given Americans a sense of renewed faith in the future. In the congressional elections of 1934, the Democrats increased their dominance in Congress with an almost unprecedented midterm victory for a party in power.

 eleanor roosevelt

 One of the reasons for Franklin Roosevelt’s popularity was his energetic wife, Eleanor Roosevelt, who would prove to be one of the most influential leaders of the time. She ceaselessly prodded her husband about social justice issues and sometimes scolded him, yet she always supported his ambitions and decisions.

 Roosevelt’s New Deal  1125

 Born in 1884 in New York City, Eleanor married her distant cousin Franklin in 1905. All too quickly, she learned that Franklin’s domineering mother, Sara Delano Roosevelt, would always be the most important woman in his life. “He might have been happier with a wife who was completely uncritical,” like his mother, Eleanor wrote later. “That I was never able to be, and he had to find it in other people.” During the 1920s, Eleanor, shy and insecure, revealed that at heart she was a creature of conscience. She began a lifelong crusade on behalf of women, blacks, and youth, giving voice to the voiceless. Her tireless compassion resulted in large part from the ­self-​­doubt and loneliness she had experienced as the child of an alcoholic father and an aloof mother. Equally influential in shaping Eleanor’s outlook was the sense of betrayal she felt upon discovering in 1918 that her husband had fallen recklessly in love with Lucy Mercer, her friend and secretary. “The bottom dropped out of my own particular world,” she recalled. Eleanor and Franklin decided to maintain their marriage, but as their son James said, it became an “armed truce.” Eleanor later observed that she could “forgive, but never forget,” but she never truly forgave or forgot. T ­ art-​ ­tongued Alice Roosevelt ­Longworth—​­the daughter of Theodore Roosevelt, and a cousin of Eleanor’­s—​­actually nurtured the affair, hosting Mercer and Franklin for dinner several times. She later explained that Roosevelt “deserved a good time . . . ​ he was married to Eleanor.” Franklin and Eleanor were both s­trong-​­willed people who were concerned for each other’s happiness while acknowledging their inability to provide it. In the White House, they lived entirely apart, rarely seeing each other except for formal occasions and public events. Eleanor Roosevelt redefined the role of the First Lady. She was not content just to host social events in the White House. Instead, she became an outspoken and relentless activist: the first woman to address a national political Eleanor Roosevelt Intelligent, convention, to write a nationally syndi- principled, and a political figure in cated newspaper column, and to hold her own right, she is pictured here addressing the Red Cross Convention regular press conferences. The tireless in 1934. “Eleanor Everywhere” crisscrossed the

 1126  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 nation, speaking in support of the New Deal, meeting with African American leaders, supporting women’s causes and labor unions, and urging Americans to live up to their humanitarian ideals. In 1933, she convened a White House conference on the emergency needs of women which urged the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA) to ensure that it “pay particular attention to see that women are employed wherever possible.” Within six months, some 300,000 women were at work on various federal government projects. A popular joke in Washington claimed that President Roosevelt’s nightly prayer was: “Dear God, please make Eleanor a little tired.” But he was in fact deeply dependent on his industrious wife. She was the impatient agitator dedicated to what should be done; he was the calculating politician concerned with what could be done.

 The New Deal under Fire By 1934, Franklin Roosevelt had become the best loved and most hated president of the twentieth century. He was loved because he believed in and fought for the common people, for the “forgotten man” (and woman). And he was loved for what one French leader called his “glittering personality.” Roosevelt radiated energy and hope, joy in his work, courage in a crisis, optimism for the future, and a monumental ­self-​­assurance bordering on arrogance. His famously arched eyebrows, upturned chin, and twinkling eyes, along with his cigarette holder, itself tilted upward, symbolized his jaunty determination to triumph over the nation’s massive problems. “Meeting him,” said British prime minister Winston Churchill, “was like uncorking a bottle of champagne.” Roosevelt, he added, was “the greatest man I have ever known.” Roosevelt was perhaps the most visible and accessible president who had occupied the White House. Twice a week he held press conferences, explaining new legislation, addressing questions and criticisms, and, in the process, winning over most journalists. Roosevelt also mastered the art of using carefully timed radio addresses (“fireside chats”) to speak to the nation. But he was hated, too, especially by business leaders and political conservatives who believed that the New Deal and the higher taxes it required were moving America toward socialism. Some called Roosevelt a “traitor to his class.” Even his cousin Alice, Theodore’s daughter, accused him of being a dictator. Others, on the left, hated him for not doing enough to end the Depression. By the ­mid-​­1930s, the early New Deal programs had slowed the economy’s downward slide, but prosperity remained elusive. “We have been patient and long suffering,” said a farm leader. “We were promised a New Deal. . . . ​Instead, we have the same old stacked deck.”

 The New Deal under Fire  1127

 In many respects, the conflicting opinions of Roosevelt reflected his own divided personality and erratic management style. He was at the same time a man of idealistic principles and a practical politician prone to snap judgments, capable of both compromise and contradictory actions. He once admitted to an aide that to implement the New Deal he had to “deceive, misrepresent, leave false impressions . . . ​and trust to charm, loyalty, and the result to make up for it. . . . ​A great man cannot be a good man.”

Continuing Hardships
 Although the programs making up the First New Deal helped ease the devastation caused by the Depression, they did not restore prosperity or end the widespread suffering. As late as 1939, some 9.5 million workers (17 percent of the labor force) remained unemployed. Critics stressed that the economy, while stabilized, remained mired in the Depression.

 “There’s no way like the American way” Margaret ­Bourke-​­White’s famous 1937 photograph of desperate people waiting in a Louisville, Kentucky, ­disaster-​­relief line captures the continuing racial divide of the era and the elusiveness of the “American Dream” for many minorities.

 1128  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 african americans and the new deal

 However progressive Franklin Delano Roosevelt was on social issues, he showed little interest in the plight of African Americans, even as black voters were shifting from the Republicans (the “party of Lincoln”) to the Democrats. Roosevelt, like Woodrow Wilson before him, failed to address ­long-​­standing patterns of racism and segregation in the South for fear of angering conservative southern Democrats in Congress. As a result, many New Deal programs discriminated against blacks. As Mary White Ovington, the treasurer of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), stressed, the racism in any agency “varies according to the white people chosen to administer it, but always there is discrimination.” For example, the payments from the AAA to farm owners to take land out of production in an effort to raise the prices for farm products forced hundreds of thousands of tenant farmers and sharecroppers, both blacks and whites, off the land. The FHA refused to guarantee mortgages on houses purchased by blacks in white neighborhoods, and both the CCC and the TVA practiced racial segregation. The NAACP waged an energetic legal campaign against racial prejudice throughout the 1930s, but a major setback occurred in the Supreme Court ruling on Grovey v. Townsend (1935), which upheld the Texas Democrats’ w ­ hites-​­only election primary. Thanks to relentless pressure from Eleanor Roosevelt, the president did appoint more African Americans to government positions than ever before. One of the most visible was Mary McLeod Bethune, the child of former slaves from South Carolina, who had founded ­Bethune-​­Cookman College in Florida and served as head of the NAACP in the 1920s. In 1935, Roosevelt approved her appointment as the director of the Division of Negro Affairs within the National Youth Administration, an agency that provided jobs to unemployed young Americans. Bethune worked with other blacks in New Deal agencies to form an informal “Black Cabinet” to ensure that African Americans had equal access to federal programs.

 court cases and civil liberties

 The continuing prejudice against blacks in the South was vividly revealed in a controversial case in Alabama. In 1931, an ­all-​­white jury, on flimsy, conflicting testimony, convicted nine black youths, ranging in age from thirteen to ­twenty-​­one, of raping two young white women while riding a freight train. Eight of the “Scottsboro Boys” were sentenced to death before cheering whites who packed the courtroom, while 10,000 spectators outside celebrated with a brass band. In his ­award-​ w ­ inning novel Native Son (1940), African American writer Richard Wright

 The New Deal under Fire  1129

 Scottsboro case Haywood Patterson (center), one of the defendants in the case, with his attorney, Samuel Liebowitz (left) in Decatur, Alabama, in 1933.

 recalled the “mob who surrounded the Scottsboro jail with rope and kerosene” after the initial conviction. The injustice of the Scottsboro case sparked protests throughout the nation and the world. The two white girls, it turned out, had been selling sex to white and black boys on the train. One of the girls eventually recanted the rape charges and began appearing at rallies on behalf of the defendants. No case in legal history had produced as many trials, appeals, reversals, and retrials as the Scottsboro case. Further, it prompted two important legal interpretations. In Powell v. Alabama (1932), the U.S. Supreme Court overturned the original convictions because the judge had not ensured that the accused were provided adequate defense attorneys. The Court ordered new trials. In another case, Norris v. Alabama (1935), the Court ruled that the systematic exclusion of African Americans from Alabama juries had denied the Scottsboro defendants equal protection under the ­law—​­a principle that had widespread impact on state courts by opening up juries to blacks. Although the state of Alabama eventually dropped the charges against the four youngest of the Scottsboro defendants and granted paroles to the others, their lives were ruined. The last defendant was released from prison in 1950.

 native americans and the depression

The Great Depres­
 sion also ravaged Native Americans. They were initially encouraged by Roosevelt’s appointment of John Collier as commissioner of the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA). Collier steadily increased the number of Native Americans

 1130  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 employed by the BIA and ensured that Native Americans gained access to the various relief programs. Collier’s primary objective, however, was passage of the Indian Reorganization Act. Designed to reinvigorate Native American cultural traditions by restoring land to tribes, the proposed law would have granted them the right to start businesses, establish ­self-​­governing constitutions, and receive federal funds for vocational training and economic development. The act that Congress passed, however, was a ­much-​­diluted version of Collier’s original proposal, and the “Indian New Deal” brought only partial improvement to the lives of Native Americans. But it did spur the various tribes to revise their constitutions so as to give women the right to vote and hold office.

 Cultural Life during the Depression In view of the ­celebrated—​­if e­ xaggerated—​­alienation felt by the “lost generation” of writers, artists, and intellectuals during the 1920s, one might have expected the onset of the Great Depression to have deepened their despair. Instead, it brought a renewed sense of militancy and affirmation, as if society could no longer afford the ­art-​­for-​­art’­s-​­sake outlook of the 1920s. Said one writer early in 1932: “I enjoy the period thoroughly. The breakdown of our cult of business success and optimism, the miraculous disappearance of our famous American complacency, all this is having a tonic effect.” In the early 1930s, the “tonic effect” of commitment sometimes sparked revolutionary political activities. By the summer of 1932, even the “golden boy” of the “lost generation,” the writer F. Scott Fitzgerald, had declared that “to bring on the revolution, it may be necessary to work within the Communist party.” But few Americans remained Communists for long. Being a notoriously independent lot, most writers rebelled at demands to hew to a shifting party line. And many abandoned communism upon learning that the Soviet leader Josef Stalin practiced a tyranny more horrible than anything under the Russian czars.

 literature and the depression

 Among the writers who ad­­­­­ dressed themes of social significance during the 1930s, two deserve special notice: John Steinbeck and Richard Wright. The novel that best captured the ordeal of the Depression, Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath (1939), treats workers as people rather than variables in a political formula. Steinbeck had traveled with displaced “Okies” driven from the Oklahoma Dust Bowl to pursue the illusion of good jobs in the fields of California’s Central Valley. This firsthand experience allowed him to create a vivid tale of the Joad family’s painful journey west. Among the most talented novelists to emerge in the 1930s was Richard Wright. The grandson of former slaves and the son of a Mississippi sharecropper

 The New Deal under Fire  1131

 who deserted his family, Wright ended his formal schooling with the ninth grade (as valedictorian of his class). He then worked in Memphis and devoured books he borrowed on a white friend’s library card, all the while saving to go north to escape the racism of the South. In Chicago, the Federal Writers’ Project gave him a chance to develop his talent. His period as a Communist, from 1934 to 1944, gave him an intellectual framework that did not overpower his fierce independence. Native Son (1940), Wright’s masterpiece, is the story of Bigger Thomas, a product of the ghetto who is hemmed in by forces beyond his control, and finally impelled to commit murder.

 popular culture

 While many writers and artists dealt with the suffering and social tensions aroused by the Great Depression, the more popular cultural outlets, such as radio programs and movies, provided a welcome escape from the decade’s grim realities. In 1930, more than 10 million families owned a radio; by the end of the decade, the number had tripled. Franklin Roosevelt was the first president to take full advantage of the popularity of radio broadcasting. He hosted sixteen “fireside chats” to generate support for his New Deal initiatives. In the late 1920s, movies were transformed by the introduction of sound. The “talkies” made movies by far the most popular form of entertainment during the 1930­s—​­much more popular than they are today. The introduction of double features in 1931 and the construction of outdoor d ­ rive-​­in theaters in 1933 boosted interest and attendance. More than 60 percent of the ­population—​ ­70 million ­people—​­paid a quarter to see at least one movie each week. The movies of the 1930s rarely dealt directly with hard times. People wanted to be cheered up when they entered movie houses. In Stand Up and Cheer! (1934), featuring child star Shirley Temple, President Roosevelt appoints a Broadway producer to his cabinet as the Secretary of Amusement. His goal is to use entertainment to distract people from the ravages of the Depression. Most feature films transported viewers into the escapist realm of adventure, spectacle, and fantasy. Gone with the Wind (1939), based on Margaret Mitchell’s Pulitzer P ­ rize-​­winning novel, was a good example of such escapism, as were The Wizard of Oz (1939) and Walt Disney’s feature cartoons. Moviegoers also relished ­shoot-’­em-​­up gangster films, spectacular musicals (especially those starring dancers Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers), “screwball” romantic comedies featuring wacky situations, zany characters, and witty dialogue like It Happened One Night (1934), My Man Godfrey (1936), and Mister Deeds Goes to Town (1936), and horror films such as Dracula (1931), Frankenstein (1931), The Mummy (1932), King Kong (1933), The Invisible Man (1933), and Werewolf of London (1935).

 1132  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

A
Paramount Picture (1934) The glamor of actress Claudette Colbert’s Cleopatra is sharply contrasted with the exhaustion of the average theatergoer in this painting by Reginald Marsh. The growing popularity of movies offered Americans escape from the daily challenges of the Great Depression, though Marsh’s work suggests that this was fleeting at best. 
 Perhaps the best way to escape the daily troubles of the Depression was to watch one of the zany comedies of the Marx Brothers, former vaudeville performers turned movie stars. As one Hollywood official explained, the movies of

 The New Deal under Fire  1133

 the 1930s were intended to “laugh the big bad wolf of the depression out of the public mind.” The Cocoanuts (1929), Animal Crackers (1930), Monkey Business (1931), Horse Feathers (1932), and Duck Soup (1933) introduced moviegoers to the anarchic antics of Chico, Groucho, Harpo, and Zeppo Marx, who combined slapstick humor with verbal wit to create plotless masterpieces of irreverent satire.

Critics Assault the New Deal
 For all of their criticisms of the inadequacy of New Deal programs, Native Americans and African Americans still voted in large majorities for Franklin Roosevelt. Other New Deal critics, however, hated Roosevelt the man, as much as they despised his policies. Many Republican business executives were so angered by the president’s promotion of a welfare state and the goals of labor unions that they refused to use the president’s name, calling him instead “that man in the White House.”

 huey long

 Others criticized Roosevelt for not doing enough to help the common people. The most potent of the president’s “populist” opponents was Huey Pierce Long Jr., a Democratic senator from Louisiana. A short, colorful man with wild, curly hair, Long, known as “Kingfish,” was a theatrical politician (a demagogue) who appealed to the raw emotions of the masses. The swaggering son of a backwoods farmer, he sported pink suits and pastel shirts, red ties, and t­wo-​­ toned shoes. He claimed to serve the poor, arguing that his Louisiana would be a place where “every man [is] a king, but no one wears a crown.” First as Louisiana’s governor, then as its most powerful U.S. senator, Long viewed the state as his personal empire. Reporters called him the “dictator of Louisiana.” True, he reduced state taxes, improved roads and schools, built charity hospitals, and provided better pub- Huey Long As the powerful governor lic services, but in the process, he used of Louisiana, Long was a shrewd lawyer and consummate “­wheeler-​­dealer” bribery, intimidation, and blackmail to politician. get his way.

 1134  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 In 1933, Long arrived in Washington as a supporter of Roosevelt and the New Deal, but he quickly grew suspicious of the NRA’s efforts to cooperate with big business. Having developed presidential aspirations, he had also grown jealous of “Prince Franklin” Roosevelt’s popularity. To launch his own presidential candidacy, Long devised a simplistic plan for dealing with the Great Depression that he called the ­Share-​­the-​­Wealth Society. Long wanted to raise taxes on the wealthiest Americans and redistribute the money to “the people”—giving every poor family $5,000 and every worker an annual income of $2,500, providing pensions to retirees, reducing working hours, paying bonuses to military veterans, and enabling every qualified student to attend college. It did not matter that his plan would have spent far more money than would have been raised by his proposed taxes. As he told a group of Iowa farmers, “Maybe somebody says I don’t understand it [government finance]. Well, you don’t have to. Just shut your damn eyes and believe it. That’s all.” By early 1935, Long claimed to have enough support to unseat Roosevelt. “I can take him,” he bragged. “He’s a phony. . . . ​He’s scared of me. I can outpromise him, and he knows it. People will believe me, and they won’t believe him.” Long’s antics led the president to declare that the Louisiana senator was “one of the two most dangerous men in the country.” (The other was General Douglas MacArthur.)

 the townsend plan

 Another popular critic of Roosevelt was a retired California doctor, Francis E. Townsend. Shocked by the sight of three elderly women digging through garbage cans for food scraps, he began promoting the Townsend Recovery Plan in 1934. Townsend wanted the federal government to pay $200 a month to every American over sixty who agreed to quit working. The recipients would have to spend the money each month. Townsend claimed that his plan would create jobs for young people by giving older people the means to retire, and it would energize the economy by enabling retirees to buy more products. But like Huey Long’s ­Share-​­the-​ ­Wealth scheme, the numbers in Townsend’s plan did not add up; although it would have served only 9 percent of the population, it would have paid those retirees more than half the total national income. Townsend, like Long, didn’t care about the plan’s cost. Not surprisingly, it attracted great support among Americans sixty years of age and older. Thousands of Townsend Clubs sprang up across the nation, and advocates flooded the White House with letters urging Roosevelt to enact it.

 father coughlin

 A third outspoken critic was Father Charles E. Coughlin, a Roman Catholic “radio priest” in Detroit, Michigan. In fiery

 The New Deal under Fire  1135

 weekly broadcasts that attracted as many as 40 million listeners, he assailed Roosevelt as “­anti-​­God” and claimed that the New Deal was a Communist conspiracy. During the 1930s, Coughlin became increasingly a­nti-​­Semitic, claiming that Roosevelt was a tool of “international Jewish bankers” and relabeling the New Deal the “Jew Deal.” He praised Adolf Hitler and the Nazis for killing Jews because he believed that all Jews were Communists who must be hunted down. During the 1940 presidential campaign, the thuggish Coughlin gave a Nazi salute and bragged, “When we get through with the Jews in America they’ll think the treatment they received in Germany was nothing.” Of Long, Townsend, and Coughlin, Long had the largest political following. A 1935 poll showed that he could draw more than 5 million votes as a ­third-​­party candidate for president, perhaps enough to prevent Roosevelt’s reelection. Roosevelt decided to “steal the thunder” from his most vocal critics by instituting an array of new programs. “I’m fighting Communism, Huey Longism, Coughlinism, Townsendism,” Roosevelt told a reporter in early 1935. He needed “to save our system, the capitalist system” from such “crackpot ideas.”

 Promoters of welfare capitalism Dr. Francis E. Townsend, Rev. Gerald L. K. Smith, and Rev. Charles E. Coughlin (left to right) attend the Townsend Recovery Plan convention in Cleveland, Ohio.

 1136  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 Opposition from the Court The opposition to the New Deal came from all directions. Among the most powerful opponents was the U.S. Supreme Court. By the m ­ id-​­1930s, businesses were filing lawsuits against various elements of the New Deal, and some of them made their way to the Supreme Court. On May 27, 1935, the U.S. Supreme Court killed the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA) by a unanimous vote. In Schechter Poultry Corporation v. United States, the justices ruled that Congress had given too much of its authority to the president when the NIRA created the National Recovery Administration (NRA), giving it the power to bring business and labor leaders together to create “codes of fair competition” for their ­industries—​­an activity that violated federal ­anti-​­trust laws. In a press conference soon after the Court announced its decision, Roosevelt fumed: “We have been relegated to the ­horse-​­and-​­buggy definition of interstate commerce.” Then, on January 6, 1936, in United States v. Butler, the Supreme Court declared the Agricultural Adjustment Act’s tax on “middle men,” the companies that processed food crops and commodities like cotton, unconstitutional. In response to the Court’s decision, the Roosevelt administration passed the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938, which reestablished the earlier ­crop-​ ­reduction payment programs but left out the tax on processors. Although the AAA helped boost the overall farm economy, conservatives criticized its sweeping powers. By the end of its 1936 term, the Supreme Court had ruled against New Deal programs in seven of nine major cases. The same line of conservative judicial reasoning, Roosevelt warned, might endanger other New Deal ­programs—​­if he did not act swiftly to prevent it.

The Second New Deal
 To rescue his legislative program from judicial and political challenges, Roosevelt in January 1935 launched the second, more radical phase of the New Deal, explaining that “social justice, no longer a distant ideal, has become a definite goal” of his administration. In his effort “to steal Huey Long’s thunder,” the president called on Congress to pass a cluster of what he designated as “must” legislation that included a federal construction program to employ the jobless; banking reforms; increased taxes on the wealthy; and “social security” programs to protect people during unemployment, old age, and illness. Roosevelt’s closest aide, Harry L. Hopkins, told the cabinet: “­Boys—​­this is our hour. We’ve got to get everything we ­want—​­a [public] works program, social security, wages and hours, ­everything—​­now or never.”

The Second New Deal  1137


 the wpa

 In the first three months of 1935, dubbed the Second Hundred Days, Roosevelt convinced Congress to pass most of the Second New Deal’s “must” legislation. The results changed the face of American life. The first major initiative was the $4.8 billion Emergency Relief Appropriation Act. The largest peacetime spending bill in history to that point, it included an array of federal job programs managed by a new agency, the Works Progress Administration (WPA). The WPA quickly became the nation’s largest employer, hiring an average of 2 million people annually over four years. WPA workers built New York’s LaGuardia Airport, restored the St. Louis riverfront, and managed the bankrupt city of Key West, Florida. The WPA also employed a wide range of writers, artists, actors, and musicians in new cultural programs: the Federal Theatre Project, the Federal Art Project, the Federal Music Project, and the Federal Writers’ Project. The National Youth Administration (NYA), also under the WPA, provided ­part-​­time employment to students and aided jobless youths. Two future presidents were among the beneficiaries; t­ wenty-​­seven-​­year-​­old Lyndon B. Johnson

 Federal art project A group of WPA artists at work on Building the Transcontinental Railroad, a mural celebrating the contributions of foreign newcomers that appears in the immigrants’ dining hall on Ellis Island, outside of New York City.

 1138  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 directed an NYA program in Texas, and Richard M. Nixon, a struggling Duke University law student, found work through the NYA at 35¢ an hour. Although the WPA took care of only 3 million of some 10 million jobless at any one time, it helped some 9 million people before it expired in 1943.

 the wagner act

 Another major element of the Second New Deal was the National Labor Relations Act, often called the Wagner Act in honor of the New York senator, Robert Wagner, who drafted it and convinced Roosevelt to support it. The Wagner Act was one of the most important pieces of labor legislation in history, guaranteeing workers the right to organize unions and bargain directly with management about wages and other issues. It also created a National Labor Relations Board to oversee union activities.

 social security

 As Francis Townsend had stressed, the Great Depression hit the oldest Americans and those with disabilities especially hard. To address the problems faced by the elderly and disabled, Roosevelt proposed the Social Security Act of 1935. Social Security was, he announced, the “cornerstone” and “supreme achievement” of the New Deal. The basic concept of government assistance to the elderly was not new. Progressives during the early 1900s had proposed a federal system of social security for the aged, poor, disabled, and unemployed. Other nations had already enacted such programs, but not the United States. The hardships caused by the Great Depression revived the idea, however, and Roosevelt masterfully guided the legislation through Congress. The Social Security Act was designed largely by Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins, the first woman cabinet member in history. Its centerpiece was a ­self-​­financed federal retirement fund for people over ­sixty-​­five. Beginning in 1937, workers and employers contributed payroll taxes to establish the fund. Most of the collected taxes were spent on pension payments to retirees; whatever was left over went into a trust fund for the future. Roosevelt stressed that Social Security was not intended to guarantee everyone a comfortable retirement. Rather, it was meant to supplement other sources of income and protect the elderly. Only during the 1950s did voters and politicians come to view ­ orking-​­class Social Security as the primary source of retirement income for w Americans. The Social Security Act also set up a shared ­federal–​­state ­unemployment-​ ­insurance program, financed by a payroll tax on employers. In addition, it committed the national government to a broad range of ­social-​­welfare activities based upon the assumption that “unemployables”—people who were unable to w ­ ork—​­would remain a state responsibility while the national g­ overnment would provide work

The Second New Deal  1139


 relief for the a­ ble-​­bodied. To that end, the Social Security Act provided federal funding for three s­ tate-​­administered ­public-​ a­ ssistance ­programs—​­old-​­age assis­tance, aid to dependent children, and aid for the b ­ lind—​­and further aid for maternal, ­child-​­welfare, and public health services. When compared with similar programs in Europe, the U.S. Social Security system was conservative. It was the only ­government-​­managed retirement program in the world financed by taxes on the earnings of workers; most other countries funded such programs out of general government revenues. The Social Security payroll tax was also a regressive tax because it used a single withholding tax rate for everyone, regardless of income level. It thus pinched the poor more than the rich, and it hurt efforts to revive the economy because it removed from circula- Social Security A poster distributed tion a significant amount of money. In by the government to educate the public addition, the Social Security system, at about the new Social Security Act. the insistence of southern Democrats determined to maintain white supremacy, excluded 9.5 million workers who most needed the new program: farm laborers, domestic workers (maids and cooks), and the s­ elf-​­employed, a disproportionate percentage of whom were African Americans. Roosevelt regretted the act’s limitations, but he knew that they were necessary compromises to gain congressional approval and to withstand court challenges. As he told an aide who criticized funding the program out of employee contributions: I guess you’re right on the economics, but those taxes were never a problem of economics. They are politics all the way through. We put those payroll contributions there so as to give the contributors a moral, legal, and political right to collect their pensions and their unemployment benefits. With those taxes in there, no damn politician can ever scrap my Social Security program.

 1140  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 Roosevelt also preferred that workers fund their own Social Security pensions because he wanted Americans to view their retirement checks as an ­entitlement—​­as something that they had paid for and deserved. Conservatives condemned the Social Security Act as tyrannical and “socialistic.” Former president Herbert Hoover refused to apply for a Social Security card because of his opposition to the “radical” program. He received a Social Security number anyway.

 taxing the rich

 Another major bill in the second phase of the New Deal was the Revenue Act of 1935, sometimes called the “­Wealth-​­Tax Act” but popularly known as the “­soak-​­the-​­rich” tax. It raised tax rates on annual income above $50,000, in part because of stories that many wealthy Americans were not paying taxes. The powerful banker J.P. Morgan confessed to a Senate committee that he had created fictitious sales of stock to his wife that enabled him to pay no taxes.

 Labor union violence This 1935 photograph captures unionized strikers fighting “scabs,” or nonunion replacement employees, as the scabs try to pass the picket line and enter the factory.

The Second New Deal  1141


 Morgan and other business leaders fumed over Roosevelt’s tax and spending policies. Newspaper tycoon William Randolph Hearst growled that the wealth tax was “essentially communism.” Roosevelt countered by stressing that “I am fighting communism. . . . ​I want to save our system, the capitalistic system.” Yet he added that saving capitalism and “rebalancing” its essential elements required a more equal “distribution of wealth.”

 a new direction for unions

 The New Deal reinvigorated the labor union movement. When the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA) demanded that every industry code affirm workers’ rights to organize, unionists quickly translated it to mean “the president wants you to join the union.” John L. Lewis, head of the United Mine Workers (UMW), was among the first to capitalize on the ­pro-​­union spirit of the NIRA. He rebuilt the UMW from 150,000 members to 500,000 within a year. Encouraged by Lewis’s success, Sidney Hillman of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers and David Dubinsky of the International Ladies Garment Workers organized workers in the clothing industry. As leaders of industrial unions (composed of all types of workers in a particular industry, skilled or unskilled), which were in the minority by far, they found the smaller, more restrictive craft unions (composed of skilled male workers only, with each union serving just one trade) to be obstacles to organizing workers in the country’s basic industries. In 1935, with the passage of the Wagner Act, industrial unionists formed a Committee for Industrial Organization (CIO). Craft unionists began to fear submergence by the mass unions made up mainly of unskilled workers. Jurisdictional disputes divided them, and in 1936 the American Federation of Labor (AFL) expelled the CIO unions, which then formed a permanent structure, called after 1938 the Congress of Industrial Organizations (also known by the initials CIO). The rivalry spurred both groups to greater efforts. The CIO focused on organizing the automobile and steel industries. Until the Supreme Court upheld the Wagner Act in 1937, however, companies failed to cooperate with its p ­ ro-​­union provisions. Employers instead used various forms of intimidation to fight the infant unions. Early in 1937, automobile workers spontaneously tried a new tactic, the “­sit-​­down strike,” in which they refused to leave a workplace until employers had granted them ­collective-​­bargaining rights. Led by the fiery Walter Reuther, thousands of employees at the General Motors assembly plants in Flint, Michigan, occupied the factories and stopped all production. Company officials called in police to harass the strikers, sent spies to union meetings, and threatened to fire the workers. They also pleaded with President Roosevelt to dispatch federal troops. He refused, while expressing his displeasure with the ­sit-​­down strike, which the courts later declared

 1142  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 illegal. The standoff lasted more than a month. Then, on February 11, 1937, the company relented and signed a contract recognizing the United Automobile Workers (UAW) as a legitimate union.

 Roosevelt’s Second Term On June 27, 1936, Franklin Delano Roosevelt accepted the Democratic party’s nomination for a second term. The Republicans chose Governor Alfred M. Landon of Kansas, a progressive Republican who had endorsed many New Deal programs. “We cannot go back to the days before the depression,” he scolded conservative Republicans. “We must go forward, facing our new problems.” The Republicans hoped that the followers of Huey Long, Charles E. Coughlin, Francis E. Townsend, and other Roosevelt critics would combine to draw enough Democratic votes away from the president to give Landon a winning margin. But that possibility faded when an assassin, the ­son-​­in-​­law of a Louisiana judge whom Long had sought to remove, shot and killed the ­forty-​­two-​­year-​ ­old senator in 1935. In the 1936 election, Roosevelt carried every state except

 Campaigning for a second term Roosevelt campaigning with labor leader John L. Lewis (to the right of Roosevelt) in ­Wilkes-​­Barre, Pennsylvania.

The Second New Deal  1143


 Maine and Vermont, with a popular vote of 27.7 million to Landon’s 16.7 million, the largest margin of victory to that point. Democrats would also dominate the new Congress, by 77 to 19 in the Senate and 328 to 107 in the House. In winning another landslide election, Roosevelt forged a new electoral coalition that would affect national politics for years to come. While holding the support of most traditional Democrats, North and South, he made strong gains in the West among beneficiaries of New Deal agricultural programs. In the northern cities, he held on to the ethnic groups helped by New Deal welfare policies. Many ­middle-​­class voters whose property had been saved by New Deal measures flocked to support Roosevelt, as did intellectuals stirred by the ferment of new ideas coming from the government. The revived labor union movement also threw its support to Roosevelt, and in the most meaningful shift of all, a majority of African Americans voted for a Democratic president. “My friends, go home and turn Lincoln’s picture to the wall,” a Pittsburgh journalist told black voters. “That debt has been paid in full.”

 the ­court-​­packing plan

 Roosevelt’s landslide victory convinced him that he could do almost anything and the voters would support him. He believed his reelection demonstrated that the nation wanted even more government action to revive the economy. The t­ hree-​­to-​­one Democratic majorities in Congress ensured that he could pass new legislation. But one major roadblock stood in the way: the conservative Supreme Court, made up of “nine old men.” Lawsuits challenging the constitutionality of the Social Security and Wagner Acts were pending before the Court. Given the Court’s conservative bent and its earlier ­anti–​­New Deal rulings, Roosevelt feared that the Second New Deal was in danger of being nullified. For that reason, he hatched a clumsy plan to “reform” the Court by enlarging it. Congress, not the Constitution, determines the size of the Supreme Court, which over the years had numbered between six and ten justices. In 1937, the number was nine. On February 5, 1937, Roosevelt, without consulting congressional leaders or even his own advisers, asked Congress to name up to six new Supreme Court justices, one for each of the current justices over seventy years old, explaining that the aging members of the Court were falling behind in their work and needed help. But the “­Court-​­packing” scheme, as opponents labeled the plan, backfired. It was too manipulative and far too political, and quickly became the most controversial proposal of Roosevelt’s presidency. The plan ignited a firestorm of opposition among conservative Republicans and even aroused fears among Democrats that the president was seeking dangerous new powers. As it turned out, several Court decisions during the spring of 1937 surprisingly upheld disputed provisions of the Wagner and Social Security Acts. In

 1144  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

 addition, a conservative justice resigned, and Roosevelt replaced him with a New Dealer, Senator Hugo Black of Alabama. Despite criticism from both parties, Roosevelt insisted on forcing his Court-​­packing bill through Congress. On July 22, 1937, the Senate overwhelmingly voted it down. It was the biggest political blunder and greatest humiliation of Roosevelt’s career. The episode fractured the Democratic party and damaged the president’s prestige. The momentum of his 1936 landslide victory was lost. As Secretary of Agriculture Henry A. Wallace later remarked, “The whole New Deal really went up in smoke as a result of the Supreme Court fight.”

 a slumping economy

 During 1935 and 1936, the economy finally began showing signs of revival. By the spring of 1937, industrial output had risen above the 1929 level. In 1937, however, Roosevelt, worried about federal budget deficits and rising inflation, ordered sharp cuts in government spending. The economy stalled, then slid into a slump deeper than that of 1929. In only three months, unemployment rose by 2 million people. When the spring of 1938 failed to bring economic recovery, Roosevelt reversed himself and asked Congress to adopt a new federal spending program, and Congress voted $3.3 billion in new expenditures. The increase in government spending reversed the economy’s decline, but only during World War II would employment again reach ­pre-1929 levels. The C ­ ourt-​­packing fight, the ­sit-​­down strikes, and the 1937 recession all undercut Roosevelt’s prestige and power. When the 1937 congressional session ended, the only major New Deal initiatives were the W ­ agner-​­Steagall National Housing Act and the B ­ ankhead-​­Jones Farm Tenant Act. The Housing Act, developed by Senator Robert F. Wagner, set up the federal Housing Authority, which extended ­long-​­term loans to cities to build public housing projects in blighted neighborhoods and provide subsidized rents for poor people. Later, during World War II, it financed housing for workers in new defense plants. The Farm Tenant Act created a new agency, the Farm Security Administration (FSA), which provided loans to keep farm owners from losing their land to bankruptcy. It also made loans to tenant farmers to enable them to purchase farms. In the end, however, the FSA proved to be little more than another relief operation that tided a few farmers over during difficult times. A more effective answer to the problem eventually arrived in the form of national mobilization for war, which landed many struggling tenant farmers in military service or the defense industry, broadened their horizons, and taught them new skills. In 1938, the Democratic Congress also enacted the Fair Labor Standards Act. It replaced many of the provisions that had been in the NIRA, which had

The Second New Deal  1145


 been declared unconstitutional. The federal government established a minimum wage of 40¢ an hour and a maximum workweek of forty hours. The act, which applied only to businesses engaged in interstate commerce, also prohibited the employment of children under the age of sixteen.

 setbacks for the president

 During the late 1930s, the Democrats in Congress increasingly split into two factions, with conservative southerners on one side and liberal northerners on the other. Many white southern Democrats balked at the party’s growing dependence on the votes of northern labor unions and African Americans. Senator Ellison “Cotton Ed” Smith of South Carolina and several other southern delegates walked out of the 1936 Democratic party convention, with Smith declaring that he would not support any party that views “the Negro as a political and social equal.” Other critics believed that Roosevelt was exercising too much power and spending too much money. Some southern Democrats began to work with conservative Republicans to veto any additional New Deal programs. Roosevelt now headed a divided party, and the congressional elections of November 1938 handed the administration another setback when the Democrats lost 7 seats in the Senate and 80 in the House. In his State of the Union message in 1939, Roosevelt for the first time presented no new reform programs but instead spoke of the need “to preserve our reforms.” The conservative coalition of Republicans and southern Democrats had stalemated the president. As one observer noted, the New Deal “has been reduced to a movement with no program, with no effective political organization, with no vast popular party strength behind it.”

 a halfway revolution

 The New Deal’s political momentum petered out in 1939 just as a new world war was erupting in Europe and Asia. Many New Deal programs had failed or were poorly conceived and implemented, but others were changing American life for the better: Social Security, federal regulation of stock markets and banks, minimum wage levels for workers, federally insured bank accounts, the right to join labor unions. Never before had the federal government intervened so directly in the economy or spent so much on social welfare programs. Franklin Roosevelt had also transformed the nation’s political dynamics, luring black voters in large numbers to the Democratic party, and he had raised the nation’s spirits through his relentless optimism. Roosevelt had led the nation out of the Depression and changed the role of the federal government. By the end of the 1930s, its power and scope were vastly larger than in 1932. Landmark laws expanded the powers of the national

 1146  CHAPTER 25  The Great Depression 1929–1939

Meeting of the a
 ­ nti–​­New Dealers Democratic senator Ellison D. “Cotton Ed” Smith of South Carolina cringes at the thought of a fourth term for Roosevelt, while meeting with fellow ­anti–​­New Dealers at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington, D.C.

 government by establishing new regulatory agencies and laying the foundation of a social welfare system. Most important of all, the New Deal brought faith and hope to the discouraged and desperate. As a CCC worker recalled late in life, Roosevelt “restored a sense of confidence and morale and ­hope—​­hope being the greatest of all.” New Deal programs provided stability for tens of millions of people. “We aren’t on relief anymore,” one woman noted with pride. “My husband is working for the government.” The enduring reforms of the New Deal also constituted a significant change from the progressivism of Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson. They had assumed that the function of government was to use aggressive regulation of industry and business to ensure that people had an equal opportunity to pursue the American Dream. But Franklin Roosevelt and the New Dealers insisted that the government should provide at least a minimal quality of life for all Americans. The enduring protections afforded by b ­ ank-​­deposit insurance, unemployment benefits, a minimum hourly wage, the Wagner Act, and Social Security

The Second New Deal  1147


 pensions gave people a sense of security and protected the nation against future economic crises. (There has not been a similar “depression” since the 1930s.) The greatest failure of the New Deal was its inability to restore prosperity and end record levels of unemployment. In 1939, 10 million A ­ mericans—​ ­nearly 17 percent of the ­workforce—​­remained jobless. Only the Second World War would finally produce full e­ mployment—​­in the armed forces as well as in factories supporting the military. Roosevelt’s energetic pragmatism was his greatest ­strength—​­and weakness. He was flexible in developing new policies and programs; he kept what worked and discarded what failed. He sharply increased the regulatory powers of the federal government and laid the foundation for what would become an expanding system of social welfare programs. Despite what his critics charged, however, Roosevelt was no socialist; he sought to preserve the basic capitalist economic structure while providing protection to the nation’s most vulnerable people. In this sense, the New Deal represented a “halfway revolution” that permanently altered the nation’s social and political landscape. In a time of peril, Roosevelt created for Americans a more secure future.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 Hoover’s Failure The first phase of the federal response to the Great Depression included President Hoover’s attempts at increasing public works and exhorting unions, businesses, and farmers to cooperate to revive economic growth. His belief in voluntary ­self-​­reliance prevented him from using federal intervention to relieve the human suffering and contributed to his underestimation of the financial collapse. Such programs as the Reconstruction Finance Corporation were too few and too late. By March 1933, the economy was shattered. Millions of Americans were without jobs, without the basic necessities, and without hope.

•


 The First New Deal In 1933, newly inaugurated president Franklin Delano Roosevelt and his “brain trust” set out to restore the economy and public confidence. During his early months in office, Congress and Roosevelt enacted the First New Deal, which propped up the banking industry with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, provided ­short-​­term emergency work relief in the form of jobs for the unemployed, promoted industrial recovery with the National Recovery Administration, and passed the Agricultural Adjustment Act intended to raise agricultural prices by encouraging farmers to cut production. Most of the early New Deal programs eased hardships but did not restore prosperity; they helped to end the economy’s downward spiral but still left millions unemployed and mired in poverty.

•


 New Deal Under Fire The Supreme Court ruled that many of the First New Deal programs were unconstitutional violations of private property and states’ rights. Many conservatives criticized the New Deal for expanding the scope and reach of the federal government so much that it was steering the nation toward socialism. The “radio priest,” Father Charles E. Coughlin, charged that the New Deal was a ­Jewish-​­atheist-​­Communist conspiracy. Other critics did not think the New Deal reforms went far enough. Senator Huey Long of Louisiana and Dr. Francis Townsend of California proposed radical plans to reshape the distribution of wealth from the rich to the poor. African Americans criticized the widespread racial discrimination in New Deal policies and agencies.

•


 The Second New Deal and the New Deal’s Legacy Roosevelt responded to the criticism and the continuing economic hardship with a Second New Deal, which sought to reshape the nation’s social structure by expanding the role of the federal government. Many of the programs making up the Second New Deal, such as the Works Progress Administration, Social Security, and the Wagner Act, aimed to achieve greater social justice by establishing new regulatory agencies and laying the foundation of a federal social welfare system. Frustrated by the Supreme Court’s opposition to the First New Deal, Roosevelt proposed his “­Court-​­packing” scheme, but it was rejected by the Senate. Support for the New Deal began to lose steam amid the lingering effects of the Great Depression. However, the New Deal



The Second New Deal  1149
 established the idea that the federal government should provide at least a minimal quality of life for all Americans, and it provided people with some security against a future crisis, reaffirming for millions a faith in American capitalism.

Chronology
November 1932


 Franklin D. Roosevelt is elected president

 March 1933	Congress passes the Emergency Banking Relief Act

(“Bank Holiday”)


 Congress establishes the Civilian Conservation Corps May 1933	Congress creates the Tennessee Valley Authority and the Agricultural Adjustment Act June 1933	Congress establishes the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Banking Act) and passes National Industrial Recovery Act December 1933	Prohibition repealed with the passage of the ­Twenty-​­First Amendment to the Constitution May 1935	Supreme Court finds National Industrial Recovery Act unconstitutional 1935	President Roosevelt creates the Works Progress Administration President Roosevelt is reelected in a landslide Social Security payments begin

Key Terms


Great Depression
(1929–1941) p. 1105


Agricultural Adjustment
Act (1933) p. 1121


Reconstruction Finance
 Corporation (RFC) (1933) p. 1109

Dust Bowl p. 1121


Bonus Expeditionary Force p. 1110
First New Deal (1933–1935) p. 1115
Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation (FDIC) (1933) p. 1116 Securities and Exchange Commission (1934) p. 1117 National Recovery Administration (NRA) (1933) p. 1120

Second New Deal
(1935–1938) p. 1137
Works Progress
 Administration (WPA) (1935) p. 1137 Wagner Act (1935) p. 1138 Social Security Act (1935) p. 1138 ­“Court-​­packing” scheme (1937) p. 1143

IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




The Second
World War
1933–1945


 Raising the Flag on Iwo Jima (February 23, 1945) Five members of the United States Marine Corps raise the U.S. flag on Mount Suribachi, during the Battle of Iwo Jima. Three of these Marines would die within days after this photograph was taken. The image earned photographer Joe Rosenthal the Pulitzer Prize. A bronze statue of this scene is the centerpiece of the Marine Corps War Memorial in Virginia.

W


 hen Franklin Roosevelt became president in 1933, he shared with most Americans a determination to stay out of international disputes. His focus was on combating the Great Depression at home. While the United States had become deeply involved in global trade during the twenties, it had remained aloof from global conflicts. ­So-​­called isolationists insisted that there was no justification for America to become embroiled in international affairs, much less another major war. With each passing year during the thirties, however, Germany, Italy, and Japan threatened the peace and stability of Europe and Asia. Roosevelt strove mightily to keep the United States out of what he called the “spreading epidemic of world lawlessness,” as fascist dictatorships in Germany and Italy and ultranationalist militarists in Japan violated international law by invading neighboring countries. By the end of the decade, Roosevelt had decided that the only way for the United States to avoid fighting in another war was to offer all possible assistance to its allies, Great Britain, France, and China. Roosevelt’s efforts to stop “aggressor nations” ignited a fierce debate between isolationists and interventionists which ended with shocking suddenness on December 7, 1941, when Japan staged a surprise attack against U.S. military bases at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii. The second world war that Americans had struggled to avoid had arrived at last. It would become the most significant event of the twentieth century, engulfing five continents and leaving few people untouched. The Japanese attack unified Americans as never before. Men and women rushed to join the armed forces. Eventually, 16.4 million people would serve

 focus questions 1. How did German and Japanese actions lead to the outbreak of war in Europe and Asia?

 2. How did President Roosevelt and Congress respond to the outbreak of wars in Europe and Asia between 1933 and 1941?

 3. What were the effects of the Second World War on American society? 4. What were the major factors that enabled the United States and its allies to win the war in Europe?

 5. How were the Japanese defeated in the war in the Pacific? 6. How did President Roosevelt and the Allies work to shape the postwar world?



