 640  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 However much Jefferson Davis and other southerners argued that secession and the war were about states’ rights, the states of the Lower South seceded in 1860–1861 to protect slavery. The evidence is overwhelming. The South Carolina Declaration on the Immediate Causes of Secession, for example, was quite clear on the reasons for secession, highlighting the “increasing hostility on the part of the n ­ on-​­slaveholding states to the institution of slavery.” Mississippi only mentioned one reason for seceding: preserving slavery. Georgian Alexander Stephens, the vice president of the Confederate States of America, was equally emphatic, saying that slavery was the “immediate cause” of secession and war. And, as Lincoln noted in his second inaugural address, everyone knew that slavery “was somehow the cause of the war.” Certainly that was true for Nathan Bedford Forrest, a Tennessee slave trader and wealthy planter who would become one of the Confederacy’s most valued and controversial cavalry generals. Years after the war, he exploded while listening to Confederate veterans giving flowery orations in which they claimed that the South had fought the Civil War to defend states’ rights. The ­plain-​­speaking Forrest stood and shouted that he fought for one reason: “to keep his niggers, and other folks’ niggers.” On April 15, three days after the Confederate attack on Fort Sumter, Lincoln called upon the “loyal” states to supply 75,000 soldiers to suppress the rebellion. Senator Stephen Douglas insisted that “there are only two sides to the question [of civil war]. Every man must be for the United States or against it. There can be no neutrals in this war, only ­patriots—​­or traitors.” The Civil War would force e­ veryone—​­men and women, white and black, immigrants and Native Americans, free and e­ nslaved—​­to choose sides. Thousands of southerners fought for the Union; thousands of northerners fought for the Confederacy. Thousands of European volunteers fought on each side.

Choosing Sides
 The first seven states to secede were all from the Lower S­ outh—​­South Carolina, Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and T ­ exas—​­where the cotton economy was strongest and slaves the most numerous. All the states in the Upper South, especially Tennessee and Virginia, had areas (mainly in the mountains) where whites were poor, slaves were scarce, and Union support was strong. Nevertheless, the outbreak of actual fighting led four more southern slave states to join the Confederacy: Virginia, Arkansas, Tennessee, and North Carolina. In east Tennessee, however, the mountain counties would provide more Union soldiers than Confederate fighters. ­Thirty-​­nine counties in ­mountainous

Choosing Sides  641


 western Virginia were so loyal to the Union that they split off and formed the new state of West Virginia in October 1861. Of the slaveholding states along the border between North and South, Delaware remained firmly in the Union, but Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri went through bitter struggles to decide which side to support. “I think to lose Kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game,” Lincoln said to a friend, explaining the situation in the state where he was born. If Kentucky were to join the Confederacy, “we cannot hold Missouri, nor, as I think, Mary­ land.” Lincoln hoped “to have God on my side, but I must have Kentucky.” The president was so determined to keep slaveholding Kentucky on the Union side that he muffled all talk of abolition. If Maryland had seceded, Confederates would have surrounded Washington, D.C. To keep Maryland in the Union, Lincoln had ­pro-​­Confederate SECESSION, 1860–1861 ILLINOIS KANSAS TERRITORY

 IN

WV MISSOURI KENTUCKY

UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

TEXAS
Feb. 1, 1861 
 PA

 OHIO

TENNESSEE
May 7, 1861 
AR
May 6, MS Jan. 9, 
AL
Jan. 11, 
 MD

NJ DE

VA
April 17, 
NC
May 20, SC Dec. 20, GEORGIA Jan. 19, 
LOUISIANA
Jan. 26, 1861 
FLORIDA
Jan. 10, 
 States seceding before Fort Sumter’s surrender

 MEXICO







200 Miles


100 200 Kilometers


■


 States seceding after Fort Sumter’s surrender Slave states adhering to the Union Free states and territories adhering to the Union

 Why did South Carolina and six other states secede from the Union before

 the siege at Fort Sumter? WWN64 ■ Why did secession not win unanimous approval in Tennessee and Virginia? Figure M15_1 1st ■proof How did Lincoln keep Maryland in the Union?

 642  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 leaders arrested, including Baltimore’s mayor and chief of police. The fragile neutrality of Kentucky lasted until September 3, when Confederate and Union armies moved into the divided state. Kentucky voters elected a secessionist governor and a Unionist majority in the state legislature, as did Missouri, a state with many European immigrants, especially Germans. When a p ­ ro-​­Confederate militia gathered in St. Louis, hoping to take control of the federal arsenal, it was surprised and disarmed by German immigrants “eager to teach the ­German-​­haters a ­never-​­to-​­be-​­forgotten lesson.” The German militiamen then chased the p ­ ro-​­Confederate governor across the border to Arkansas. When news of the Civil War reached Missouri, 4,200 men volunteered to join the Union army; all but 100 of them were German Americans. On the eve of the Civil War, the U.S. Army had only 16,400 men, about 1,000 of whom were officers. Of them, about 25 percent, like future Confederate general Robert E. Lee, resigned to join the Confederate army. On the other hand, many southerners made great sacrifices to remain loyal to the Union. Some left their native region once the fighting began; others remained in the South but found ways to support the Union. Some 100,000 men from the southern states fought against the Confederacy.

 regional advantages

 Once battle lines were finally drawn, the Union held ­twenty-​­three states, including four border slave states, Missouri, Kentucky, Maryland, and Delaware, while the Confederacy had eleven states. The population count was about 22 million in the Union (some 400,000 of whom were enslaved African Americans) to 9 million in the Confederacy (of whom about 3.5 million were enslaved). To help balance the odds, the Confederacy mobilized 80 percent of its ­military-​­age white men, a third of whom would die during the ­four-​­year war. An even greater advantage for the North was its superior industrial development. As southerner Rhett Butler complains in the classic movie Gone with the Wind (1939), “Why, all we have [in the South] is cotton and slaves and arrogance.” The hated Yankees, he adds, have “the factories, the foundries, the shipyards, the iron and coal ­mines—​­all the things we haven’t got.” The southern states produced just 7 percent of the nation’s manufactured goods on the eve of the war. The Union states produced 97 percent of the firearms and 96 percent of the railroad equipment. The North also had a huge advantage in transportation, particularly ships. At the start of the war, the Union had ninety warships; the South had no navy at all. Federal gunboats and transports played a direct role in securing the Union’s control of the Mississippi River and its larger tributaries, which provided easy invasion routes into the center of the Confederacy. Early on,

Choosing Sides  643


 The U.S. Watervliet Arsenal in Watervliet, New York The North had a huge advantage in industrial development, and its foundries turned out most of the firearms used by Union forces.

 the Union navy’s blockade of the major southern ports sharply reduced the amount of cotton that could be exported to Britain and France as well as the flow of goods (including military weapons) imported from Europe. In addition, the Union had more wagons and horses than the Confederacy, and an even more impressive edge in the number of railroad locomotives. The Confederates, however, had major geographic and emotional advantages: they could fight a war on their own territory in defense of their homeland. In warfare, it is usually easier to defend than to attack, since defending troops have the opportunity to dig protective trenches and fortifications. In the Civil War, 90 percent of the time, armies that assaulted ­well-​­defended positions were mauled. Many Confederate leaders thought that if they could hold out long enough, disgruntled northern voters might convince Lincoln and Congress to end the war. As the two sides mobilized, the Confederacy had ­more-​­experienced military leaders and better horsemen. Many Confederates also displayed a brash sense of confidence. After all, had not the Revolutionaries of 1776 defeated a much stronger British army? “Britain could not conquer three million [Americans],” a Louisianan declared, and “the world cannot conquer the South.”

 The War’s Early Strategies The two sides initially had quite different goals. The Confederacy sought to convince the Union and the world to recognize its independence. The United

 644  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 States, on the other hand, fought to restore the Union. The future of slavery was not yet an issue. After the fall of Fort Sumter, neither side was ready to wage war, but excited newspaper editors and politicians on both sides pressured the generals to strike quickly. “Forward to Richmond!” screamed a New York newspaper headline. In the summer of 1861, Jefferson Davis told General Pierre G. T. Beauregard to rush the main Confederate army to Manassas Junction, a railroad crossing in northern Virginia, about ­twenty-​­five miles southwest of Washington. President Lincoln hoped that the Union army (often called Federals) would overrun the outnumbered Confederates (often called Rebels) and quickly push on to Richmond, only 107 miles to the south. “What a picnic,” predicted a New York soldier, “to go down South for three months and clean up the whole business.”

 first bull run

 When word reached Washington, D.C., that the two armies were converging for battle, hundreds of civilians packed picnic lunches and went to watch the spectacle, assuming that the first clash of arms would be short, glorious, and bloodless. It was a hot, dry day on July 21, 1861, when 37,000 untested Union recruits breezily marched to battle, some of them breaking ranks to eat blackberries or drink water from streams along the way. Many of them died with the berry juice still staining their lips as they engaged the Confederates dug in behind a branch of the Potomac River called

 First Bull Run Moments before battle, a spectator in a top hat chats with Union soldiers (bottom right), while an artist sketches the passing troops breezily heading to war (at left).

Choosing Sides  645


 Bull Run near the Manassas Junction railroad station. For most of the soldiers, the battle at Bull Run was their first taste of the chaos and confusion of combat. Many were disoriented by the smoke from gunpowder and saltpeter, the deafening roar of cannon fire, the screaming of fallen comrades, and the distinctive sound of bullets whizzing past. Because neither side yet wore s­ tandard-​­colored uniforms, the soldiers had trouble deciding friend from foe. The Union troops almost won the battle early in the afternoon. “We fired a volley,” wrote a Massachusetts private, “and saw the Rebels running. . . . The boys were saying constantly, in great glee, ‘We’ve whipped them.’ ‘We’ll hang Jeff Davis from a sour apple tree.’ ‘They’re running.’ ‘The war is over.’” But Confederate reinforcements poured in to tip the balance. Amid the furious fighting, a South Carolina officer rallied his troops by pointing to the courageous example of Thomas Jackson’s men: “Look! There is General Jackson with his Virginians, standing like a stone wall!” Jackson ordered his men to charge the faltering Union ranks, urging them to “yell like furies!” From that day forward, “Stonewall” became Jackson’s popular nickname, and he would be the most ­celebrated—​­and ­feared—​­Confederate commander. The Union army’s retreat from Bull Run turned into a panicked rout (the “great skedaddle”) as fleeing soldiers and terrified civilians clogged the road to Washington, D.C. The victorious Confederates, however, were so disorganized and exhausted that they failed to give chase. As the armies moved on, they left behind a battlefield strewn with the dead and the ­dying—​­mangled men and bloated horses and mules, all scattered among discarded knapsacks, canteens, blankets, rifles, wagons, and cannons. Stonewall Jackson sent his wife a letter reporting that “we fought a great battle and gained a great victory, for which all the glory is due to God alone.” His Union counterpart, General William T. Sherman, admitted that the Federals had suffered a “terrible defeat” during which many inexperienced soldiers “degenerated into an armed mob.” The news of the Confederate victory triggered sharp criticism of President Lincoln. Michigan senator Zachariah Chandler, a Republican, dismissed the president as “timid, vacillating & inefficient.” An Ohio Republican was even more critical, denouncing Lincoln as “an admitted failure” who “has no will, no courage, no executive capacity.” Lincoln, however, learned from defeat. The hallmark of his presidency was his ability to acknowledge his mistakes and move forward. With each passing year, he would grow more sure of himself as a wartime leader. The First Battle of Bull Run (or First Manassas)* was a sobering experience for both sides, each of which miscalculated the other’s strength and tenacity. *The Federals most often named battles for natural features; the Confederates, for nearby ­towns—​­thus Bull Run (Manassas), Antietam (Sharpsburg), Stones River (Murfreesboro), and the like.

 646  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 Much of the romance of ­war—​­the colorful uniforms, bright flags, marching bands, and rousing ­songs—​­gave way to the agonizing realization that this would be a long, costly, grim struggle. Harper’s Weekly bluntly warned: “From the fearful day at Bull Run dates war. Not polite war, not incredulous war, but war that breaks hearts and blights homes.”

 the union’s “anaconda” plan

 The Battle of Bull Run demonstrated that the war would not be decided with one sudden stroke. General Winfield Scott, the ­seventy-​­five-​­year-​­old commander of the Union war effort, devised a ­three-​­pronged strategy that called first for the Army of the Potomac, the main Union army, to defend Washington, D.C., and exert constant pressure on the Confederate capital at Richmond. THE FIRST BATTLE OF BULL RUN, JULY 21, 1861







10 Miles


M


10 Kilometers


L


N
D


 m Union Ar

Bull Run


Y


A


Centreville


 fed e

R


Washington
Arlington


Bull Run


Co
 n

A


 y Alexandria

 rat es Manassas Junction V

I


R


G


I
Oc


 coq

N
 ua n

I


A


Cr
 ee

■


■
■


Po
 tom ac

Ri
 ve

 r

 k

Area of map


 Confederate advance Union advance Union retreat Battle site

 Why did the Confederate and Union armies rush to battle before they were ready? How did General Beauregard win the First Battle of Bull Run? Why did the Confederates not pursue the retreating Union army?

WWN64
Figure M15_2 1st proof 
Choosing Sides  647


 At the same time, the Federal navy’s blockade of southern ports would cut off the Confederacy’s access to foreign goods and weapons. The final component of the plan called for other Union armies to divide the Confederacy by pushing south along the crucial inland water routes: the Mississippi, Tennessee, and Cumberland Rivers. This ­so-​­called Anaconda Plan was intended to slowly trap and crush the southern resistance, like an anaconda snake strangling its prey.

 confederate strategy

 Confederate president Jefferson Davis was better prepared than Lincoln at the start of the war to guide military strategy. A graduate of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, he had served with distinction both as an officer during the M ­ exican-​­American War and as U.S. secretary of war from 1853 to 1857. If the war could be prolonged, Davis and others hoped, then the British or French, desperate for southern cotton, might be persuaded to join their cause. Or, perhaps a long war would influence public sentiment in the North and force Lincoln to seek a negotiated settlement. So while armies were forming in the South, Confederate diplomats were seeking military and financial assistance in London and Paris, and Confederate sympathizers in the North were urging an end to the Union’s war effort. The Confederate representatives in Paris won a promise from France to recognize the Confederacy as a new nation if Great Britain would do the same. But the British refused, partly in response to pressure from President Lincoln and partly out of Britain’s desire to maintain its trade with the United States. Confederate leaders had assumed that Britain would support the South in order to get its cotton. “The cards are in our hands!” crowed the Mercury, a Charleston newspaper. “And we intend to play them out to the bankruptcy of every cotton factory in Great Britain and France for the acknowledgement of our independence.” As it turned out, however, the British were able to import enough cotton from India to maintain production. In the end, Confederate diplomacy in Europe was more successful in getting military supplies than in gaining official recognition of the Confederacy as an independent nation.

 forming armies

 Once fighting began, President Lincoln called for 500,000 more men, a staggering number at the time and one that the Confederacy struggled to match. “War! And volunteers are the only topics of conversation or thought,” wrote a student at Ohio’s Oberlin College. “I cannot study. I cannot sleep, and I don’t know as I can write.” In Illinois, Ulysses S. Grant, a

 648  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 mediocre graduate of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point who had displayed courage and a knack for leadership in the ­Mexican-​­American War, as well as a fondness for horses, liquor, and cigars, rejoined the army in 1861, explaining that there “are but two parties n ­ ow—​­traitors and ­patriots—​­and I want hereafter to be ranked with the latter.” Confederates were equally committed to their cause. Charleston, wrote Mary Chesnut, the literary wife of a prominent planter, was “crowded with soldiers” who feared “the war will be over before they get a sight of the fun.” Tennessee’s ­twenty-​­one-​­year-​­old Sam Watkins reported that everyone in his town “was eager for the war.” The basic unit of the ­nineteenth-​­century U.S. Army was the regiment, about 1,000 soldiers, and during the Civil War most regiments were made up of friends, neighbors, and relatives from the same local community. Ethnic groups also formed their own regiments. A quarter of the Union troops were ­foreign-​­born. The Union army, for example, included a Scandinavian regiment (the 15th Wisconsin Infantry), a French regiment (the 55th New York Infantry), a Polish Legion (the 58th New York Infantry), and a mixed regiment of Poles, Hungarians, Germans, Spaniards, and Italians (the 39th New York Infantry). Many immigrant soldiers did not speak English. Immigrants were attracted to serve for many reasons: a strong belief in the Union cause, cash bonuses, regular pay, or the need for a steady job. Whatever the reason, the high proportion of immigrants in the Union army gave it an ethnic diversity absent in the Confederate ranks. Many of the first Confederate army units chose flamboyant names: the Frontier Guards, ­Rough-​­and-​­Ready Grays, Game Cocks, Tigers, Cherokee Lincoln Killers, Tallapoosa Thrashers, and Raccoon Roughs. Because the Confederacy had a smaller male population than the North, Jefferson Davis was forced to enact a conscription law (mandatory military draft). On April 16, 1862, all white males between eighteen and ­thirty-​­five were required to serve in the army for three years. “From this time until the end of the war,” a Tennessee soldier wrote, “a soldier was simply a machine, a conscript. . . . All our pride and valor had gone, and we were sick of war and cursed the Southern Confederacy.” The Confederate conscription law included controversial loopholes. A draftee might avoid service either by paying a “substitute” who was not of draft age or by paying $500 to the government. Elected officials and key civilian workers, as well as planters with twenty or more slaves, were exempted from military service. Many among the planter elite argued that if they left to fight, their slaves would escape or riot. Equally galling to many Confederate soldiers was the behavior of wealthy officers who brought their enslaved servants with them to army camps.

Choosing Sides  649


 The U.S. Army recruiting office in City Hall Park, New York City The sign advertises the money offered to those willing to serve: $677 to new recruits, $777 to veteran soldiers, and $15 to anyone who brought in a recruit.

 The Union waited nearly a year to force men into service. In 1863, with the war going badly for the Federal armies, the government began to draft men. As in the South, northerners found ways to avoid military service. Exemptions were granted to selected federal and state officeholders and to others on medical or compassionate grounds; or a draftee might pay $300 to avoid service. Such exemptions led to bitter complaints on both sides about the conflict being “a rich man’s war and a poor man’s fight.” The Civil War also divided families. Lincoln’s wife had four brothers who fought for the Rebel side. The son of Lincoln’s attorney general, Edward Bates, fought for the Confederacy. In June 1862, two brothers, Alexander and James Campbell, fought against each other at the Battle of Secessionville on James Island, South Carolina. Alexander joined Union forces in assaulting a Confederate fort, one of whose defenders was his brother. Afterward, James wrote his brother, expressing astonishment that Alexander had been among the Union attackers. “I was . . . doing my best to Beat you, but I hope that you and I will never again meet face to face.” But if they should, he urged his brother to “do your duty to your cause, for I can assure you I will strive to discharge my duty to my country & my cause.”

 the life of a soldier

 The average Civil War soldier or sailor was ­twenty-​­five years old, stood five feet eight inches, and weighed 143 pounds.

 650  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 A third of the southern soldiers could neither read nor write. One in nine would be killed or wounded. Half of the Union soldiers and ­two-​­thirds of the Confederates were farmers. Army camps featured their own libraries, theatrical stages, churches, and numerous “mascot” p ­ ets—​­and monotonous routine. Because most of the fighting was seasonal, in the spring and summer, soldiers spent far more time preparing for war than actually fighting. A Pennsylvania private wrote home that “the first thing in the morning is drill. Then drill, then drill again. Then drill, drill, a little more drill, then drill, lastly drill.” Life in army camps was difficult at best. When not training, soldiers spent time outdoors, in makeshift shelters or in small ­tents—​­talking, reading books, newspapers, or letters; playing cards or checkers; singing songs, smoking pipes; washing and mending clothes; and fighting swarms of lice, ticks, chiggers, and mosquitoes. Their diet was plain and dull: baked bread crackers (called hardtack), salted meat (pork or beef), and coffee. A favorite camp song included the following lyrics: Let us close our game of poker, Take our tin cups in our hand, While we gather round the cook’s tent door, Where dry mummies of hard crackers Are given to each man; O hard crackers, come again no more! Some soldiers could not stand the rigors and strains of combat and camp life. ­Des­ertions soared with each passing year, as did incidents of drunkenness, thievery, and insubordination. Punishments varied. Some deserters were executed, either shot or hanged. Others were tied to a ball and chain, forced to bury dead horses or tend to animals, or drummed out of the service. Most of those who served on either side, however, came to view their military experience as beneficial. Charles Biddlecom, for example, concluded that the army was “a very good school for hot heads such as I was.” Military service helped him mature into a man.

 mixed motives Several million mostly young and inexperienced Americans fought in the Civil War. As in all great wars, their motives for doing so varied dramatically. Sullivan Ballou, a t­hirty-​­two-​­year-​­old Rhode Island lawyer and legislator who enlisted in the Union army, wrote his wife that he would have loved nothing more than to have stayed with his family and seen their sons grow to “honorable manhood,” but his ultimate priority was serving his country. He felt a great debt to “those who went before us through the

Choosing Sides  651


 Union soldiers Smoking their pipes, these soldiers share a moment of rest and a bottle of whiskey.

 blood and sufferings of the Revolution.” A week later, Ballou was killed in the first Battle of Bull Run. In his last letter to his wife, he had expressed a premonition of death: “do not mourn me dead . . . wait for me, for we shall meet again.” Southerners felt the same sense of patriotism and manly honor. An Alabama planter explained to his anxious wife why he had to fight. “My honor, my duty, your reputation & that of my darling little boy,” he stressed, forced him to don a uniform “when our bleeding country needs the services of every man.” As the months passed and the suffering grew, however, many combatants on both sides saw their initial enthusiasm fade. Charles Biddlecom, a farmer from upstate New York, volunteered in May 1861 as an enlisted man in the Union army. He was eager to get the “fuss” with the South over and whip the “Southern whelps.” By 1863, however, Biddlecom had had enough of war. Sick with dysentery, overrun with lice, and miserably lonesome, he and three comrades were forced to live in a “little dog kennel” just four feet high. Although he still hated slaveholders, he now felt it might have been “better in the end to have let the South go out peaceably and tried her hand at making a nation.” Like many other soldiers and sailors on both sides, Biddlecom’s moods and motives for fighting fluctuated wildly depending upon the course of the war. In 1864, he confessed that the Union army was “worn out, discouraged, [and] demoralized.” He stuck it out to preserve his sense of manly honor, but

 652  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 “as for men fighting from pure love of country, I think them as few as white blackbirds.” He declared that he was neither a “Union saver” nor a “freedom shrieker.” At one point, he had heard enough about a war to free the slaves: “to hell with the devilish twaddle about freedom.” By the time the war ended, however, Biddlecom’s emotions had again reversed themselves with the Union victory. He celebrated the defeat of the Confederacy for affirming that “freedom shall extend over the whole nation.” The “greatest nation of Earth” showed that it would not surrender to “traitors in arms.”

 blacks in the south As had happened during the Revolutionary War and the War of 1812, enslaved African Americans took advantage of the confusion created by the war to run away, engage in sabotage, join the Union war effort, or pursue their own interests. A plantation owner in Tennessee was disgusted by the war’s effect on his slaves, as he confessed in his diary: “My Negroes all at home, but working only as they see fit, doing little.” Some slaves had reported that they would “serve the federals rather than work on the farm.” Later, he revealed that when Union armies arrived in the area, his slaves had “stampeded” to join the Yankees: “Many of my servants have run away and most of those left had [just] as well be gone, they being totally demoralized and ungovernable.” Some enslaved blacks escaped and served as spies or guides for Union forces; others joined the Union army or navy.

Fighting in the West
 kansas

 The most intense fighting west of the Mississippi occurred along the K ­ ansas-​­Missouri border, where the disputes that had developed between the ­pro-​­slavery and a­ nti-​­slavery settlers in the 1850s turned into brutal guerrilla warfare. The most prominent ­pro-​­Confederate leader in the area was William Quantrill. He and his followers, mostly teenagers, fought under a black flag, meaning that they would kill anyone who surrendered. In destroying Lawrence, Kansas, in 1863, Quantrill ordered his men to “kill every male and burn every house.” By the end of the day, 182 boys and men had been massacred. Their opponents, the J­ ayhawkers, responded in kind. They tortured and hanged ­pro-​­Confederate prisoners, burned houses, and destroyed livestock. Many Indian nations got caught up in the war on both sides, and in Oklahoma they fought against each other. Indians among the “Five Civilized Tribes” held African American slaves and felt a bond with southern whites. Oklahoma’s proximity to Texas influenced the Choctaws and Chickasaws to support the Confederacy. The Cherokees, Creeks, and Seminoles were more divided in

Fighting in the West  653


 their loyalties. The Cherokees, for example, split in two, some supporting the Union and others the South.

 kentucky and tennessee

 Little happened of military significance east of the Appalachian Mountains before May 1862. On the other hand, important battles occurred in the West (from the Appalachians to the Mississippi River). In western Kentucky, Confederate general Albert Sidney Johnston had perhaps 40,000 men stretched over some 150 miles. Early in 1862, General Ulysses S. Grant made the first Union thrust against the weak center of Johnston’s overextended lines. Moving on boats out of Cairo, Illinois, and Paducah, Kentucky, the Union army steamed up the Tennessee River and captured Fort Henry in northern Tennessee on February 6. The relentless Grant then moved quickly overland to attack nearby Fort Donelson, on the Cumberland River, where, on February 16, some 12,000 Confederates surrendered. This first major Union victory touched off wild celebrations throughout the North. President Lincoln’s delight, however, was tempered by the death of his ­eleven-​­year-​­old son Willie, who succumbed to typhoid fever. The tragedy “overwhelmed” the president. A White House staff member said she had never seen “a man so bowed down in grief.”

 shiloh

 After defeats in Kentucky and Tennessee, the Confederate forces in the West fled southward before regrouping under General Johnston at Corinth in northern Mississippi near the Tennessee border. Their goal was to protect the Memphis and Charleston Railroad linking the lower Mississippi Valley and the Atlantic coast. While planning his attack on Corinth, Grant made a costly mistake when he exposed his 42,000 troops on a rolling plateau between Lick and Snake Creeks flowing into the Tennessee River. Johnston recognized Grant’s blunder, and at dawn on Sunday, April 6, he launched a surprise attack, urging his men to be “worthy of your race and lineage; worthy of the women of the South.” The 44,000 Confederates struck at Shiloh, a whitewashed Methodist chapel in the center of the Union camp in southwestern Tennessee. Most of Grant’s troops were still sleeping or eating breakfast; many died in their bedrolls. After a day of confused fighting and terrible losses on both sides, including Confederate general Johnston, the fleeing Union soldiers were pinned against the river. One of them wrote that “this is going to be a great battle, such as I have been anxious to see for a long time, and I think I have seen enough of it.” The new Confederate commander, Pierre G. T. Beauregard, telegraphed President Jefferson Davis that his army had scored “a complete victory, driving the enemy from every position.” But his celebration was premature.

 654  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

CAMPAIGNS IN THE WEST, F
­ EBRUARY–​­APRIL 1862 Confederate advance Confederate retreat Union advance Battle site 
Area of map


 Main railroad lines





Louisville


 INDIANA

50 Miles


Oh
 i

50 Kilometers


Lexington
 r



 ve



Harrodsburg


 o Ri

Perryville


ILLINOIS K

Paducah


Cairo


E


N


T


U


C


Bowling Green


Fort Donelson


 m

E


N


N


E
Joh n s


 to

 n

Shiloh


S


S


Murfreesboro


E


Knoxville


E
Ri
 v

Mis
 siss

 er Riv

Nashville


T


Beauregard


 d

Y


Cu


Polk


 ippi R.

Fort Henry


Fort
Pillow
Memphis


 be rla n

Columbus


Island No. 10


K


 er

Ten
 ne ss ee

 MISSOURI

Chattanooga


Corinth


Bragg


MISSISSIPPI
Johnston 
Decatur


 GEORGIA

 ALABAMA

 Why was General Grant’s campaign in Kentucky a significant victory for the Union army? ■ Describe the events at Shiloh. What were the costs to the Union as a result of the battle? WWN64 ■

Figure M15_3
 1st proof

 Union General William T. Sherman, who had been wounded twice and had three horses shot from under him, visited Grant as rain fell. “Well, Grant,” he said, “we’ve had the devil’s own day, haven’t we?” “Yes,” Grant answered. But we will “lick ’em tomorrow.” And they did. Reinforced by 25,000 fresh Union troops, Grant’s army took the offensive at dawn the next day, and the Confederates glumly withdrew twenty miles to Corinth. The Union troops were too battered and weary to pursue. Confederate private Sam Watkins observed that “those Yankees were whipped, fairly whipped, and according to all the rules of war they ought to have retreated. But they didn’t.” Another Rebel soldier wrote home to his family that his first battle

Fighting in the West  655


 had shaken him: “Oh God, forever keep me out of such another fight. I was not scared. I was just in danger.” Shiloh, a Hebrew word meaning “Place of Peace,” was the largest and costliest battle in which Americans had ever engaged to that point. Viewing the battle, said General Sherman, “would have cured anybody of war.” Of the 100,000 men who participated, a quarter of them were killed or wounded, seven times the casualties at the Battle of Bull Run. Grant remembered that the battlefield was so littered with corpses that he could not walk in any direction without “stepping on dead bodies.” He now realized that the only way the war would end would be through “complete conquest.” Like Bull Run earlier and so many battles to come, Shiloh was a story of missed opportunities and lucky accidents. Throughout the Civil War, winning armies would fail to pursue their retreating foes, thus allowing the wounded opponent to slip away and fight again. After Shiloh, Union general Henry Halleck, already jealous of Grant’s success, spread a false rumor that Grant had been drinking during the battle. Some urged Lincoln to fire Grant, but the president refused: “I can’t spare this man; he fights.” Halleck, however, took Grant’s place as field commander, and as a result the Union thrust in the Mississippi Valley southward ground to a halt.

 new orleans

 Just three weeks after the Battle of Shiloh, however, the Union won a great naval victory at New Orleans, as ­sixty-​­year-​­old David G. Farragut’s warships blasted their way past Confederate forts under cover of darkness to take control of the largest city in the Confederacy. Union general Benjamin F. Butler, a c­ ross-​­eyed Massachusetts Democrat, thereafter served as the military governor of captured New Orleans. When a Confederate sympathizer ripped down a Union flag, Butler had him hanged. After a Rebel woman leaned out her window and emptied her chamber pot on the head of newly promoted Admiral Farragut, General Butler decreed that any woman who was disrespectful of Union soldiers would be treated as a “woman of the town plying her avocation” (that is, as a prostitute). Residents of the captured towns thereafter referred to General Butler as “the Beast,” but they also quit harassing Union soldiers and sailors. The loss of New Orleans was a devastating blow to the Confederate economy. The Union army gained control of 1,500 cotton plantations and liberated 50,000 slaves in the Mississippi Valley. As a result, the slave system in Louisiana was “forever destroyed and worthless,” reported a northern journalist.

 perryville

 In the late summer of 1862, General Braxton Bragg’s Army of Mississippi, 30,000 strong, used railroads to link up with General Edmund

 656  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 Kirby Smith’s Army of East Tennessee. Their goal was to invade the North by taking control of the border state of Kentucky. They hoped to recruit volunteers for the Confederacy as well as push the Union army out of the state across the Ohio River. The Confederates met the Union Army of Ohio, led by General Don Carlos Buell, at the central Kentucky village of Perryville in October 1862. The outnumbered Confederates attacked the Union lines, pushing them back more than a mile. When Bragg learned that Union reinforcements were approaching, however, he ordered the Army of Mississippi to withdraw south toward Tennessee. After the Battle of Perryville, the Union retained control of Kentucky for the rest of the war.

Fighting in the East
 The fighting in the East remained fairly quiet for nine months after the Battle of Bull Run. In the wake of the Union defeat, Lincoln had appointed glamorous General George B. McClellan, Stonewall Jackson’s classmate at West Point and a former railroad president, as head of the Army of the Potomac. The ­thirty-​­four-​­year-​­old McClellan, who encouraged journalists to call him “Little Napoleon,” set about building the Union’s most powerful, ­best-​­trained army. Yet for all of his boundless ­self-​­confidence (“I can do it all”) and demonstrated organizational ability, McClellan’s paralyzing cautiousness would prove crippling. Months passed while he remained in a state of perpetual preparation, building and training his massive army to meet the superior numbers of Confederates he mistakenly believed were facing him. “Tardy George” M ­ cClellan always found a reason to do something other than engage the Confederates in battle. Lincoln finally lost his patience and ordered McClellan to attack.

 mcclellan’s peninsular campaign

 In ­mid-​­March 1862, McClellan moved his huge army of 122,000 men on 400 ships and barges down the Potomac River and the Chesapeake Bay to the mouth of the James River at the tip of the Yorktown peninsula, within sixty miles of the C ­ onfederate ­capital of Richmond, Virginia. Thousands of residents fled the city in panic, but McClellan overestimated the number of Confederate defenders and waited too long to strike. A frustrated Lincoln told McClellan that the war could be won only by engaging the Rebel army. “Once more,” Lincoln told his commanding general, “let me tell you, it is indispensable to you that you strike a blow.” On May 31, 1862, Confederate general Joseph E. Johnston struck first at McClellan’s army along the Chickahominy River, six miles east of Richmond. In the Battle of Seven Pines (Fair Oaks), only the arrival of Federal

Fighting in the East  657


 er

Ri


 ve

 r

THE PENINSULAR CAMPAIGN, 1862

Riv


 oa

 nd

Po


Sh


Front Royal


Ja
 ck so n

 ac

Washington


MARYLAND
Cross Keys ES CH 
Ja


Port Republic


Fredericksburg


J


 C h i c k a homi

 un

 ke

 n

 y

Richmond .
Lee and Johnston


50 Kilometers


Williamsburg
Yorktown


Monitor and
Merrimack


 r



50 Miles


 ve

■




 Harrison’s Landing

River




 r

Ri


■




 ve

 rk

 Union retreat Battle site

 tox

Ri


Yo


 o

 Confederate advance Union advance

 at

 y

Seven Days Battles


R


Seven
Pines


A pp


 m

Mc


A


Y


Pam
 es R i v e r am

I


 BA

N


–M
 n, March ay ella Cl

I


E


G


K


R


 EA

I


P


V


A


 s ck y a M

Jack
 son , Ju ne

 on

■


Area of map


R


 er

 McDowell

 t om

 a en

 iv

 n kso Jac

Po


 h

 to

 m

 ac

Winchester


Fort Monroe


Norfolk


 What was General McClellan’s strategy for attacking Richmond? How did General Jackson divert the attention of the Union army? Why did President Lincoln demote McClellan after the Peninsular campaign?

WWN64
Figure M15_4 1st proof 
 r­einforcements, who somehow crossed the swollen river, prevented a disastrous Union defeat. Both sides took heavy casualties, and Johnston was severely wounded. At this point, Robert E. Lee assumed command of the Confederates’ main army, the Army of Northern Virginia, a development that changed the course of the war. The brilliant, dignified Lee had graduated second in his class at West Point, and during the ­Mexican-​­American War, he had impressed General Winfield Scott as the “very best soldier I ever saw in the field.” In 1857, Scott predicted that Lee would become America’s greatest military leader. Lee would prove to be a daring, even reckless, strategist who was as aggressive

 658  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 as McClellan was timid. “He is silent, inscrutable, strong, like a God,” said a Confederate officer. On July 9, when Lincoln visited McClellan’s headquarters on the coast of Virginia, the general complained that the administration had failed to support him and lectured the president at length on military strategy. Such insubordination was ample reason to relieve McClellan of his overall command. After returning to Washington, Lincoln called Henry Halleck from the West to take charge.

 second bull run Lincoln and Halleck ordered McClellan to move his Army of the Potomac back Robert E. Lee Military adviser to President Jefferson Davis and later to Washington, D.C., and join with commander of the Army of Northern General John Pope, commander of Virginia. the Union Army of Virginia, in a new assault on Richmond. Pope declared that his goal “was attack and not defense.” In a letter to his wife, a jealous McClellan ­predicted—​­accurately—​­that “Pope will be thrashed and disposed of ” by Lee’s army. He also dismissed Lincoln “as an idiot.” Lee moved northward to strike Pope’s army before McClellan’s troops could arrive. Lee knew that his only chance was to drive a wedge between the two larger Union armies so that he could deal with them one at a time. Violating a basic rule of military strategy, Lee boldly divided his forces, sending Stonewall Jackson’s “foot cavalry” around Pope’s flank to attack his supply lines in the rear. At the Second Battle of Bull Run (or Manassas), fought on almost the same site as the earlier battle, a confused Pope assumed that he faced only Jackson, but Lee’s main army by that time had joined in. On August 30, 1862, a crushing Confederate attack drove the larger Union army from the field, giving the Confederates a sensational victory and leading one disheartened Union officer to confess from his deathbed that “General Pope had been outwitted. . . . Our generals have defeated us.” In contrast, a Rebel soldier wrote home that “General Lee stands now above all generals in modern history. Our men will follow him to the end.”

Emancipation  659


Emancipation
 The Confederate victories in 1862 devastated morale in the North and convinced Lincoln that he had to take bolder steps to win the war. Now the North had to assault slavery itself. When fighting began in 1861, the need to keep the border slave states (Delaware, Kentucky, Maryland, and Missouri) in the Union dictated caution on the volatile issue of emancipation. Beyond that, Lincoln had to contend with a ­deep-​­seated racial prejudice among most northerners, who were willing to allow slavery to continue in the South as long as it was not allowed to expand into the West. Lincoln himself harbored doubts about his constitutional authority to end slavery, and he did not believe that blacks, if freed, could coexist with whites.

 slaves in the war

 The expanding war forced the issue. As Federal forces pushed into the Confederacy, fugitive slaves began to turn up in Union army camps, and the commanders did not know whether to declare them free. One general designated them as being “contraband of war,” and thereafter the slaves who sought protection and freedom with Union forces were known as contrabands. Some Union officers put the refugee slaves to work digging trenches, building fortifications, and burying the dead; others simply set them free. Lincoln, meanwhile, began to edge toward ending slavery. On April 16, 1862, he signed an act that abolished slavery in the District of Columbia; on June 19, he signed another bill that excluded slavery from the western territories. Still, he insisted that the war was about restoring the Union and ending secession, not ending slavery. But the course of the war changed Lincoln’s outlook. In the summer of 1862, he decided that emancipation of slaves in the Confederate states was necessary to win the war. Many of the more than 3 million enslaved laborers in the Confederacy were being forced to aid the Rebel war e­ ffort—​­digging trenches, hauling supplies or cooking meals for the armies, repairing railroads, and working as servants for Confederate officers. In July 1862, Lincoln confided to his cabinet that “decisive and extreme measures [to win the war] must be adopted.” Emancipation, he said, had become “a military necessity, absolutely necessary to the preservation of the Union. We must free the slaves or be ourselves subdued.” Secretary of State William H. Seward agreed, but advised Lincoln to delay the announcement until after a Union battlefield victory, to avoid being viewed as desperate.

 660  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 Contrabands Former slaves on a farm in Cumberland Landing, Virginia, 1862.

 antietam: a turning point

 Robert E. Lee made his own momentous decision in the summer of 1862: he would invade Maryland and thereby force the “much weakened and demoralized” Army of the Potomac and its “timid” commander McClellan to leave northern Virginia and relieve the pressure on Richmond, the Confederate capital. Lee also hoped to influence the upcoming elections in the North; he wanted to gain official British and French recognition of the Confederacy, which would bring his troops desperately needed military supplies. In addition, Lee and Jefferson Davis planned to capture Maryland, with its many Confederate supporters, separate it from the Union, and gain control of its farms and foodstuffs needed for the war effort. For those reasons and others, in September 1862, Lee and his 40,000 troops, many of them ragged, barefoot, and underfed, pushed north into western Maryland. On September 17, 1862, the Union and Confederate armies clashed in the furious Battle of Antietam (Sharpsburg). Had not Union soldiers discovered Lee’s detailed battle plans wrapped around three cigars that a Rebel soldier had carelessly dropped on the ground, the Confederates might have won. McClellan, had he moved his 100,000 men more quickly, could have destroyed Lee’s Army of Northern Virginia while it was scattered and on the move. As always, however, McClellan moved slowly, enabling Lee and his troops to regroup at Sharpsburg, between Antietam Creek and the Potomac River. There, over the course of fourteen hours, the poorly coordinated Union army launched repeated attacks. The fighting was savage; a Union officer counted “hundreds of dead bodies lying in rows and in piles.” The scene after “five hours of continuous slaughter” was “sickening, harrowing, horrible. O what a terrible sight!”

Emancipation  661


 Lincoln’s search for a “fighting general” Abraham Lincoln and George C. McClellan confer at Antietam, in Maryland, October 4, 1862.

 The next day, Lee braced for another Union attack, but it never came. That night, cloaked by fog and drizzling rain, the battered Confederates slipped south back across the Potomac River to the safety of Virginia. “The ‘barefoot boys’ have done some terrible fighting,” a Georgian wrote his parents. “We are a dirty, ragged set [of soldiers], mother, but courage & heroism find many a true disciple among us.” Although the battle was technically a draw, Lee’s northern invasion had failed. Both sides displayed heroic courage and reckless bravery in what one Rebel general called the “hardest fought battle of the war.” McClellan, never known for his modesty, claimed that he “had fought the battle splendidly” against great odds. To him, the Battle of Antietam was “the most terrible battle of the age.” Indeed, it was the bloodiest single day in American military history. Some 6,400 soldiers on both sides were killed, twice as many as at Shiloh, and another 17,000 were wounded or listed as missing. The Confederate people, said a soldier, wanted “an active [military] campaign, and General Lee has certainly given it to us.” President Lincoln was pleased that Lee’s army had been forced to retreat, but he was disgusted by McClellan’s failure to attack the retreating Confederates and win the war. The president sent a sarcastic message to the general: “I have just read your dispatch about s­ ore-​­tongued and fatigued horses. Will you pardon me for asking what the horses of your army have done . . . that fatigues anything?” Failing to receive a satisfactory answer, Lincoln sacked McClellan as commander of the Army of the Potomac and assigned him to recruiting duty in New Jersey. Never again would McClellan command troops, but he would challenge Lincoln for the presidency in 1864 as a Democrat.

 662  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 The Battle of Antietam had several important results. It revived sagging northern morale, dashed the Confederacy’s hopes of forging alliances with Great Britain and France, and convinced Lincoln to transform the war from an effort to restore the Union to a crusade to end slavery.

 emancipation proclamation

 On September 22, 1862, five days after the battle, he issued the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation, which warned the Confederacy that if it did not stop fighting, all slaves still under Rebel control were to be made “forever free” in exactly 100 days, on January 1, 1863. The Emancipation Proclamation was not based on ideas of racial equality or on abstract ideals of human dignity. It was, according to Lincoln, a “military necessity.” The proclamation freed only those slaves in areas still controlled by the Confederacy; it had no bearing on slaves in the four border states, because they remained in the Union. Lincoln believed that the Constitution allowed each state to decide the fate of slavery, so his only legal avenue was to act as commander in chief of the armed forces rather than as president. He would declare the end of slavery as a “fit and necessary war measure” to save the Union.

 Union view of the Emancipation Proclamation A thoughtful Lincoln composes the proclamation with the Constitution and the Bible in his lap. The Scales of Justice hangs on the wall behind him.

Emancipation  663


 When Lincoln officially signed the Emancipation Proclamation in January, however, he amended his original message, adding that the proclamation was “an act of justice” as well as a military necessity. Lincoln’s constitutional concerns about abolishing slavery would lead him to promote the Thirteenth Amendment ending slavery across the nation. As Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation, he said, “I never, in my life, felt more certain that I was doing the right thing than I do in signing this paper.” Simply restoring the Union was no longer the purpose of the war; the transformation of the South and the slave system was now the goal.

 reactions to emancipation

 Lincoln’s threat to free slaves under Confederate control triggered emotional reactions. The Illinois State Register savaged the president for violating the Constitution and causing “the permanent disruption of the republic.” Democrats exploded with rage, calling the president’s decision dictatorial, unconstitutional, and catastrophic. “We Won’t Fight to Free the Nigger,” proclaimed one popular banner. Many voters felt likewise. Lincoln forcefully responded to his critics. “You say you will not fight to free negroes,” he wrote. “Some of them seem willing to fight for you; but, no

 Confederate view of the Emancipation Proclamation Surrounded by demonic faces hidden in his furnishings, Lincoln pens the proclamation with a foot trampling the Constitution. The devil holds the inkwell before him.

 664  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 matter. Fight you, then, exclusively to save the Union. I issued the [emancipation] proclamation on purpose to aid you in saving the Union.” In the November 1862 congressional elections, Republicans lost almost two dozen seats. Illinois, Indiana, Pennsylvania, New York, and Ohio went Democratic, largely because of opposition to the Emancipation Proclamation. Even Lincoln’s home district in Illinois elected a Democrat. Although Lincoln’s proclamation technically would free only the slaves where Confederates remained in control, many slaves in the northern border states and the South claimed their freedom anyway. As Lincoln had hoped, word spread rapidly among the slave community in the Confederacy, arousing hopes of freedom, creating general confusion in the cities, and encouraging hundreds of thousands to escape. A Union general said that emancipation “was like an earthquake. It shook and shattered the whole previously existing social system.” George Washington Albright, an enslaved teen in Mississippi, recalled that white planters tried to prevent slaves from learning about the proclamation but word of it slipped through the “grapevine.” His father was inspired to escape and join the Union army, and the younger Albright served as a “runner” for the 4Ls (“Lincoln’s Legal Loyal League”), a secret group created to spread the news about the proclamation to slaves throughout the region. Confederate leaders were incensed by Lincoln’s action, predicting it would ignite a race war in the South. By contrast, Frederick Douglass, the African American abolitionist leader, was overjoyed at the “righteous decree”; he knew that, despite its limitations, it would inspire abolitionists in the North and set in motion the eventual end of slavery. As Lincoln had hoped, the Emancipation Proclamation did aid the Union war effort by undermining support for the Confederacy in Europe. The decision to end slavery in the Confederacy gave the Federal war effort greater moral legitimacy in the eyes of ­Europeans—​­and many Americans. As the war continued and Union armies advanced into the southern states, they became an army of liberation, freeing slaves in their path and circulating thousands of copies of the Emancipation Proclamation as they went. At Camp Saxton, a former plantation on the coast of South Carolina, the First South Carolina Volunteers, a new Union regiment made up of former slaves, gathered on January 1, 1863, to celebrate Lincoln’s official signing of the Emancipation Proclamation. After the proclamation was read aloud, it was “cheered to the skies.” As Colonel Thomas W. Higginson, the new unit’s commander, unfurled an ­American flag, the black troops spontaneously began singing “My Country ‘Tis of Thee / Sweet land of liberty / Of thee I sing!” Higginson reported his

Emancipation  665


 emotional reaction: “I never saw anything so electric; it made all other words cheap; it seemed the choked voice of a race at last unloosed.”

 fredericksburg

 In selecting a new commanding general, Lincoln made his poorest choice of all in the fall of 1862, when he turned to Ambrose E. Burnside, a tall, imposing man whose massive facial hair gave rise to the term “sideburns.” Twice before, Burnside had turned down the job, saying he was not worthy of such responsibility. Now he accepted, although he still neither sought the command nor wanted it. He was right to be hesitant. Burnside was an eager fighter but a poor strategist who, according to Fanny Seward, the secretary of state’s daughter, had “ten times as much heart as he has head.” The Union army soon paid for his mistakes. On December 13, 1862, Burnside foolishly sent the 122,000 men in the Army of the Potomac west across the icy Rappahannock River to assault Lee’s outnumbered forces, who were well entrenched on a line of ridges and behind stone walls at the base of Marye’s Heights, west of Fredericksburg, Virginia, midway between Richmond and Washington, D.C. Confederate cannons and muskets chewed up the advancing Federal soldiers as they crossed half a mile of open land. A Rebel artillery officer boasted that “a chicken could not live on that field when we open fire on it.” One of the Federal survivors said it felt like “the ground were bursting underfoot and the very sky was crashing down upon ­us—​­the bullets hissed like a seething sea.” Still, they charged over dead men and fragments of arms and legs, only to be “mown down in heaps.” The assault across the plain in front of the heights was, a Union general regretted, “a great ­slaughter-​­pen,” more like murder than warfare. Wave after wave of b ­ lue-​­clad troops surged toward the w ­ ell-​­protected Confederates. None of the Union soldiers made it to the Rebel lines. The awful scene of dead and dying Federals, some stacked three deep on the battlefield, led Lee to remark: “It is well that war is so ­terrible—​­we should grow too fond of it.” After 12,600 Federals were killed or wounded, compared with fewer than 5,300 for the Confederates, a weeping Burnside told his men to withdraw back across the river as darkness fell. As Burnside rode past his retreating men, his aide called for three cheers for their commander. All he got was sullen silence. That night, however, there was no silence as thousands of wounded and dying soldiers left on the battlefield moaned and shrieked in agony amid the corpses of their friends. A soldier said death was preferable to the experience of the “fearfully and mortally wounded.” Abraham Lincoln was devastated by the news of the Union catastrophe. “We are now on the brink of destruction,” he wrote. “It appears to me the Almighty is against us, and I can hardly see a ray of hope.”

 666  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 The year 1862 ended with a stalemate in the East and the Union thrust in the West mired down. Northern morale plummeted, and northern Democrats’ victories in the fall congressional elections sharply reduced the Republican majorities in the House and the Senate. Many Democrats were calling for a negotiated peace, and ­Republicans—​­even Lincoln’s own cabinet m ­ embers—​ ­grew increasingly critical of the president’s leadership. “If there is a worse place than hell,” Lincoln sighed, “I am in it.” Newspapers circulated rumors that the president was going to resign. General Burnside, too, was under fire, with some of his own officers eager to testify publicly to his shortcomings. One of them claimed that the general was “fast losing his mind.”

 new york city draft riots

 Lincoln’s proclamation freeing slaves in the Confederacy created anxiety and anger among many laborers in the North who feared that freed slaves would eventually migrate north and take their jobs. In New York City, such fears erupted into violence. In July 1863, a group of 500 wage workers, led by volunteer firemen, assaulted the army draft office, shattering its windows, then burning it down. When the city police superintendent arrived at the scene, he was beaten unconscious, and the outnumbered policemen were forced to retreat. The rioters, now swollen by thousands of w ­ orking-​­class whites, mostly Irish, were angry over the unfair military draft, ruthlessly taking out their frustrations on blacks. Mobs rampaged through the streets of Manhattan, ­randomly assaulting African Americans, beating them, dragging them through the streets, and lynching a disabled black man while chanting “Hurrah for Jeff Davis.” Thugs also burned down more than fifty buildings, including the mayor’s home, police stations, two Protestant churches, and the Colored Orphan Asylum, forcing 233 children to flee. The raging violence went on for three days, killing 105 people and injuring thousands. Only the arrival of Federal soldiers put an end to the rioting. Thousands of terrified blacks thereafter moved out of the city for fear of continuing racial violence. Similar riots occurred in other northern cities, including Boston.

 black soldiers and sailors

 In July 1862, in an effort to strengthen the Union war effort, the U.S. Congress had passed the Militia Act, which authorized the army to use freed slaves as laborers or soldiers (They were already eligible to serve in the navy). Lincoln, however, did not encourage the use of freed slaves as soldiers because he feared the reaction in the border states where slavery remained in place. It was only after the formal signing of the Emancipation Proclamation in January 1863 that the Union army recruited blacks in large numbers.

Emancipation  667


CAMPAIGNS IN VIRGINIA AND MARYLAND, 1862
Confederate advance 
Hagerstown
Le


Lee


Jackso
 n

, Sept.
 lan lel cC c M

Washington


Manassas
Junction


 e Le

 ide rns Bu

 e

 Battle site

 o tom a River

Jackson


 M cClellan

P


Second
Bull
Run


Pope


Shen
 and oa hR ive r

Frederick


Harpers
Ferry


 p Po

 Confederate retreat Union advance Union retreat

 e

Antietam
Sharpsburg


MARYLAN D

Cedar Mountain


N


I


A


Y


Pam
 un ke y

Ri
 ve r

Richmond


 Harrison’s Landing

 McClellan to Washington

I


 BA

J


E


 es River am

 AK

 so n,

G


 r

R


 st gu Au

I


 PE

 d

 e Riv ck no

 an

V


 SA

Rap
 pah an

Lee


Ja
 ck

 CHE

Fredericksburg


Area of map




30 Miles
30 Kilometers


 How did the Confederate army defeat General Pope at the Second Battle of Bull Run? ■ Why was General Burnside’s decision to attack at Fredericksburg a WWN64 mistake? Figure M15_5 1st proof ■

 668  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 On May 22, 1863, the U.S. War Department created the Bureau of Colored Troops to recruit free blacks and freed slaves. More than 180,000 blacks enlisted. Some 80 percent of them were from southern states, and 38,000 of them gave their lives. In the navy, African Americans accounted for about a fourth of all enlistments; of these, more than 2,800 died. Initially, blacks were not allowed in combat, but the need to win the prolonged war changed that. Once in battle, they fought tenaciously. A white Union army private reported in the late spring of 1863 that the black troops “fight like the Devil.” To be sure, racism in the North influenced the status of African Americans in the Union military. Many people who opposed slavery did not support racial equality. Black soldiers and sailors were placed in ­ all-​­ black units led by white officers. They were also paid less than whites ($7 per month versus $16 for white recruits) and were ineligible for the enlistment bonus paid to whites. Still, as Frederick Douglass declared, “this is no time for hesitation. . . . This is our chance, and woe betide us if we fail to embrace it.” Service in the Union army or navy provided former slaves a unique opportunity to grow in confidence, awareness, and maturity. A northern social worker in the South Carolina Sea Islands was “astonished” at the positive effects of “soldiering” on e­x-​­slaves: “Some who left here a month ago to join [the army were] cringing, dumpish, slow,” but now they “are ready to look you in the ­eye—​­are wide awake and active.” Commenting on Union victories at Port Hudson and Milliken’s Bend, LouisiBlack Union army sergeant Wearing ana, Lincoln reported that “some of our his uniform and sword, he poses with commanders . . . believe that . . . the a copy of J. T. Headley’s The Great use of colored troops constitutes the Rebellion in his hand. heaviest blow yet dealt to the rebels.”

 The War behind the Lines  669

 The War behind the Lines Feeding, clothing, and supplying the vast armies required tremendous sacrifices on both home fronts. Farms and villages were transformed into battlefields, churches became makeshift hospitals, civilian life was disrupted, and families grieved for soldiers who would not be coming home.

 women and the war While breaking the bonds of slavery, the Civil War also loosened traditional restraints on female activity. “No conflict in history,” a journalist wrote, “was such a woman’s war as the Civil War.” Women on both sides played prominent roles. They worked in mills and factories, sewed uniforms, composed patriotic poems and songs, and raised money and supplies. In Greenville, South Carolina, when T. G. Gower went off to fight, his wife Elizabeth took over the family business, converting production in their carriage factory to military wagons and ambulances. Three thousand northern women worked as nurses with the U.S. Sanitary Commission, a civilian agency that provided medical relief and other services for soldiers. Other women, black and white, supported the freedmen’s aid movement to help impoverished freed slaves. In the North alone, some 20,000 women served as nurses and ­health-​ ­related volunteers. The most famous nurses were Clara Barton and Dorothea Lynde Dix. Barton explained that her place was “anywhere between the bullet and the battlefield.” Dix declared that nurses should be “plain looking” women between the ages of ­thirty-​­five and fifty who could “bear the presence of suffering and exercise entire ­self-​ ­control.” Barton, who later founded the American Red Cross, claimed that the war advanced by fifty years the progress of women in gaining social and economic equality. In many southern towns and counties, the home front became a world Clara Barton She oversaw the of white women and children and distribution of medicines to Union troops and would later help found the African American slaves. A resident American Red Cross. of Lexington, Virginia, reported that

 670  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 there were “no men left” in town by ­mid-​­1862. Women suddenly found themselves ­full-​­time farmers or plantation managers, clerks, and schoolteachers. A few women disguised themselves as men and fought in the war, while dozens served as spies. Others traveled with the armies, cooking meals, writing letters, and assisting with amputations. New Yorker Mary Edwards Walker, a Union battlefield surgeon, was captured and imprisoned by the Confederates for spying. She was the only woman in the war (and since) to be awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor, the nation’s highest military award. In 1864, President Lincoln told a soldier that all the praise of women over the centuries did not do justice “for their conduct during the war.”

 wartime government

 Whi­-le freeing the slaves in the Confederacy was a transformational development, a political revolution began as a result of the shift in congressional power from the South to the North after secession. In 1862, the R ­ epublican-​­dominated Congress sought to promote the “prosperity and happiness of the whole people” by passing a more comprehensive tariff bill (called the Morrill Tariff in honor of its sponsor, Vermont Republican congressman Justin Smith Morrill) to raise government revenue and “protect” America’s manufactures, agriculture, mining, and fishing industries from foreign competition. For the rest of the nineteenth century, U.S. manufacturers were the most protected in the world in terms of high federal tariffs discouraging foreign imports. The Republicans in Congress, with Lincoln’s support, enacted legislation reflecting their belief (and that of the old Whig party) that the federal government could benefit the nation by actively promoting economic development. To that end, Congress approved Susie King Taylor Born into slavery, the Pacific Railway Act (1862), which she served as a nurse in U ­ nion-​ provided federal funding and grants of ­occupied Georgia and operated a land for construction of a 1,900 ­mile-​ school for freed slaves. long transcontinental railroad line ­

 The War behind the Lines  671

 from Omaha, Nebraska, to Sacramento, California. In addition, a Homestead Act (1862) granted 160 acres of public land to each settler who agreed to work the land for five years. To help farmers become more productive, Congress created a new federal agency, the Department of Agriculture. Two other key pieces of Republican legislation were the Morrill Land Grant Act (1862), which provided states with 30,000 acres of federal land to establish public universities that would teach “agriculture and mechanic arts,” and the National Banking Act (1863), which created national banks that could issue paper money that would be accepted across the country. These wartime measures had ­long-​­term significance for the growth of the national ­economy—​­and the expansion of the federal government.

 union finances

 In December 1860, as southern states announced their plans to secede, the federal treasury was virtually empty. To meet the war’s huge expenses, Congress needed money f­ast—​­and lots of it. It focused on three options: raising taxes, printing paper money, and selling government bonds to investors. The taxes came chiefly in the form of the Morrill Tariff on imports and a 3 percent tax on manufactures and most professions. In 1862, Congress created the Internal Revenue Service within the Trea­ sury department to collect the first income tax on citizens and corporations. The tax rate was 3 percent on those with annual incomes more than $800. The tax rate went up to 5 percent on incomes more than $10,000. Yet very few people paid the taxes. Only 250,000 people out of a population of 39 million had income high enough to pay taxes. Congressman Justin S. Morrill, who had authored the Land Grant Act and the Tariff Act of 1862, endorsed the concept of “progressive” taxation, in which tax rates rose with designated income levels. Taxation, he argued, “must be distributed equally, not upon each man an equal amount, but a tax [rate] proportionate to his ability to pay.” The new federal tax revenues, however, fell ­short of what was needed—​­in the end they would meet only 21 percent of wartime e­ xpenditures. In 1862, Congress approved the printing of paper money. With the Legal Tender Act of 1862, the Treasury issued $450 million in new paper currency, called ­greenbacks because of the color of the ink used to print the bills. The federal government also relied upon the sale of bonds. A Philadelphia banker named Jay Cooke (the “Financier of the Civil War”) mobilized a nationwide campaign to sell $2 billion in government bonds to private investors.

 confederate finances

 In comparison to the Union, the Confederate efforts to finance the war were a disaster. Jefferson Davis had to create

 672  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 State currency Banknotes were paper currency. Generally, the better the art on the note, the more it was trusted.

 a treasury and a r­ evenue-​­collecting system from scratch. Moreover, the South’s agrarian economy was l­ and-​­rich but c­ ash-​­poor. While the Confederacy owned 30 percent of America’s assets (businesses, land, slaves) in 1861, its currency in circulation was only 12 percent of that in the North. In its first year, the Confederacy created a property tax, which should have yielded a hefty amount of revenue. But collecting taxes was left to the states, and the result was chaos. In 1863, the desperate Confederate Congress began taxing nearly everything, but enforcement was poor and evasion easy. Altogether, taxes covered no more than 5 percent of Confederate war costs, and bond issues accounted for less than 33 percent. During the course of the war, the Confederacy issued more than $1 billion in paper money, which, along with a shortage of consumer goods, caused prices to soar. By 1864, a turkey sold in the Richmond market for $100, flour brought $425 a barrel, and bacon was $10 a pound. Such rampant inflation (price increases) caused great distress, and frustrations over the burdens of war increasingly erupted into rioting, looting, and mass protests. By 1865, some 100,000 Confederate soldiers had deserted the army for various reasons, including the defense of slavery. A poor farmer in Alabama refused to serve in the Confederate army because the war was being fought to preserve the “infernal negroes” owned by wealthy planters. Another Confederate said he and his comrades were “tired of fighting for this n ­ egro-​­owning aristockracy [sic].” David Harris, a farmer, deserted from the army because the cause was lost: “I am now going to work instead of to the war,” he wrote home.

 union politics

 The North had its share of dissension and factionalism. President Lincoln was forced to use all of his substantial political genius

 The War behind the Lines  673

 to fend off uprisings against him in Congress and conspiracies against him among cabinet members. He loved the jockeying of backroom politics, and he excelled at it. Throughout the war, the president faced a radical wing of Republicans composed mainly of militant abolitionists who criticized his leadership of the war effort. Led by Thaddeus Stevens in the House and Charles Sumner in the Senate, the ­so-​­called Radical Republicans in Congress wanted more than defeat of the Confederacy; they wanted to “reconstruct” it by allowing Union armies to seize southern plantations and give the land to the former slaves. The majority of Republicans, however, continued to back Lincoln’s more cautious approach. The Democratic party was devastated by the departure of its ­long-​­dominant southern wing and the death of its nationalist spokesman, Stephen A. Douglas, in June 1861. What were called Peace Democrats favored restoring the Union “as it was [before 1860] and the Constitution as it is.” They reluctantly ­supported Lincoln’s war policies but opposed Republican economic l­ egislation. ­So-​­called War Democrats, such as Tennessee senator Andrew Johnson and Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton, backed Lincoln’s policies. A few Peace Democrats verged on disloyalty to the Union cause. The Copperhead Democrats (poisonous snakes) were strongest in states such as Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, that had substantial numbers of former southerners. The Copperheads openly sympathized with the Confederacy, savagely criticized Lincoln, and called for an end to the war.

 civil liberties Such support for the enemy led Lincoln to crack down hard. Like all wartime leaders, he faced the challenge of balancing the urgent needs of winning a war with the protection of civil liberties. Using his authority as commander in chief in wartime, Lincoln exercised emergency powers, including suspending the writ of habeas corpus, which guarantees arrested citizens a speedy hearing before a judge. The Constitution states that habeas corpus may be suspended only in cases of invasion, but Supreme Court justice Roger Taney and several congressional leaders argued that Congress alone had the authority to take such action. By the Habeas Corpus Act of 1863, Congress allowed the president to order people arrested on the suspicion of treason. Thereafter, Union soldiers and local sheriffs arrested thousands of Confederate sympathizers in the northern states without using a writ of habeas corpus. Union general Henry Halleck jailed one Missourian for saying, “[I] wouldn’t wipe my ass with the stars and stripes.”

 674  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 confederate politics and states’ rights

 Unlike Lincoln, Jefferson Davis never had to worry about reelection. He and his vice president, Alexander Stephens, were elected in 1861 for s­ix-​­year terms. But discontent with their leadership grew as the war dragged on. Poor white southerners expressed bitter resentment of the planter elite while food grew scarce and prices skyrocketed. A food riot erupted in Richmond on April 2, 1863, when an angry mob, mostly women armed with pistols or knives, marched to the governor’s mansion to demand that bread in C ­ onfederate warehouses be shared with civilians. When the governor announced that nothing could be done, the protesters shouted “Bread or blood!” They broke into stores, stealing shoes and clothing, as well as food. The riot ended only when President Davis arrived and threatened to shoot the protesters. Police then arrested ­forty-​­four women and t­ wenty-​­nine men. Davis’s greatest challenge came from the southern politicians who criticized the “tyrannical” powers of the Confederate government in Richmond. As a ­general reported, “The state of feeling between the President [Davis] and Congress is ­bad—​­could not be worse.” Critics asserted states’ rights against the authority of the Confederate government, just as they had against the Union. Georgia’s governor Joseph Brown hated Jefferson Davis, explaining that he joined the Confederacy to “sustain the rights of the states and prevent the consolidation of the Government, and I am still a rebel . . . no matter who may be in power.” The Confederacy also suffered from Davis’s difficult personality and constant political squabbling. Where Lincoln was a pragmatist, Davis was a brittle ideologue with a stinging temper. Once he made a decision, nothing could change his mind, and he could never admit a mistake. One southern politician said that Davis was “as stubborn as a mule.” Such a dogmatic personality was Jefferson Davis President of the ill suited to the chief executive of an Confederacy. ­infant—​­and ­fractious—​­nation. Cabi-

The Faltering Confederacy  675


 net members resigned almost as soon as they were appointed. During the four years of the Confederacy, there were three secretaries of state and six secretaries of war, and Vice President Stephens constantly warred against Davis’s “military despotism.” Stephens’s brother described President Davis as a “little, conceited, hypocritical, sniveling, canting, malicious, ambitious, dogged knave and fool.”

The Faltering Confederacy
 The Confederate strategy of fighting largely a defensive war worked well at first. As the armies maneuvered for battle in the spring of 1863, however, President Lincoln found a commanding general in the West as capable as Robert E. Lee was in the East. Humble, unassuming, ­plain-​­spoken Ulysses S. Grant, five feet eight inches tall and weighing only 135 pounds, calm and steady under fire, was blessed with an uncommonly ruthless determination to win on the b ­ attlefield—​­at all cost.

 chancellorsville

 After the Union disaster at Fredericksburg at the end of 1862, President Lincoln turned to General Joseph Hooker, a h ­ ard-​ fi ­ ghting, h ­ ard-​­drinking leader who had earned the nickname “Fighting Joe,” to lead the Army of the Potomac. With a force of 130,000 men, the largest Union army yet gathered, an overconfident Hooker failed his leadership test at Chancellorsville, in eastern Virginia, during the first week of May, 1863. “My plans are perfect. . . . May God have mercy on General Lee,” Hooker boasted, “for I will have none.” Hooker spoke too soon. Robert E. Lee, with perhaps half as many troops, split his army in thirds and gave Hooker a lesson in the art of elusive mobility when Stonewall Jackson’s 28,000 Confederates surprised the Union army by smashing into its exposed right flank. The attack sparked Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson The days of confusing and desperate fight- celebrated Confederate commander, Jackson would later die of friendly fire in ing, ultimately forcing Hooker’s army the Battle of Chancellorsville. to retreat. “My God, my God,” moaned

 676  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 Lincoln when he heard the news. “What will the country say?” Chancellorsville was the peak of Lee’s military career, but it would also be his last significant victory.

 vicksburg

 While Lee frustrated the Federals in the East, General Grant had been inching his army down the Mississippi River toward the Confederate stronghold of Vicksburg, Mississippi, a busy commercial town situated on high bluffs overlooking a sharp, sweeping horseshoe bend in the river. Capturing the Rebel stronghold, Grant stressed, “was of the first importance,” because Vicksburg was the only rail and river junction between Memphis, Tennessee,

THE VICKSBURG CAMPAIGN, 1863
Grant from Memphis 
River


L O U I S I A N A


 oo

CHICKASAW BLUFFS

 z Ya





Grant
 iver

 siege

 ac kR

 ss

Bl


Jackson


Bi


 g

Gra
 nt

Mi s s i


M


I


S


 Union advance Battle site

■
■


S


I


S


S


I


P


I


Area of map


 Why was the capture of Vicksburg a strategic victory? Why was Vicksburg difficult to seize from the Confederacy? How did General Lee hope to save Vicksburg from the Union siege?

WWN64
Figure M15_6 1st proof 
P


Pearl River


 t an Gr

■


10 Kilometers


 r Vicksburg

 ippi

Riv
 e

Vicksburg


10 Miles






The Faltering Confederacy  677


 and New Orleans. President Lincoln said that Vicksburg held the “key” to a Union victory in the war, and Jefferson Davis agreed, saying that holding the Mississippi River open was “vital” to the Confederacy. “Vicksburg must not be lost!” If Union forces could gain control of the river, they could split the Confederacy in two and prevent western food and livestock from reaching Confederate armies. While Union warships sneaked past the Confederate cannons overlooking the river, Grant moved his army eastward on a campaign across Mississippi that Lincoln later called “one of the most brilliant in the world.” Grant captured Jackson, Mississippi, before pinning the 31,000 Confederates inside Vicksburg so tightly that “not a cat could have crept out . . . without being discovered.” The Union forces dug twelve miles of interconnected trenches encircling the besieged city. In the Battle of Vicksburg, Grant decided to use constant bombardment and gradual starvation to wear down the Confederates holed up in the town. Many people were forced to live in cellars or caves dug to protect them from the unending shelling. The Rebel soldiers and the city’s residents were ­hopelessly trapped; they could neither escape nor be reinforced nor resupplied with food and ammunition. As the weeks passed, desperate Confederates and civilians ate their horses and mules, then dogs and cats, and, finally, rats, which sold for a dollar each. One starving girl ate her pet bird. General John C. Pemberton, the Confederate commander at Vicksburg, wrote Jefferson Davis that the situation in the beleaguered city was “hopeless.” A group of ragged soldiers pleaded with their commander: “If you can’t feed us, you had better surrender us, horrible as that idea is.”

 gettysburg

 Vicksburg’s dilemma led Jefferson Davis to ask Robert E. Lee to send troops to break the siege. Lee, however, thought he had a better plan. He would make another daring strike into the North in hopes of forcing the Union army surrounding Vicksburg to retreat. He also wagered that a bold northern offensive would persuade ­peace-​­seeking northern Copperhead Democrats to end the war on terms favorable to the Confederacy. The stakes were high. A Confederate general said the invasion into Maryland and Pennsylvania would “either destroy the Yankees or bring them to terms.” Or be a disaster for Lee. In June 1863, the fabled Army of Northern Virginia, which Lee said was made up of “invincible troops” who would “go anywhere and do anything if properly led,” again moved northward, taking thousands of animals and wagons as well as throngs of slaves for support.

 678  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 The Confederates moved quickly. As a Rebel soldier said, he had enjoyed “breakfast in Virginia, whiskey in Maryland, and supper in Pennsylvania.” A Maryland woman reported that the Confederate soldiers were “the dirtiest I ever saw, a most ragged, lean, and hungry set of wolves.” One reason Lee moved into the North was the need for food. His soldiers and slaves gathered thousands of horses, cattle, and hogs, as well as tons of wheat and corn. They also captured free blacks in Maryland and Pennsylvania and sent them back to slavery in Virginia. Once the Union commander, General George Meade, realized the Confederates were again moving north, he gave chase, knowing that the next battle would “decide the fate of our country and our cause.” As he moved into Pennsylvania, Lee lost track of the Federals because of the unexplained absence of General J. E. B. Stuart’s 5,000 horse soldiers, who were Lee’s “eyes and ears.” Stuart, it turned out, had decided to create a panic in the Union capital by threatening an attack on Washington, D.C. On June 28, Lee uttered in exasperation: “I cannot think what has become of Stuart. I ought to have heard from him long before now.” Neither side expected Gettysburg, a hilly crossroads farming town of 2,400 people in southeastern Pennsylvania, to be the site of the largest battle ever fought in North America. Both armies were caught by surprise when Confederate troops entered the town at dawn on June 30 and collided with Union cavalry units that had been tracking their movements. The main forces of both ­sides—​­65,000 Confederates and 85,000 ­Federals—​ ­then raced to the scene, and on July 1, the armies clashed in what came to be called the Battle of Gettysburg, the most dramatic contest of the war. While preparing to fight, a Union cavalryman who sensed the importance of the coming battle, yelled at the soldiers from New York and Pennsylvania: “You stand alone, between the Rebel army and your homes. Fight like hell!” Initially, the Confederates forced the Federals to retreat, but the Union troops regrouped to stronger positions on high ridges overlooking the town. Meade rushed reinforcements to his new lines along the heights. That night he wrote his wife that both sides had been “shattered” by the first day’s combat. On July 2, wave after wave of screaming Confederates assaulted Meade’s army, pushing the Federal lines back across ­blood-​­soaked wheat fields and through peach orchards, but never breaking through. A wounded Confederate officer scrawled a note before he died: “Tell my father I died with my face to the enemy.” Some 16,000 were killed or wounded on both sides during the inconclusive second day of fighting. Worse was to come. The next day, July 3, against the advice of his senior general, Georgian James Longstreet, Robert E. Lee risked all on a climactic assault against the ­well-​­defended Union lines along Cemetery Ridge. For two hours, both sides

The Faltering Confederacy  679


 “A Harvest of Death” Timothy H. O’Sullivan’s grim photograph of the dead at Gettysburg.

 bombarded the other, leading a Union soldier to write that it felt “as if the heavens and earth were crashing together.” Deafening sounds “more terrible never greeted human ears.” Then, the cannons stopped firing. At about two o’clock on the broiling summer afternoon, three Confederate infantry ­divisions—​­about 12,500 men in ­all—​­emerged from the woods and prepared to attack in the 90-degree heat. General George Pickett, commander of the lead division, told them to “Charge the enemy and remember Old Virginia!” With drums pounding and bugles blaring, a gray wave of sweating Rebels began a desperate, ­mile-​­long dash up a grassy slope of newly mown hay crisscrossed with fences. Awaiting them behind a low stone wall at the top of the ridge were 120 Union cannons and thousands of rifles. It was as hopeless a situation as the Union charge at Fredericksburg. A Union soldier remembered that the attacking Confederates displayed a desperate courage: they “came on in magnificent order with the step of men who believed themselves invincible.” When the Federals opened fire, the Confederates were “enveloped in a dense cloud of dust. Arms, heads, blankets, guns, and knapsacks were tossed into the clear air.” Only a few Rebels made it to the top of the ridge, where they fought bravely in h ­ and-​­to-​­hand combat. A general leading the assault climbed atop the stone wall and shouted: “Come on, boys! Give them the cold steel!

 680  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 Who will follow me?” Two minutes later, he was d ­ ead—​­as was the Confederate ­attack—​­when Union soldiers held in reserve rushed to close the gap in their lines. With stunning suddenness, the carnage was over. The surviving Confederates retreated in a jostling mob to where they had started. The once roaring battlefield was now a deathly quiet field of horror punctuated by the “moanings and groanings” of thousands of wounded soldiers and horses. What General Lee had called the “grand charge” was, in the end, a grand failure. As he watched the survivors straggling back across the bloody field, he muttered, “All this has been my fault. It is I who have lost this fight.” He then ordered General Pickett to prepare his battered division for another attack, CAMPAIGNS IN THE EAST, 1863 Confederate advance Confederate retreat Union advance Battle site

P E N N S Y L V A N I A
Chambersburg
Gettysburg
Hagerstown


Area of map


Le


 e

M A R Y L A N D
Meade
Frederick
 ve r

 e

Ri


Le


 oa

 h

Middletown


 nd

Washington


 ker

 na

C H E SAPEA

Hoo


S he


V I R G I N I A


 n

 an

Po


 to m

 n

 ac

Ri


 er

 v

■


 ah

 r

■


 d Jac

Rapp


 iv e

■


20 Kilometers


 o ks

 kR



20 Miles


 an

 oc





Le e




 er

 BAY

Fredericksburg


Chancellorsville
Riv


 KE

 r ke

Rapid an


Ho
 o

 Why was Gettysburg a major turning point of the war? What were General Lee’s goals for marching north? Why did his assault at Cemetery Ridge fail?

WWN64
Figure M15_7 1st proof 
The Faltering Confederacy  681


 only to have Pickett tartly reply: “General Lee, I have no division now.” Every one of his regimental commanders had fallen, and fully half of his men lay dead or wounded. Some 42,000 on both sides were killed, wounded, or missing during three days at Gettysburg, and thousands of horses were also killed and left rotting in the summer heat. A Union soldier who witnessed the slaughter on the final day wrote home: “Great God! When will this horrid war stop?” Others asked the same question. John Futch, a Confederate private from North Carolina, saw his brother Charley shot in the head, suffer, and die at Gettysburg on July 3. He wrote his wife that the slaughter had left him “half crazy.” A few weeks after the battle, he deserted, was captured, tried, and executed.

 lee’s retreat

 Again, as after Antietam, Lee’s mangled army was forced to retreat back to Virginia, this time in a driving ­rain—​­and again, the Federals failed to give chase. Had General Meade pursued Lee’s army, he might have ended the war. President Lincoln was outraged: “We had them within our grasp!” Lee had escaped to fight a­ gain—​­and the war would grind on for another ­twenty-​­one months. But Lee’s desperate gamble had failed in every way, not the least being its inability to save the besieged Confederate army at Vicksburg, Mississippi. On July 4, as Lee’s defeated army left Pennsylvania, the Confederate commander at Vicksburg surrendered his entire 30,000-man army, ending the ­forty-​ ­seven-​­day siege. Union vessels now controlled the Mississippi River, and the ­Confederacy was effectively split in two, with Louisiana, Texas, and Arkansas cut off from the other Rebel states. Jefferson Davis said in late July that it was the Confederacy’s “period of disaster.” After Gettysburg, a group of northern states funded a military cemetery in commemoration of the thousands of soldiers killed in the battle. On November 19, 1863, President Lincoln spoke at the ceremony dedicating the new national cemetery. In his brief remarks, known now as the Gettysburg Address, he expressed the pain and sorrow of the uncivil war. The prolonged conflict was testing whether a nation “dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal . . . can long endure.” In stirring words, Lincoln predicted that “this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of f­reedom—​­and that government of the people, by the people, and for the people, shall not perish from the earth.”

 chattanooga

 The third Union triumph of 1863 occurred in southern Tennessee around Chattanooga, the river port that served as a gateway to northern Georgia. In the late summer, a Union army led by General William

 682  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 Rosecrans took Chattanooga on September 9 and then chased General Braxton Bragg’s Rebel forces into Georgia, where they clashed at Chickamauga (a Cherokee word meaning “river of death”). The Confederates, for once, had a numerical advantage, and the battered Union forces fell back into Chattanooga while the Confederates surrounded the city. Rosecrans reported that “we have met a serious disaster. Enemy overwhelmed us, drove our right, pierced our center, and scattered troops there.” Lincoln urged him to persevere: “If we can hold Chattanooga, and East Tennessee, I think [the] rebellion must dwindle and die.” The Union command rushed in reinforcements, and on November 24 and 25, the Federal troops dislodged the Confederates from Lookout Mountain and Missionary Ridge, thereby gaining effective control of Tennessee. The South had lost the war in the West.

 the confederacy at risk The dramatic Union victories at Vicksburg, Gettysburg, and Chattanooga turned the tide against the Confederacy. During the summer and fall of 1863, however, Lincoln’s generals in the East lost the momentum that Gettysburg had provided, thereby allowing the Army of Northern Virginia to nurse its wounds and continue fighting. By 1864, Robert E. Lee was ready to renew the war. His men were “in fine spirits and anxious for a fight.” Still, the tone had changed. Earlier, Confederate leaders assumed they could actually win the war. Now, they began to worry about defeat. A Confederate officer in Richmond, writing in his diary after the defeats at Gettysburg and Vicksburg, noted that “today absolute ruin seems to be our fortune. The Confederacy totters to its destruction.” Mary Chesnut confessed in her diary that the war was not going well for her beloved Confederacy. On January 1, 1864, she wrote: “God help my country!” a wartime election War or no war, 1864 was still a presidential election year, and by autumn the contest would become a referendum on the war itself. No president since Andrew Jackson had won reelection, and Lincoln became convinced that he would lose without a dramatic change in the course of the war. Radical Republicans, frustrated that the war had not been won, tried to prevent Lincoln’s nomination for a second term, but he consistently outmaneuvered them. Once Lincoln was assured of the nomination, he selected Andrew Johnson, a War Democrat from Tennessee, as his running mate on the “National Union” ticket. The War Democrats had indiscreetly asked General Grant to be their candidate against Lincoln. He firmly declined, explaining that “I am not a poli­ tician, never was, and hope never to be.” Becoming president “is the last thing in the world I desire.”

The Faltering Confederacy  683


 Spurned by Grant, the Democrats at their national convention in Chicago stressed that people were tired of the costly war and called for an immediate end to the fighting. They nominated General George B. McClellan, the former Union commander who had clashed with Lincoln, his commander in chief. McClellan pledged that if elected he would stop the war and, if the Rebels refused to return to the Union, he would allow the Confederacy to “go in peace.” Lincoln knew that the election would be decided on the battlefields. To save the Union before a new Democratic administration could stop the war and recognize the independence of the Confederacy, the president had brought his best commander, Ulysses S. Grant, to Washington, D.C., in March 1864, promoted him to lieutenant general, the rank held by George Washington, and given him overall command of the war effort, promising him all the troops and supplies he needed. “Grant is my man,” Lincoln exclaimed, “and I am his the rest of the war!” A New York newspaper reported that Lincoln’s presidency was now “in the hands of General Grant, and the failure of the General will be the overthrow of the president.”

 grant’s strategy

 The ­cigar-​­chewing Grant was a ­hard-​­nosed warrior with unflagging energy and tenacity. One soldier said that Grant always looked like he was “determined to drive his head through a brick wall and was about to do it.” The Union commander had a simple concept of war: “Find out where your enemy is, get to him as soon as you can, and strike him as hard as you can, and keep moving on”— regardless of the number of dead and wounded. Grant dramatically changed the Union military strategy. He would focus on crippling Rebel armies rather than attacking particular cities, like Richmond. He planned for the three largest Union armies, one in Virginia, one in Tennessee, and one in Louisiana, to launch offensives in the spring of 1864. No more short battles followed by long pauses. The Union armies would force the outnumbered Confederates to keep fighting, day after day, week after week, until they were worn out. “Grant is like a bulldog,” Lincoln said. “Let him get Ulysses S. Grant At his headquarters his teeth in, and nothing can shake him in City Point (now Hopewell), Virginia. loose.”

 684  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 Grant assigned his trusted friend, General William Tecumseh Sherman, a ­rail-​­thin, ­red-​­haired Ohioan, to lead the Union army in Tennessee southward and apply Grant’s strategy of “complete conquest” to the heart of the Confederacy. Sherman, cool under pressure and obsessed with winning at all costs, owed much of his success to Grant’s support. “He stood by me when I was crazy, and I stood by him when he was drunk,” Sherman said. Grant and Sherman would now wage total war, confiscating or destroying civilian property that might be of use to the military. It was a ruthless and costly plan, but in the end it would prove effective. The f­ ull-​­bearded Confederate general James Longstreet, an old friend of Grant, told Lee that the Union commander “will fight us every day and every hour until the end of the war.”

 chasing lee In May 1864, General Grant’s massive Army of the Potomac, numbering about 115,000 to General Lee’s 65,000, moved south across the Rappahannock and Rapidan Rivers in eastern Virginia. In the nightmarish Battle of the Wilderness (May 5–6), the armies clashed in an impenetrable tangle of dense forest and thickety undergrowth. Explosions set off brushfires in which many wounded soldiers were burned to death. “What a medley of sounds,” wrote a soldier: “the incessant roar of the rifle; the screaming bullets; the forest on fire; men cheering, groaning, yelling, swearing, and praying!” At one point in the intense battle, the Union forces threatened to overrun General Lee’s headquarters. Lee himself helped organize a counterattack, lining up soldiers from Texas to lead the effort. Spurred by a rush of adrenaline, he stood high in his stirrups, waved his hat, and yelled: “Texans always move them!” The Rebel commander then turned his horse toward the enemy to lead the men in a charge. The worried soldiers shouted, “Go back, General Lee, go back!” But he kept moving forward. “Lee to the rear!” they chanted. Yet he still kept going. Finally, an officer pulled ahead of Lee, grabbed the reins of his horse, and prevented him from moving. “Can’t I, too, die for my country,” the general muttered. His mood brightened as the Confederates swept the Federals from the field and broke the Union advance. Grant’s men suffered more casualties than the Confederates in the awful slugging match, but the Rebels struggled to find replacements. Always before, when bloodied by Lee’s troops, Union armies had quit fighting to rest and nurse their wounds, but now Grant refused to halt. Instead, he continued to push southward, forcing the Rebels to keep fighting. The Union army engaged Lee’s men again near Spotsylvania Court House, eleven miles southwest of Fredericksburg, on the road to Richmond. For twelve days in May, the two armies engaged in some of the fiercest combat of the war. Grant’s troops kept the pressure on, pushing relentlessly toward Richmond.

The Faltering Confederacy  685


 In the first days of June, just as Republican party leaders were gathering to renominate Lincoln as their presidential candidate, Grant foolishly ordered a poorly coordinated frontal attack on Lee’s army. The Confederates were well entrenched at Cold Harbor near the Chickahominy River, just ten miles east of Richmond. In twenty minutes, almost 4,000 Federals, caught in a blistering cross fire, were killed or wounded. It was, according to a Union general, “one of the most disastrous days the Army of the Potomac has ever seen.” A C ­ onfederate ­commander from Alabama reported that “it was not war; it was murder.” The frightful losses nearly unhinged Grant, who later admitted that the botched attack was his greatest mistake as a commander. Critics, including Lincoln’s wife Mary, called him “the Butcher” after Cold Harbor. In just two months, Grant’s massive offensive across Virginia, labeled the Overland Campaign, had cost some 60,000 killed and wounded Union soldiers and 33,000 Rebel casualties. Criticism of the war in the North skyrocketed. Even Horace Greeley, the powerful Unionist publisher of the New York Tribune, urged Lincoln to negotiate with Confederate leaders to save the “bleeding, bankrupt, almost dying country.” During the summer of 1864, the Union war effort came close to ending. Yet Grant, for all of his mistakes, knew that his army could more easily replace its dead and wounded than could the Rebels. While the Confederates were winning battles, they were losing the war. In June 1864, Grant brilliantly maneuvered his battered forces around Lee’s army and headed for Petersburg, a major supply center and transportation hub ­twenty-​­five miles south of Richmond. There the opposing armies dug in along long lines of trenches above and below Petersburg. Grant would now lay siege to the Confederate army, tightening the noose around Lee and the Rebels as he had done at Vicksburg. For nine months, the two sides held each other in check around Petersburg. Grant’s troops, twice as numerous as Lee’s, were generously supplied by Union vessels moving up the James River, while the Confederates, hungry and cold, wasted away. The number of deserters grew so large that Lee asked permission to shoot them when caught. Petersburg had become Lee’s prison while disasters piled up for the Confederacy elsewhere. Lee admitted that it was “a mere question of time” before he would have to retreat or surrender. On June 15, 1864, a Rebel soldier noted in his diary that “our affairs do look gloomy.” Grant, he added later, “will no doubt capture the place.”

 sherman pushes south Meanwhile, General Grant ordered William T. Sherman to drive through the heart of Dixie and “break it up,” inflicting “all the damage you can.” As General Sherman moved his large army south from Chattanooga through the Georgia mountains toward the crucial

 686  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

GRANT IN VIRGINIA, 1864–1865 MA RY L A N D
Culpeper Court House Gra 
Area of map


 nt The Wilderness

 ni

 po om

 i ny

 Sailor’s Creek

 r ive

Le e


B A Y


Ch
 ick ah

R
 rk Yo

 Lee surrenders to Grant

Ri
 ve r

 ver Ri

Appomattox
Court House


 er

Cold Harbor


Richmond
Amelia
Court
House


 iv

 an

 t

Ja
 m

North
Anna


 r ve Ri

Appomattox
River


S A P E A K E
H E


A


R


I


 ck

N


 ap p

 r

 no

I


 ac R iver

 tt a

Lynchburg


 es

G


 om

Ma


R


 ve

 na

 r ve Ri

I


An


Ri


R


 an ah

So


V


 ot

Spotsylvania
Court House


C


North
An
 na ut h

Chancellorsville
Fredericksburg


P


Le e


Gr


 Petersburg siege

Five Forks


■


■


 r ve Ri

 Confederate advance Confederate retreat Union advance Battle site

Ja
 m es





30 Miles
30 Kilometers


 How were General Grant’s tactics in the Battle of the Wilderness different from the Union’s previous encounters with General Lee’s army? Why did Grant have the advantage at Petersburg?

 railroad hub of Atlanta, he sent a warning to the city’s residents intended to

 WWN64 frighten them: “prepare for my coming.” Figure M15_8 1st proof By the middle of July, Sherman’s troops

 had reached the outskirts of ­heavily-​­fortified Atlanta, trapping the 40,000 Confederate soldiers there. Jefferson Davis was so concerned about the situation that he made the hugely controversial decision to replace the Confederate commander, General Joseph Johnston, with General John Bell Hood, who had been Lee’s most aggressive general after the death of Stonewall Jackson. Hood, a Texan, was a reckless fighter. A Confederate senator’s wife said that “a braver man, a purer patriot, a more gallant soldier never breathed than

The Faltering Confederacy  687


 The tattered colors of the 56th and 36th Massachusetts Regiments Union soldiers march through Virginia in 1864.

 General Hood.” His arm had been shattered at Gettysburg, and he had lost a leg at Chickamauga. Strapped to his saddle, he refused simply to “defend” Atlanta; instead, he attacked Sherman’s army, which is exactly what Sherman, the Union commander, wanted him to do. Three times in eight days, the Confederates lashed out at the Union lines encircling the city. Each time they were turned back, suffering seven times as many casualties as the Federals. The Battle of Atlanta left Hood’s army shattered, surrounded, and outnumbered. Finally, on September 1, the Confederates, desperately low on food and supplies, evacuated the city. Sherman then moved his troops into Atlanta. In Richmond, Mary Chesnut took the news hard. “We are going to be wiped off the earth,” she wrote. “Since Atlanta,” she added, “I have felt as if all were dead within me, forever.” Sherman’s soldiers stayed in Atlanta until November, resting and resupplying themselves in the heart of the Confederacy. The 20,000 residents were told to leave. When city officials protested, the Union commander replied: “War is cruelty.” His men then set fire to the city’s railroads, iron foundries, shops, mills, hotels, and businesses.

 lincoln reelected William Tecumseh Sherman’s conquest of Atlanta turned the tide of the election of 1864. As a Republican senator said, the Union victory in Georgia “created the most extraordinary change in public opinion here [in the North] that ever was known.” The capture of Mobile,

 688  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 ­ labama, by Union naval forces in August, and Confederate defeats in VirginA ia’s Shenandoah Valley in October also spurred the dramatic revival of Abraham Lincoln’s political support in the North. The South’s hope that northern discontent would lead to a negotiated peace vanished. In the 1864 election, the Democratic candidate, McClellan, carried only New Jersey, Delaware, and Kentucky, with just 21 electoral votes to Lincoln’s 212, and won only 1.8 million popular votes (45 percent) to Lincoln’s 2.2 ­million (55 percent). Union soldiers and sailors voted in large numbers, and their choice was Lincoln. The president’s victory sealed the fate of the Confederacy, for it ensured that the Union armies would keep the pressure on the Rebels.

 sherman’s “march to the sea” In November 1864, General Sherman led 60,000 soldiers out of burning Atlanta on their famous “March to the Sea,” advancing rapidly through Georgia toward the coast.

 Lincoln’s second inauguration As Lincoln delivered his second inaugural address on the Capitol portico, John Wilkes Booth was among those standing on the porch, overhead.

The Faltering Confederacy  689


 Sherman planned to wage a modern war against soldiers and civilians. He pledged to “whip the rebels, to humble their pride, to follow them into their inmost recesses, and make them fear and dread us.” John Bell Hood’s Confederate Army of Tennessee, meanwhile, tried a ­desperate gamble by heading in the opposite direction from the Union forces, pushing northward into Alabama and then Tennessee. Hood hoped to trick Sherman into chasing him. Sherman refused to take the bait, ­however. He was determined to keep his main army moving southward to the Georgia coast and then into South Carolina, the seedbed of secession. But he did send General George Thomas William Tecumseh Sherman Sherman’s and 30,000 soldiers north to shadow campaign through Georgia developed into a war of maneuver as they raced to Hood’s Confederates. The two forces clashed in Tennes- the coast, without the pitched battles of Grant’s campaign in Virginia. see. Hood was a ferocious fighter but a foolish commander. In the Battle of Franklin (November 30, 1864), near Nashville, he sent his 18,000 soldiers in a hopeless frontal assault against ­dug-​­in Union troops backed by cannons. In a few hours, Hood lost six generals and saw 6,252 of his men killed or wounded, a casualty figure higher than “Pickett’s Charge” at Gettysburg. Two weeks later, in the Battle of Nashville, the Federals led by General Thomas scattered what was left of Hood’s bloodied army. A few days later, a grieving Hood was relieved of his command. Meanwhile, Sherman’s army pushed southward across Georgia, living off the land while destroying plantations, barns, crops, warehouses, bridges, and rail lines. “We are not only fighting hostile armies,” Sherman explained, “but a hostile people” who must “feel the hard hand of war.” An Ohio sergeant confirmed their intent: “Every house, barn, fence, and cotton gin gets an ­application of the torch. That prospect is revolting, but war is an uncivil game, and can’t be civilized.” After the war, a Confederate officer acknowledged that Sherman’s march through Georgia was well conceived and well managed. “I don’t think there

 690  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 was ever an army in the world that would have behaved better, in a similar expedition, in an enemy country. Our army certainly wouldn’t have.” On December 24, 1864, Sherman sent a whimsical telegram to President Lincoln offering him the coastal city of Savannah as a Christmas present. By the time Sherman’s army arrived in Savannah, it had freed more than 40,000 slaves, burned scores of plantations, and destroyed all of the railroads. “God bless you, Yanks!” shouted a freed slave in Georgia. “Come at last! God knows how long I been waitin’. ”

 south carolina

 On February 1, 1865, Sherman’s army headed north across the Savannah River into South Carolina, the “­hell-​­hole of secession” in

 Destroying southern railroads Sherman’s troops cut a swath of destruction across Georgia in his “March to the Sea.” Here, Union troops rip up railroad tracks in Atlanta.

The Faltering Confederacy  691


 the eyes of Union troops. Sherman reported that his “whole army is burning with an insatiable desire to wreak vengeance upon South Carolina. I almost tremble at her fate, but feel she deserves all that seems in store for her.” General Joseph Johnston, who had been called out of retirement to take charge of the scattered remnants of the Rebel forces, knew that the war was all but over. All he could hope to do, he said, was “annoy” the advancing Federals. South Carolina paid a high price for having led the South out of the Union. Sherman’s men burned more than a dozen towns, including Barnwell, which they called “Burnwell.” On February 17, 1865, Sherman’s men captured the state capital of Columbia. Soon thereafter, Charleston itself surrendered after Confederate soldiers set fires to buildings containing material that would valuable to the Yankees. It was no accident that Sherman ordered two ­all-​­black regiments to lead the Union advance into the city that launched secession and war. On April 14, Major Robert Anderson was given the honor of raising the Union flag once again over Fort Sumter.

 a losing cause

 During the late winter and early spring of 1865, the Confederacy found itself besieged on all sides. Defeat was in the air. Some Rebel leaders wanted to negotiate a peace settlement. Confederate secretary of war John C. Breckinridge, the Kentuckian who had served as vice president under James Buchanan and had run for president in 1860, urged Robert E. Lee to negotiate an honorable end to the war. “This has been a magnificent epic,” he said. “In God’s name, let it not terminate in a farce.” Jefferson Davis rejected any talk of surrender, however. If his armies should be defeated, he wanted the soldiers to scatter and fight an unending guerrilla war. “The war came and now it must go on,” he stubbornly insisted, “till the last man of this generation falls in his tracks, and his children seize his musket and fight our battle.” Davis, Lee, and others finally became so desperate that they did the unthinkable: on March 13, 1865, Davis signed a Virginia bill calling for the immediate recruitment of blacks into the army. Before they could be enlisted and trained, however, the war came to an end.

 a second term

 While Confederate forces made their last stands, Abraham Lincoln prepared for his second term as president. The weary commander in chief had weathered constant criticism during his first term, but with the war nearing its end, Lincoln now garnered deserved praise. The Chicago Tribune observed that the president “has slowly and steadily risen in the respect, confidence, and admiration of the people.” On March 4, 1865, amid rumors of a Confederate attempt to abduct or assassinate the president, the s­ix-​­foot-​­four-​­inch Lincoln, dressed in a black

 692  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

SHERMAN’S CAMPAIGNS, 1864–1865

Nashville


C


 KENTUCKY um

Columbia
Florence


Sherman


 od

 Confederate forces

 Battle site

 VIRGINIA

River


Ten


 s ne

 e se

R iv


 er

Chattanooga
Dalton
Johnston
Kennesaw
Mountain
Atlanta
 he rm an ’s m ar Macon ch

NORTH CAROLINA

SOUTH CAROLINA

Raleigh Goldsboro
Johnston
Bentonville
Fayetteville


 an erm h S Columbia

 GEORGIA

Charleston


 to the sea

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Savannah


■
■
■


Wilmington


S


 ALABAMA

 Union forces

 r l a nd

 TENNESSEE

 as to om ta ) Th tlan ville (A ash N

Franklin


Ho


 be



100 Miles
100 Kilometers


 What was General Sherman’s goal as he marched across Georgia? How much damage did Sherman do in Georgia and South Carolina? How did it affect the Confederate war effort?

WWN64
Figure M15_9 1st proof 
 suit and stovepipe hat, his face weathered by prairie wind and political worry, delivered his second inaugural address on the East Portico of the Capitol. Not a hundred feet away, looking down on Lincoln from the Capitol porch, was a ­twenty-​­six-​­year-​­old actor named John Wilkes Booth, who five weeks later would kill the president in a desperate attempt to do something “heroic” for his beloved South. Lincoln’s second inaugural address was more a sermon than a speech. Slavery, he said, had “somehow” caused the war, and everyone bore some guilt for the national shame of racial injustice and the awful war to end it. Both sides had known before the fighting began that war was to be avoided at all costs, but “one of them would make war rather than let the nation survive; and the other would accept war rather than let it perish.” Lincoln longed for peace and reunion. “Fondly do we h ­ ope—​­fervently do we ­pray—​­that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away.” He noted

The Faltering Confederacy  693


 the paradoxical irony of both sides in the civil war reading the same Bible, praying to the same God, and appealing for divine support in its fight against the other. Now the president urged the Union forces “to finish the work we are in,” bolstered with “firmness in the right insofar as God gives us to see the right.” As Lincoln looked ahead to the end of the fighting and a “just and lasting peace,” he stressed that vengeance must be avoided at all costs. Reconciliation must be pursued “with malice toward none; with charity for all.” Those eight words captured Lincoln’s hopes for a restored Union. Redemption and reunion were his goals, not vengeance. With a loving tolerance of human complexity and sinfulness, Lincoln revealed how the rigors of war had helped him see the need for humility in victory. The abolitionist leader Frederick Douglass proclaimed Lincoln’s second inaugural address “a sacred effort.”

 appomattox

 During the spring of 1865, General Grant’s army kept pounding the Rebels defending Petersburg, Virginia. Lee was on the horns of a dilemma, and he knew it. He had no way to replace the men he was losing, and his dwindling army couldn’t kill enough Yankees to make Grant quit. On April 2, 1865, the badly outnumbered Confederates tried to break out of Petersburg, but the Union army was in hot pursuit. Five days later, on April 7, Grant sent a note urging Lee to surrender. With his army virtually surrounded, Lee told General James Longstreet that “there is nothing left for me to do but go and see General Grant, and I would rather die a thousand deaths.” On April 9 (Palm Sunday), four years to the day since the Confederate attack on Fort Sumter, the dignified Lee, stiff and formal in his dress uniform, met the short, ­mud-​­spattered Grant in the village of Appomattox Court ­ exican-​­American War, Lee House. After discussing their service in the M asked what the terms of surrender would be. In keeping with Lincoln’s desire for a gracious peace, Grant let the Confederates keep their pistols, horses, and mules, and he ensured that none of them would be tried for treason. Lee then confessed that his men were starving, and Grant ordered that they be provided food. After signing the surrender documents in the parlor of a farmhouse, Lee mounted his horse and returned to his army. The next day, as the gaunt Confederates formed ranks for the last time, Joshua Chamberlain, the Union general in charge of the surrender ceremony, ordered his men to salute the Rebel soldiers as they paraded past to give up their weapons. His Confederate counterpart signaled his men to do likewise. Chamberlain remembered that there was not a s­ound—​­no trumpets or drums, no cheers or jeers, simply an “awed stillness . . . as if it were the

 694  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 passing of the dead.” The remaining Confederate forces surrendered in May. Jefferson Davis fled Richmond ahead of the advancing Federal troops, only to be captured in Georgia on May 10. He was eventually imprisoned in Virginia for two years. The brutal war was at last over. Upon learning of the Union victory, John Wilkes Booth, a popular young actor in Washington, D.C., who hated Lincoln and the Union, wrote in his diary that “something decisive and great must be done” to avenge the Confederate defeat. He began plotting to kill President Lincoln and members of his cabinet. Two days after Lee surrendered, President Lincoln gave a speech on the White House lawn in which he looked forward to “reconstructing” the Confederate states. He also hoped that literate freed blacks and those who had served in the Union military would be able to vote. Booth, who was in the audience, noted that Lincoln’s pledge “meant nigger citizenship. Now, by God, I’ll put him through [kill him]. That is the last speech he will ever make.”

A
Transforming War  The Civil War was the most traumatic event in American history. “We have shared the incommunicable experience of war,” reflected Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., the ­twice-​­wounded Union officer who would one day become the nation’s leading jurist. “We have felt, we still feel, the passion of life to its top. . . . In our youth, our hearts were touched by fire.” In Virginia, elderly Edmund Ruffin, the arch secessionist planter who had been given the honor of firing the first shots at Fort Sumter, was so distraught by the Confederate surrender that he put his rifle barrel in his mouth and blew off the top of his head. The long war changed the nation in profound ways. A New York Times editorial said that the war left “nothing as it found it. . . . It leaves us a different people in everything.” The war destroyed the South’s economy, many of its railroads and factories, much of its livestock, and several of its cities. In 1860, the northern and southern economies were essentially equal in size. By 1865, the southern economy’s productivity had been cut in half. Many southern economic and political leaders had been killed during the war or had seen their plantations and businesses destroyed.

 the union preserved

 The war ended the Confederacy and preserved the Union; shifted the political balance of power in Congress, the U.S. Supreme Court, and the presidency from South to North; and boosted

A
Transforming War 695 

 the northern economy’s industrial development, commercial agriculture, and western settlement. The Homestead Act (1862) made more than a billion acres in the West available to the landless. The power and scope of the federal government were expanded at the expense of states’ rights. In 1860, the annual federal budget was $63 million; by 1865, it was more than $1 billion. In winning the war, the federal government had become the nation’s largest employer. By the end of the war, the Union was spending $2.5 million per day on the military effort, and whole new industries had been established to meet its needs for weapons, uniforms, food, equipment, and supplies. The massive amounts of preserved food required by the Union armies, for example, helped create the canning industry and transformed Chicago into the meatpacking capital of the world. Federal contracts also provided the money needed to accelerate the growth of new industries such as the production of iron, steel, and petroleum, thus laying the groundwork for a postwar economic boom. Ohio senator John Sherman, in a letter to his brother, General William T. Sherman, said the war had dramatically expanded the vision “of leading capitalists” who now talk of earning “millions as confidently as formerly of thousands.”

 the first “modern” war In many respects, the Civil War was the first modern war. Its scope and scale were unprecedented, as it was fought across the entire continent. And armies for the first time used railroads and steamboats to move around. One of every twelve men on both sides served in the war, and few families were unaffected. More than 750,000 soldiers and sailors (37,000 of whom were blacks fighting for the Union) died, 50 percent more than the number who would die in the Second World War. The comparable number of deaths relative to today’s population would be almost 7.5 million. Of the surviving combatants, 50,000 returned home with one or more limbs amputated. Disease, however, was the greatest threat to soldiers, killing twice as many as were lost in battle. Some 50,000 civilians were also killed during the war, and virtually every community hosted uncounted widows and orphans. Unlike previous conflicts, much of the fighting in the Civil War was distant and impersonal, in part because of improvements in the effectiveness of muskets, rifles, and cannons. Men were killed at long distance, without knowing who had fired the shots that felled them. The opposing forces used an array of new weapons and instruments of war, such as cannons with “rifled,” or grooved, barrels for greater accuracy; repeating rifles; ironclad ships; railroad artillery; the first military telegraph; observation balloons;

 696  CHAPTER 15  The War of the Union 1861–1865

 and wire entanglements. The war was also modern because civilians could follow its activities by reading the newspapers that sent reporters to the front lines, or by visiting exhibitions of photographs taken at the battlefields and camps.

 thirteenth amendment

 The most important result of the war was the liberation of almost 4 million slaves. The Emancipation Proclamation had technically freed only those slaves in areas still controlled by the Confederacy. As the war entered its final months, however, freedom for all slaves emerged more fully as a legal reality as President Lincoln moved from viewing emancipation as a military weapon to seeing it as the mainspring of the conflict itself. Three major steps occurred in January 1865: Missouri and then Tennessee abolished slavery, and, at Lincoln’s insistence, the U.S. House of Represen­tatives passed an amendment to the Constitution that banned slavery everywhere. Upon ratification by ­three-​­fourths of the reunited states, the Thirteenth Amendment became law eight months after the war ended, on December 18, 1865. It removed any lingering doubts about the legality of emancipation. By then, slavery remained only in the border states of Kentucky and Delaware.

 the debate continues

 Historians have provided conflicting assessments of the Union victory. Some have focused on the inherent weaknesses of the Confederacy: its lack of industry and railroads, the tensions between the states and the central government in Richmond, poor political leadership, faulty coordination and communication, the expense of preventing slave rebellions and runaways, and the advantages in population and resources enjoyed by the North. Still others have highlighted the erosion of Confederate morale in the face of terrible food shortages and unimaginable human losses. The debate about why the North won and the South lost will probably never end, but as in other modern wars, disparities in resources were key factors. Robert E. Lee’s own explanation remains accurate: “After four years of arduous service marked by unsurpassed courage and fortitude, the Army of Northern Virginia has been compelled to yield to overwhelming numbers and resources.” Whatever the reasons, the North’s victory resolved a key issue: no state could divorce itself from the Union. The Union, as Lincoln had always maintained, was indissoluble. At the same time, the war led to the Constitution being permanently amended to eliminate slavery. The terrible war thus served to clarify the meaning of the ideals (“All men are created equal”) on which the United States had been established. The largest slaveholding nation in the world had at last chosen l­iberty—​­for all. In his first message to Congress

A
Transforming War 697 

 in December 1861, Lincoln recognized early on what was at stake amid the onrush of civil war: “The struggle of today is not altogether for today; it is for a vast future also.” So it was. The “fiery ordeal” of a war both “fundamental and astounding” produced, as Lincoln said, not just a preserved Union but “a new birth of freedom.”

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 Civil War Strategies When the war began, the Confederacy had a geographic advantage of fighting a defensive war on their own territory. The Union, however, held strong advantages in population and industrial development, particularly in the production of weapons, ships, and railroad equipment. After suffering a defeat at the First Battle of Bull Run, the Union military leaders adopted the “­ Anaconda Plan,” imposing a naval blockade on southern ports and slowly ­crushing resistance on all fronts. The Union’s industrial might was a deciding factor in the long war of attrition.

•


 Emancipation Proclamation Initially, President Lincoln declared that the war’s aim was to restore the Union and that slavery would be maintained where it existed. Gradually, Lincoln came to see that winning the war required ending slavery. He justified the Emancipation Proclamation (1862) as a military necessity because it would deprive the South of its captive labor force. After the Battle of Antietam in September 1862, he announced plans to free the slaves. He hoped that southern states would return to the Union before his deadline of January 1, 1863, when all slaves living in areas under Confederate control were declared free.

•


 Wartime Home Fronts The federal government proved much more capable with finances than did the Confederacy. Through a series of tariffs, income taxes, bond issues, and banking reforms, the Union was better able to absorb the war’s soaring costs. In the absence of the southern delegation in Congress, the Republican C ­ ongress approved a higher tariff, a transcontinental railroad, and a Homestead Act, all of which accelerated Union settlement of the West and the growth of a national economy. The Morrill Land Grant Act provided large land grants for the creation of state universities intended to promote economic development by turning out engineers and entrepreneurs. Both sides experienced pockets of ­opposition to the war efforts. In the North, Copperhead Democrats opposed the war and Lincoln’s decision to end slavery.

•


 The Winning Union Strategy The Union victories at the Battles of Vicksburg and Gettysburg in July 1863 turned the war in the Union’s favor. With the capture of ­Vicksburg, the last ­Confederate-​­controlled city along the Mississippi River, Union forces cut the Confederacy in two, depriving armies in the East of supplies and ­manpower. In 1864, Lincoln placed General Ulysses S. Grant in charge of the Union’s war efforts. For the next year, his forces constantly attacked Robert E. Lee’s in V ­ irginia while, farther south, General William T. Sherman’s “March to the Sea” destroyed ­plantations, railroads, and morale in Georgia and South Carolina. His successes helped propel Lincoln to victory in the election of 1864. After that, southern resistance wilted. Lee surrendered his army to Grant at Appomattox Court House in April 1865.

•


 The Significance of the Civil War The Civil War involved the largest number of casualties of any American war, and the Union’s victory changed the course of



 the nation’s development. Most important, the war ended slavery, embodied in the adoption of the Thirteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in 1865. Not only did the power of the federal government increase, but the center of politi­ cal and economic power shifted away from the South and the planter class. The ­Republican-​­controlled Congress enacted legislation during the war to raise tariffs, fund the first transcontinental railroad, and introduce many financial reforms that would drive the nation’s economic development for the rest of the century.

Chronology
 Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas join Confederacy; West Virginia splits from Virginia to stay with Union July 1861 First Battle of Bull Run (Manassas) ­April–​­September 1862 Battles of Shiloh, Second Bull Run, and Antietam September 1862 Lincoln issues Emancipation Proclamation ­May–​­July 1863 New York City draft riots; siege of Vicksburg; Battle of Gettysburg March 1864 Lincoln places General Ulysses S. Grant in charge of Union military operations September 1864 General William T. Sherman seizes and burns Atlanta November 1864 Lincoln is reelected April 9, 1865 General Robert E. Lee surrenders at Appomattox Court House Thirteenth Amendment is ratified April 1861

Key Terms
Anaconda Plan p. 647


Copperhead Democrats p. 673


 contrabands p. 659

Battle of Vicksburg (1863) p. 677


Battle of Antietam (1862) p. 660


Battle of Gettysburg (1863) p. 678


Emancipation Proclamation (1862)
 p. 662

 election of 1864 p. 687

Militia Act (1862) p. 666


Appomattox Court House p. 693


Homestead Act (1862) p. 671
Morrill Land Grant Act (1862) p. 671


“March to the Sea” p. 688
Thirteenth Amendment (1865)
 p. 696

IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




The Era of
­Reconstruction
1865–1877


A
Visit from the Old Mistress (1876) This powerful painting by Winslow Homer depicts a plantation mistress visiting her former slaves in the postwar South. Although their living conditions are humble, these freedwomen stand firmly and e ­ ye-​­to-​­eye with the woman who had kept them in bondage. 
I


 n the spring of 1865, the terrible conflict was finally over. The war to restore the Union ended up transforming American life. The United States was a “new nation,” said an Illinois congressman, because it was now “wholly free.” At a cost of some 750,000 lives and the destruction of the southern economy, the Union had won the costly war, and almost 4 million enslaved Americans had won their freedom. This was the most dramatic social change in the history of the nation. But the end of slavery did not bring the end of racism. The defeated Confederates had seen their world turned upside down. The abolition of slavery, the ­war-​­related disruptions to the southern economy, and the horrifying human losses had destroyed the plantation system and upended racial relations in the South. “Change, change, indelibly stamped upon everything I meet, even upon the faces of the people!” marveled Alexander Stephens, the vice president of the Confederacy. His native region now had to come to terms with a new era and a new order as the United States government set about “reconstructing” the South and policing defiant ­ex-​­Confederates. Diarist Mary Chesnut expressed the angry frustration felt by the defeated ­ ead—​­all Yankees!” southern white elite when she wished that “they were all d Freed slaves felt just the opposite. Yankees were their saviors. No longer would enslaved workers be sold and separated from their families or prevented from learning to read and write or attending church. “I felt like a bird out of a cage,” said former slave Houston Holloway of Georgia who had been sold to three different owners during his first twenty years. “Amen. Amen. Amen. I could hardly ask to feel any better than I did that day.” Eda Harper from Mississippi was even more ecstatic. Upon learning of the end of the war, she and her fellow slaves “danced all night long.”

 focus questions 1. What major challenges faced the federal government in reconstructing the South after the Civil War during the period from 1865 to 1877?

 2. How and why did Reconstruction policies change over time? 3. In what ways did white and black southerners react to Reconstruction? 4. What were the political and economic factors that helped lead to the end of Reconstruction in 1877?

 5. What was the significance of Reconstruction for the nation’s future?



