Chapter 3 The Growth of a Young Nation
1833J Great Britain abolishes slavery in the empire.
1845 The Great Potato Famine begins in Ireland.
: 118481 Karl Marx's The ;• Communist Manifesto : is published.

Andrew
Jackson
Martin Van Buren
William Henry Harrison
John Tyler (William Henry Harrison dies)
Zachary Taylor
Millard Fiimore (Zachary Taylor dies)
h*
jr.
Review Unit 111
TEKS 12B, 21C
The Jeffersonian Era
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms ft Names
During the presidencies of Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and James Monroe, the country grew in both size and prestige.
Today’s Democratic Party traces its roots to Jefferson and the Democratic-Republicans.
Democratic-
Republicans
Jeffersonian
republicanism
Marbury v.
Madison
John Marshall
judicial review Louisiana Purchase impressment James Monroe Monroe Doctrine
^^^^^^^bneAmerican'sStor^^^^^^^R
i
|s’5r hmhsocialstudies.com 1
< P jr j i /. r i J Ji ll J
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the major events of the Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe administrations.
Patrick Gass was among those who took part in the famous Lewis and Clark expedition. Setting out in 1804, this expedition traveled overland from St. Louis, Missouri, to the Pacific. Along the way, Gass kept a journal in which he took notes on people, places, and the dramatic events he witnessed. Gass described one of those events in his journal entry for May 14, 1805.
A
Personal Voice Patrick gass “ This forenoon we passed a large creek on the North side and a small river on the South. About 4 in the afternoon we passed another small river on the South side near the mouth of which some of the men discovered a large brown bear, and six of them went out to kill it. They fired at it; but having only wounded it, it made battle and was near seizing some of them, but they all fortunately escaped, and at length succeeded in dispatching it. These bears are very bold and ferocious; and very large and powerful.
The natives say they have killed a number of their brave men.99
Patrick Gass
—/A Journal of the Voyages and Travels of a Corps of Discovery
The journey Gass undertook with Lewis and Clark helped lay the foundations for expansion. The explorers brought back to the new government reports about the vast regions that lay to the west. Meanwhile, other Americans continued to shape the government in their growing nation.
Jefferson’s Presidency
The election of 1800 pitted Thomas Jefferson, a leader of the Democratic-Republicans (sometimes shortened to "Republicans"), against President John Adams and his Federalist Party. It was a hard-fought struggle. Each party hurled wild charges at the other. Democratic-Republicans called Adams a tool of the
(Chapter 3 The Growth of a Young Nation
rich who wanted to turn the executive branch into a British-style monarchy. Federalists protested that Jefferson was a dangerous supporter of revolutionary France and an atheist.
THE ELECTION OF 1800
In the balloting in the electoral college, Jefferson defeated Adams by eight electoral votes. However, since Jefferson's running mate, Aaron Burr, received the same number of votes as Jefferson, the House of Representatives was called upon to break the tie and choose between the two running mates. For six feverish days, the House took one ballot after another— 35 ballots in all. Finally, Alexander Hamilton intervened. Although Hamilton opposed Jefferson's philosophy of government, he regarded Burr as unqualified for the presidency. Hamilton persuaded enough Federalists to cast blank votes that Jefferson received a majority of two votes. Burr then became vice-president. The deadlock revealed a flaw in the electoral process established by the Constitution. As a result, Congress passed the Twelfth Amendment, which called for electors to cast separate ballots for president and vice-president. This system is still in effect today.
In his inaugural address, Jefferson extended the hand of peace to his opponents. "Every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle," he said. "We are all Republicans; we are all Federalists."
MAIN IDEA |
Making
Inferences
$ How did Jefferson’s actions reflect his theory of government?
MAIN IDEA
Evaluating
Decisions
Why was the principle of judicial review important for the future of the Supreme Court?
SIMPLIFYING THE GOVERNMENT
Jefferson's theory of government, often called Jeffersonian republicanism, held that the people should control the government and that a simple government best suited the needs of the people. In accord with his belief in decentralized power, Jefferson tried to shrink the government and cut costs wherever possible. He reduced the size of the army, halted a planned expansion of the navy, and lowered expenses for government social functions. He also rolled back Hamilton's economic program by eliminating all internal taxes and reducing the influence of the Bank of the United States. Jefferson was the first president to take office in the new federal capital, Washington, D.C. Though in appearance the city was a primitive place of dirt roads and few buildings, its location between Virginia and Maryland reflected the growing importance of the South in national politics. In fact,
Jefferson and the two presidents who followed him—
James Madison and James Monroe—all were from Virginia. This pattern of Southern dominance underscored the declining influence of both New England and the Federalists in national political life at that time.
JOHN MARSHALL AND THE SUPREME COURT
Just before leaving office, President Adams had tried to influence future judicial decisions by filling federal judge-ships with Federalists. But the signed documents authorizing some of the appointments had not been delivered by the time Adams left office. Jefferson argued that these appointments were invalid and ordered Madison, his secretary of state, not to deliver them. This argument led to one of the most important Supreme Court decisions of all time in Marbury v.
Madison (1803). (See page 118.) The Federalist chief justice John Marshall declared that part of Congress's Judiciary Act of 1789, which would have forced Madison to hand over the papers, was unconstitutional. The decision strengthened the Supreme Court by establishing the principle of judicial review—the ability of the Supreme Court to declare a law, in this case an act of Congress, unconstitutional.
I
John Marshall, Chief Justice of the United States (about 1832), by William James Hubard.
Review Unit 113
THE LOUISIANA PURCHASE
In 1800, Napoleon Bonaparte of France had persuaded Spain to return to France the Louisiana Territory, the land spanning from the Mississippi River west to the Rocky Mountains. France had handed this territory over to Spain in 1762, during the French and Indian War, but Napoleon planned to use it as a "breadbasket" for the colonial empire that he hoped to build in the West Indies. Many Americans were alarmed when they heard of this transfer, as they feared that a strong French presence in North America would force the United States into an alliance with Britain. However, by 1803, Napoleon had abandoned his ideas of an American empire and offered to sell the Louisiana Territory to the United States. Jefferson doubted whether the Constitution gave him the power to make such a purchase, but he decided to proceed. At a price of $15 million, the Louisiana Purchase more than doubled the size of the United States. Under the direction of President Jefferson, Meriwether Lewis and William Clark organized and led a group, including Patrick Gass, and set off in 1804 to explore the new territory. The explorers brought back valuable information about the West and showed that transcontinental travel was possible.
Madison and the War of 1812
Jefferson easily won reelection in 1804 but a crisis clouded his second administration. Renewed fighting between Britain and France threatened American shipping. The crisis continued into the administration of James Madison, who was elected president in 1808. Some four years later, Madison led the nation into the War of 1812 against Great Britain.
THE CAUSES OF THE WAR
Although France and Britain both threatened U.S. ships between 1805 and 1814, Americans focused their anger on the British. One reason was the British policy of impressment, the practice of seizing Americans at sea and "impressing," or drafting, them into the British navy. Americans grew even angrier after learning that officials in British Canada were supplying arms to Native Americans in support of their ongoing battle against American settlers. A group of young congressmen from the South and the West, known as the war hawks, demanded war. THE COURSE OF THE WAR
By the spring of 1812, President Madison had decided to commit America to war against Britain, and Congress approved the war declaration in mid-June. Republican funding cuts and a lack of popular support had left the American military with few volunteers and ill-prepared for war. Britain, however, was too preoccupied with Napoleon in Europe to pay much attention to the Americans. Nonetheless, the British scored a stunning victory in August of 1814, when they brushed aside American troops and sacked Washington, D.C. Madison and other federal officials fled the city as the British burned the Capitol, the Presidential Mansion, and other public buildings. The most impressive American victory occurred at the Battle of New Orleans. There, on January 8, 1815, U.S. troops led by General Andrew Jackson of Tennessee routed a British force. Ironically, British and American diplomats had already signed a peace agreement before the Battle of New Orleans, but news of the pact had not reached Jackson in time. The Treaty of Ghent, signed on Christmas Eve, 1814, declared an armistice, or end to the fighting.
THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE WAR
The war had three important consequences. First, it led to the end of the Federalist Party, whose members generally opposed the war. Second, it encouraged the growth of American industries to manufacture products no longer available from Britain because of the war. Third, it confirmed the status of the United States as a free and independent nation Background
Napoleon Bonaparte seized control of the French
government in 1799 and expanded French territory until his defeat at Waterloo in Belgium in 1815.
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
What were the principal consequences of the War of 1812?
Chapter 3 The Growth of a Young Nation


Lewis and Clark Expedition, 1804-1806
^Thisdollar coW honors Sacajawea, young Shoshone woman, who
served as ^Interpreter and guide fortheexpedition. *

C?

>
April 25-26, 1805 In high winds and cold, Lewis searches by land for the | Yellowstone River. He rejoins Clark at the junction of the
April 7, 1805 A party of 32, including Clark’s black servant York, French-Canadian trader Charbonneau, his wife Sacajawea, and their son, depart at 5 p.m. to continue the journey. High northwest wind but otherwise fair weather.
Mandan Village, by Karl Bodmer
Fort Clatsop i
November 3,1804 A hard wind from the northwest sets in as the party makes camp.
XV
, '/frf Iz./ /f
fr;; i ■fau&jL. (X. o
'wz'.
V- >>// w
BRITISH
TERRITORY

u*. &j) mua... y? *<«*«*, o^. "fUL ‘fa—*'- i*
ft-	M z,
rt«..
Zui,£«
y ^S>	„ &,wjp £*vt~
ig$
of
4/XewiSa<ClarfcZ
A ' y.w
i-X
/ X „if	Journey west, 1804-1805 Journey home, 1806
	Lewis's route home
--«►	Clark's route home
W
Fort 0	250	500 miles
0	250	500 kilometers 	i	r-'f-i < v	1 Z ZF
f M
X. 'J* 4
x k ■ X GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1- Movement About how many miles did the
expedition travel on its route to the Pacific Ocean?
2. Movement On average, how many miles per day did they travel from Fort Clatsop to the place where the party split up on July 3, 1806?

1
Review Unit 115
Nationalism Shapes Foreign Policy
As with James Madison, foreign affairs dominated the first term of President James Monroe, who was elected in 1816. His secretary of state, John Quincy Adams, established a foreign policy based on nationalism—a belief that national interests should be placed ahead of regional concerns, such as slavery in the South or tariffs in the Northeast.
TERRITORY AND BOUNDARIES
High on Adams's list of national interests were the security of the nation and the expansion of its territory. To further these interests, Adams arranged the Convention of 1818, which fixed the U.S. border at the 49th parallel from Michigan west to the Rocky Mountains. Adams also reached a compromise with Britain to jointly occupy the Oregon Territory, the territory west of the Rockies, for ten years. He also convinced Don Luis de Onis, the Spanish minister to the United States, to transfer Florida to the United States. The Adams-Oms Treaty (1819) also established a western boundary for the United States that extended along the Sabine River from the Gulf of Mexico north to the Arkansas River to its source, and then north to the 42nd parallel, and west to the Pacific Ocean. THE MONROE DOCTRINE
When Napoleon invaded Portugal and Spain in 1807, the two countries did not have the money or military force to both defend themselves and keep control of their overseas territories at the same time. But when Napoleon was defeated in 1815, Portugal and Spain wanted to reclaim their former colonies in Latin America. Meanwhile, the Russians, who had been in Alaska since 1784, were establishing trading posts in what is now California. In 1821, Czar Alexander I of Russia
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
What were the major boundary disputes resolved by John Quincy Adams?
U.S.
Boundary Settlements, 1803-1819 
claimed that Alaska's southern boundary was the 51st parallel, just north of Vancouver Island. He forbade foreign vessels from using the coast north of this line.
With Spain and Portugal trying to move back into their old colonial areas, and with Russia pushing in from the northwest, the United States knew that it had to do something. Many Americans were interested in acquiring northern Mexico and the Spanish colony of Cuba. Moreover, the Russian action posed a threat to American trade with China, which brought huge profits.
I MAIN IDEA
Predicting
Effects
Do you think that the Monroe Doctrine would be a source of peace or conflict for the United States? Why?
Accordingly, in his 1823 message to Congress, President Monroe warned all European powers not to interfere with affairs in the Western Hemisphere. They should not attempt to create new colonies, he said, or try to overthrow the newly independent republics in the hemisphere. The United States would consider such action "dangerous to our peace and safety." At the same time, the United States would not involve itself in European affairs or interfere with existing colonies in the Western Hemisphere.
A
Personal Voice president james monroe “Our policy in regard to Europe ... is not to interfere in the internal concerns of any of its powers. . . . But in regard to those continents [of the Western Hemisphere], circumstances are eminently and conspicuously different. It is impossible that the allied [European] powers should extend their political system to any portion of either continent without endangering our peace and happiness/9 —Annual Message to Congress, December 2, 1823
James Monroe
These principles became known as the Monroe Doctrine. The doctrine became a foundation for future American policy and represented an important step onto the world stage by the assertive young nation. At home however, sectional differences soon challenged national unity, requiring strong patriotic sentiments and strong leaders like Andrew Jackson to hold the nation together, JE>
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. •Democratic-Republicans	•John Marshall	•Louisiana Purchase
•Jeffersonian republicanism	•judicial review	•impressment
• Marbury v. Madison
•James Monroe
•Monroe Doctrine
!
■ 1
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one below, list an event from the administration of each president and note its significance.
Thomas Jefferson	
Event	
Significance	
James Madison	
Event	
Significance	
James Monroe	
Event	
Significance
CRITICAL THINKING
EVALUATING LEADERSHIP
How successful was Thomas Jefferson as president in achieving his goal of simplifying the government? Think About:
•	the Louisiana Purchase
•	military spending
•	Jefferson’s attitude toward the national bank
Tii
4.	EVALUATING
Why was the War of 1812 a turning point for the early United States?
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
How did the Monroe Doctrine assert American nationalism?

Review Unit 117
$
ig
MARBURY v. MADISON (1803)
ORIGINS OF THE CASE A
few days before Thomas Jefferson's inauguration, outgoing president John Adams appointed William Marbury to be a justice of the peace. But the commission was not delivered to Marbury. Later, Jefferson's new secretary of state, James Madison, refused to give Marbury the commission. Marbury asked the Supreme Court to force Madison to give him his commission. THE RULING
The Court declared that the law on which Marbury based his claim was unconstitutional, and therefore it refused to order Madison to give Marbury his commission. LEGAL REASONING
Writing for the Court, Chief Justice John Marshall decided that Marbury had a right to his commission, and he scolded Madison at length for refusing to deliver it.
However, he then considered Marbury's claim that, under the Judiciary Act of 1789, the Supreme Court should order Madison to deliver the commission. As Marshall pointed out, the powers of the Supreme Court are set by the Constitution, and Congress does not have the authority to alter them. The Judiciary Act attempted to do just that.
Marshall reasoned that, since the Constitution is the "supreme law of the land, no law that goes against the Constitution can be valid."
“If.. . the courts are to regard the constitution, and the constitution is superior to any ordinary act of the legislature, the constitution, and not such ordinary act, must govern the case to which they both apply. ”
If an act of Congress violates the Constitution, then a judge must uphold the Constitution and declare the act void. In choosing to obey the Constitution, the Supreme Court did declare the Judiciary Act unconstitutional and void, and so refused to I grant Marbury's request.
LEGAL SOURCES
U.S. CONSTITUTION
U.S. CONSTITUTION, ARTICLE III, SECTION 2
(1789) “The judicial power shall extend to all cases . . . arising under this Constitution, the laws of the United States, and treaties made . . . under their authority."
U.S. CONSTITUTION, ARTICLE VI,
CLAUSE 2 (1789)
“This Constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be made in pursuance thereof. . . shall be the supreme law of the land; and the judges in every State shall be bound thereby."
RELATED CASES
FLETCHER v. PECK (1810)
The Court ruled a state law unconstitutional for the first time.
COHENS v. VIRGINIA (1821)
The Court overturned a state court decision for the first time.
GIBBONS v. OGDEN (1824)
The Court ruled that the federal Congress—not the states—had the power under the Constitution to regulate interstate commerce.
◄ Chief Justice John Marshall
•< William Marbury
WHY IT MATTERED
In 1803, interest in Marbury's commission was primarily about partisan politics. The fight was just one skirmish in the ongoing battle between Federalists, such as Adams, and Democratic-Republicans, led by Jefferson and Madison, which had intensified in the election of 1800.
When Jefferson won the election, Adams made a final effort to hinder Jefferson's promised reforms. Before leaving office, he tried to fill the government with Federalists, including the "midnight" justices such as Marbury. Madison's refusal to deliver Marbury's appointment was part of Jefferson's subsequent effort to rid his administration of Federalists.
Marshall's opinion in Marbury might seem like a victory for Jefferson because it denied Marbury his commission. However, by scolding Madison and extending the principle of judicial review—the power of courts to decide whether or not specific laws are valid—the Court sent a message to Jefferson and to the Congress that the judiciary had the power to affect legislation. The Marshall Court, however, never declared another act of Congress unconstitutional.
HISTORICAL IMPACT
In striking down part of the Judiciary Act, an act of Congress, Marshall gave new force to the principle of judicial review. The legacy of John Marshall and of Marbury is that judicial review has become an essential component of democratic government; by ensuring that Congress exercises only those powers granted by the Constitution, the courts protect the sovereignty of the people.
Of equal importance, the principle of judicial review plays a vital role in our federal system of checks and balances. With Marbury, the judicial branch secured its place as one of three coequal branches of the federal government. The judiciary has no power to make laws or to carry them out. However, judges have an important role in deciding what the law is and how it is carried out.
Interpretations of the Constitution can differ. In another decision, McCulloch v. Maryland (1819), Chief Justice Marshall expressed the opinion that Article I, Section 8, of the Constitution guaranteed to Congress implied powers that are not explicitly stated. Such an interpretation is called a loose construction of the Constitution, which means it allows for reasonable inferences based on the text. A strict construction, on the other hand, allows only for a literal reading of the text. Each Supreme Court justice has his or her own ideas about how to interpret the Constitution. As these justices decide cases, their rulings may change the meaning of the Constitution, by determining the rights of citizens and the government.
Through the 2007-2008 term, the Court had rendered 162 decisions striking down—in whole or part— acts of Congress. It had also voided or restricted the enforcement of state laws 1,179 times. That the entire country has with few exceptions obeyed these decisions, no matter how strongly they disagreed, proves Americans' faith in the Supreme Court as the protector of the rule of law.
THINKING CRITICALLY
CONNECT TO HISTORY
1. Comparing Read encyclopedia articles about another Marshall Court decision, such as Fletcher v. Peck, Cohens v. Virginia, or Gibbons v. Ogden. Compare that decision with Marbury and consider what the two cases and opinions have in common. Write a paragraph explaining the major similarities between the cases.
CONNECT TO TODAY
2. Visit the links for Historic Decisions of the Supreme Court to research a recent Supreme Court decision involving judicial review of an act of Congress. Write a case summary in which you describe the law’s purpose, the Court’s ruling, and the potential impact of the decision.
71 hmhsocialstudies.com
INTERNET ACTIVITY
Review Unit 119
The Age of Jackson
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
During a time of growing sectionalism, Andrew Jackson’s election in 1828 ushered in a new era of popular democracy.
Jackson’s use of presidential powers laid the foundation for the modern presidency.
•	Henry Clay	-John Quincy
•American System Adams •John C. Calhoun 'Jacksonian
•	Missouri	democracy
Compromise	‘Trail of Tears
•Andrew Jackson ‘John Tyler
One American’s Story
' hmhsocialstudies.com
»TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on key events during the Age of Jackson.
Robert Fulton designed and built the first commercially successful steamboat. In 1807 his Clermont made the 150-mile trip up the Hudson River from New York City to Albany in 32 hours.
Another one of Fulton's boats, the Paragon, was so luxurious that it had a paneled dining room and bedrooms. Fulton even posted regulations on his luxurious steamboats.
A
Personal Voice Robert fulton “As the steamboat has been fitted up in an elegant style, order is necessary to keep it so; gentlemen will therefore please to observe cleanliness, and a reasonable attention not to injure the furniture; for this purpose no one must sit on a table under the penalty of half a dollar each time, and every breakage of tables, chairs, sofas, or windows, tearing of curtains, or injury of any kind must be paid for before leaving the boat. ’ Steamboats, like the one pictured here, could move against a river’s current or a strong wind.
—quoted in Steamboats Come True: American Inventors in Action
Steamboats like the one Fulton described did more than comfortably transport passengers. They also carried freight and played an important role in uniting the nation economically. Although tensions continued to arise between the different sections of the nation, a growing national spirit kept the country together. This spirit was ultimately personified by Andrew Jackson—a self-made man from the growing West who was both confident and dynamic.
Regional Economies Create Differences
In the early decades of the 19th century, the economies of the various regions of the United States developed differently. The Northeast began to industrialize while the South and West continued to be more agricultural.
10 Chapter 3 The Growth of a Young Nation
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
How did agriculture and industry support a market economy in the North?
EARLY INDUSTRY IN THE UNITED STATES
The Industrial Revolution—large-scale production resulting in massive change in social and economic organization began in Great Britain in the 18th century and gradually reached the United States. Industry took off first in New England, whose economy depended on shipping and foreign trade. Agriculture there was not highly profitable, so New Englanders were more ready than other Americans to embrace new forms of manufacturing—and prime among these were mechanized textile, or fabric, mills.
Soon, farmers in the North began to specialize in one or two crops or types of livestock (such as corn and cattle), sell what they produced to urban markets, and then purchase with cash whatever else they needed from stores. Increasingly, these were items made in Northern factories. As a result, a market economy began to develop in which agriculture and manufacturing each supported the growth of the other.
THE SOUTH REMAINS AGRICULTURAL
Meanwhile, the South continued to grow as an agricultural power. Eli Whitney's invention of a cotton gin (short for "engine," or machine) in 1793 made it possible for Southern farmers to produce cotton more profitably. The emergence of a Cotton Kingdom in the South—and THE COTTON GIN
In 1794, Eli Whitney was granted a patent for a “new and useful improvement in the mode of Ginning Cotton.” Workers who previously could clean only one pound of cotton by hand per day could now clean as much as fifty pounds per day. Because of Whitney’s cotton gin, cotton production in the United States increased from three thousand bales in 1790 to more than two million bales in 1850.
A hand crank turns a series of rollers.
i A roller with tight rows of wire teeth removes seeds from the cotton fiber.
The cotton seeds fall into a hopper.
Raw cotton is placed in the gin.
A “clearer compartment” catches the cleaned cotton.
A second roller, with brushes, removes the cleaned cotton from the roller.
The teeth pass through a slotted metal grate, pushing the cotton fiber through but not the seeds, which are too large to pass.
7
Review Unit 121
thus the need for more field labor—contributed to the expansion of slavery. Between 1790 and 1820, the enslaved population increased from less than 700,000 to over 1.5 million. In the North, things were different. By 1804, states north of Delaware had either abolished slavery or had enacted laws for gradual emancipation. Slavery declined in the North, but some slaves remained there for decades.
Vocabulary emancipation: the
act of freeing from bondage or slavery
Balancing Nationalism and Sectionalism
These economic differences often created political tensions between the different sections of the nation. Throughout the first half of the 19th century, however, American leaders managed to keep the nation together.
HISTORICAL
SPOTLIGHT
THE SUPREME COURT
BOOSTS NATIONAL POWER
As Henry Clay promoted the American System in an effort to strengthen nationalism, the Supreme Court also boosted national power with two significant decisions.
In McCulloch v. Maryland (1819), the high court denied Maryland the right to tax the Bank of the United States, thus strengthening the authority of the national government over state governments.
In Gibbons v. Ogden (1824), the Court further bolstered federal power by affirming the national government’s right to regulate interstate commerce.
CLAY’S AMERICAN SYSTEM
As the North, South, and West developed different economies, President Madison developed a plan to move the United States toward economic independence from Britain and other European powers. In 1815 he presented his plan to Congress. It included three major points: •	establishing a protective tariff
•	rechartering the national bank
•	sponsoring the development of transportation systems and other internal improvements in order to make travel throughout the nation easier
House Speaker Henry Clay promoted the plan as the "American System."
Madison and Clay supported tariffs on imports to protect U.S. industry from British competition. Most Northeasterners also welcomed protective tariffs. However, people in the South and West, whose livelihoods did not depend on manufacturing, were not as eager to tax European imports. Nevertheless, Clay, who was from the West (Kentucky), and John C. Calhoun, a Southerner (South Carolina), convinced congressmen from their regions to approve the Tariff of 1816. Also in 1816, Congress voted to charter the Second Bank of the United States for a 20-year period and to create a unified currency.
HISTORY
VIDEO
Jackson's Personality and Legacy
71 hmhsocialstudies.com!
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Motives
What was the intention behind the “American System”?
THE MISSOURI COMPROMISE
In spite of these efforts to unify the national economy, sectional conflicts remained part of American politics. In 1818 settlers in Missouri requested admission to the Union. Northerners and Southerners disagreed, however, on whether Missouri should be admitted as a free state or a slave state. Behind the leadership of Henry Clay, Congress passed a series of agreements in 1820-1821 known as the Missouri Compromise. Under these agreements, Maine was admitted as a free state and Missouri as a slave state. The rest of the Louisiana Territory was split into two parts. The dividing line was set at 36°30'
north latitude. South of the line, slavery was legal. North of the line_except in
Missouri—slavery was banned.
The Election of Andrew Jackson
Despite these sectional tensions, the story of America in the early 19th century was one of expansion—expanding economies, expanding territory, and expanding democracy. The man who embraced the spirit of that expansion and to many personified it was Andrew Jackson, who captured the presidency in 1828.
j MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
$ What agreements made up the Missouri Compromise?
!2 Chapter 3 The Growth of a Young Nation
Vocabulary corrupt: marked by bribery
THE ELECTION OF 1824
In 1824, Andrew Jackson lost his bid for the presidency to John Quincy Adams. Jacksonians, or followers of Jackson, accused Adams and Jackson's political enemy, Henry Clay, of stealing the presidency. Then, because Adams appointed Clay secretary of state, the Jacksonians claimed Adams had struck a corrupt bargain. The split between Clay and Jackson tore apart the Democratic-Republican party. While Clay and his faction were called the National Republican Party, the Jacksonians became known as the Democratic Party.
EXPANDING DEMOCRACY CHANGES POLITICS
During John Quincy Adams's presidency, most states had eased property requirements for voting, thereby enlarging the voting population. In the election of 1824, approximately 350,000 white males voted for the presidency. In 1828, over three times that number voted. Many of these new voters were common people who viewed the rugged westerner Jackson as their champion. The support of this new voting bloc gave Jackson victory in the election of 1828. KEY PI
AVf;p -•/ V ■
k-
r,.
Jacksonian Democracy

THE SPOILS SYSTEM
Jackson's ideal of political power for all classes is often called Jacksonian democracy. As part of this philosophy, Jackson sought to give common people a chance to participate in government. He did this through the spoils system, in which new administrations hire their own supporters to replace supporters of the previous administration. Using the spoils system, Jackson gave away huge numbers of jobs to friends and also to political allies. President-elect Andrew Jackson greets well-wishers on his way to Washington, D.C., to be inaugurated president in 1S29.


ANDREW JACKSON 1767-1845
Andrew Jackson thought of himself as a man of the people. He had been born in poverty in the Carolina backcountry, the son of Scots-Irish immigrants. He was the first president since George Washington without a college education.
At the time of his election at the age of 61, however, Jackson was hardly one of the common people. He had built a highly successful career in Tennessee in law, politics, land speculation, cotton planting, and soldiering. His home, the Hermitage, was a mansion, not a log cabin. Anyone who owned more than a hundred slaves, as Jackson did, was very wealthy.
jNITI
Review Unit 123

THE INDIAN REMOVAL ACT
In 1830 Congress, with the support of Jackson, passed the Indian Removal Act. Under this law, the federal government provi funds to negotiate treaties that would force the Native Americans to move west. Many of the tribes signed removal treaties. However, the Cherokee Nation refused and fought the government in the courts. In 1832, the Supreme Court ruled in Worcester v. Georgia that the state of Georgia could not regulate the Cherokee Nation by law or invade Cherokee lands. However, Jackson refused to abide by the Supreme Court decision, saying, "John Marshall has made his decision; now let him enforce it." jjy
THE TRAIL OF TEARS
In the years following the Court's ruling, U.S. troops rounded up the Cherokee and drove them into camps to await the journey west. ▲
This painting depicts the Trail of Tears.
HISTORY
VIDEO
Jackson v. the Cherokee and South Carolina
MiIhIiH-WI-MhI
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Events
How did the federal government initially try to enforce the Indian Removal Act?
A
Baptist missionary described the scene. A
Personal Voice evan jones “The Cherokees are nearly all prisoners. They had been dragged from their houses and encamped at the forts and military places, all over the nation. In Georgia especially, multitudes were allowed no time to take anything with them except the clothes they had on. Well-furnished houses were left as prey to plunderers. ”
—Baptist Missionary Magazine, June 16, 1838
Beginning in the fall of 1838, the Cherokee were sent off in groups of about 1,000 each on the 800-mile journey, mostly on foot. As winter came, more and more Cherokee died. The Cherokee buried more than a quarter of their people along the Trail of Tears, the forced marches the Cherokee followed from Georgia to the Indian Territory. (See map on page 125.)
Nullification and the Bank War
In 1824 and again in 1828, Congress increased the Tariff of 1816. Jackson’s vice-president, John C. Calhoun of South Carolina, called the 1828 tariff a Tariff of Abominations because he blamed it for economic problems in the South.
The South's economy depended on cotton exports. Yet the high tariff on manufactured goods reduced British exports to the United States, and because of this, Britain bought less cotton. With the decline of British goods, the South was now forced to buy the more expensive Northern manufactured goods. From the South's point of view, the North was getting rich at the expense of the South.
THE NULLIFICATION CRISIS
To try to free South Carolinians from the tariff, Calhoun developed a theory of nullification. Calhoun's theory held that the U.s' Constitution was based on a compact among the sovereign states. If the Constitution had been established by 13 sovereign states, he reasoned, then the states must still be sovereign, and each would have the right to determine whether acts of Congress were constitutional. If a state found an act to be unconstitutional, the state could declare the offending law nullified, or inoperative within its borders. ' The Senate debated the tariff question (and the underlying states' rights issue) Senator Daniel Webster of Massachusetts opposed nullification and South Carolina Senator Robert Hayne aired Calhoun’s views.
MAIN IDEA
Making
Predictions
What do you think might be the consequences of Calhoun’s nullification theory for federal-state relations?
>124 Chapter 3 The Growth of a Young Nation
o
Effects of the Indian Removal Act, 1830s-1840s
\>«
ye
Sequoyah, or George Guess, devised the Cherokee alphabet in 1821 to help preserve the culture of the Cherokee Nation against the growing hreat of American expansion. ►
-	* „ a ? 4 /
Many Cherokee in the western territory, like the woman pictured here, taught their children at home in order to keep the Cherokee language and customs alive.
WISCONSIN TERRITORY
! Ottawa
MICHIGAN
o * *a / « </\ "A
By 1840, about 16,000 Cherokee had been forcibly moved 800 miles west on routes afterward called the Trail of Tears. Because of the suffering they endured from cold, hunger, and diseases such as tuberculosis, smallpox, and cholera, one-fourth died.
Sauk\		
and S		
Fox 7/	* PotawatomL/^	Delaware
	Miami	OHIO / Shawnee and
INDIANA/
Seneca r ILLINOIS
PENNSYLVANIA
NEW JERSEY
ELAWARE HYLAND
ATLANTIC OCEAN

%
Nearly 15,000 Creek, many in manacles and chains, were moved from Alabama and Georgia to the Canadian River ^in Indian Territory in 1835.
REPUBLIC OFTEXAS
MEXICO
KENTUCKY
MISSOURI
ARKANSAS’
X
Chickasaw

ALABAMA
GEORGIA
Creek
NORTH CAROLINA
SOUTH
CAROLINA
. 30'N '
(By 1834, about 14,000 Choctaw had relocated along the Red River under the terms of the Indian Removal Act of 1830. About 7,000
\jemained in Mississippi. y
LOUUSIANA
90°W
FLORIDA
TERRITORY
Seminob
Cm//
of Mexico
<3

Detail from “Trail of Tears,” a parting by Robert Lindeux
SHi Cherokee
|	~|	Chickasaw
BlBl Choctaw
I I
Creek 1	)	Seminole
■4^ 1 ’ ' 1 Other tribes
0	100________200 miles
0	100	200 kilometers

c * * 8Q°W	"V
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Place Where were most of the tribes moved?
2.	Movement What do you think were the long-term effects of this removal on Native Americans?
Review Unit 125
In 1832 the issue of states' rights was put to a test when Congress raised tariffs again. South Carolinians declared the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 "null, void, and no law." Then they threatened to secede, or withdraw from the Union, if customs officials tried to collect duties.
In response, an outraged Jackson urged Congress to pass the Force Bill to allow the federal government to use the military if state authorities resisted paying proper duties. A bloody confrontation seemed likely until Henry Clay forged a compromise in 1833. Clay proposed a tariff bill that would gradually lower duties over a ten-year period. The compromise also included passage of the Force Bill. The tension between states' rights and federal authority subsided—temporarily.
JACKSON’S BANK WAR
Although Jackson defended federal power in the nullification crisis, he tried to decrease federal power when it came to the Second Bank of the United States. Jackson believed that the national bank was an agent of the wealthy, and that its members cared nothing for the common people. In 1832 Jackson won reelection despite the efforts of his critics to make a campaign issue out of Jackson's opposition to the bank. After his reelection, he tried to kill the bank by withdrawing all government deposits from the bank's branches and placing them in certain state banks called "pet banks" because of their loyalty to the Democratic Party. As a result, the Bank of the United States became just another bank.
Jackson won the bank war, but his tactics and policies angered many people. Many accused him of acting more like a king than a president. In 1832, his opponents formed a new political party, which they later called the Whig Party.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Motives
& What were some of Jackson’s reasons for opposing the Second Bank of the United States?
Analyzing
Political Cartoons
ANDREW THE FIRST”
Andrew Jackson once justified his tendency to place personal prerogative above constitutional law or national policy by stating that “One man with courage makes a majority.” His critics replied with accusations of tyranny. The New York American condemned Jackson as a “maniac,” who would “trample the rights of our people under his feet.” The Whig convention of 1834 declared, “Your president has become your MONARCH.”
Both of those sentiments are reflected in this political cartoon that portrays Jackson as a king.
•	Ancient portraits of kings often depicted them grinding their conquered enemies beneath their heel. Beneath Jackson’s feet are the torn pages of the Constitution.
•	In one hand, Jackson is holding a scepter, a symbol of kingly power, while in the other, he is holding the veto, a symbol of presidential power.
SKILLBUILDER
Analyzing Political Cartoons 1.	What does this cartoon suggest about Jackson’s attitude toward the Constitution?
2.	How does this cartoon particularly comment on Jackson’s use of presidential power?
I
o
Pm
O
BOKJsr TO COMMAND.
I BEEN CONSULTED.
Chapter 3 The Growth of a Young Nation
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
$ How did “wildcat banks” contribute to the panic of 1837?
Successors Deal with Jackson’s Legacy
When Jackson announced that he would not run for a third term in 1836, the Democrats chose Vice-President Martin Van Buren as their candidate. The newly formed Whig Party ran three regional candidates against him. With Jackson's support, however, Van Buren easily won the election.
THE PANIC OF 1837
Along with the presidency, however, Van Buren inherited the consequences of Jackson's bank war. Many of the pet banks that accepted federal deposits were wildcat banks that printed bank notes wildly in excess of the gold and silver they had on deposit. Such wildcat banks were doomed to fail when people tried to redeem their currency for gold or silver. By May 1837, many banks stopped accepting paper currency. In the panic of 1837, bank closings and the collapse of the credit system cost many people their savings, bankrupted hundreds of businesses, and put more than a third of the population out of work.
HARRISON AND TYLER
In 1840 Van Buren ran for reelection against Whig Party candidate William Henry Harrison, who was known as "Tippecanoe" for a battle he won against Native Americans in 1811. The Whigs blamed Van Buren for the weak economy and portrayed Harrison, the old war hero, as a man of the people and Van Buren as an aristocrat. Harrison won the election, but died just a month after his inauguration. John Tyler, Harrison's vice-president, became president. A strong-minded Virginian and former Democrat, Tyler opposed many parts of the Whig program. He halted hopes for significant Whig reforms.
The Democrat and Whig parties went on to dominate national politics until the 1850s. The new politicians appealed more to passion than to reason. They courted popularity in a way that John Quincy Adams and his predecessors never would have. Thus, the style of politics in America had changed drastically since the 1790s. Political speeches became a form of mass entertainment, involving far more Americans in the political process. Also, the West was playing an increasing role in national politics. That trend would continue as more Americans moved to places like Texas and California.

1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. •Henry Clay	•Missouri Compromise	’John Quincy Adams
•American System	’Andrew Jackson	’Jacksonian democracy
C.
Calhoun •Trail of Tears •John Tyler
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one shown, write newspaper headlines that tell the significance of each date.
Dates	Headlines
1815	
1820	
1828	
1832	
1837	
1838	
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	EVALUATING
In what ways do you think the Missouri Compromise and the nullification crisis of 1832 might be considered important milestones in American history? Think About:
•	the expansion of slavery into the West
•	Calhoun’s nullification theory
•	Jackson’s reaction to South Carolina’s actions
ANALYZING CAUSES
What factors set the stage for the Indian Removal Act of 1830 and the Trail of Tears? Think About:
•	U.S. expansion to the west
•	removal treaties
•	Jackson’s response to Worcester v. Georgia
Review Unit
TRACING THEMES
States' Rights
The power struggle between states and the federal government has caused controversy since the country's beginning. At its worst, the conflict resulted in the Civil War. Today, state and federal governments continue to square off on jurisdictional issues.
•	In 1996, the Supreme Court ruled that congressional districts in Texas and North Carolina that had been redrawn to increase minority representation were unconstitutional.
•	In 2000, the Supreme Court agreed to hear another case in the ongoing—since 1979—dispute between the federal government and the state of Alaska over who has authority to lease offshore land for oil and gas drilling.
Constitutional conflicts between states' rights and federal jurisdiction are pictured here. As you read, see how each issue was resolved.
CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION
ISSUE:
The Constitution tried to resolve the original debate over states’ rights versus federal authority. At the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia, delegates wanted to create a federal government that was stronger than the one created by the Articles of Confederation. But delegates disagreed about whether the federal government should have more power than the states. They also disagreed about whether large states should have more power than small states in the national legislature. The convention compromised—the Constitution reserves certain powers for the states, delegates other powers to the federal government, divides some powers between state and federal governments, and tries to balance the differing needs of the states through two houses of Congress.
NULLIFICATION
ISSUE:
The state of South Carolina moved to nullify, or declare void, a tariff set by Congress. In the cartoon above, President Andrew Jackson, right, is playing a game called bragg. One of his opponents, Vice-President John C. Calhoun, is hiding two cards, “Nullification” and “Anti-Tariff,” behind him. Jackson is doing poorly in this game, but he eventually won the real nullification dispute. When Congress passed high tariffs on imports in 1832, politicians from South Carolina, led by Calhoun, tried to nullify the tariff law, or declare it void. Jackson threatened to enforce the law with federal troops. Congress reduced the tariff to avoid a confrontation, and Calhoun resigned the vice-presidency.
Chapter 3 The Growth of a Young Nation
	
,,, „ 118(1)IW
SOUTH CAROLINA’S SECESSION
ISSUE:
The conflict over a state’s right to secede, or withdraw, from the Union led to the Civil War. In December 1860, Southern secessionists cheered “secession” enthusiastically in front of the Mills House (left), a hotel in Charleston,
South Carolina. South Carolina seceded after the election of Abraham Lincoln, whom the South perceived as anti-states’ rights and antislavery. Lincoln took the position that states did not have the right to secede from the Union. In 1861, he ordered that provisions be sent to the federal troops stationed at Fort Sumter in Charleston harbor. South Carolinians fired on the fort—and the Civil War was under way. The Union’s victory in the war ended the most serious challenge to federal authority: states did not have the right to secede from the Union.
LITTLE ROCK CENTRAL HIGH SCHOOL
ISSUE:
Some Southern governors refused to obey federal desegregation mandates for schools. In 1957, President Eisenhower mobilized federal troops in Little Rock, Arkansas, to enforce the Supreme Court’s 1954 ruling in the case of Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka. This ruling made segregation in public schools illegal. The Arkansas National Guard escorted nine African-American students into Little Rock Central High School against the wishes of Governor Orval Faubus, who had tried to prevent the students from entering the school. After this incident, Faubus closed the high schools in Little Rock in 1958 and 1959, thereby avoiding desegregation.
Review Unit 129
Manifest Destiny
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
Through settlement and war, the United States greatly expanded its boundaries during the mid-1800s.
The actions Americans took during this period established the current borders of the 48 contiguous states.
•manifest destiny •Santa Fe Trail •Oregon Trail •Stephen F. Austin •Texas Revolution •the Alamo •Sam Houston
K.
Polk •Republic of California •Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo One American's
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on how the boundaries of the U.S. mainland developed.
In 1821, Stephen F. Austin led the first of several groups of American settlers to a fertile area along the Brazos River. Drawn by the promise of inexpensive land and economic opportunity, Austin established a colony of American settlers in Tejas, or Texas, then the northernmost province of the Mexican state of Coahuila. However, Austin's plans didn't work out as well as he had hoped; 12 years later, he found himself in a Mexican prison and his new homeland in an uproar. After his release, Austin spoke about the impending crisis between Texas and Mexico.
A
Personal Voice Stephen f. Austin “Texas needs peace, and a local government; its inhabitants are farmers, and they need a calm and quiet life. .. . [But] my efforts to serve Texas involved me in the labyrinth of Mexican politics. I was arrested, and have suffered a long persecution and imprisonment. . . .
I fully hoped to have found Texas at peace and in tranquillity, but regret to find it in commotion; all disorganized, all in anarchy, and threatened with immediate hostilities. . . . Can this state of things exist without precipitating the country into a war? I think it cannot. ”
—quoted in Lone Star: A History of Texas and Texans
Stephen F. Austin
Austin's prediction was correct. War did break out in Texas—twice. First, Texans rebelled against the Mexican government. Then, the United States went to war against Mexico over the boundaries of Texas. These conflicts were the climax of decades of competition over the western half of North America—a competition that involved the United States, Mexico, Native Americans, and various European nations. The end result of the competition would be U.S. control over a huge swath of the continent, from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
Settling the Frontier
As various presidents established policies in the early 19th century that expanded U.S. territory, American settlers pushed first into the Northwest Territorv and then headed farther west.	y
130Chapter 3 The Growth of a Young Nation
MAIN IDEA
Predicting
Effects
$ How might manifest destiny later affect U.S. relations with Native Americans?
AMERICANS PURSUE MANIFEST DESTINY
For a quarter century after the War of 1812, only a few Americans explored the West. Then, in the 1840s, expansion fever gripped the country. Many Americans began to believe that their movement westward was predestined by God. The phrase "manifest destiny" expressed the belief that the United States was ordained to expand to the Pacific Ocean and into Mexican and Native American territory. Many Americans also believed that this destiny was manifest, or obvious and inevitable. Most Americans had practical reasons for moving west. For settlers, the abundance of land was the greatest attraction. As the number of western settlers climbed, merchants and manufacturers followed, seeking new markets for their goods. Many Americans also trekked west because of personal economic problems in the East. The panic of 1837, for example, had disastrous
Background
The Mormon religion was controversial for its belief in polygamy, a practice that allowed a man to have more than one wife.
consequences and convinced many Americans that they would be better off attempting a fresh start in the West.
TRAILS WEST
The settlers and traders who made the trek west used a series of old Native American trails as well as new routes. One of the busiest routes was the Santa Fe Trail, which stretched 780 miles from Independence, Missouri, to Santa Fe in the Mexican province of New Mexico. (See map on page 132.) Each spring from 1821 through the 1860s, American traders loaded their covered wagons with goods and set off toward Santa Fe. For about the first 150 miles, traders traveled individually. After that, fearing attacks by Native Americans, traders banded into organized groups of up to 100 wagons. Cooperation, though, came to an abrupt end when Santa Fe came into view. Traders raced off on their own as each tried to be the first to arrive. After a few days of trading, they loaded their wagons with goods, restocked their animals, and headed back to Missouri.
The Oregon Trail stretched from Independence, Missouri, to Oregon City, Oregon. It was blazed in 1836 by two Methodist missionaries named Marcus and Narcissa Whitman. By driving their wagon as far as Fort Boise (near present-day Boise, Idaho), they proved that wagons could travel on the Oregon Trail.
Following the Whitmans' lead, many pioneers migrated west on the Oregon Trail. Some bought "prairie schooners," wooden-wheeled wagons covered with sailcloth and pulled by oxen. Most walked, however, pushing handcarts loaded with a few precious possessions, food, and other supplies. The trip took months, even if all went well.
THE MORMON MIGRATION
One group migrated westward along the Oregon Trail to escape persecution. These people were the Mormons, a religious community that would play a major role in the development of the West. Founded by Joseph Smith in upstate New York in 1827, the Mormon community moved to Ohio and then Illinois to escape persecution. After an anti-Mormon mob murdered Smith a leader named Brigham Young urged the Mormons to move farther west. Thousands of believers walked to Nebraska, across Wyoming to the Rockies, and then southwest In 1847, the Mormons stopped at the edge of the desert near the Great Salt Lake, in what is now Utah. Young boldly JIM BECKWOURTH 1798-1867?
James Pierson Beckwourth (or Beckwirth) was the toughest kind of pioneer, a mountain man. The son of an African-American woman, he ventured westward with a fur-trading expedition in 1823 and found the place that would become his home for nearly the next quarter century—the Rocky Mountains. He greatly impressed the Crow, who gave him the name “Bloody Arm” because of his skill as a fighter.
Beckwourth served from 1837 until 1848 as an Army scout and trading-post operator. In 1848, he discovered a passage in the Sierra Nevada range that led to California’s Sacramento Valley and decided to settle down near the pass and become a rancher. “In the spring of 1852 I established myself in Beckwourth Valley, and finally found myself transformed into a hotel-keeper and chief of a trading-post.”
Review Unit 131
American Trails West, I860
The interior of a covered wagon may ► have looked like this on its way west.
. 42
w-


PoH
Sil
* 4’ :




**


? ;.a


Los An
PACIFIC
OCEAN
120°W
/


'$■$
•>4* <

,-«5' , 'J
\.’r * «. ’ '
ajo
> ■
'M
;«- t
r/ »..
SI



'.A,


'•>1
y«M*i

90cW
A
Navajo man and woman in photographs taken by Edward S. Curtis 132 Chapter 3 The Growth of a Young Nation
Butterfield Overland Trail California Trail Mormon Trail Old Spanish Trail Oregon Trail Sante Fe Trail
100	200 miles
w-
0	100 200 kilometers
.. -aU i - i.	, > /’Wjj I
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
| 1. Location Approximately how long was the trail from St. Louis to El Paso?
2. Movement At a wagon train speed of about 15 miles a day, about how long would that trip take?
1/? Wi ’T
MW?

MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Motives
Why did the Mormons move farther west in their search for a new home?
MAIN IDEA
Developing
Historical
Perspective
Why did many Americans initially settle in Texas?
declared, This is the place." Soon they had coaxed settlements and farms from the bleak landscape by irrigating their fields. Salt Lake City blossomed out of the land the Mormons called Deseret.
SETTING BOUNDARIES
In the early 1840s, Great Britain still claimed areas near the Canadian border in parts of what are now Maine and Minnesota. The Webster-Ashburton Treaty of 1842 settled these territorial disputes in the East and the Midwest, but the two nations merely continued the "joint occupation" of the Oregon Territory that they had first established in 1818. In 1846 the two countries agreed to extend the mainland boundary along the 49th parallel westward from the Rocky Mountains to Puget Sound, establishing the current boundary between the United States and Canada. Unfortunately, establishing the boundary in the Southwest with Mexico would not be so peaceful. Texan Independence
After 300 years of Spanish rule, only a few thousand Mexican settlers had migrated to what is now Texas. After 1820, that changed as Texas became an important region in Mexico and then an independent republic.
MEXICAN INDEPENDENCE AND TEXAN LAND GRANTS
The mission system used by Spain declined after Mexico had won independence from Spain in 1821. After freeing the missions from Spanish control, the Mexican government offered the surrounding lands to government officials and ranchers. To make the land more secure and stable, the Mexican government also encouraged Americans to settle in Texas. Many Americans rushed at the chance to buy inexpensive land in Texas. The population of Anglo, or English-speaking, settlers from the United States soon surpassed the population of Tejanos, or Mexican settlers, who lived in Texas. Among the more prominent leaders of these American settlers was
Stephen E Austin. ||
Austin's father, Moses Austin, had received a land grant from Spain to establish a colony between the Brazos and Colorado rivers but died before he was able to carry out his plans. Stephen obtained permission, first from Spain and then from Mexico after it had won its independence, to carry out his father's project. In 1821 he established a colony where "no drunkard, no gambler, no profane swearer, and no idler” would be allowed.
The main settlement of the colony was named San Felipe de Austin, in Stephen's honor. By 1825, Austin had issued 297 land grants to the group that later became known as Texas's Old Three Hundred. Each family received either 177 very inexpensive acres of farmland, or 4,428 acres for stock grazing, as well as a 10-year exemption from paying taxes. "I am convinced," Austin said, "that I could take on fifteen hundred families as easily as three hundred if permitted to do so." By 1830, there were more than 20,000 Americans in Texas.
THE TEXAS REVOLUTION
Despite peaceful cooperation between Anglos and Tejanos, differences over cultural issues intensified between Anglos and the Mexican government. The overwhelmingly Protestant Anglo settlers spoke English instead of Spanish. Furthermore, many of the settlers were Southerners, who had brought slaves with them to Texas. Mexico, which had abolished slavery in 1829, insisted in vain that the Texans free their slaves. Meanwhile, Mexican politics had become increasingly unstable. Austin had traveled to Mexico City late in 1833 to present petitions to Mexican president Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna for greater self-government for Texas. While Austin was on his way home, Santa Anna had Austin imprisoned for inciting revolution After Santa Anna suspended local powers in Texas and other
Review Unit 133
Mexican states, several rebellions broke out, including one that would be known as the Texas Revolution.
When Austin returned to Texas in 1835, he was convinced that war was its "only resource." Determined to force Texas to obey Mexican law, Santa Anna marched his army toward San Antonio. At the same time, Austin and his followers issued a call for Texans to arm themselves. Jgj
THE ALAMO!”
The commander of the Anglo troops, Lieutenant Colonel William Travis, moved his men into the Alamo, a mission and fort in the center of San Antonio. Travis believed that maintaining control of the Alamo would prevent Santa Anna's movement farther north. From February 23, 1836, Santa Anna and his troops attacked the rebels holed up in the Alamo. On March 2, 1836, as the battle for the Alamo raged, Texans declared their independence from Mexico and quickly ratified a constitution based on that of the United States. The 13-day siege finally ended on March 6, 1836, when Mexican troops scaled the Alamo's walls. All 187 U.S. defenders and hundreds of Mexicans died.
Later in March, Santa Anna's troops executed 300 rebels at Goliad. The Alamo and the Goliad executions whipped the Texan rebels into a fury. Six weeks after the defeat at the Alamo, the rebels' commander in chief, Sam Houston, and 900
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Issues
What
disagreement led to the Texas Revolution?
War for Texas Independence, 1835-1836
KEY PLAYERS
SAM HOUSTON 1793-1863
Sam Houston ran away from home in Tennessee at about age 15 and lived for three years with the Cherokee. He later fought in the U.S. Army, studied law, was elected to Congress, and became governor of Tennessee.
In his memoirs Houston told of listening in vain for the signal guns indicating that the Alamo still stood. “I listened with an acuteness of sense which no man can understand whose hearing has not been sharpened by the teachings of the dwellers of the forest."
The Republic of Texas chose Houston to be its first president. When Texas became a state, he was elected to the U.S. Senate.
SANTA ANNA 1795-1876
Antonio Ldpez de Santa Anna reportedly once said, “If I were God, I would wish to be more.” Santa Anna began his career fighting for Spain in the war over Mexican independence. Later, he switched sides to fight for Mexico.
Declaring himself the “Napoleon of the West,” Santa Anna took control of the government after Mexico won independence in 1821. He spent the next 35 years alternately serving as president, leading troops into battle, and living in exile. Santa Anna served as president of Mexico 11 times.
Santa Anna was a complex man with much charm. He sacrificed his considerable wealth to return again and again to the battlefield and died in poverty, almost forgotten.
MAIN IDEA
Contrasting
How would you contrast the Northern and Southern positions on the annexation of Texas?
soldiers surprised a group of Mexicans near the San Jacinto River. With shouts of "Remember the Alamo!" the Texans killed 630 of Santa Anna's soldiers in 18 minutes and captured Santa Anna himself. The Texans set Santa Anna free only after he signed the Treaty of Velasco, which granted independence to Texas. In September 1836, Sam Houston was elected president of the new Republic of Texas.
TEXAS MOVES TOWARD THE UNION
Most Texans hoped that the United States would annex their republic, but U.S. opinion divided along sectional lines. Southerners wanted Texas in order to extend slavery, which already had been established there. Northerners feared that the annexation of more slave territory would tip the uneasy balance in the Senate in favor of slave states—and prompt war with Mexico. The 1844 U.S. presidential campaign focused on westward expansion. The winner, James K. Polk, a slaveholder, firmly favored the annexation of Texas.
The War with Mexico
In March 1845, angered by U.S.-Texas negotiation on annexation, the Mexican government recalled its ambassador from Washington. On December 29, 1845, Texas entered the Union. Events moved quickly toward war.
HISTORY
VIDEO
Independence for Texas
71 hmhsocialstudies.com
POLK URGES WAR
President Polk believed that war with Mexico would bring not only Texas into the Union, but also New Mexico and California. Hence, the president supported Texan claims in disputes with Mexico over the Texas-Mexico border. While Texas insisted that its southern border extended to the Rio Grande, Mexico maintained that Texas's border stopped at the Nueces River, 100-150 miles northeast of the Rio Grande. Despite the fact that Mexico had ceased formal diplomatic relations with the U S Polk hoped to negotiate secretly the boundary dispute, as well as the sale of California and New Mexico. He dispatched John Slidell, a congressman from Louisiana to negotiate both matters. The Mexican government refused to receive Slidell When Polk heard this news, he ordered U.S. troops into the territory between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River that the United States claimed as its own.
Review Unit 135

GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Location From which locations in Texas did U.S. forces come to Buena Vista?
2.	Region In which country were most of the battles fought?
HISTORY
VIDEO
The Mexican-American War
5T hmhsocialstudies.com
THE WAR BEGINS
In 1845, John C. Fremont led an American military exploration party into California, violating Mexico's territorial rights. In response, Mexican troops crossed the Rio Grande. In a skirmish near Matamoros, Mexican soldiers killed 11 U.S. soldiers. Polk immediately called for war and Congress approved. JF^ In 1846, Polk ordered Colonel Stephen Kearny and his troops to march from Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, to Santa Fe, New Mexico. They were met there by a New Mexican contingent that included upper-class Mexicans who wanted to join the United States. New Mexico fell to the United States without a shot.
I MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Issues
What border dispute affected the war with Mexico?
THE REPUBLIC OF CALIFORNIA
In California, a group of American settlers seized the town of Sonoma in June 1846. Hoisting a flag that featured a grizzly bear, the rebels proudly declared their independence from Mexico and proclaimed the nation of the Republic of California. Kearny arrived from New Mexico and joined forces with Fremont and an American naval expedition. The Mexican troops quickly gave way, leaving U.S. forces in control of California. AMERICA WINS THE WAR
Meanwhile, American troops in Mexico, led by U.S. generals Zachary Taylor and Winfield Scott, scored one military victory after another. After about a year of fighting, Mexico conceded defeat. On February 2, 1848, the United States and Mexico signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. Mexico agreed to the Rio Grande as the border between Texas and Mexico and ceded the New Mexico and California territories to the United States. The United Chapter 3 The Growth of a Young Nation
States agreed to pay $15 million for the Mexican cession, which included present-day California, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, most of Arizona, and parts of Colorado and Wyoming.
Five years later, in 1853, President Franklin Pierce authorized James Gadsden to pay Mexico an additional $10 million for another piece of territory south of the Gila River in order to secure a southern railroad route to the Pacific Ocean. Along with the settlement of the Oregon boundary and the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, the Gadsden Purchase established the current borders of the contiguous 48 states.
The California Gold Rush
The United States quickly benefited from its new territories when gold was discovered at Sutter's Mill in the California Sierra Nevada mountains.
THE FORTY-NINERS
On the cold clear morning of January 24, 1848, a carpenter named James Marshall discovered a few shiny particles lying near John Sutter's sawmill. Marshall took what he had found to Sutter, who confirmed the carpenter's suspicions: the particles were gold. Soon, more gold was found by other workers at Sutter's mill, and news of the chance discovery began to spread with lightning speed. When the news reached San Francisco, virtually the whole town hustled to the Sacramento Valley to pan for gold. On June 6, 1848, Monterey's mayor, Walter Colton, sent a scout to report on what was happening. The scout returned on June 14 with news of gold, and the mayor described the scene that followed as news traveled along the town's main street.
A
Goldminers at Spanish Flat, California, 1852


i
A
Personal Voice Walter colton “The blacksmith dropped his hammer, the carpenter his plane, the mason his trowel, the farmer his sickle, the baker his loaf, and the tapster [bartender] his bottle. All were off for the mines. ... I have only a community of women left, and a gang of prisoners, with here and there a soldier who will give his captain the slin at first chance. I don’t blame the fellow a whit; seven dollars a month, while others [pmspectors] are making two or three hundred a day! ”
—quoted in California: A Bicentennial History
As gold fever traveled eastward, overland migration to California rose from 400 in 1848 to 44,000 in 1850. By the end of 1849, California's population exceeded 100 000, including Mexicans, free African-American miners, and slaves.
The rest of the world caught the fever as well. Among the so-called forty-niners—the prospectors who flocked to California in 1849 in the California gold rush-were people from Asia, South America, and Europe. In time, the names of
Review Unit 137
the mining camps that sprung up in California reflected the diversity of its growing population: French Corral, Irish Creek, Chinese Camp.
Crowded buildings and a forest of masts stand out in this 1850 photograph of San Francisco.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
In what ways did the gold rush change the population of California?
THE GOLDEN ECONOMY
The discovery of gold revolutionized California's economy. Gold financed the development of farming, manufacturing, shipping, and banking. By 1855, more newspapers were published in San Francisco than in London, more books were published than in all the rest of the United States west of the Mississippi. Because of its location as a supply center, San Francisco became "a pandemonium of a city." Ships linked
California markets to the expanding markets of the rest of the United States. Mining continued in California throughout the 1850s, but the peak of the gold
rush was over by 1853. While most individual efforts yielded little or no profit, those who were able to use more sophisticated methods made fortunes. By 1857, ten years after James Marshall's discovery of a few shiny flakes, the total value of gold production in California approached two billion dollars.
WEST, YOUNG MAN!”
Horace Greeley, editor of the New York Tribune, had declared in his paper prior to the gold rush that anyone who made the dangerous journey west was a fool. But when he heard of the discovery in the Sierra Nevadas his curiosity was aroused. Before long, he made the journey west himself and declared California to be "the new El Dorado." "Go west, young man!" Greeley advised. In the spirit of manifest destiny, countless settlers heeded his words in the decades that followed. MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
How did the discovery of gold affect California’s economy?
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance, •manifest destiny	-Stephen F. Austin	-Sam Houston
•Santa Fe Trail	-Texas Revolution	•James K. Polk
•Oregon Trail	•the Alamo
Republic of California Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Draw a chart like the one below to show how the boundaries of the U.S. mainland were formed from the 1840s to 1853.
Year	Boundary Change
1845	Texas annexed
	
	
	
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING ISSUES
What were the benefits and drawbacks of believing in manifest destiny? Use specific references to the section to support your response.
Think About:
•	the growth of new cities and towns
•	the impact on Native Americans
•	the impact on the nation as a whole
4.	EVALUATING
Would you have supported the war with Mexico? Why or why not? Explain your answer, including details from the chapter.
DEVELOPING HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
How did the California gold rush transform the West in the American imagination?
Chapter 3 The Growth of a Young Nation
MAIN IDEA WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names Inventions and economic		The market revolution and free	• market revolution	•strike
developments in the early		enterprise system that took hold	•free enterprise	• immigration
19th century helped		during this period still drive the	•entrepreneurs	• National Trades’
transform American society.		nation’s economy today.	•Samuel F. B.	Union
			Morse	• Commonwealth
			•Lowell textile	v. Hunt
			mills	
		One American's Story i		

TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on important developments in manufacturing during the early 19th century.
At sunrise on July 4, 1817, a cannon blast from the United States arsenal in Rome, New York, announced the groundbreaking for the Erie Canal. With visiting dignitaries and local residents in attendance, Samuel Young opened the ceremony.
A
Personal Voice samuel young “We have assembled to commence the excavation of the Erie Canal. This work when accomplished will connect our western inland seas with the Atlantic Ocean. ... By this great highway, unborn millions will easily transport their surplus productions to the shores of the Atlantic, procure their supplies, and hold a useful and profitable Intercourse with all the maritime nations of the earth. . . . Let us proceed then to the work, animated by the prospect of its speedy accomplishment, and cheered with the anticipated benedictions of a grateful posterity. ”
—quoted in Erie Water West
When the canal was completed, it stretched 363 miles from Albany, New York, to Lake Erie. The human-made waterway ushered in a new era, in which technology and improved transportation sent new products to markets across the United States.
i
A lock on the Erie Canal in Lockport, New York, shown here in an 1838 engraving, was one of 83 that helped link the Great Lakes with the Northeast.
The Market Revolution
Changes like those brought by the Erie Canal contributed to vast economic changes in the first half of the 19th century in the United States. In this period, known as the market revolution, people increasingly bought and sold goods rather than make them for themselves.
Review Unit 139
U.S. MARKETS EXPAND
Over a few decades, buying and selling multiplied while incomes rose. In the 1840s alone, the national economy grew more than it had in the first 40 years of the century. The quickening pace of U.S. economic growth coincided with the growth of free enterprise—the freedom of private businesses to operate competitively for profit with little government regulation. In their pursuit of profit, businessmen called entrepreneurs, from a French word that means "to undertake," invested their own money in new industries. In doing this, entrepreneurs risked losing their investment if a venture failed, but they also stood to earn huge profits if it succeeded.
cronivi tci chdadu
INVENTIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS
Inventor-entrepreneurs began to develop goods to make life more comfortable for more people. While some inventions simply made life more enjoyable, others fueled the economic revolution and transformed manufacturing, transportation, and communication. New communication links began to put people into instant contact with one another. In 1837, Samuel F. B. Morse, a New England artist, patented the telegraph, which sent messages in code over a wire in a matter of seconds. Businesses used the new communication device to transmit orders and relay up-to-date information on prices and sales. The new railroads employed the telegraph to keep trains moving regularly and to warn engineers of safety hazards. By 1854, 23,000 miles of telegraph wire crossed the country.
Meanwhile, better transportation systems improved the movement of people and goods. In 1807, Pennsylvanian Robert Fulton had ushered in the steamboat era when his boat, the Clermont, made the 150-mile trip up the Hudson River from New York City to Albany in 32 hours, a remarkable speed for that era. By 1830, 200 steamboats traveled the nation's western rivers that flowed into the Mississippi River. Steamboats slashed freight rates as well as voyage times.
Water transport was particularly important in moving raw materials such as lead, copper, and heavy
MAIN IDEA
Synthesizing
How did entrepreneurs contribute to the market revolution?
FROM TELEGRAPH TO INTERNET
What do the telegraph and the Internet have in common? They are both tools for instant communication. While the telegraph relied on a network of wires that spanned the country, the Internet—an international network of smaller computer networks— allows any computer user to communicate instantly with any other computer user in the world.
MORSE CODE
In 1837 Samuel Morse patents the telegraph, the first instant electronic communicator. Morse taps on a key to send bursts of electricity down a wire to the receiver, where an operator “translates" the coded bursts into understandable language within seconds. Chapter 3
icLtrnui\t m xoro Alexander Graham Bell invents the telephone, which relies on a steady stream of electricity, rather than electrical bursts, to transmit sounds. By 1900, there are over one million telephones in the United States.
MARCONI RADIO
In 1895, Guglielmo Marconi, an Italian inventor, sends telegraph code through the air as electromagnetic waves. By the early 1900s, “the wireless” makes voice transmissions possible. Commercial radio stations are broadcasting music and entertainment programs by the 1920s. MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
How did technology influence both the North and the Midwest in the 1840s?
machinery. Where waterways didn't exist, Americans made them by building canals. By the 1840s, America boasted more than 3,300 miles of canals.
Canals, however, soon gave way to railroads, which offered the important advantage of speed as well as winter travel. Developed in England in the early 1800s, steam-powered locomotives began operating in the United States in the 1830s. By 1850, over 9,000 miles of track had been laid across the United States.
THE MARKET REVOLUTION TRANSFORMS THE NATION
Although most Americans during the early 1800s still lived in rural areas and only 14 percent of workers had manufacturing jobs, these workers produced more and better goods at lower prices than ever before. Many of these goods became affordable for ordinary Americans, and improvements in transportation allowed people to purchase items manufactured in distant places. By the 1840s, improved transportation and communication also made America's regions more interdependent. Steamboats went up as well as down the Mississippi, linking North to South. The Erie Canal, and eventually railroads and telegraph wires, soon linked the East and the West.
Heavy investment in canals and railroads transformed the Northeast into the center of American commerce. As the Northeast began to industrialize, many people then moved away to farm the fertile soil of the Midwest. They employed new machines, such as the John Deere steel plow, for cultivating the tough prairie sod, and Cyrus McCormick's reaper, for harvesting grain. Meanwhile, most of the South remained agricultural and relied on such crops as cotton, tobacco, and rice.
Changing Workplaces
The new market economy in the United States did not only affect what people bought and sold, it also changed the ways Americans worked. Moving production from the home to the factory split families, created new communities, and transformed relationships between employers and employees.
By the mid-19th century, new machines allowed unskilled workers to perform tasks that once had taken the effort of trained artisans. To do this work, though, workers needed factories.
TELEVISION
In the late 1800s, scientists begin to experiment with transmitting pictures as well as words through the air. In 1923 Vladimir Zworykin, a Russian-born American scientist, files a patent for the
suitable for broadcast-
kinescope, the picture
In 1929, Zworykin
all-electronic television.
COMPUTERS
Scientists develop electronically powered computers during the 1940s. In 1951, UNIVAC I (UNIVersal Advanced Computer) becomes the first commercially available computer. In 1964, IBM initiates System/360, a family of mutually compatible computers that allow several terminals to be attached to one computer system.
INTERNET
Today, on the Internet, through e-mail (electronic mail) or online conversation, any two people can have instant dialogue. The Internet becomes the modern tool for instant global communication not only of words but images too. And it is just as amazing now as the telegraph was in its time. Review Unit 141
THE LOWELL TEXTILE MILLS
In the 1820s, a group of entrepreneurs built several large textile mills in Lowell, Massachusetts. The Lowell textile mills soon became booming enterprises. Thousands of people, mostly women, left family farms to find work in Lowell. Mill owners sought female employees because women provided an abundant source of labor and owners could pay lower wages to women than men. To the girls in the mills, though, textile work offered better pay than their main alternatives: teaching, sewing, and domestic work. In letters written in 1846 to her father in New Hampshire, 16-year-old Mary Paul expressed her satisfaction with her situation at Lowell.
A
Personal Voice mary paul “I have a very good boarding place, have enough to eat.. . . The girls are all kind and obliging. ... I think that the factory is the best place for me and if any girl wants employment, I advise them to come to Lowell. ” —quoted in Women and the American Experience
A young mill girl from around 1840. Her swollen hands suggest that she worked as a warper, someone who straightened the strands of cotton or wool as they entered the loom.
Before long, however, work conditions deteriorated. The workday at Lowell was more than 12 hours long. In addition, mills often were dark, hot, and cramped. Factory owners often showed little sympathy for the plight of workers. In the mid-1840s one mill manager said, "I regard my workpeople just as I regard my machinery. So long as they can do my work for what I choose to pay them, I keep them, getting out of them all I can."
MAIN IDEA
Workers Seek Better Conditions
As industry grew, strikes began to break out when workers protested poor working conditions and low wages.
WORKERS STRIKE
In 1834, when the Lowell mills announced a 15 percent wage cut, 800 mill girls organized a strike, a work stoppage to force an employer to respond to demands. Criticized by the Lowell press and clergy, most of the strikers agreed to return to work at reduced wages. The mill owners fired the strike leader. In 1836, Lowell mill workers struck again, but as in 1834, the company won, and most of the strikers returned to their jobs. Although only 1 or 2 percent of workers in the United States were organized, the 1830s and 1840s saw dozens of strikes—many for higher wages, but some for shorter hours. Employers defeated most of these strikes because they could easily replace unskilled workers with people recently arrived from Europe who desperately needed jobs.
IMMIGRATION INCREASES
European immigration, leaving one country and settling in another, rose dramatically in the United States between 1830 and 1860. Between 1845 and 1854 alone, nearly 3 million immigrants were added to the population. More than 1 million were Irish immigrants, who fled their homeland after a disease on potatoes caused the Great Potato Famine and led to mass starvation. Irish immigrants faced prejudice, both because they were Roman Catholic and because they were poor. Frightened by allegations of a Catholic conspiracy to take over the country, Protestant mobs in big cities constantly harassed them. Other workers resented the Irish for their willingness to work as cheap labor, a willingness that made them more desirable to employers.
Making
Inferences
What was the attitude of many factory owners toward their workers?
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
& Why were most labor strikes of the 1880s and 1840s ineffective?
Background
During the Great Potato Famine of 1845-1849, about 1,000,000 Irish died of starvation and disease.
Chapter 3 The Growth of a Young Nation
European immigrants arriving in New York City (from a colored engraving made in 1858)
NATIONAL TRADES’ UNION
Amid the growing labor unrest in the 1830s, the trade unions in different towns began to join together to expand their power. Journeymen's organizations from several industries united in 1834 to form the National Trades' Union. The national trade union movement faced fierce opposition from bankers and owners. In addition, workers' efforts to organize were at first hampered by court decisions declaring strikes illegal. In 1842, however, the Massachusetts Supreme Court supported the workers' right to strike in the case of Commonwealth v. Hunt. The workplace was not the only area of American life that experienced unrest in the mid-19th century. Indeed, a series of religious and social reform movements went hand in hand with these economic changes.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•market revolution	•Samuel F. B. Morse	’Strike	-National Trades’ Union
•free enterprise	•Lowell textile mills	’immigration	•Commonwealth v. Hunt
•entrepreneurs
main idea
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a time line like the one below on which you label and date important developments in manufacturing during the early 19th century.
1807
Write a paragraph explaining which development was most important and why.
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING ISSUES
Do you think the positive effects of mechanizing the manufacturing process outweighed the negative effects? Why or why not?
Think About:
•	changes in job opportunities for unskilled laborers
•	changes in employer-employee relationships
•	working conditions in factories
•	the cost of manufactured goods
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
A 20th-century historian said of the 1820s: “It was the miraculous machinery of the times . . . which made it obvious that things were getting better all the time.” How do you think the people you have read about in this chapter would have responded to that statement?
Review Unit 143
Reforming American Society
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names

Throughout the mid-19th century, men and women embarked on a widespread effort to solve problems in American society.
A number of achievements from this period, including laws enacted and institutions established, still exist today.
OneAmerican'sStory
•abolition
•	Unitarians
•	Ralph Waldo Emerson
•	transcendentalism •William Lloyd
Garrison
•	Frederick
Douglass
•	Nat Turner
•	Elizabeth Cady
Stanton
•Seneca Falls convention •Sojourner Truth
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the historical events and key figures related to reforming American society in the 19th century.
James Forten's great-grandfather had been brought from Africa to the American colonies in chains, but James was born free. By the 1830s Forten had become a wealthy sailmaker. A leader of Philadelphia's free black community, Forten took an active role in a variety of political causes. When some people argued that free blacks should return to Africa, Forten disagreed and responded with sarcasm.
A
Personal Voice james forten “ Here I have dwelt until I am nearly sixty years of age, and have brought up and educated a family.... Yet some ingenious gentlemen have recently discovered that I am still an African; that a continent three thousand miles, and more, from the place where I was born, is my native country. And I am advised to go home. . . . Perhaps if I should only be set on the shore of that distant land, I should recognize all I might see there, and run at once to the old hut where my forefathers lived a hundred years ago/9 —quoted in Forging Freedom: The Formation of Philadelphia’s Black Community 1720-1840
Forten's unwavering belief that he was an American not only led him to oppose colonization—the effort to resettle free blacks in Africa—but also pushed him fervently to oppose slavery. Forten was joined in his opposition to slavery by a growing number of Americans in the 19th century. Abolition, the movement to abolish slavery, became the most important of a series of reform movements in America.
James Forten
A
Spiritual Awakening Inspires Reform Many of these movements had their roots in a spiritual awakening that swept the nation after 1790. People involved in these movements began to emphasize individual responsibility for seeking salvation and insisted that people could improve themselves and society. These religious attitudes were closely linked to
1
MAIN IDEA
Evaluating
How did the existence of separate black churches benefit the African-American community?
the ideas of Jacksonian democracy that stressed the importance and power of the common person.
THE SECOND GREAT AWAKENING
The Second Great Awakening was a widespread Christian movement to awaken religious sentiments that lasted from the 1790s to the 1830s. The primary forum for the movement was the revival meeting, where participants attempted to revive religious faith through impassioned preaching. Revival meetings might last for days as participants studied the Bible, reflected on their lives, and heard emotional sermons. Revivalism had a strong impact on the American public. According to one estimate, in 1800 just 1 in 15 Americans belonged to a church, but by 1850 1 in 6 was a member. UNITARIANS AND TRANSCENDENTALISTS
Another growing religious group was the Unitarians, who shared with revivalism a faith in the individual. But instead of appealing to emotions, Unitarians emphasized reason as the path to perfection. As the Second Great Awakening reached its maturity in the 1830s, another kind of awakening led by a writer, philosopher, and former Unitarian minister named Ralph Waldo Emerson began in New England. In 1831, Emerson traveled to England, where he discovered romanticism, an artistic and intellectual movement that emphasized nature, human emotions, and the imagination. From these romantic ideals, Emerson, along with other thinkers, developed a philosophy called transcendentalism, which emphasized that truth could be discovered intuitively by observing nature and relating it to one's own emotional and spiritual experience.
THE AFRICAN-AMERICAN CHURCH
The urge to reform was growing among African Americans, too. Slaves in the rural South heard the same sermons and sang the same hymns as did their owners, but they often interpreted the stories they heard, especially those describing the exodus from Egypt, as a promise of freedom. In the North, however, free African Americans were able to form their own churches. These churches often became political, cultural, and social centers for African Americans by providing schools and other services that whites denied free blacks. &
I
Slavery and Abolition
By the 1820s, abolition—the movement to free African Americans from slavery-had taken hold. More than 100 antislavery societies were advocating that African Americans be resettled in Africa. In 1817, the American Colonization Society had been founded to encourage black emigration. Other abolitionists, however, demanded that African Americans remain in the United States as free citizens. WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON The most radical white abolitionist was a young editor named William Lloyd Garrison. Active in religious reform movements in Massachusetts, Garrison became the editor of an antislavery paper in 1828. Three years later he established his own paper, The Liberator, to deliver an uncompromising demand: immediate emancipation.
THI
OUA COUNTRY.
is THE Otm COUNTRYMEN ARE MXNKlNP.
1TOK
WILLIAM
[Saturday* May 28,1831.
Boston, Massachusetts.)
<4 William Lloyd Garrison’s The Liberator was published from 1831 to 1865. Its circulation never grew beyond 3,000.
I
HISTORY
VIDEO
Frederick Douglass
71 hmhsocialstudies.com
Before Garrison’s call for the immediate emancipation of slaves, suppor or that position had been limited. In the 1830s, however, that position game P port. Whites who opposed abolition hated Garrison. In 1835 a Boston mob paraded him through town at the end of a rope. Nevertheless, Garrison enjoyed widespread black support; three out of four early subscribers to The Liberator were African Americans.
FREDERICK DOUGLASS
One of those eager readers was Frederick Douglass, who escaped from bondage to become an eloquent and outspoken critic of slavery. Garrison heard him speak and was so impressed that he sponsored Douglass to speak for various anti-slavery organizations. Hoping that abolition could be achieved without violence, Douglass broke with Garrison, who believed that abolition justified whatever means were necessary to achieve it. In 1847, Douglass began his own antislavery newspaper. He named it The North Star, after the star that guided runaway slaves to freedom. LIFE UNDER SLAVERY
In the 18th century, most slaves were male, had recently arrived from the Caribbean or Africa, and spoke one of several languages other than English. By 1830, however, the numbers of male and female slaves had become more I consider it settled that the black	“!“a1' The ma>orlt5' had bMn born
and white people of America ought	!? Amer‘“ “d spoke . E"8“sh'
to share common destiny.	stant in the lives of slaves_hard
FREDERICK DOUGLASS, 1851
work and oppression. The number of slaves owned by individual masters varied widely across the South. Most slaves worked as house servants, farm hands, or in the fields. Some states allowed masters to free their slaves and even allowed slaves to purchase their freedom over time. But these "manumitted” or freed slaves were very few. The vast majority of African Americans in the South were enslaved and endured lives of suffering and constant degradation. (See "Southern Plantations” on page 147.)
TURNER’S REBELLION
Some slaves rebelled against their condition of bondage. One of the most prominent rebellions was led by Virginia slave Nat Turner. In August 1831, Turner and more than 50 followers attacked four plantations and killed about 60 whites. Whites eventually captured and executed many members of the group, including Turner. SLAVE OWNERS OPPOSE ABOLITION
The Turner rebellion frightened and outraged slaveholders. In some states, people argued that the only way to prevent slave revolts was through emancipation. Others, however, chose to tighten restrictions on all African Americans to prevent them from plotting insurrections. Some proslavery advocates began to argue that slavery was a benevolent institution. They used the Bible to defend slavery and cited passages that counseled servants to obey their masters. MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
jiy How would you describe the lives of enslaved African Americans in the 1830s?
146 Chapter 3 The Growth of a Young Nation
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs According to the pie graph, what was the smallest group of African Americans living in the American South in 1860?
Nevertheless, opposition to slavery refused to disappear. Much of the strength of the abolition movement came from the efforts of women—many of whom contributed to other reform movements, including a women's rights movement.
Women and Reform
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing Issues
What were some of the areas of society that women worked to reform?
In the early 19th century, women faced limited options. Prevailing customs encouraged women to restrict their activities after marriage to the home and family. As a result, they were denied full participation in the larger community. WOMEN MOBILIZE FOR REFORM Despite such pressures, women actively participated in all the important reform movements of the 19th century. For many, their efforts to improve society had been inspired by the optimistic message of the Second Great Awakening. From abolition to education, women worked for reform
despite the cold reception they got from many men.
Perhaps the most important reform effort that women participated in was
abolition. Women abolitionists raised money, distributed literature, and collected
signatures for antislavery petitions to Congress.
Women also played key roles in the temperance movement, the effort to pro-
hibit the drinking of alcohol. Some women, most notably Dorothea Dix, fought to improve treatment for the mentally disabled. Dix also joined others in the effort to reform the nation's harsh and often inhumane prison system. Q
Review Unit 147
EDUCATION FOR WOMEN
Work for abolition and temperance accompanied gains in education for women. Until the 1820s, American girls had few educationa opportunities beyond elementary school. As Sarah Grimke complained in Letters on the Equality of the Sexes and the Condition of Woman (1838), a woman who knew "chemistry enough to keep the pot boiling, and geography enough to know the location of the different rooms in her house" was considered learned enough. Grimke believed that increased education for women was a better alternative. Still, throughout the 1800s, more and more educational institutions for women began to appear. In 1821 Emma Willard opened one of the nation s first academically-oriented schools for girls in Troy, New York. In addition to classes in domestic sciences, the Troy Female Seminary offered classes in math, history, geography, languages, art, music, writing, and literature. The Troy Female Seminary became the model for a new type of women's school. Despite tremendous ridicule—people mocked that "they will be educating cows next"—Willard's
Background
Sarah GrimkS and her sister Angelina were leading voices in the abolition and women’s rights movements.
school prospered.
ELIZABETH CADY STANTON 1815-1902
Stanton was an ardent abolitionist, and she timed her marriage in 1840 so that she and her new husband could travel together to London for the World’s Anti-Slavery Convention.
She also believed that women deserved the same rights as men and even persuaded the minister to omit the word “obey” from her vow in the marriage ceremony because she felt no need to “obey one with whom I supposed I was entering into an equal relation.”
At the antislavery convention, Stanton and the other women delegates were barred from participation in the convention and were forced to sit and listen from a curtained gallery. There she met Lucretia Mott. Stanton and Mott vowed “to hold a convention as soon as we returned home, and form a society to advocate the rights of women.” Eight years later, the Seneca Falls convention fulfilled that vow.
In 1833, the first class of Ohio's Oberlin College included four women, thus becoming the nation's first fully coeducational college. In 1837, Mary Lyon surmounted heated resistance to found another important institution of higher learning for women, Mount Holyoke Female Seminary (later Mount Holyoke College) in South Hadley, Massachusetts. JJ)
EDUCATION AND WOMEN’S HEALTH
Improvement in women's education began to improve women's lives, most notably in health reform. Elizabeth Blackwell, who in 1849 became the first woman to graduate from medical college, later opened the New York Infirmary for Women and Children. In the 1850s, Catharine Beecher, sister of novelist Harriet Beecher Stowe, and a respected educator in her own right, undertook a national survey of women's health. To her dismay, Beecher found three sick women for every healthy one. It was no wonder: women rarely bathed or exercised, and the fashionable women's clothing of the day included corsets so restrictive that breathing sometimes was difficult. Unfortunately, black women enjoyed even fewer educational opportunities than their white counterparts. In 1831 Prudence Crandall, a white Quaker, opened a school for girls in Canterbury, Connecticut. Two years later she admitted an African-American girl named Sarah Harris. The townspeople protested so vigorously that Crandall decided to enroll only African Americans. This aroused even more opposition, and in 1834 Crandall was forced to close the school and leave town. Only after the Civil War would the severely limited educational opportunities for black women slowly begin to expand.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS MOVEMENT EMERGES
The reform movements of the mid-19th century fed the growth of the women's movement by providing women with increased opportunities to act outside the home. Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott had been ardent abolitionists. Male abolitionists discriminated against them at the World's Anti-Slavery Convention in 1840, so the pair resolved to hold a women's rights convention. In 1848, more than 300 women convened in Seneca Falls, New York. Before the convention started, Stanton and Mott composed an agenda and a detailed statement of grievances. MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
4J) What improvements in women’s education occurred in the 1820s and '30s?
Chapter 3 The Growth of a Young Nation
t
The participants at the Seneca Falls convention approved all parts of the declaration, including a resolution calling for women to have the right to vote. In spite of all the political activity among middle-class white women, African-American women found it difficult to gain recognition of their problems. A former slave named Sojourner Truth did not let that stop her, however. At a women's rights convention in 1851, Truth, an outspoken abolitionist, refuted the arguments that because she was a woman she was weak, and because she was black, she was not feminine.
^1
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Issues
How did Sojourner Truth describe her life as an African-American woman?
A
Personal Voice sojourner truth 66 Look at me! Look at my arm! I have ploughed, and planted, and gathered into barns, and no man could head me! And ain’t I a woman? I could work as much and eat as much as a man—when I could get it—and bear the lash as well! And ain’t I a woman? I have borne thirteen children, and seen most all sold off to slavery, and when I cried out with my mother’s grief, none but Jesus heard me! And ain’t I a woman?”99 —quoted In Africa in the Days of Exploration
With her dignified bearing and powerful voice, Sojourner Truth made audiences snap to attention. Truth fought for women’s rights, abolition, prison reform, and temperance.
I
As Truth showed, hard work was a fact of life for most women. But she also pointed to the problem of slavery that continued to vex the nation. As abolitionists intensified their attacks, proslavery advocates strengthened their defenses. Before long the issue of slavery threatened to destroy the Union, jy
J-''’!
hi
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•abolition	.transcendentalism	*Nat Turner	*Seneca Falls convention
•	Unitarians	• William Lloyd Garrison	• Elizabeth Cady Stanton • Sojourner Truth
•	Ralph Waldo Emerson	• Frederick Douglass
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a diagram similar to the one shown, fill in historical events or key figures related to reforming American society in the 19th century.
Write a paragraph about one of the examples you chose, explaining its significance.
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	EVALUATING
Which do you think was a more effective strategy—violence or nonviolence—for eliminating slavery? Why? Think About:
•	Frederick Douglass
•	Nat Turner
•	William Lloyd Garrison
•	Sojourner Truth
MAKING INFERENCES
Consider the philosophical and religious ideas expressed during the Second Great Awakening. How did they influence the activities of 19th-century reformers? Think About:
•	concepts of individualism and Jacksonian democracy
•	the views of Emerson
•	the activities of Garrison,
Douglass, Stanton, and Truth
'! 'i
Review Unit 149
CITIZENSHIP SPOTLIGHT
Alexis de Tocqueville and America's Success
In 1831, Alexis de Tocqueville visited the United States in order to study the
nation's prison system for the French government. A Parisian aristocrat eager to
learn more about the United States, 25-year-old Tocqueville spent nine months
traveling throughout the country and recording his thoughts about American
society and politics. In 1835, he published his observations in the first volume of
Democracy in America; a second volume followed in 1840.
Through his writing, Tocqueville tried to identify the characteristics and
values that made the United States and its inhabitants unique or exceptional. He
wanted to explore why democracy succeeded in America. He wrote, "I confess that
in America I saw more than America; I sought the image of democracy itself, with
its inclinations, its character, its prejudices, and its passions, in order to learn what
we have to fear or to hope from its progress." Historians, political scientists, and
other observers have since used Tocqueville's writing to elaborate their own ideas
about the reasons for America's success as a constitutional republic.
LIBERTY
For Tocqueville, the key to democracy was balancing liberty with equality. Liberty, or the freedom of the individual to act and think as he or she chooses, had to be balanced against the needs of the nation. Tocqueville praised the Founders for their ability to find this balance when they drafted the U.S. Constitution, not allowing the concerns of the American Revolution to drive them too far toward liberty: “The chief cause of the superiority of the Federal Constitution lay in the character of the legislators who composed it. . . . They had all been nurtured at a time when the spirit of liberty was braced by a continual struggle against a powerful and predominant authority. . . . They had the courage to say what they believed to be true, because they were animated by a warm and sincere love of liberty; and they ventured to propose restrictions, because they were resolutely opposed to destruction.”
i ■! h
EGALITARIANISM
Egalitarianism, or equality, is the principle that all people possess a fundamental right to fair treatment under the law and equal opportunity in all aspects of life. Tocqueville deeply admired the widespread economic equality that he witnessed during his travels, viewing it as American democracy’s great promise. He wrote, “[N]othing struck me more forcibly than the general equality of conditions. ... it has no less empire over civil society than over the Government; it creates opinions, engenders sentiments, suggests the ordinary practices of life . . . [T]he equality of conditions is the fundamental fact from which all others seem to be derived. . . However, he also worried that equality could be a threat to liberty if the people gave too much power to the central government to achieve equality. For democracy to truly work, equality had to be kept in balance with liberty.
Chapter 3
INDIVIDUALISM
The characteristic of rugged individualism is one that many Americans point to with pride. In Tocqueville’s words, "As social conditions become more equal, the number of persons increases who, although they are neither rich enough nor powerful enough to exercise any great influence over their fellow-creatures, have nevertheless acquired or retained sufficient education and fortune to satisfy their own wants. They owe nothing to any man, they expect nothing from any man; they acquire the habit of always considering themselves as standing alone, and they are apt to imagine that their whole destiny is in their own hands." Tocqueville worried that too much individualism could detract from a vibrant and active civil society. However, he believed that Americans’ willingness to participate in local government and to form political associations could prevent this problem.
POPULISM
Populism is a political movement that champions the common person over the elite. Tocqueville never uses the word populism in Democracy in America because the concept did not exist then as it does now. However, he observed that unlike in Europe’s aristocracies, the equality of condition that he found in America made labor a noble pursuit: "Amongst a democratic people, where there is no hereditary wealth, every man works to earn a living, or has worked, or is born of parents who have worked. The notion of labor is therefore presented to the mind on every side as the necessary, natural, and honest condition of human existence. Not only is labor not dishonorable amongst such a people, but it is held in honor: the prejudice is not against it, but in its favor." In addition to this respect for labor, Tocqueville believed that the relatively equal distribution of property found in America compared to other nations helped to explain why the masses felt contempt for the elites.
LAISSEZ-FAIRE
The literal translation of the French term laissez-faire is "let to do." This is understood to mean being left alone, without interference. In explaining the continued success of the U.S. democratic republic, Tocqueville cited three main factors: the laws, the manners and customs of the people, and something that he referred to as the “peculiar and accidental situation in which Providence has placed the Americans.” By this, Tocqueville was referring to the fact that, unlike European nations, America had few neighbors to interfere with its affairs, which allowed democracy to continue relatively unchallenged. He declared, "A thousand circumstances, independent of the will of man, concur to facilitate the maintenance of a democratic republic in the United States. . . . The Americans have no neighbors, and consequently they have no great wars, or financial crises, or inroads, or conquest to dread; . . .”
The Growth of a Young Nation 151


REVIEW
CHAPTER
ASSESSMENT
TERMS & NAMES
For each term or name below, write a sentence explain* ing its connection to the nation’s growth during the early and mid-1800s.
1.	Jeffersonian republicanism
2.	Monroe Doctrine
3.	Missouri Compromise
4.	Jacksonian democracy
5.	Trail of Tears
6.	Stephen F. Austin
7.	market revolution
8.	Lowell textile mills
9.	Frederick Douglass 10. Elizabeth Cady
Stanton
MAIN IDEAS
Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
The Jeffersonian Era (pages 112-117)
1.	How did the Louisiana Purchase affect the United States?
2.	What did the Treaty of Ghent accomplish?
The Age of Jackson (pages 120-127)
3.	What changes occurred in the voting population and in voting patterns between the presidential elections of 1824 and 1828?
4.	Why did Jackson oppose the Bank of the United States?
Manifest Destiny (pages 130-138)
5.	Why was the concept of manifest destiny such an appealing one to Americans in the 1840s?
6.	Describe the battle of the Alamo and explain why it is an important symbol in U.S. history.
The Market Revolution (pages 139-143)
7.	How did the inventions and innovations of the mid-19th ' century help fuel the nation’s economy?
8.	Why did workers go on strike and begin to form trade unions in the 1830s?
Reforming American Society (pages 144-149)
9.	What new religious ideas set the stage for the reform movements of the mid-19th century?
10.	What was the purpose of the Seneca Falls convention?
CRITICAL THINKING
USING YOUR NOTES
What were America’s goals and ideals during this period of expansion and economic change? Draw a chart in which you list goals from the period, how they were achieved, and in what ways their effects were positive or negative. Goal	How Achieved	Positlve/Negatlve Effects
		
EVALUATING IMPACT
Review the historical impact of Marbury v. Madison on page 119. How can judicial interpretation as opposed to strict construction cause constitutional change? FORMING GENERALIZATIONS
Westward expansion helped shape the personal identity of Americans in the early 19th century. What values and traits characterized many Western settlers of this era? Think about Jim Beckwourth’s life (See the Historical Spotlight on page 131) and the rise of the common person during the Age of Jackson. VISUAL SUMMARY
The Growth of a Young Nation l
-
TERRITORIES AND EXPLORATION
•	National boundaries are extended in the North, West, and South.
•	Lewis and Clark expand knowledge of the Louisiana Territory.
•	The Oregon and Santa Fe trails extend exploration of and settlement in the Northwest and Southwest.
•	The California Gold Rush creates an influx of settlers in the West.
TECHNOLOGY AND COMMERCE
•	The telegraph expands the possibilities of communication.
•	Textile mills increase manufacturing in the North
•	The cotton gin allows for greater agricultural profits in the South.
•	Canals and railroads improve transportation throughout the country.
SOCIAL REFORMS
•	Voting rights are expanded in many states, although for males only.
•	National Trades’ Union calls for improved working conditions.
•	Women's institutions of higher education are founded.
•	Abolitionists call for the end of slavery.
Use the image below and your knowledge of U.S history to answer question 1.
,x,,.a,
TEXAS TEST PRACTICE

This print by Robert Cruikshank, entitled The President's Levee [reception], or All Creation Going to the White House, was issued in 1829. It is satirizing —
A the Louisiana Purchase.
B the California gold rush.
C
Jacksonian democracy. D the Indian Removal Act.
2.	The Supreme Court decision Marbury v. Madison is important for affirming which of the following principles?
F impressment G the “American System"
H popular sovereignty J judicial review
3.	The main effect of the Missouri Compromise was to —
A admit Missouri as a state.
B resolve disputes over slavery in the territories. C change the balance of free and slave states.
D incline Southerners toward secession.
4.	Between 1830 and 1850, the geographic area of the United States increased by about one third. Most of this land was acquired by —
F
G
war.
purchase.
H exchange.
J inciting rebellion.

71 hmhsocialstudies.com
TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests • Tutorials
INTERACT WITH HISTORY
mvWriteSmart Think about the issues you recorded in myNotebook as you read the chapter. Now that you know more about nullification and the fight over tariffs and states’ rights, form small groups and discuss the following question: Would you have supported the federal or state government? Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write a paragraph summarizing your group’s discussion.
COLLABORATIVE LEARN
XCjBMTOKY
In a small group read and discuss the
feature on pages 150-151. What five values did Alexis de Tocqueville identify as crucial to America’s success as a constitutional republic? Have each group member select a different value and design a web page explaining the value and why it is significant. Then, as a group, create an introductory page that describes how the American values identified are different from those of other nations.
Imagine you are a member of Congress, and you believe that the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo is flawed. Write a different version of the treaty for Congress to adopt. For each main point in your treaty, compare it to the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo and explain why your version is better. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your treaty and explanation.
Review Unit 153
End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Finding Main Ideas
DEFINING THE SKILL
Finding main ideas means identifying words that sum up the single most important thought in an entire paragraph or section. By finding the main idea of a passage, article, or speech, you will increase your understanding as you read about historical events, people, and places. Main ideas are supported by details and examples.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: IDENTIFY THE TOPIC AND SUPPORTING DETAILS
To find the main idea of a passage, identify the topic. Then, as you read, ask, What central idea do the many details explain or support? This passage is about the beginning of the women's rights movement at the Seneca Falls Convention. The diagram that follows identifies and organizes information in the passage. Women's Rights and the Seneca Falls Convention, 1848 ©
Q
Many people believe that the Seneca Falls Convention in 1848 was the beginning of the women's rights movement. The convention resulted from the work of Elizabeth Cady Stanton and ; Lucretia Mott.Their work for equity began as abolitionists. In 1840, they were not recognized as delegates at the World Anti-Slavery convention because of their gender. They were reminded of the injustices between men and women and resolved to fight for equal rights for women. ©Stanton and Mott wanted the public to become more aware of the injustices faced by women. ©In 1848, they decided to hold a convention to discuss the need for "social, civil, and religious ‘ condition and rights of women.'They wrote a detailed statement of grievance modeled on the Declaration of Independence. ©Their "Declaration of Sentiments" listed rights and privileges they believed women should have. Stanton even slipped in a measure about women's right to vote. On July 19 and 20th, more than 300 women and men gathered at Seneca Falls, New York. © Over 100 signed the declaration.
O
Identify the topic by looking at the title or subtitle, or by looking for key words. Look at the title of this passage. It helps you identify the topic of the passage as women’s rights. The passage discusses rights of women, equal rights, and women’s right to vote. © Look for a topic sentence. Ask whether any one sentence sums up the point of the whole passage. In this passage, the first sentence discusses the Seneca Falls Convention as the beginning of the women’s rights movement.
© Look for details or examples. The many examples support the idea that representatives at the Seneca Falls convention discussed the important ideas that marked the beginning of the women’s rights movement.
SKI
STRATEGY: MAKE A DIAGRAM
State the topic and list the supporting details in a chart. Use the information you record to help you state the main idea. APPLYING THE SKILL
Turn to Chapter 3, Section 5, p. 146 and read the passage headed "Life Under Slavery." Make a diagram, like the one above, to identify the topic, the most important details, and the main idea of the passage. Use what you have learned about identifying the main idea and details in a passage.
1.	Identify the topic of the passage.
What is this passage about?
2.	Identify the topic sentence.
Which sentence sums up the point of this section.
3.
Look for details that support the topic.
What details support the main idea? What do these life under slavery?
details tell you about
153 SK2
m»i ■ ILLL
HISTORY


/
and






5W3
In 1804 Meriwether Lewis, William Clark, and the 33-man Corps of Discovery began a 8,000-mile journey across uncharted territory. Under orders from President Thomas Jefferson, the expedition mapped a route across the Louisiana Purchase to the Pacific Ocean. From St. Louis, Missouri, they traveled west up the Missouri River, then across the Rocky Mountains, and to the Pacific. They met Native American peoples and cataloged geography,
plants, and animals. Not only was their mission one of history's greatest explorations, it also secured an American claim to the Pacific Coast and helped inspire millions to migrate west.
Explore entries from Lewis's journal and other primary sources online. You can find a wealth of information, video clips, activities, and more at
71 hmhsocialstudies.com






J

...the Indian wornon recogntzrd thepoint oj-a, high 'jdatn to our right which vhe infer need us was not very cUhtartfeein the summer retreat ofeher nation ok a. river beyond the ncountatns which rune to the west.
INTER ACTIVITIES
Underway on the Missouri
Watch the video to see how the Corps of Discovery sailed up the Missouri River to begin their expedition.
I860
USA
WORLD
		H f485l] The Great H * Exhibition opens H : in London.		
			: 148541 Charles Dickens’s •’ Hard Times is published.	: ‘1861 Russian serfs : emancipated by
' I				* Czar Alexander II.
