10 Chapter 6
i
i
Vocabulary
entrepreneur:
a person who organizes, operates, and assumes the risk for a business venture
BLACK GOLD
Oil became a key commodity in the late 1800s, valued as a fuel source and an industrial lubricant. Though Native Americans had made fuel and medicine from crude oil, early settlers had little use for it. Then, in the 1840s, Americans began using kerosene to light lamps after the Canadian geologist Abraham Gesner discovered how to distill the fuel from oil or coal. It wasn't until 1859, however, when Edwin L. Drake successfully used a steam engine to drill for oil near Titusville, Pennsylvania, that removing oil from beneath the earth's surface became practical. This breakthrough started an oil boom that spread to Kentucky, Ohio, Illinois, Indiana, and, eventually, Texas. Petroleum-refining industries arose in Cleveland and Pittsburgh as entrepreneurs rushed to transform the oil into kerosene. Gasoline, a byproduct of the refining process, originally was thrown away. But after the automobile became popular, gasoline became the most important form of oil.
BESSEMER STEEL PROCESS
Oil was not the only natural resource that was plentiful in the United States. There were also abundant deposits of coal and iron. In 1887, prospectors discovered iron ore deposits more than 100 miles long and up to 3 miles wide in the Mesabi Range of Minnesota. At the same time, coal production skyrocketed—from 33 million tons in 1870 to more than 250 million tons in 1900. Iron is a dense metal, but it is soft and tends to break and rust. It also usually contains other elements, such as carbon. Removing the carbon from iron produces a lighter, more flexible, and rust-resistant metal—steel. The raw materials needed to make steel were readily available; all that was needed was a cheap and efficient manufacturing process. The Bessemer process, developed independently by the British manufacturer Henry Bessemer and American ironmaker William Kelly around 1850, soon became widely used. This technique involved injecting air into molten iron to remove the carbon and other impurities. By 1880, American manufacturers were using the new method to produce more than 90 percent of the nation's steel. In this age of rapid change and innovation, even
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Region Which state had the most steel-producing areas?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction What connection can you draw between natural resources (including water) and steel production in Pittsburgh?
Natural Resources and the Birth of a Steel Town, 1886-1906
o Steel mills, 1886 • Steel mills, 1906
The Technological Explosion, 1826-1903
1826 1831
1846 •Sewing Machine
I860	1867
Dynamite •
1873	1877
1876 1879
1895
1903
1837
• Telegraph
* Reaper * Photography
Internal-iTypewriter’ Combustion
Engine
• Light Bulb • Phonograph
• Telephone Electric Motor
•	Radio • Airplane
•	Motion Pictures
•	X-Ray
the successful Bessemer process was bettered by the 1860s. It was eventually replaced by the open-hearth process, enabling manufacturers to produce quality steel from scrap metal as well as from raw materials.
NEW USES FOR STEEL
The railroads, with thousands of miles of track, became the biggest customers for steel, but inventors soon found additional uses for it. Joseph r.HHHpn'c harhpti wire and McCormick's and Deere's farm MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
What natural resources were most important for industrialization?
HISTORICAL
SPOTLIGHT-
ILLUMINATING THE LIGHT BULB
Shortly after moving into a long wooden shed at Menlo Park, Thomas Alva Edison and his associates set to work to develop the perfect incandescent bulb.
Arc lamps already lit some city streets and shops, using an electric current passing between two sticks of carbon, but they were glaring and inefficient.
Edison hoped to create a long-lasting lamp with a soft glow, and began searching for a filament that would burn slowly and stay lit. Edison tried wires, sticks, blades of grass, and even hairs from his assistants’ beards. Finally, a piece of carbonized bamboo from Japan did the trick. Edison's company used bamboo filaments until 1911, when it began using tungsten filaments, which are still used today.
machines helped transform the plains into the food pro-ducer of the nation.
Steel changed the face of the nation as well, as it made innovative construction possible. One of the most remarkable structures was the Brooklyn Bridge. Completed in 1883, it spanned 1,595 feet of the East River in New York City. Its steel cables were supported by towers higher than any man-made and weight-bearing structure except the pyramids of Egypt. Like those ancient marvels, the completed bridge was called a wonder of the world.
Around this time, setting the stage for a new era of expansion upward as well as outward, William Le Baron Jenney designed the first skyscraper with a steel frame—the Home Insurance Building in Chicago. Before Jenney had his pioneering idea, the weight of large buildings was supported entirely by their walls or by iron frames, which limited the buildings' height. With a steel frame to support the weight, however, architects could build as high as they wanted. As structures soared into the air, not even the sky seemed to limit what Americans could achieve.
Inventions Promote Change
By capitalizing on natural resources and their own ingenuity, inventors changed more than the landscape. Their inventions affected the very way people lived and worked.
THE POWER OF ELECTRICITY
In 1876, Thomas Alva Edison became a pioneer on the new industrial frontier when he established the world's first research laboratory in Menlo Park, New Jersey. There Edison perfected the incandescent light bulb—patented in 1880—and later invented an entire system for producing and distributing electrical power. Another inventor, George Westinghouse, along with Edison, added innovations that made electricity safer and less expensive. The harnessing of electricity completely changed the nature of business in America. By 1890, electric power ran numerous machines, from fans to printing presses. This inexpensive, convenient source of energy soon became available in homes and spurred the invention of time-saving appliances. Electric streetcars made urban travel cheap and efficient and also promoted the outward spread of cities
More important, electricity allowed manufacturers to locate their plants
Vocabulary
Incandescent:
giving off visible light as a result of being heated
Chapter 6
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
$ How did electricity change American life?
wherever they wanted—not just near sources of power, such as rivers. This enabled industry to grow as never before. Huge operations, such as the Armour and Swift meatpacking plants, and the efficient processes that they used became the models for new consumer industries. JEy
INVENTIONS CHANGE LIFESTYLES
Edison's light bulb was only one of several revolutionary inventions. Christopher Sholes invented the typewriter in 1867 and changed the world of work. Next to the light bulb, however, perhaps the most dramatic invention was the telephone, unveiled by Alexander Graham Bell and Thomas Watson in 1876. It opened the way for a worldwide communications network. The typewriter and the telephone particularly affected office work and created new jobs for women. Although women made up less than 5 percent of all office workers in 1870, by 1910 they accounted for nearly 40 percent of the clerical work force. New inventions also had a tremendous impact on factory work, as well as on jobs that traditionally had been done at home. For example, women had previously sewn clothing by hand for their families. With industrialization, clothing could be mass-produced in factories, creating a need for garment workers, many of whom were women.
Industrialization freed some factory workers from backbreaking labor and helped
improve workers' standard of living. By 1890, the average workweek had been reduced by about ten hours. However, many laborers felt that the mechanization of so many tasks reduced human workers' worth. As consumers, though, workers regained some of their lost power in the marketplace. The country's expanding urban population provided a vast potential market for the new inventions and products of the late 1800s.
▲
The typewriter shown here dates from around 1890.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•	Edwin L. Drake	• Thomas Alva Edison	• Alexander Graham Bell
•	Bessemer process	• Christopher Sholes
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one below, list resources, ideas, and markets that affected the industrial boom of the 19th century. In the second column, note how each item contributed to industrialization.
Resources, Ideas, Markets	Impact
	
CRITICAL THINKING
MAKING INFERENCES
Do you think that consumers gained power as industry expanded in the late 19th century? Why or why not?
4.	HYPOTHESIZING
If the U.S. had been poor in natural resources, how would industrialization have been affected?
ANALYZING EFFECTS
How did scientific discoveries and technological innovations affect the economic development of the United States? Think About:
•	the discoveries and inventions of the period
•	the impact of inventions on people’s daily lives
•	the effect of inventions on the workplace
A
New Industrial Age 233 CITIZENSHIP SPOTLIGHT
Qualities of Effective Leadership
Leadership matters. In many instances, a team or organization is only as good as its leader. By influencing people to work toward common goals, effective leaders are able to accomplish important tasks and effect change in the world. There is no list of characteristics that a good leader must possess. In fact, good leadership can depend on the situation; different leaders might behave in different ways depending on their position, their goals, their personalities and those of their followers. However, there are some qualities that can help an individual be an effective leader.
A DESIRE TO LEAD
Perhaps the most important quality is the desire to lead. In order to lead effectively, an individual must be committed to his or her cause and feel confident enough to advance that cause. Billy Graham (shown at left) is a good example of an individual with a desire to lead. He believes his purpose in life is to help people find a personal relationship with God. Since beginning his ministry in 1950, Graham has worked tirelessly to accomplish that mission and share his faith with others. He has written 31 books and conducted events in 185 countries. He has even served as a spiritual adviser to presidents, including Dwight D. Eisenhower and Richard Nixon. Part of what enabled Graham to reach so many people with his message was that he was committed to his cause.
JUDGMENT AND DECISIVENESS
Another important characteristic is the ability to act decisively and with good judgment. In the face of complex issues with many factors, a strong leader needs to determine an appropriate course of action to pursue. By demonstrating these leadership qualities, Sonia Sotomayor earned a place as a U.S. Supreme Court justice. She is the only current member of the Court with experience as a trial judge. In that position, she was required to hand down decisions on a variety of complex legal and constitutional issues, and she earned a reputation as an able judge as a result of her thoughtful opinions. She continues to employ her skills of judgment and decisiveness from the Supreme Court bench.
11 11 ill
! I i
i
I1
: f i
'll
i 1

4 Chapter 6

u
STRONG SOCIAL SKILLS
An effective leader must be able to work well with others. A leader must be able to listen to the opinions of others and to use tact and diplomacy when interacting with team members to ensure achievement of common goals. Good leaders are able to use their strong social skills to communicate about their mission and to inspire others to follow them. One of the best examples of a leader who used language to inspire a movement is Martin Luther King, Jr. A Baptist minister from Atlanta, King delivered his most famous speech, known as the “I Have a Dream” speech, at the March on Washington on August 28, 1963, in front of a crowd of more than 200,000 people. In his speech, King drew from patriotic and religious texts of the past to review African Americans’ long struggle for freedom. His rhetoric drew in his listeners and reached beyond them to communicate a moral basis for the civil rights movement to a vast national audience. The speech inspired African Americans to continue to work for change within their communities. Through this speech and his other writings, King became a powerful voice of the African American civil rights movement. His leadership helped the movement make significant progress toward achieving its goal of equality.
PERSEVERANCE
Even the best leaders will face challenges. When challenges arise, the most important thing is how a leader deals with them. Perseverance involves persistence in the face of obstacles. It requires tenacity and commitment to a belief or purpose. Great leaders do not give up in the face of difficulty; instead, they find a way to keep going. Andrew Carnegie’s path to financial success required perseverance. Born in Scotland to parents who hit tough economic times, Carnegie immigrated to the United States with his family at the age of 12. He began working in a factory, but through talent and persistence he advanced quickly to other, more rewarding jobs. Carnegie began invest-
ing his earnings in the iron, oil, railroad, and telegraph industries. He was soon able to use the money from his investments to found his own company, the Carnegie Steel Company. He used the business experience that he had gained to build his company up until it dominated the steel industry in the United States. Carnegie’s success can be attributed in part to his perseverance, as he worked hard to overcome the challenges of his humble beginnings.
1.	Making Generalizations What are some qualities of effective leadership? What other qualities do you think might also be helpful for leaders to possess? Explain.
2.	Researching a Leader Choose one of the leaders discussed in this textbook. Do research to identify the qualities that made this leader effective. Did he or she excel in some areas but not in others? Write an essay explaining what your selected leader accomplished and which qualities helped him or her do so.
/T hmhsocialstudies.com
RESEARCH WEB LINKS
A
New Industrial Age 23S TEKS3B, 1SB
The Age of the Railroads
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
The growth and consolidation Railroads made possible the of railroads benefited the	expansion of industry across
nation but also led to	the United States,
corruption and required
government regulation.
transcontinental railroad George M. Pullman
•Credit Mobllier • Munn v. Illinois •Interstate Commerce Act
hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the effects of the rapid growth of the railroads.
^^^^One American's
In October 1884, the economist Richard Ely visited the town of Pullman, Illinois, to write about it for Harper's magazine. At first, Ely was impressed with the atmosphere of order, planning, and well-being in the town George M. Pullman had designed for the employees of his railroad-car factory. But after talking at length with a dissatisfied company officer, Ely concluded the town had a fatal flaw: it too greatly restricted its residents. Pullman employees were compelled to obey rules in which they had no say. Ely concluded that "the idea of Pullman is un-American."
A
Personal Voice richard t. ely “It Is benevolent, well-wishing feudalism [a medieval social system], which desires the happiness of the people, but in such way as shall please the authorities. ... If free American institutions are to be preserved, we want no race of men reared as underlings.”
A
Social Study" The town of Pullman was carefully laid out and strictly controlled.
136 Chapter 6
As the railroads grew, they came to influence many facets of American life, including, as in the town of Pullman, the personal lives of the country's citizens. They caused the standard time and time zones to be set and influenced the growth of towns and communities. However, the unchecked power of railroad companies led to widespread abuses that spurred citizens to demand federal regulation of the industry.
Railroads Span Time and Space
Rails made local transit reliable and westward expansion possible for business as well as for people. Realizing how important railroads were for settling the West and developing the country, the government made huge land grants and loans to the railroad companies.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
A^
What were the effects of railroad expansion? A NATIONAL NETWORK
By 1856, the railroads extended west to the Mississippi River, and three years later, they crossed the Missouri. Just over a decade later, crowds across the United States cheered as the Central Pacific and Union Pacific Railroads met at Promontory, Utah, on May 10, 1869. A golden spike marked the spanning of the nation by the first transcontinental railroad. Other transcontinental lines followed, and regional lines multiplied as well. At the start of the Civil War, the nation had had about 30,000 miles of track. By 1890, that figure was nearly six times greater. ROMANCE AND REALITY
The railroads brought the dreams of available land, adventure, and a fresh start within the grasp of many Americans. This romance was made possible, however, only by the harsh lives of railroad workers. The Central Pacific Railroad employed thousands of Chinese immigrants. The Union Pacific hired Irish immigrants and desperate, out-of-work Civil War veterans to lay track across treacherous terrain while enduring attacks by Native Americans. Accidents and diseases disabled and killed thousands of men each year. In 1888, when the first railroad statistics were published, the casualties totaled more than 2,000 employees killed and 20,000 injured.
RAILROAD TIME
In spite of these difficult working conditions, the railroad laborers helped to transform the diverse regions of the country into a united nation. Though linked in space, each community still operated on its own time, with noon when the sun was directly overhead. Noon in Boston, for example, was almost 12 minutes later than noon in New York. Travelers riding from Maine to California might reset their watches 20 times.
In 1869, to remedy this problem, Professor C. F. Dowd proposed that the earth's surface be divided into 24 time zones, one for each hour of the day. Under his plan, the United States would contain four zones: the Eastern, Central, Mountain, and Pacific time zones. The railroad companies endorsed Dowd's plan enthusiastically, and many towns followed suit.
Finally, on November 18, 1883, railroad crews and towns across the country synchronized their watches. In 1884, an international conference set worldwide time zones that incorporated railroad time. The U.S. Congress, however, didn't officially adopt railroad time as the standard for the nation until 1918. As strong a unifying force as the railroads were, however, they also opened the way for abuses that led to social and economic unrest. &
SPOTLIGHT
HISTORICAL
CHINESE IMMIGRANTS AND THE RAILROADS
Although the railroads paid all their employees poorly, Asians usually earned less than whites. The average pay for whites working a ten-hour day was $40 to $60 a month plus free meals. Chinese immigrants hired by the Central Pacific performed similar tasks from dawn to dusk for about $35 a month—and they had to supply their own food.
The immigrants’ working conditions were miserable. In 1866, for example, the railroad hired them to dig a tunnel through a granite mountain. For five months of that year, the Chinese lived and worked in camps surrounded by banks of snow. The total snowfall reached over 40 feet. Hundreds of the men were buried in avalanches or later found frozen, still clutching their shovels or picks.
Opportunities and Opportunists
The growth of the railroads influenced the industries and businesses in which Americans worked. Iron, coal, steel, lumber, and glass industries grew rapidly as they tried to keep pace with the railroads' demand for materials and parts. The rapid spread of railroad lines also fostered the growth of towns, helped establish new markets and offered rich opportunities for both visionaries and profiteers.
A
New Industrial Age 237 ON THE WRONG TRACK
While the railroads captured the imagination of most 19th-century Americans, there were those who didn’t get on the bandwagon. The writer Herman Melville raged against the smoke-belching iron horse and the waves of change it set in motion as vehemently as his character Captain Ahab raged against the white whale and the sea in Moby-Dick. "Hark! here comes that old dragon again— that gigantic gadfly . . . snort! puff! scream! Great improvements of the age,” Melville fumed. "Who wants to travel so fast? My grandfather did not, and he was no fool.”
NEW TOWNS AND MARKETS
By linking previously isolated cities, towns, and settlements, the railroads promoted trade and interdependence. As part of a nationwide network of suppliers and markets, individual towns began to specialize in particular products. Chicago soon became known for its stockyards and Minneapolis for its grain industries. These cities prospered by selling large quantities of their products to the entire country. New towns and communities also grew up along the railroad lines. Cities as diverse as Abilene, Kansas; Flagstaff, Arizona; Denver, Colorado; and Seattle, Washington, owed their prosperity, if not their very existence, to the railroads. PULLMAN
The railroads helped cities not only grow up but branch out. In 1880, for example, George M. Pullman built a factory for manufacturing sleepers and other railroad cars on the Illinois prairie. The nearby town that Pullman built for his employees followed in part the models of earlier industrial experiments in Europe. Whereas New England textile manufacturers had traditionally provided housing for their workers, the town of Pullman provided for almost all of workers' basic needs. Pullman residents lived in clean, well-constructed brick houses and apartment buildings with at least one window in every room—a luxury for city dwellers. In addition, the town offered services and facilities such as doctors' offices, shops, and an athletic field. As Richard Ely observed, however, the town of Pullman remained firmly under company control. Residents were not allowed to loiter on their front steps or to drink alcohol. Pullman hoped that his tightly controlled environment would ensure a stable work force. However, Pullman's refusal to lower rents after cutting his employees' pay led to a violent strike in 1894.
CREDIT MOBILIER
Pullman created his company town out of the desire for control and profit. In some other railroad magnates, or powerful and influential industrialists, these desires turned into self-serving corruption. In one of the most infamous schemes, stockholders in the Union Pacific Railroad formed, in 1864, a construction company called Credit Mobilier (kred'Tt mo-beUyer). The stockholders gave this company a contract to lay track at two to three times the actual cost—and pocketed the profits. They donated shares of stock to about 20 representatives in Congress in 1867. A congressional investigation of the company, spurred by reports in the New York Sun, eventually found that the officers of the Union Pacific had taken up to $23 million in stocks, bonds, and cash. Testimony implicated such well-known and respected federal officials as Vice-President Schuyler Colfax and Congressman James Garfield, who later became president. Although these public figures kept their profits and received little more than a slap on the wrist, the reputation of the Republican Party was tarnished.
The Grange and the Railroads
Farmers were especially disturbed by what they viewed as railroad corruption. The Grangers-members of the Grange a farmers' organization founded in 1867—began demanding governmental control over the railroad industry.
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
How did the railroads affect cities?
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
How did railroad owners use Credit Mobilier to make huge, undeserved profits?
Chapter 6
©
Portia
■SO'
TA ■ ,
Los Art
|	1	Eastern time
1	|	Central time
|	|	Mountain time
[	|	Pacific time
----- Railroads by 1870
----- Railroads by 1890
0	150 300	miles
0 150 300 kilometers
Tucson.
[Denver
/Albuquerque
YE I
Paso Major Railroad Lines, 1870-1890
©>
L.
OntarioA tBdston
~L)maha\
Topek
Kansa
City
St. Louis.
TYork ' Philadelphia Kimore nington, DC
iRiqlynond ^Norfolk
Fort Worth 1
ew Orleans
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Human-Environment Interaction What factor led to rapid growth in Chicago, Minneapolis, and Denver?
2.	Movement Why was rail construction concentrated in the East before 1870 and in the West after 1870?
Wilmington
ATLANTIC OCEAN
/Savannah	30°N
§ >
so°w


©
0

$ y '	/ V " ^°**MERN PM»Bc
,--^3*^altLakeCir
N
L	•


©




Background
Price fixing occurs when companies within an industry all agree to charge the same price for a given service, rather than competing to offer the lowest price.
j MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Issues
JgJ How did the Grangers, who were largely poor farmers, do battle with the giant railroad companies?
RAILROAD ABUSES
Farmers were angry with railroad companies. They were upset by misuse of government land grants, which the railroads sold to other businesses rather than to settlers. The railroads also entered into formal agreements to fix prices, which helped keep farmers in their debt. In addition, they charged different customers different rates, often demanding more for short than for long hauls. GRANGER LAWS
In response to these abuses by the railroads, the Grangers took political action. They sponsored state and local political candidates, elected legislators, and successfully pressed for laws to protect their interests. In 1871 Illinois authorized a commission "to establish maximum freight and passenger rates and prohibit discrimination." Grangers throughout the West, Midwest, and Southeast convinced state legislators to pass similar laws, called Granger laws. The railroads fought back, challenging the constitutionality of the regulatory laws. In 1877, however, in the case of Munn v. Illinois, the Supreme Court upheld the Granger laws by a vote of seven to two. The states thus won the right to regulate the railroads for the benefit of farmers and consumers. The Grangers also helped establish an important principle—the federal government's right to regulate private industry to serve the public interest. D;
INTERSTATE COMMERCE ACT
The Grangers' triumph was short-lived, however. In 1886, the Supreme Court ruled that a state could not regulate railroad traffic moving across state boundaries. In response to public outrage, Congress passed the Interstate Commerce Act in 1887. Its objective was to make railroad rates fair for all customers by requiring rates to be "fair and reasonable." To oversee the railroads, the act established a five-member Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC). Unfortunately, Congress did not give the ICC the power to enforce the provisions of the law. Due to poorly defined language in the act and resistance from the railroads, the ICC had difficulty regulating rates. Several court cases challenged the act, costing government resources as most went in favor of the railroads. A
New Industrial Age 239 Vocabulary consolidation: the
act of uniting or combining
Analyzing
Political Cartoonsj-
MODERN COLOSSUS OF (RAIL) ROADS”
Joseph Keppler drew this cartoon in 1879, featuring the railroad “giants” William Vanderbilt (top), Jay Gould (bottom right), and Cyrus W. Fields (bottom left). The three magnates formed a railroad trust out of their Union Pacific, New York Central, and Lake Shore & Dependence lines.
SKILLBUILDER
Analyzing Political Cartoons 1.	The title of this cartoon is a pun on the Colossus of Rhodes, a statue erected in 282 b.c. on an island near Greece. According to legend, the 100-foot-tall statue straddled Rhodes’s harbor entrance. Do you think the artist means the comparison as a compliment or a criticism? Why?
2.	The reins held by the railroad magnates attach not only to the trains but also to the tracks and the railroad station. What does this convey about the magnates' control of the railroads?
The law had the most success in preventing the railroads from arranging special rates among themselves, which offered consumers some protection. Not until 1906, under President Theodore Roosevelt, did the ICC gain the power it needed to be effective. Still, the law was a historic milestone, marking the first time that the federal government had regulated an industry, and it served as a model for later attempts.
PANIC AND CONSOLIDATION
Corporate abuses, mismanagement, overbuilding, and competition pushed many railroads to the brink of bankruptcy. Their financial problems played a major role in a nationwide economic collapse. The panic of 1893 was the worst depression up to that time: by the end of 1893, around 600 banks and 15,000 businesses had failed, and by 1895, 4 million people had lost their jobs. Large investment firms such as J. P. Morgan & Company reorganized the railroads. As the 20th century dawned, seven powerful companies held sway over two-thirds of the nation's railroad tracks. j ASSESSMENT
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one below, fill in effects of the rapid growth of railroads.
How did the growth of railroads affect people’s everyday lives? How did it affect farmers?
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•	transcontinental railroad • Credit Mobilier	• Interstate Commerce Act
•	George M. Pullman	• Munn v. Illinois
CRITICAL THINKING
MAKING INFERENCES
How did the Interstate Commerce Act mark a changing relationship between the federal government and private business? What were the costs and benefits of the act? Give examples to support your opinion. Think About:
•	the rights of railroad customers and workers
•	the scope of government regulations
4.	SYNTHESIZING
The federal government gave land and made loans to the railroad companies. Why was the government so eager to promote the growth of railroads?
ANALYZING MOTIVES
Reread "Another Perspective” on railroads (page 238). Why do you think that some Americans disliked this new means of transportation?
!40 Chapter 6
Big Business and Labor
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
The expansion of industry resulted in the growth of big business and prompted laborers to form unions to better their lives.
Many of the strategies used today in industry and in the labor movement, such as consolidation and the strike, have their origins in the late 19th century.
•Andrew Carnegie • laissez-faire •Social Darwinism •vertical and horizontal integration •John D.
Rockefeller •Sherman Antitrust Act
f hmhsocialstudies.com!
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the achievements and setbacks of the labor movement between 1876 and 1911.
OneAmerican’s Story
Born in Scotland to penniless parents, Andrew Carnegie came to this country in 1848, at age 12. Six years later, he worked his way up to become private secretary to the local superintendent of the Pennsylvania Railroad. One morning, Carnegie single-handedly relayed messages that unsnarled a tangle of freight and passenger trains. His boss, Thomas A. Scott, rewarded Carnegie by giving him a chance to buy stock. Carnegie's mother mortgaged the family home to make the purchase possible. Soon Carnegie received his first dividend.
A
Personal Voice Andrew carnegie “ One morning a white envelope was lying upon my desk, addressed In a big John Hancock hand, to ‘Andrew Carnegie, Esquire.’ ... All It contained was a check for ten dollars upon the Gold Exchange Bank of New York. I shall remember that check as long as I live.... It gave me the first penny of revenue from capital—something that I had not worked for with the sweat of my brow. ‘Eureka!’ I cried. ‘Here’s the goose that lays the golden eggs.’ ”
—Autobiography of Andrew Carnegie
Andrew Carnegie was one of the first industrial moguls to make his own fortune. His rise from rags to riches, along with his passion for supporting charities, made him a model of the American success story.
Nineteenth-century industrialist Andrew Carnegie gave money to build public libraries, hoping to help others write their own rags-to-riches stories.
•Samuel Gompers •American Federation of Labor (AFL)
•	Eugene V. Debs •Industrial Workers
of the World (IWW)
•	Mary Harris Jones
A
Favorable Climate^ ............... Manypeople in the late 1800s believed that a strong work ethic made one successful The business world welcomed entrepreneurs—risk takers who use their money and talents to launch new ventures. During this time period, social philosophers argued that this new definition of success could be explained scientifically.
A
New Industrial Age 241 BELIEF IN FREE MARKETS
American entrepreneurs were working within free enterprise capitalism. Free enterprise is an economic system in which private businesses run most industries. Competition determines prices and wages. By the late 1800s most business leaders believed in laissez-faire (le-say-FER) capitalism. The term laissez-faire is French for "to let do." Laissez-faire capitalism allows companies to conduct business without intervention by the government. Business leaders believed that government regulation would destroy individual self-reliance, reduce profits, and harm the economy.
SOCIAL DARWINISM
Americans understood that there were inequalities in the free enterprise system. But many thinkers believed that inequalities were part of the social order. To explain why some people prospered and others did not, economists, social philosophers, and business leaders embraced the philosophy of Social Darwinism. This philosophy adapted the ideas of the British naturalist Charles Darwin and applied them to human society. Darwin had studied plants and animals and concluded that members of a species compete for survival. Those best adapted to their environment thrive and pass their traits to the next generation. Less-suited members gradually die out. Darwin called this process natural selection.
The English philosopher Herbert Spencer used Darwin's biological theories to explain the evolution of human society. Economists found in Social Darwinism a way to justify the doctrine of laissez-faire. Stronger people, businesses, and nations would prosper. Weaker ones would fail. According to Social Darwinists, the market should not be regulated because no one had the right to interfere with this process.
MONOPOLIES AND TRUSTS
Although some business owners endorsed the "natural law" in theory, in practice most entrepreneurs did everything they could to control the competition that threatened the growth of their business empires. To gain dominance, some companies pursued mergers. A merger usually occurred when one corporation bought out the stock of another. A firm that bought out all its competitors could achieve a monopoly, or complete control over its industry's production, wages, and prices. Some corporations took a different approach to mergers: they joined with competing companies in trust agreements. Participants in a trust turned their stock over to a group of trustees—people who ran the separate companies as one large corporation. In return, the companies were entitled to dividends on profits earned by the trust. Trusts were not legal mergers, but that did not prevent them from forming. $
Fewer Control More
As businesses grew ever larger in the late 1800s, many corporate leaders amassed staggering fortunes. Some viewed these individuals as "robber barons" who profited unfairly while others saw them as "captains of industry."
CARNEGIE AND STEEL
By 1865, Carnegie was so busy managing the money he had earned in dividends that he happily left his job at the Pennsylvania Railroad. He entered the steel business in 1873 after touring a British steel mill and witnessing the awesome spectacle of the Bessemer process in action. By 1899, the Carnegie Steel MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
What
strategies enabled big businesses to eliminate competition?
Chapter 6
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
What were Andrew Carnegie’s management and business strategies?
Company manufactured more steel than all the factories in Great Britain.
Carnegie's success was due in part to management practices that he initiated and that soon became widespread. First, he continually searched for ways to make better products more cheaply. He incorporated new machinery and techniques, such as accounting systems that enabled him to track precise costs. Second, he attracted talented people by offering them stock in the company, and he encouraged competition among his assistants.
In addition to improving his own manufacturing operation,
Carnegie attempted to control as much of the steel industry as he could. He did this mainly by vertical integration, a process in which he bought out his suppliers— coal fields and iron mines, ore freighters, and railroad lines—in order to control the raw materials and transportation systems. Carnegie also attempted to buy out competing steel producers. In this process, known as horizontal integration, companies producing similar products merge. Having gained control over his suppliers and having limited his competition, Carnegie controlled almost the entire steel industry. By the time he sold his business in 1901, Carnegie's companies produced by far the largest portion of the nation's steel, m
Vertical and Horizontal Integration
RESOURCES
Raw materials, fields, forests, and farms
MANUFACTURING
Production and processing
DISTRIBUTION
Shipping and transportation, delivery to customers
HORIZONTAL
HISTORY
VIDEO
Great Minds in Business:
Andrew Carnegie
MAIN IDEA
Evaluating
5/ Do you agree with Carnegie’s defense of millionaires? Why or why not?
ROCKEFELLER AND OIL
John D. Rockefeller entered the oil business in 1863 and proved himself to be a superb business leader. His company, Standard Oil, began as a refinery. Using vertical integration, Rockefeller acquired companies that supplied his business. He bought barrel factories, oil fields, oil-storage facilities, pipelines, and railroad cars. He also practiced horizontal integration by taking over competing companies. In 1870 Rockefeller’s company processed two or three percent of the country's crude oil. Within a decade, it controlled 90 percent of the refining business. Rockefeller reaped huge profits by paying his employees extremely low wages and driving his competitors out of business by selling his oil at a lower price than it cost to produce it. Then, when he controlled the market, he hiked prices far above original levels.
A MIXED LEGACY
Alarmed at the tactics of industrialists, some Americans came to view them as robber barons. Critics argued that these tycoons profited unfairly by squeezing out competitors and using other tough tactics. However, admirers credited these entrpreneurs with using their business skills to make the American economy more productive and, in turn, stronger. Industrialists were also philanthropists. Although Rockefeller kept most of his assets, he still gave away over $500 million, establishing the Rockefeller Foundation' providing funds to found the University of Chicago, and creating a medical institute that helped find a cure for yellow fever. Andrew Carnegie donated about 90 percent of the wealth he accumulated during his lifetime; his fortune still supports the arts and learning today. "It will be a great mistake for the community to shoot the millionaires," he said, "for they are the bees that make the most honey, and contribute most to the hive even after they have gorged themselves full."£>
A
New Industrial Age 243 I
I
In this photograph, taken by Lewis Hine in 1912, a young sweatshop laborer in New York City carries piecework home.
Government and Business
For a time, the government was content to allow the laissez-faire system to continue unregulated for fear of harming the economy. However, as corporations expanded, the government grew uneasy about the power of these giants. While industrialization was raising the standard of living for all Americans, income inequality was increasing as well.
SHERMAN ANTITRUST ACT
In 1890 Congress passed the Sherman Antitrust Act. This act made it illegal to form a trust that interfered with free trade. It also prohibited monopolies and activities that hindered competition. Prosecuting companies under the Sherman Act was not easy, however, because the act didn't clearly define terms such as trust. In addition, if firms such as Standard Oil felt pressure from the government, they simply reorganized into single corporations. The Supreme Court threw out seven of the eight cases the federal government brought against trusts. Eventually, the government stopped trying to enforce the Sherman act, and the consolidation of businesses continued.
BUSINESS BOOM BYPASSES THE SOUTH
Industrial growth concentrated in the North, where natural and urban resources were plentiful. The South was still trying to recover from the Civil War, hindered by a lack of capital—money for investment. After the war, people were unwilling to invest in risky ventures. Northern businesses already owned 90 percent of the stock in the most profitable Southern enterprise, the railroads, thereby keeping the South in a stranglehold. The South remained mostly agricultural, with farmers at the mercy of railroad rates. Entrepreneurs suffered not only from excessive transportation costs, but also from high tariffs on raw materials and imported goods, and from a lack of skilled workers. The post-Reconstruction South seemed to have no way out of economic stagnation. However, growth in forestry and mining, and in the tobacco, furniture, and textile industries, offered hope. I , e
i;
Labor Unions Emerge
As business leaders merged and consolidated their forces, it seemed necessary for workers to do the same. Although Northern wages were generally higher than Southern wages, exploitation and unsafe working conditions drew workers together across regions in a nationwide labor movement. Laborers—skilled and unskilled, female and male, black and white—joined together in unions to try to improve their lot.
LONG HOURS AND DANGER
One of the largest employers, the steel mills, often demanded a seven-day workweek. Seamstresses, like factory workers in most industries, worked 12 or more hours a day, six days a week. Employees were not entitled to vacation, sick leave, unemployment compensation, or reimbursement for injuries suffered on the job. Yet injuries were common. In dirty, poorly ventilated factories, workers had to perform repetitive, mind-dulling tasks, sometimes with dangerous or faulty equipment. In 1882, an average of 675 laborers were killed in work-related accidents each week. In addition wages were so low that most families could not survive unless everyone held a job. Between 1890 and 1910, for example, the number of women working for wages
MAIN IDEA
Synthesizing
How did economic factors limit industrialization in the South?
I
doubled, from 4 million to more than 8 million. Twenty percent of the boys and 10 percent of the girls under age 15—some as young as five years old—also held full-time jobs. With little time or energy left for school, child laborers forfeited their futures to help their families make ends meet.
In sweatshops, or workshops in tenements rather than in factories, workers had little choice but to put up with the conditions. Sweatshop employment, which was tedious and required few skills, was often the only avenue open to women and children. Jacob Riis described the conditions faced by "sweaters."
A
Personal Voice Jacob riis " The bulk of the sweater’s work is done in the tenements, which the law that regulates factory labor does not reach. ... In [them] the child works unchallenged from the day he is old enough to pull a thread. There is no such thing as a dinner hour; men and women eat while they work, and the ‘day’ is lengthened at both ends far Into the night."
—How the Other Half Lives
Not surprisingly, sweatshop jobs paid the lowest wages—often as little as 27 cents for a child's 14-hour day. In 1899, women earned an average of $267 a year, nearly half of men's average pay of $498. The very next year Andrew Carnegie made $23 million—with no income tax.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing Issues 4^ How did industrial working conditions contribute to the growth of the labor movement?
Vocabulary arbitration: a
method of settling disputes in which both sides submit their differences to a mutually approved judge
EARLY LABOR ORGANIZING
Skilled workers had formed small, local unions since the late 1700s. The first large-scale national organization of laborers, the National Labor Union (NLU), was formed in 1866 by ironworker William H. Sylvis. The refusal of some NLU local chapters to admit African Americans led to the creation of the Colored National Labor Union (CNLU). Nevertheless, NLU membership grew to 640,000. In 1868, the NLU persuaded Congress to legalize an eight-hour day for government workers. NLU organizers concentrated on linking existing local unions. In 1869, Uriah Stephens focused his attention on individual workers and organized the Noble Order of the Knights of Labor. Its motto was "An injury to one is the concern of all." Membership in the Knights of Labor was officially open to all workers, regardless of race, gender, or degree of skill. Like the NLU, the Knights supported an eight-hour workday and advocated "equal pay for equal work" by men and women. They saw strikes, or refusals to work, as a last resort and instead advocated arbitration. At its height in 1886, the Knights of Labor had about 700,000 members. Although the Knights declined after the failure of a series of strikes, other unions continued to organize.
Union Movements Diverge
As labor activism spread, it diversified. Two major types of unions made great gains under forceful leaders.
CRAFT UNIONISM
One form of labor organization was craft unionism, which included skilled workers from one or more trades. Jewish immigrant Samuel Gompers led the Cigar Makers' International Union to join other craft unions in 1886. The American Federation of Labor (AFL), HISTORICAL
SPOTLIGHT
AFRICAN AMERICANS AND THE LABOR MOVEMENT
Angered by their exclusion from the NLU, African American laborers formed the Colored National Labor Union (CNLU) in 1869. Led by Isaac Meyers, a caulker from Baltimore, the CNLU emphasized cooperation between management and labor and the importance of political reform.
The CNLU disbanded in the early 1870s, but many African-American laborers found a home in the Knights of Labor, the first union to welcome blacks and whites alike. The Great Strike of 1877 brought whites and African Americans together, but the labor movement remained largely divided along racial lines.
Management often hired African Americans as strikebreakers, which intensified white unions’ resistance to accepting blacks. African Americans continued to organize on their own, but discrimination and their small numbers relative to white unions hurt black unions’ effectiveness.
A
New Industrial Age 245 In New York City’s Union Square in 1914, IWW members protest violence against striking coal miners in Colorado.
The strike is the weapon of the oppressed. ” EUGENE V. DEBS
with Gompers as its president, focused on collective bargaining, or negotiation between representatives of labor and management, to reach written agreements on wages, hours, and working conditions. Unlike the Knights of Labor, the AFL used strikes as a major tactic. Successful strikes helped the AFL win higher wages and shorter workweeks. Between 1890 and 1915, the average weekly wages in unionized industries rose from $17.50 to $24, and the average workweek fell from almost 54.5 hours to just under 49 hours.
INDUSTRIAL UNIONISM
Some labor leaders felt that unions should include all laborers—skilled and unskilled—in a specific industry. This concept captured the imagination of Eugene V. Debs, who attempted to form such an industrial union—the American Railway Union (ARU). Most of the new union's members were unskilled and semiskilled laborers, but skilled engineers and firemen joined too. In 1894, the new union won a strike for higher wages. Within two months, its membership climbed to 150,000, dwarfing the 90,000 enrolled in the four skilled railroad brotherhoods. Though the ARU, like the Knights of Labor, never recovered after the failure of a major strike, it added to the momentum of union organizing. SOCIALISM AND THE IWW
In an attempt to solve the problems faced by workers, Eugene Debs and some other labor activists eventually turned to socialism, an economic and political system based on government control of business and property and equal distribution of wealth. Socialism, carried to its extreme form— communism, as advocated by the German philosopher Karl Marx—would result in the overthrow of the capitalist system. Most socialists in late-19th-century America drew back from this goal, however, and worked within the labor movement to achieve better conditions for workers. In 1905, a group of radical unionists and socialists in Chicago organized the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), or the Wobblies. Headed by William "Big Bill" Haywood, the Wobblies included miners, lumberers, and cannery and dock workers. Unlike the ARU, the IWW welcomed African Americans, but membership never topped 100,000. Its only major strike victory occurred in 1912. Yet the Wobblies, like other industrial unions, gave dignity and a sense of solidarity to unskilled workers. OTHER LABOR ACTIVISM IN THE WEST
In April 1903, about 1,000 Japanese and Mexican workers organized a successful strike in the sugar-beet fields of Ventura County, California. They formed the Sugar Beet and Farm Laborers' Union of Oxnard. In Wyoming, the State Federation of Labor supported a union of Chinese and Japanese miners who sought the same wages and treatment as other union miners. These small, independent unions increased both the overall strength of the labor movement and the tension between labor and management. MAIN IDEA
Contrasting
How did
craft unions and industrial unions differ?
Chapter 6
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
How did the 1877 strike and Haymarket cause the public to resent the labor movement?
Strikes Turn Violent
Industry and government responded forcefully to union activity, which they saw as a threat to the entire capitalist system.
THE GREAT STRIKE OF 1877
In July 1877, workers for the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad (B&O) struck to protest their second wage cut in two months. The work stoppage spread to other lines. Most freight and even some passenger traffic, covering over 50,000 miles, was stopped for more than a week. After several state governors asked President Rutherford B. Hayes to intervene, saying that the strikers were impeding interstate commerce, federal troops ended the strike. THE HAYMARKET AFFAIR
Encouraged by the impact of the 1877 strike, labor leaders continued to press for change. On the evening of May 4, 1886, 3,000 people gathered at Chicago's Haymarket Square to protest police brutality—a striker had been killed and several had been wounded at the McCormick Harvester plant the day before. Rain began to fall at about 10 o'clock, and the crowd was dispersing when police arrived. Then someone tossed a bomb into the police line. Police fired on the workers; seven police officers and several workers died in the chaos that followed. No one ever learned who threw the bomb, but the three speakers at the demonstration and five other radicals were charged with inciting a riot. All eight were convicted; four were hanged and one committed suicide in prison. After Haymarket, the public began to turn against the labor movement. THE HOMESTEAD STRIKE
Despite the violence and rising public anger, workers continued to strike. The writer Hamlin Garland described conditions at the Carnegie Steel Company's Homestead plant in Pennsylvania. A
Personal Voice hamlin garland “ Everywhere . . . groups of pale, lean men slouched In faded garments, grimy with the soot and grease of the mills. ... A roar as of a hundred lions, a thunder as of cannons,. . . jarring clang of falling iron. . . !99
—quoted in McClure’s Magazine
The steelworkers finally called a strike on June 29, 1892, after the company president, Henry Clay Frick, announced his plan to cut wages. Frick hired armed
The Growth of Union Membership, 1878-1904
° i«sn i«82 1884 1886 1888 1890 1892 1894 1896 1898 1900 1902 1904
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs
1.	Which union’s membership increased in 1889-1890?
2.	What effect(s) did the Haymarket Riot have on union membership?
A
New Industrial Age 247 KEY PLAYERS
EUGENE V. DEBS 1855-1926
Born in Indiana, Eugene V.
Debs left home at the age of 14 to work for the railroads.
In 1875 he helped organize a local lodge of the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen, and after attempts to unite the local railroad brotherhoods failed, Debs organized the American Railway Union.
While in prison following the Pullman strike in 1894, Debs read the works of Karl Marx and became increasingly disillusioned with capitalism. He became a spokesperson for the Socialist Party of America and was its candidate for president five times. In 1912, he won about 900,000 votes—an amazing 6 percent of the total.
guards from the Pinkerton Detective Agency to protect the plant so that he could hire scabs, or strikebreakers, to keep it operating. In a pitched battle that left at least three detectives and nine workers dead, the steelworkers forced out the Pinkertons and kept the plant closed until the Pennsylvania National Guard arrived on July 12. The strike continued until November, but by then the union had lost much of its support and gave in to the company. It would take 45 years for steelworkers to mobilize once again.
THE PULLMAN COMPANY STRIKE
Strikes continued in other industries, however. During the panic of 1893 and the economic depression that followed, the Pullman company laid off more than 3,000 of its 5,800 employees and cut the wages of the rest by 25 to 50 percent, without cutting the cost of its employee housing. After paying their rent, many workers took home less than $6 a week. A strike was called in the spring of 1894, when the Pullman company failed to restore wages or decrease rents. Eugene Debs asked for arbitration, but Pullman refused to negotiate with the strikers. So the ARU began boycotting Pullman trains. After Pullman hired strikebreakers, the strike turned violent, and President Grover Cleveland sent in federal troops. In the bitter aftermath, Debs was jailed. Pullman fired most of the strikers, and the railroads blacklisted many others, so they could never again get rail-
road jobs.
WOMEN ORGANIZE
Although women were barred from many unions, they united behind powerful leaders to demand better working conditions, equal pay for equal work, and an end to child labor. Perhaps the most prominent organizer in the women's labor movement was Mary Harris Jones. Jones supported the Great Strike of 1877 and later organized for the United Mine Workers of America (UMW). She endured death threats and jail with the coal miners, who gave her the nickname Mother Jones. In 1903, to expose the cruelties of child labor, she led 80 mill children— many with hideous injuries—on a march to the home of President Theodore Roosevelt. Their crusade influenced the passage of child labor laws. Other organizers also achieved significant gains for women. In 1909, Pauline Newman, just 16 years old, became the first female organizer of the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union (ILGWU). A garment worker from the age of eight, Newman also supported
MOTHER JONES 1830-1930
Mary Harris “Mother” Jones was a native of Ireland who immigrated to North America as a child. She became involved in the American labor movement after receiving assistance from the Knights of Labor. According to a reporter who followed “the mother of the laboring class” on her children’s march in 1903, “She fights their battles with a Mother’s Love.” Jones continued fighting until her death at age 100.
Jones was definitely not the kind of woman admired by industrialists. “God almighty made women,” she declared, “and the Rockefeller gang of thieves made ladies.”
Chapter 6
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
$ What factors made the Triangle Shirtwaist fire so lethal?
the "Uprising of the 20,000," a 1909 seamstresses' strike that won labor agreements and improved working conditions for some strikers.
The public could no longer ignore conditions in garment factories after a fire broke out at the Triangle Shirtwaist factory in New York City on March 25, 1911. The fire spread swiftly through the oil-soaked machines and piles of cloth, engulfing the eighth, ninth, and tenth floors. As workers attempted to flee, they discovered that the company had locked all but one of the exit doors to prevent theft. The unlocked door was blocked by fire. The factory had no sprinkler system, and the single fire escape collapsed almost immediately. In all, 146 women died; some were found huddled with their faces raised to a small window. Public outrage flared after a jury acquitted the factory owners of manslaughter. In response, the state of New York set up a task force to study factory working conditions, <j|j
MANAGEMENT AND GOVERNMENT PRESSURE UNIONS
The more powerful the unions became, the more employers came to fear them. Management refused to recognize unions as representatives of the workers. Many employers forbade union meetings, fired union members, and forced new employees to sign "yellow-dog contracts," swearing that they would not join a union.
Finally, industrial leaders, with the help of the courts, turned the Sherman Antitrust Act against labor. All a company had to do was say that a strike, picket line, or boycott would hurt interstate trade, and the state or federal government would issue an injunction against the labor action. Legal limitations made it more and more difficult for unions to be effective. Despite these pressures, workers—especially those in skilled jobs—continued to view unions as a powerful tool. By 1904, the AFL had about 1,700,000 members in its affiliated unions; by the eve of World War I, AFL membership would climb to over 2 million.
▲
The fire department’s ladders reached only to the sixth floor, two floors below the burning Triangle Shirtwaist Company.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•Andrew Carnegie	•vertical and horizontal	•Samuel Gompers	•Industrial Workers of the
•laissez-faire	integration	•American Federation of	World (IWW)
•Social Darwinism	•John D. Rockefeller	Labor (AFL)	•Mary Harris Jones
	•Sherman Antitrust Act	• Eugene V. Debs	
main idea
USING YOUR NOTES
Make a time line of the notable achievements and setbacks of the labor movement between 1876 and 1911.
I event two I | event four ] 1 event one | |event three |
In what ways did strikes threaten industry?
CRITICAL THINKING
EVALUATING LEADERSHIP
Would you classify 19th century industrialists as robber barons or captains of industry? How does their philanthropy affect your opinion?
Think About:
• their tactics and strategies
•	their contributions to the economy
•	their attitude toward competition
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
Does the life of Andrew Carnegie support or counter the philosophy of Social Darwinism? Explain.
5.	HYPOTHESIZING
If the government had supported unions instead of management in the late 19th century, how might the lives of workers have been different?
A
New Industrial Age 249 
ASSESSMENT
VISUAL SUMMARY
A
New Industrial Age TERMS & NAMES
For each term or name below, write a sentence explaining its connection to the industrialization of the late 19th century.
LONG-TERM CAUSES
1.	Thomas Alva Edison
2.	Alexander Graham Bell
3.	George M. Pullman
4.	transcontinental railroad
5.	Interstate Commerce Act
6.	Andrew Carnegie
7.	Sherman Antitrust Act
8.	Samuel Gompers
9.	American Federation of Labor (AFL)
10. Mary Harris Jones
abundant natural resources harnessing of early power sources such as water and coal invention of the steam engine ’ construction of roads, canals, and railroads in early 1800s
IMMEDIATE CAUSES
expansion of railroads in late 1800s cheap labor supply provided by increasing immigration burst of technological innovation new management techniques and business strategies investment capital
:■
MAIN IDEAS
Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
The Expansion of Industry (pages 230-233)
1.	How did the growth of the steel industry influence the development of other industries?
2.	How did inventions and developments in the late 19th century change the way people worked?
The Age of the Railroads (pages 236-240)
3.	Why did people, particularly farmers, demand regulation of the railroads in the late 19th century?
4.	Why were attempts at railroad regulation often unsuccessful?
Big Business and Labor (pages 241-249)
5.	How did the free enterprise system support industrialization?
6.	Why did the South industrialize more slowly than the North did?
7.	How did women organize to expand their economic opportunities during this period?
8.	What factors limited the success of unions?
BIG BU
IMMEDIATE EFFECTS
CRITICAL THINKING
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one shown, list what you see as the overall costs and benefits of industrialization. INDUSTRIALIZATION	
Costs	Benefits
growth of large corporations new and plentiful manufactured goods poor working conditions in factories and sweatshops
increased labor activism
LONG-TERM EFFECTS
regional economies are linked labor movement wins shorter workweek
RECOGNIZING BIAS
In 1902 George Baehr, head of the Philadelphia and Reading Railway Company, said, “The rights and interests of the labor man will be protected and cared for not by the labor agitators but by the Christian men to whom God in his infinite wisdom has given the control of the proper-ty interests of the country.” What bias does this statement reveal? How does Baehr’s view reflect Social Darwinism? DEVELOPING HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
What were the costs and benefits of the laissez-faire doctrine? How does the government’s response to the laissez-faire doctrine represent the changing relationship between the federal government and pm vate business? Chapter 6
<


TEXAS TEST PRACTICE
J
Use the quotation below and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 1.
“ No man, however benevolent, liberal, and wise, can use a large fortune so that it will do half as much good in the world as it would if it were divided into moderate sums and in the hands of workmen who had earned it by industry and frugality. "
B.
Hayes, from The Diary and Letters of Rutherford Birchard Hayes 1.	Which of the following people could best be described by Rutherford B. Hayes’s words benevolent, liberal, and a large fortune?
b Thomas Edison B Eugene V. Debs C Charles Darwin D Andrew Carnegie
2.	The American Federation of Labor (AFL) differed from the Knights of Labor in that the Knights of Labor focused on —
F collective bargaining and aggressive use of strikes.
G organizing only unskilled workers.
H arbitration and use of strikes as a last resort.
J winning a shorter workweek.
3.
How did the railroads both benefit from and contribute to the industrialization of the United States?
A
The railroads needed government protection, and their development helped government grow. B
The railroads used new inventions and brought people to see the inventions. C
The railroads used steel and coal and delivered both to new markets. D
The railroads needed passengers, and passengers needed to get to new industries. In the 19th century, government attempts to regulate industry in the United States included the Interstate Commerce Act (1887) and the Sherman Antitrust Act (1890). What posed the biggest obstacle to enforcement of these laws?
F the business tactics of industrialists G the use of vertical integration H the rulings of the Supreme Court J the theory of Social Darwinism
I
71 hmhsocialstudies.com
TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for: • Diagnostic tests • Tutorials
INTERACT WITH HISTORY
'"J'WriteSmart
COLLABORATIVE LEARNI
Recall the issues that you recorded in myNotebook as you read the chapter. Consider how knowledge of the effects of railroad expansion and business consolidation might influence one’s opinion of the Industrial Age. Then write a newspaper editorial about the Great Strike of 1877 (see page 247), supporting the position of either the railroad owners or the striking workers. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your editorial.
"’J'WrlteSmart
Imagine you are a union leader in a factory. If your demands for better working conditions are not met, all of the employees will stop work and go on strike. Write a persuasive letter in which you urge your employer to adopt specific reforms to improve working conditions. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your letter.

tCEHTURY
In a small group read and discuss the
feature on pages 234-235. Consider the following question: What are the qualities of effective leadership? Choose a political or social leader from the chapter and do library or Internet research to discover how he or she embodied those characteristics. Then make a poster describing your leader’s personal qualities and how they helped him or her to lead and inspire others. Include your own assessment of which qualities might have been most important in the success of your selected leader. Add an image of the leader to the poster and display it in your classroom.
A
New Industrial Age 251 End of Chapter Skill Activity
Sequencing
DEFINING THE SKILL
Chronological order is the sequence of events in time. Chronology may be either relative or absolute. Relative chronology relates one event to another. This helps historians to see causes, effects, and other relationships between people, events, and time periods. Absolute chronology ties events to an exact time or date, pinpointing dates in one universal framework—the passage of time.
By sequencing events in chronological order you can gain greater and more accurate understanding of the relationships among them. You can even understand how a past event may influence the outcome of a pending event.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: FOLLOW CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER
Think about the order in which things happen to better understand absolute and relative chronology. The following paragraph is about significant events in the life of Andrew Carnegie. Carnegie and Steel	|j
Andrew Carnegie lived a true rags-to-riches story. Born in ©November, 1835 in Scotland to	|.
poor parents, Carnegie and his family immigrated to the United States in 1848 when he was ©12.	|-
In 1853, at age ©17, he took a job with the Pennsylvania Railroad. He quickly advanced and began I investing in the iron, oil, railroad, and telegraph industries. He ©soon founded his own company	I
and rose to the top of the business.	|
Carnegie held down costs by using vertical integration, buying supplies in bulk, and producing I items in large quantities. ©By ©1890, the Carnegie Steel Company dominated the American steel | industry. In © 1901 Carnegie sold the company to banker J.P Morgan for $480 million. ©After	|
retiring, Carnegie began to devote his time to philanthropy, or charity. ©At the same time, he gave | money to universities and built hundreds of public libraries.	f
© Examine all text and visuals for specific dates. Dates, times of the day, seasons of the year, and people’s ages are helpful in determining the specific sequence of events, which is known as absolute chronology.
0 Look for clue words about time. Clue words such as by, in, after, first, last, before, next, then, soon, and finally help indicate the general sequence of events, which is known as relative chronology.
© Identify events that occurred at the same time. Words such as while, meanwhile, and during signal the occurrence of simultaneous events.
STRATEGY. MAKE A TIME LINE
If the events in a passage are numerous and complex, organize them on a time line. The time line here lists the events from the passage above in chronological order. You can follow the sequence to find which events in Carnegie's life came first and which came next. Key Events in the Life of Andrew Carnegie


$
/
/•
V


z z
///
•A vp
A .<7 r<y Op P
jM


APPLYING THE SKILL
Skim Chapter 6, Section 1, pages 232-233, "Inventions Promote Change," to learn about inventors who changed the way people lived. Make a list of the important dates you find, starting with the year the typewriter was invented. Use absolute chronology and the model above to help you create your own time line of inventors arranged based on the year their inventions were introduced. Then use this information to write a short paragraph discussing the changes.
1.	Look for specific dates In the text.
In what year was the typewriter invented? In what year was the telephone unveiled?
2.	Look for clue words about time.
What clue words about time can you find in the passage? What do they tell you about the order of the events?
3.	Identify events that occurred at the same time.
What two events happened in 1876? Why do you think both these things were happening at the same time? What does this tell you about the time period?
251 SK2
myNotebook
btesfeiiTf;

Essential Question ______________
What were the economic, social, and political effects of immigration?

Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
3A, 3C, 3D, 26A, 26B, 26D, 29D
SECTION 1: The New Immigrants
Main Idea Immigration from Europe, Asia, the Caribbean, and Mexico reached a new high in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
SECTION 2: The Challenges of Urbanization
Main Idea The rapid growth of cities forced people to contend with problems of housing, transportation, water, and sanitation.
SECTION 3: Politics in the Gilded Age
Main Idea Local and national political corruption in the 19th century led to calls for reform.



T


he intersection of Orchard and Hester Streets on New York City’s Lower East Side, center of Jewish immigrant life in 1905.
V
v,*	'	ZLawk.
USA
WORLD
J18771
Rutherford B. Hayes is elected president.
|18801	Fl881! Chester	
James A.	A. Arthur suc-	: [.1884.1 Grover
Garfield is	ceeds Garfield	• Cleveland
elected	after Garfield’s	: is elected
president.	assassination.	: president.
[ 18881 Benjamin Harrison is elected president.
1880
1876] Porfirio Diaz seizes power in Mexico.
1884 j Berlin Conference meets to divide Africa among European nations.
1885
Indian National Congress forms.
1892 ’ Grover
Cleveland is elected to a second term,
1893 France establishes Indochina.



1890
