728 Chapter 22
0
•
St?
>’A y? if
&T0
to. OWo'/

sr* >

HISTORY

LBJ and Vietnam: In the Eye of the Storm
71 hmhsocialstudies.com
VIDEO
iW.’ 'nW
r:w<S> ?W
: Luther King, Jr., : and Robert :Kennedy are ^assassinated.
; w Rn;h '
In 1965, America's fight against communism has spread to Southeast Asia, where the United States is becoming increasingly involved in another country's civil war. Unable to claim victory, U.S. generals call for an increase in the number of combat troops. Facing a shortage of volunteers, the president implements a draft. As you read the chapter and explore the issues below, use the annotation tools in your eBook to record your thoughts.
Explore the Issues
•	Should people who believe the war is wrong be forced to fight?
•	Should people with special skills be exempt?
•	How can a draft be made fair?
»y..■* w
1969
U.S. troops begin their withdrawal from Vietnam.
1970 Ohio National Guard kills four students at Kent State University.
Richard M. Nixon is
reelected,
: ?1973] United : States signs : cease-fire : with North : Vietnam and : Vietcong.
: 11974 j Gerald R. Ford • becomes president : after Richard M.
: Nixon resigns.
1975
: 1975 Communists - capture Saigon; South : Vietnam surrenders.
1972 Ferdinand Marcos
declares martial law in
the Philippines.
The Vietnam War Years
Moving Toward Conflict
MAMIDEA
To stop the spread of communism in Southeast Asia, the United States used its military to support South Vietnam.
WHY IT MATTERS NOW [
The United States’ support role in Vietnam began what would become America’s longest and most controversial war in its history.
Terms & Names
•Ho Chi Minh •Vietminh
•	domino theory •Dien Bien Phu
•	Geneva Accords
• Ngo Dinh Diem •Vietcong •Ho Chi Minh Trail •Tonkin Gulf Resolution
OneAmerican

TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the Vietnam policies of Presidents Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson,
On the morning of September 26, 1945, Lieutenant Colonel A. Peter Dewey was on his way to the Saigon airport in Vietnam. Only 28, Dewey served in the Office of Strategic Services, the chief intelligence-gathering body of the U.S. military and forerunner of the Central Intelligence Agency. Dewey was sent to assess what was becoming an explosive situation in Vietnam, a Southeast Asian country that had recently been freed from Japanese rule as a result of the allied victory in World War II. (See map on page 733.)
Before the war, France had ruled Vietnam and the surrounding countries; now it sought—with British aid—to regain control of the region. The Vietnamese had resisted Japanese occupation; now they were preparing to fight the French. Dewey saw nothing but disaster in France's plan. "Cochinchina [southern Vietnam] is burning," he reported, "the French and British are finished here, and we [the United States] ought to clear out of Southeast Asia."
On his way to the airport, Dewey encountered a roadblock staffed by Vietnamese soldiers and shouted at them in French. Presumably mistaking him for a French soldier, the guards shot him in the head. Thus, A. Peter Dewey, whose body was never recovered, was the first American to die in Vietnam.
Unfortunately, Dewey would not be the last. As Vietnam's independence effort came under communist influence, the United States grew increasingly concerned about the small country's future. Eventually, America would fight a war to halt the spread of communism in Vietnam. The war would claim the lives of almost 60,000 Americans and more than 2 million Vietnamese. It also would divide the American nation as no other event since the Civil War.
▲
Lieutenant Colonel A. Peter Dewey
America Supports France in Vietnam
America’s involvement in Vietnam began in 1950, during the French Indochina
War, the name given to France's attempt to reestablish its rule in Vietnam after
World War II. Seeking to strengthen its ties with France and to help fight the
spread of communism, the United States provided the French with massive eco-
nomic and military support.
730 Chapter 22
Vocabulary peasant: a
member of the class of agricultural laborers
MAIN IDEA
Synthesizing
& How and why did the United States support France’s Vietnam War efforts?
FRENCH RULE IN VIETNAM
From the late 1800s until World War II, France ruled most of Indochina, including letnam, Laos, and Cambodia. French colonists, who built plantations on peasant land and extracted rice and rubber for their own profit, encountered growing unrest among the Vietnamese peasants. French rulers reacted harshly by restricting freedom of speech and assembly and by jailing many Vietnamese nationalists. These measures failed to curb all dissent, and opposition continued to grow. The Indochinese Communist Party, founded in 1930, staged a number of revolts under the leadership of Ho Chi Minh. Although the French condemned Ho Chi Minh to death for his rebellious activity, he fled Vietnam and orchestrated Vietnam's growing independence movement from exile in the Soviet Union and later from China.
In 1940 the Japanese took control of Vietnam. The next year, Ho Chi Minh returned home and helped form the Vietminh, an organization whose goal it was to win Vietnam's independence from foreign rule. When the Allied defeat of Japan in August 1945 forced the Japanese to leave Vietnam, that goal suddenly seemed a reality. On September 2,
1945, Ho Chi Minh stood in the middle of a huge crowd in the northern city of Hanoi and declared Vietnam an independent nation.
FRANCE BATTLES THE VIETMINH
France, however, had no intention of relinquishing its former colony. French troops moved back into Vietnam by the end of 1945, eventually regaining control of the cities and the country's southern half. Ho Chi Minh vowed to fight from the North to liberate the South from French control. "If ever the tiger pauses," Ho had said, referring to the Vietminh, "the elephant [France] will impale him on his mighty tusks. But the tiger will not pause, and the elephant will die of exhaustion and loss of blood." In 1950, the United States entered the Vietnam struggle—despite A. Peter Dewey's warnings. That year, President Truman sent nearly $15 million in economic aid to France.
Over the next four years, the United States paid for much of France's war, pumping nearly $1 billion into the effort to defeat a man America had once supported. Ironically, during World War II, the United States had forged an alliance with Ho Chi Minh, supplying him with aid to resist the Japanese. But by 1950, the United States had come to view its one-time ally as a communist aggressor,
THE VIETMINH DRIVE OUT THE FRENCH
Upon entering the White House in 1953, President Eisenhower continued the policy of supplying aid to the French war effort. By this time, the United States had settled for a stalemate with the communists in Korea, which only stiffened America's resolve to halt the spread of communism elsewhere. During a news conference in 1954, Eisenhower explained the domino theory, warning that if Vietnam fell to communism, other Southeast Asian countries would soon follow, just like dominoes toppling. "You have a row of dominoes set up," the president said. "You knock over the first one, and what will happen to the last one is the certainty that it will go over very quickly." Despite massive U.S. aid, however, the French could not retake Vietnam. They were forced to surrender in May of 1954, when the Vietminh overran the French outpost at Dien Bien Phu, in northwestern Vietnam.
HO CHI MINH 1890-1969
Born Nguyen Tat Thanh to a poor Vietnamese family, Ho Chi Minh (which means “He Who Enlightens”) found work as a cook on a French steamship.
This allowed him to visit such cities as Boston and New York.
Ho Chi Minh based the phrasing of the Vietnamese Declaration of Independence on the U.S. Declaration of Independence. His admiration for the United States turned to disappointment, however, after the government chose to support France rather than his nationalist movement.
The Communist ruler’s name lived on after his death in 1969.
In 1975, the North Vietnamese Army conquered South Vietnam and changed the name of the South’s capital from Saigon to Ho Chi Minh City.

The Vietnam War Years 7
From May through July 1954, the countries of France, Great Britain, the Soviet Union, the United States, China, Laos, and Cambodia met in Geneva, Switzerland, with the Vietminh and with South Vietnam's anti-Communist nationalists to hammer out a peace agreement. The Geneva Accords temporarily divided Vietnam along the 17th parallel. The Communists and their leader, Ho Chi Minh, controlled North Vietnam from the capital of Hanoi. The anti-Communist nationalists controlled South Vietnam from the capital and southern port city of Saigon. An election to unify the country was called for in 1956.
The United States Steps In
The Vietcong saw the United States and South Vietnam as oppressors.
This propaganda poster reads, “Vietnam will surely be victorious and America will surely be defeated.”
▼
In the wake of France's retreat, the United States took a more active role in halting the spread of communism in Vietnam. Wading deeper into the country's affairs, the Eisenhower and the Kennedy administrations provided economic and military aid to South Vietnam's non-Communist regime.
DIEM CANCELS ELECTIONS
Although he directed a brutal and repressive regime, Ho Chi Minh won popular support in the North by breaking up large estates and redistributing land to peasants. Moreover, his years of fighting the Japanese and French had made him a national hero. Recognizing Ho Chi Minh's widespread popularity, South Vietnam's president, Ngo Dinh Diem (nge" din" de-em"), a strong anti-Communist, refused to take part in the countrywide election of 1956. The United States also sensed that a countrywide election might spell victory for Ho Chi Minh and supported canceling elections. The Eisenhower administration promised military aid and training to Diem in return for a stable reform government in the South. Jg/ Diem, however, failed to hold up his end of the bargain. He ushered in a corrupt government that suppressed opposition of any kind and offered little or no land distribution to peasants. In addition, Diem, a devout Catholic, angered the country's majority Buddhist population by restricting Buddhist practices.
By 1957, a Communist opposition group in the South, known as the Vietcong, had begun attacks on the Diem government, assassinating thousands of South Vietnamese government officials. Although the political arm of the group would later be called the National Liberation Front (NLF), the United States continued to refer to the fighters as the Vietcong.
Ho Chi Minh supported the group, and in 1959 began supplying arms to the Vietcong via a network of paths along the borders of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia that became known as the Ho Chi Minh Trail. (See map on page 733.) As the fighters stepped up their surprise attacks, or guerrilla tactics, South Vietnam grew more unstable. The Eisenhower administration took little action, however, deciding to "sink or swim with Ngo Dinh Diem."
KENNEDY AND VIETNAM
The Kennedy administration, which entered the White House in 1961, also chose initially to "swim" with Diem. Wary of accusations that Democrats were "soft" on communism, President Kennedy increased financial aid to Diem's teetering regime and sent thousands of military advisers to help train South Vietnamese troops. By the end of 1963, 16,000 U.S. military personnel were in South Vietnam. Meanwhile, Diem's popularity plummeted because of ongoing corruption and his failure to respond to calls for land reform. To combat the growing Vietcong presence in the South's countryside, the Diem administration initiated the strategic hamlet program, which meant moving all villagers to protected areas.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Motives
Why did the United States support canceling elections?
Background
The Buddhist religion is based on the teachings of Siddhartha Gautama, also known as Shakyamuni, an Indian mystic who believed that spiritual enlightenment could be obtained through right conduct, meditation, and wisdom.
732 Chapter 22
7
After parachuting into the mountains north of Dien Bien Phu, South Vietnamese troops await orders from French officers in 1953.
105 E
A;


The swampy terrain of South Vietnam made for difficult and dangerous fighting. This 1961 photograph shows South Vietnamese Army troops in combat operations against Vietcong.
Rivers serve as places to work, bathe, and wash clothing.
Equates___
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1. Movement Through which countries did the Ho
r Chi Minh Trail pass?
U 2. Location How might North Vietnam’s location
have enabled it to get aid from its ally, China?/
A
Buddhist monk sets himself on fire in a busy Saigon intersection in 1963 as a protest against the Diem regime. ► Many Vietnamese deeply resented being moved from their home villages where they had lived for generations and where ancestors were buried.
Diem also intensified his attack on Buddhism. Fed up with continuing Buddhist demonstrations, the South Vietnamese ruler imprisoned and killed hundreds of Buddhist clerics and destroyed their temples. To protest, several Buddhist monks and nuns publicly burned themselves to death. Horrified, American officials urged Diem to stop the persecutions, but Diem refused. Cj
It had become clear that for South Vietnam to remain stable, Diem would have to go. On November 1, 1963, a U.S.-supported military coup toppled Diem's regime. Against Kennedy's wishes, Diem was assassinated. A few weeks later, Kennedy, too, fell to an assassin's bullet. The United States presidency—along with the growing crisis in Vietnam—now belonged to Lyndon B. Johnson.
MAIN IDEA
Forming
Generalizations
& Why was the Diem regime unpopular?
Vocabulary
coup: a sudden appropriation of leadership; a takeover
President Johnson Expands the Conflict
Shortly before his death, Kennedy had announced his intent to withdraw U.S. forces from South Vietnam. "In the final analysis, it's their war," he declared. Whether Kennedy would have withdrawn from Vietnam remains a matter of debate. However, Lyndon Johnson escalated the nation's role in Vietnam and eventually began what would become America's longest war.
THE SOUTH GROWS MORE UNSTABLE
Diem's death brought more chaos to South Vietnam. A string of military leaders attempted to lead the country, but each regime was more unstable and inefficient than Diem's had been. Meanwhile, the Vietcong's influence in the countryside steadily grew. President Johnson believed that a communist takeover of South Vietnam would be disastrous. Johnson, like Kennedy, was particularly sensitive to being perceived as "soft" on communism. "If I ... let the communists take over South Vietnam," Johnson said, "then ... my nation would be seen as an appeaser and we would . . . find it impossible to accomplish anything . . . anywhere on the entire globe/'
THE TONKIN GULF RESOLUTION
On August 2, 1964, a North Vietnamese patrol boat fired a torpedo at an American destroyer, the USS Maddox which was
patrolling m the Gulf of Tonkin off the North Vietnamese coast The tornedn
missed its target, but the Maddox returned fire and inflicted heavy damage on the
734 Chapter 22
MAIN IDEA
Developing
Historical
Perspective
$ How did the Tonkin Gulf Resolution lead to greater U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War?
Two days later, the Maddox and another destroyer were again off the North The Navy destroyer Vietnamese coast. The crew reported enemy torpedoes and began firing. It was later U.S.S. Maddox. revealed that radar interference could have been mistaken for enemy torpedoes.
The alleged attack on U.S. ships prompted President Johnson to launch bombing strikes on North Vietnam. He asked Congress for powers to take "all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression." Congress approved his request and adopted the Tonkin Gulf Resolution on August 7. While not a declaration of war, it granted Johnson broad military powers in Vietnam. Some felt it altered the U.S.
Constitution's system of checks and balances by allowing the executive branch to wage war without a declaration of war from the legislative branch.
Johnson did not tell Congress or the American people that the Maddox had been in the Gulf of Tonkin to collect information for secret raids against North Vietnam. Furthermore, Johnson had prepared the resolution months beforehand and was only waiting for the chance to push it through Congress.
In February of 1965, President Johnson used his newly granted powers. In response to a Vietcong attack that killed eight Americans, Johnson unleashed "Operation Rolling Thunder," the first sustained bombing of North Vietnam. In March of that year the first American combat troops began arriving in South Vietnam. By June, more than 50,000 U.S. soldiers were battling the Vietcong. The Vietnam War had become Americanized.
main idea
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one below, cite the Vietnam policy for each of the following presidents: Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson.
President	Vietnam Policy
	
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. •Ho Chi Minh	* *Dien Bien Phu	*Ngo Dinh Diem
•Vietminh	• Geneva Accords	’Vietcong
•domino theory
•Ho Chi Minh Trail •Tonkin Gulf Resolution
CRITICAL THINKING
MAKING INFERENCES
What were the reasons for U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War? Explain your answer.
ANALYZING ISSUES
What constitutional issues were raised by the federal policy changes leading up to U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War? Which founding principle applies to this historical event?
5. EVALUATING
Do you think Congress was justified in passing the Tonkin Gulf Resolution? Use details from the text to support your response.
Think About:
•	the questionable report of torpedo attacks on two U.S. destroyers
•	the powers that the resolution would give the president
•	the fact that the resolution was not a declaration of war
Choose one of the four presidents
and explain his goals in Vietnam.
The Vietnam War Years 7:

U.S.
Involvement and Escalation MAIN IDEA
The United States sent troops to fight in Vietnam, but the war quickly turned into a stalemate.
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Since Vietnam, Americans are more aware of the positive and negative effects of using U.S. troops in foreign conflicts.
Terms & Names
•Robert McNamara •Dean Rusk •William Westmoreland •Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN)
•napalm •Agent Orange •search-and-destroy mission •credibility gap
One American’s Story
sans
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the military tactics and weapons of the U.S. and the Vietcong.
n
IfaTAKl
Tim O'Brien is a novelist who has written several books about his experience in Vietnam and its lasting effects. Drafted at the age of 21,
O'Brien was sent to Vietnam in August 1968. He spent the first seven months of his nearly two-year duty patrolling the fields outside of Chu Lai, a seacoast city in South Vietnam. O'Brien described one of the more nerve-racking experiences of the war: walking through the fields and jungles, many of which were filled with land mines and booby traps.
A
Personal Voice tim o’brien “ You do some thinking. You hallucinate. You look ahead a few paces and wonder what your legs will resemble if there is more to the earth in that spot than silicates and nitrogen. Will the pain be unbearable?
Will you scream and fall silent? Will you be afraid to look at your own body, afraid of the sight of your own red flesh and white bone? . . .
It is not easy to fight this sort of self-defeating fear, but you try. You decide to be ultra-careful—the hard-nosed realistic approach.
You try to second-guess the mine. Should you put your foot to that flat rock or the clump of weeds to its rear? Paddy dike or water?
You wish you were Tarzan, able to swing on the vines. You trace the footprints of the men to your front. You give up when he curses you for following too closely; better one man dead than two. ”
—quoted in A Life in a Year: The American Infantryman in Vietnam 1965-1972
Deadly traps were just some of the obstacles that U.S. troops faced. As the infiltration of American ground troops into Vietnam failed to score a quick victory, a mostly supportive U.S. population began to question its government's war policy.
A
Vietnam’s terrain was often treacherous, such as the thick jungles and rivers these U.S. soldiers encountered in 1966.
Johnson Increases U.S. Involvement
Much of the nation supported Lyndon Johnson's determination to contain com-
munism in Vietnam. In the years following 1965, President Johnson began send-
ing large numbers of American troops to fight alongside the South Vietnamese.
736 Chapter 22
I
i
THRONG SUPPORT FOR CONTAINMENT
Even after Congress had approved e on in Gulf Resolution, President Johnson opposed sending U.S. ground troops to Vietnam. Johnson's victory in the 1964 presidential election was due in part to charges that his Republican opponent, Barry Goldwater, was an anticommunist who might push the United States into war with the Soviet Union. In contrast to Goldwater's heated, warlike language, Johnson's speeches were more moderate, yet he spoke determinedly about containing communism. He declared he was "not about to send American boys 9 or 10,000 miles away from home to do what Asian boys ought to be doing for themselves.”
However, in March of 1965, that is precisely what the president did. Working closely with his foreign-policy advisers, particularly Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and Secretary of State Dean Rusk, President Johnson began dis-
MAIN IDEA
Contrasting
What differing opinions did Johnson’s advisers have about Vietnam?
patching tens of thousands of U.S. soldiers to fight in Vietnam. Some Americans viewed Johnson's decision as contradictory to his position during the presidential campaign. However, most saw the president as following an established and popular policy of confronting communism anywhere in the world. Congress, as well as the American public, strongly supported Johnson's strategy. A
1965 poll showed that 61 percent of Americans supported the U.S. policy in Vietnam, while only 24 percent opposed.
There were dissenters within the Johnson administration, too. In October of 1964, Undersecretary of State George Ball had argued against escalation, warning that "once on the tiger's back, we cannot be sure of picking the place to dismount.'' However, the president's closest advisers strongly urged escalation, believing the defeat of communism in Vietnam to be of vital importance to the future of America and the world. Dean Rusk stressed this view in a 1965 memo to President Johnson.
t<V.Y PLAY£R
A
Personal Voice dean rusk 46 The integrity of the U.S. commitment is the principal pillar of peace throughout the world. If that commitment becomes unreliable, the communist world would draw conclusions that would lead to our ruin and almost certainly to a catastrophic war. So long as the South Vietnamese are prepared to fight for themselves, we cannot abandon them without disaster to peace and to our interests throughout the world. ”
—quoted in In Retrospect
THE TROOP BUILDUP ACCELERATES
By the end of 1965, the U.S. government had sent more than 180,000 Americans to Vietnam. The American commander in South Vietnam, General william Westmoreland, continued to request more troops. Westmoreland, a West Point graduate who had served in World War II and Korea, was less than impressed with the fighting ability of the South Vietnamese Army, or the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN). The ARVN "cannot stand up to this pressure without substantial U.S. combat support on the ground," the general reported. "The only possible response is the aggressive deployment of U.S. troops." Throughout the early years of the war, the Johnson administration complied with Westmorelands requests; by 1967, the number of U.S. troops in Vietnam had climbed to about 500,000. GENERAL WILLIAM
WESTMORELAND (1914-2005)
General Westmoreland retired from the military in 1972, but even in retirement, he could not escape the Vietnam War.
In 1982, CBS-TV aired a documentary entitled The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception. The report, viewed by millions, asserted that Westmoreland and the Pentagon had deceived the U.S. government about the enemy’s size and strength during 1967 and 1968 to make it appear that U.S. forces were winning the war.
Westmoreland, claiming he was the victim of "distorted, false, and specious information . . . derived by sinister deception,” filed a $120 million libel suit against CBS. The suit was eventually settled, with both parties issuing statements pledging mutual respect. CBS, however, stood by its story.
The Vietnam War Years 7j
Fighting in the Jungle
The United States entered the war in Vietnam believing that its superior weaponry would lead it to victory over the Vietcong. However, the jungle terrain and the enemy's guerrilla tactics soon turned the war into a frustrating stalemate.
AN ELUSIVE ENEMY
Because the Vietcong lacked the high-powered weaponry of the American forces, they used hit-and-run and ambush tactics, as well as a keen knowledge of the jungle terrain, to their advantage. Moving secretly in and out of the general population, the Vietcong destroyed the notion of a traditional front line by attacking U.S. troops in both the cities and the countryside. Because some of the enemy lived amidst the civilian population, it was difficult for U.S. troops to discern friend from foe. A woman selling soft drinks to U.S. soldiers might be a Vietcong spy. A boy standing on the corner might be ready to throw a grenade. Adding to the Vietcong's elusiveness was a network of elaborate tunnels that allowed them to withstand airstrikes and to launch surprise attacks and then disappear quickly. Connecting villages throughout the countryside, the tunnels became home to many guerrilla fighters. "The more the Americans tried to drive us away from our land, the more we burrowed into it," recalled Nguyen Quoc, a major in the Vietcong army.
In addition, the terrain was laced with countless booby traps and land mines. Because the exact location of the Vietcong was often unknown, U.S. troops laid land mines throughout the jungle. The Vietcong also laid their own traps, and disassembled and reused U.S. mines. American soldiers marching through South
Tunnels of the Vietcong
Remote smoke outlets S
' h
Submerged entrance
Storage cache for weapons, explosives, and rice
Well
First-aid station powered by bicycle
738 Chapter 22
MAIN IDEA |
Drawing
Conclusions
Why did the U.S. forces have difficulty fighting the Vietcong?
MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
In what way did the United States underestimate the Vietcong?
Vietnam's jungles and rice paddies not only dealt with sweltering heat and leeches but also had to be cautious of every step.
In a 1969 letter to his sister, Specialist Fourth Class Salvador Gonzalez described the tragic result from an unexploded U.S. bomb that the North Vietnamese Army had rigged.
A
Personal Voice Salvador gonzalez “ Two days ago 4 guys got killed and about 15 wounded from the first platoon. Our platoon was 200 yards away on top of a hill. One guy was from Floral Park [In New York City]. He had five days left to go [before being sent home].
He was standing on a 250-lb. bomb that a plane had dropped and didn’t explode. So the NVA [North Vietnamese Army] wired It up. Well, all they found was a piece of his wallet. ”
—quoted in Dear America: Letters Home from Vietnam
A FRUSTRATING WAR OF ATTRITION
Westmoreland s strategy for defeating the Vietcong was to destroy their morale through a war of attrition, or the gradual wearing down of the enemy by continuous harassment. Introducing the concept of the body count, or the tracking of Vietcong killed in battle, the general believed that as the number of Vietcong dead rose, the guerrillas would inevitably surrender. However, the Vietcong had no intention of quitting their fight. Despite the growing number of casualties and the relentless pounding from U.S. bombers, the Vietcong—who received supplies from China and the Soviet Union— remained defiant. Defense Secretary McNamara confessed his frustration to a reporter in 1966: "If I had thought they would take this punishment and fight this well, ... I would have thought differently at the start."
General Westmoreland would say later that the United States never lost a battle in Vietnam. Whether or not the general's words were true, they underscored the degree to which America misunderstood its foe. The United States viewed the war strictly as a military struggle; the Vietcong saw it as a battle for their very existence, and they were ready to pay any price for victory. $

LAND MINES
Perhaps 3 million armed mines remain in Vietnam, and they are still claiming lives. Between 1999 and 2008, 589 Vietnamese have been killed and another 956 have been injured by these remnants of the Vietnam War.
The 1997 Mine Ban Treaty bans production and use of antipersonnel mines worldwide. As of 2010, 156 nations had agreed to the treaty, with the notable exceptions of the United States, Russia, and China. In 1998, President Clinton declared that the United States would sign the treaty by 2006, if “suitable alternatives” to land mines had been developed, and asked the military to begin working toward this goal. In 2004, however, President George W.
Bush said he would not sign the treaty. The Obama administration, too, decided to leave U.S. policy on mines unchanged.
THE BATTLE FOR “HEARTS AND MINDS”
Another key part of the American strategy was to keep the Vietcong from winning the support of South Vietnam's rural population. Edward G. Lansdale, who helped found the fighting unit known as the U.S. Army Special Forces, or Green Berets, stressed the plan's importance. "Just remember this. Communist guerrillas hide among the people. If you win the people over to your side, the communist guerrillas have no place to hide." The campaign to win the "hearts and minds" of the South Vietnamese villagers proved more difficult than imagined. For instance, in their attempt to expose Vietcong tunnels and hideouts, U.S. planes dropped napalm, a gasoline-based bomb that set fire to the jungle. They also sprayed Agent Orange, a leaf-killing toxic chemical. The saturation use of these weapons often wounded civilians and left villages and their surroundings in ruins. Years later, many would blame Agent Orange for cancers suffered by Vietnamese civilians and American veterans.
U S
soldiers conducted search-and-destroy missions, uprooting civilians with suspected ties to the Vietcong, killing their livestock, and burning villages. Many villagers fled into the cities or refugee camps, creating by 1967 more than 3 million refugees in the South. The irony of the strategy was summed up in February 1968 by a U.S. major whose forces had just leveled the town of Ben Tre: "We had to destroy the town in order to save it." The Vietnam War Years.
SINKING MORALE
The frustrations of guerrilla warfare, the brutal jungle conditions, and the failure to make substantial headway against the enemy took their toll on the U.S. troops' morale. Philip Caputo, a marine lieutenant in Vietnam who later wrote several books about the war, summarized the soldiers' growing disillusionment: "When we marched into the rice paddies... we carried, along with our packs and rifles, the implicit convictions that the Vietcong could be quickly beaten. We kept the packs and rifles; the convictions, we lost." As the war continued, American morale dropped steadily. Many soldiers, required by law to fight a war they did not support, turned to alcohol, marijuana, and other drugs. Low morale even led a few soldiers to murder their officers. Morale worsened during the later years of the war when soldiers realized they were fighting even as their government was negotiating a withdrawal. 4^ Another obstacle was the continuing cor-
ruption and instability of the South Vietnamese government. Nguyen Cao Ky, a flamboyant air marshal, led the government from 1965 to 1967. Ky ignored U.S. pleas to retire in favor of an elected civilian government. Mass demonstrations began, and by May of 1966, Buddhist monks and nuns were once again burning themselves in protest against the South Vietnamese government. South Vietnam was fighting a civil war within a civil war, leaving U.S. officials confused and angry.
A
This U.S. soldier in Vietnam wears symbols of both war and peace on his chest.
j MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
What factors led to the low morale of U.S. troops?
FULFILLING A DUTY
Most American soldiers, however, firmly believed in their cause—to halt the spread of communism. They took patriotic pride in fulfilling their duty, just as their fathers had done in World War II. Most American soldiers fought courageously. Particularly heroic were the thousands of soldiers who endured years of torture and confinement as prisoners of war. In 1966, navy pilot Gerald Coffee's plane was shot down over North Vietnam. Coffee spent the next seven years—until he was released in 1973 as part of a cease-fire agreement—struggling to stay alive in an enemy prison camp.
A
Personal Voice gerald coffee “ My clothes were filthy and ragged. . . . With no boots, my socks—which I’d been able to salvage—were barely recognizable. . . . Only a few threads around my toes kept them spread over my feet; some protection, at least, as I shivered through the cold nights curled up tightly on my morguelike slab. ... My conditions and predicament were so foreign to me, so stifling, so overwhelming. I’d never been so hungry, so grimy, and in such pain. ”
—Beyond Survival
The Early War at Home
The Johnson administration thought the war would end quickly. As it dragged on,
support began to waver, and Johnson's domestic programs began to unravel.
740 Chapter 22
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing Effects ly What led to the growing concern in America about the Vietnam War?
THE GREAT SOCIETY SUFFERS
As the number of U.S. troops in Vietnam continued to mount, the war grew more costly, and the nation's economy began to suffer. The inflation rate, which was less than 2 percent through most of the early 1960s, more than tripled to 5.5 percent by 1969. In August of 1967, President Johnson asked for a tax increase to help fund the war and to keep inflation in check. Congressional conservatives agreed, but only after demanding and receiving a $6 billion reduction in funding for Great Society programs. Vietnam was slowly claiming an early casualty: Johnson's grand vision of domestic reform. THE LIVING-ROOM WAR
Through the media, specifically television, Vietnam became America's first "living-room war." The combat footage that appeared nightly on the news in millions of homes showed stark pictures that seemed to contradict the administration's optimistic war scenario.
Quoting body-count statistics that showed large numbers of communists dying in battle, General Westmoreland continually reported that a Vietcong surrender was imminent. Defense Secretary McNamara backed up the general, saying that he could see "the light at the end of the tunnel."
The repeated television images of Americans in body bags told a different story, though. While communists may have been dying, so too were Americans—over 16,000 between 1961 and 1967. Critics charged that a credibility gap was growing between what the Johnson administration reported and what was really happening.
One critic was Senator J. William Fulbright, chairman of the powerful Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Fulbright, a former Johnson ally, charged the president with a "lack of candor" in portraying the war effort. In early 1966, the senator conducted a series of televised committee hearings in which he asked members of the Johnson administration to defend their Vietnam policies. The Fulbright hearings delivered few major revelations, but they did contribute to the growing doubts about the war. One woman appeared to capture the mood of Middle America when she told an interviewer, "I want to get out, but I don't want to give in."
By 1967, Americans were evenly split over supporting and opposing the war. However, a small force outside of mainstream America, mainly from the ranks of the nation's youth, already had begun actively protesting the war. Their voices would grow louder and capture the attention of the entire nation.
ASSESSMENT
▲
First used in World War I, dog tags were stamped with personal identification information and worn by U.S. military personnel.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•Robert McNamara	•Army of the Republic of •napalm
•Dean Rusk	Vietnam (ARVN)	’Agent Orange
•William Westmoreland
•search-and-destroy mission •credibility gap
main idea
USING YOUR NOTES
Re-create the chart below. Then, show key military tactics and weapons of the Vietcong and Americans.
	Vietcong	U.S.
Tactics		
Weapons		
CRITICAL THINKING
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
Why did Americans fail to win the “hearts and minds” of the Vietnamese?
4.	CONTRASTING
In a paragraph, contrast the morale of the U.S. troops with that of the Vietcong. Use evidence from the text to support your response.
FORMING GENERALIZATIONS
What were the effects of the nightly TV coverage of the Vietnam War? Support your answer with examples from the text. Think About:
•	television images of Americans in body bags
•	the Johnson administration’s credibility gap
Which weapons and tactics do you
think were most successful? Explain.
The Vietnam War Years
TEKS8E,8F
A
Nation Divided MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
An antiwar movement in the U.S. pitted supporters of the government’s war policy against those who opposed it.
The painful process of healing a divided nation continues today.
•draft • New Left •Students for a Democratic Society (SDS)
•Free Speech
Movement
•dove
•hawk
							i
	«0i	neAm	erl	C<	Mlysh	Story	
		£^•4 ‘A®'					Jt
hmhsocialstudies.com!
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the antiwar movement.
In 1969, Stephan Gubar was told to report for possible military service in Vietnam. Gubar, 22, a participant in the civil rights movement, had filed as a conscientious objector (CO), or someone who opposed war on the basis of religious or moral beliefs. He was granted 1-A-O status, which meant that while he would not be forced to carry a weapon, he still qualified for noncombatant military duty. That year, Gubar was drafted— called for military service.
As did many other conscientious objectors, Gubar received special training as a medic. He described the memorable day his training ended.
A
Personal Voice stephan gubar “The thing that stands out most was . .. being really scared, being in formation and listening to the names and assignments being called. The majority of COs I knew had orders cut for Vietnam. And even though I could hear that happening, even though I could hear that every time a CO’s name came up, the orders were cut for Vietnam, I still thought there was a possibility I might not go. Then, when they called my name and said 'Vietnam,’. . .
I went to a phone and I called my wife. It was a tremendous shock. ”
—quoted in Days of Decision
While many young Americans proudly went off to war, some found ways to avoid the draft, and others simply refused to go. The growing protest movement sharply divided the country between supporters and opponents of the government's policy in Vietnam.
Stephan Gubar
The Working Class Goes to War
The idea of fighting a war in a faraway place for what they believed was a questionable cause prompted a number of young Americans to resist going to Vietnam.
A “MANIPULATABLE” DRAFT
Most soldiers who fought in Vietnam were called into combat under the country's Selective Service System, or draft, which had been established during World War I. Under this system, all males had to register with their local draft boards when they turned 18. All registrants were screened, and unless they were excluded—such as for medical reasons—in the event of war' men between the ages of 18 and 26 would be called into military service. 742 Chapter 22
Vocabulary deferment: the act
or instance of delaying
As Americans doubts about the war grew, thousands of men attempted to find ways around the draft, which one man characterized as a very manipulatable system." Some men sought out sympathetic doctors to grant medical exemptions, while others changed residences in order to stand before a more lenient draft board. Some Americans even joined the National Guard or Coast Guard, which often secured a deferment from service in Vietnam.
One of the most common ways to avoid the draft was to receive a college deferment, by which a young man enrolled in a university could put off his military service. Because university students during the 1960s tended to be white and financially well-off, many of the men who fought in Vietnam were lower-class whites or minorities who were less privileged economically. With almost 80 percent of American soldiers coming from lower economic levels, Vietnam was a working-class war.
AFRICAN AMERICANS IN VIETNAM
African Americans served in disproportionate numbers as ground combat troops. During the first several years of the war, blacks accounted for more than 20 percent of American combat deaths despite representing only about 10 percent of the U.S. population. The Defense Department took steps to correct that imbalance by instituting a draft lottery system in 1969. Martin Luther King, Jr., had refrained from speaking out against the war for fear that it would divert attention from the civil rights movement. But he could not maintain that stance for long. In 1967 he lashed out against what he called the "cruel irony" of American blacks dying for a country that still treated them as second-class citizens.
A
Personal Voice dr. martin luther king, jr, 44 We were taking the young black men who had been crippled by our society and sending them eight thousand miles away to guarantee liberties in Southeast Asia which they had not found in Southwest Georgia and East Harlem. ... We have been repeatedly faced with the cruel irony of watching Negro and white boys on TV screens as they kill and die together for a nation that has been unable to seat them together in the same schools. ”
—quoted in America's Vietnam War: 4 Narrative History
Racial tension ran high in many platoons, and in some cases, the hostility led to violence. The racism that gripped many military units was yet another factor that led to low troop morale in Vietnam. Ay
▲
A
Life magazine cover shows new draft inductees arriving for training at Fort Knox, Kentucky. MAIN IDEA
Synthesizing
4) Why did King call African Americans’ fighting in Vietnam an “irony”?
(J.S. Military Personnel in Vietnam*
600
500
400
300
200
100
			536,000^					
								
								
								
								
								
1963	1964	1965	1966	1967	1968	1969
Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1985; Encyclopedia Americana
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs What years signaled a rapid increase in the deployment of U.S. troop^
Two U.S. nurses rest at Cam Ranh Bay, the major entry point in South Vietnam for American supplies and troops.
WOMEN JOIN THE RANKS
While the U.S. military in the 1960s did not allow females to serve in combat, 10,000 women served in Vietnam—most of them as military nurses. Thousands more volunteered their services in Vietnam to the American Red Cross and the United Services Organization (USO), which delivered hospitality and entertainment to the troops. As the military marched off to Vietnam to fight against communist guerrillas, some of the men at home, as well as many women, waged a battle of their own. Tensions flared across the country as many of the nation's youths began to voice their opposition to the war.
The Roots of Opposition
Even before 1965, students were becoming more active socially and politically. Some participated in the civil rights struggle, while others pursued public service. As America became more involved in the war in Vietnam, college students across the country became a powerful and vocal group of protesters.
THE NEW LEFT
The growing youth movement of the 1960s became known as the New Left. The movement was "new" in relation to the "old left" of the 1930s, which had generally tried to move the nation toward socialism, and, in some cases, communism. While the New Left movement did not preach socialism, its followers demanded sweeping changes in American society. Voicing these demands was one of the better-known New Left organizations, Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), founded in 1960 by Tom Hayden and A1 Haber. The group charged that corporations and large government institutions had taken over America. The SDS called for a restoration of "participatory democracy" and greater individual freedom.
In 1964, the Free Speech Movement (FSM) gained prominence at the University of California at Berkeley. The FSM grew out of a clash between students and administrators over free speech on campus. Led by Mario Savio, a philosophy student, the FSM focused its criticism on what it called the American "machine " the nation's faceless and powerful business and government institutions.
CAMPUS ACTIVISM
Across the country the ideas of the FSM and SDS quickly spread to college campuses. Students addressed mostly campus issues, such as
dress codes, curfews, dormitory regulations, and mandatory Reserved Officer
main idea
Making
Inferences
What concerns about American democratic society did the New Left voice?
744 Chapter 22
Training Corps (ROTC) programs. At Fairleigh Dickinson University in New Jersey, students marched merely as "an expression of general student discontent."
With the onset of the Vietnam War, students across the country found a galvanizing issue and joined together in protest. By the mid-sixties, many youths believed the nation to be in need of fundamental change.
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
$ For what reasons did the protesters oppose the Vietnam War?
The Protest Movement Emerges
Throughout the spring of 1965, groups at a number of colleges began to host teach-ins to protest the war. At the University of Michigan, where only a year before President Johnson had announced his sweeping Great Society Program, teachers and students now assailed his war policy. "This is no longer a casual form of campus spring fever," journalist James Reston noted about the growing demon-
strations. As the war continued, the protests grew and divided the country.
THE MOVEMENT GROWS
In April of 1965, SDS helped organize a march on Washington, D.C., by some 20,000 protesters. By November of that year, a protest rally in Washington drew more than 30,000. Then, in February of 1966, the Johnson administration changed deferments for college students, requiring students to be in good academic standing in order to be granted a deferment. Campuses around the country erupted in protest. SDS called for civil disobedience at Selective Service Centers and openly counseled students to flee to Canada or Sweden. By the end of 1969, SDS had chapters on nearly 400 campuses. Youths opposing the war did so for several reasons. The most common was the belief that the conflict in Vietnam was basically a civil war and that the U.S. military had no business there. Some said that the oppressive South Vietnamese regime was no better than the Communist regime it was fighting. Others argued that the United States could not police the entire globe and that war was draining American strength in other important parts of the world. Still others saw war simply as morally unjust. ..£>
The antiwar movement grew beyond college campuses.
Small numbers of returning veterans began to protest the war. Folk singers such as Pete Seeger, Joan Baez, Phil Ochs, and the trio Peter, Paul, and Mary used music as a popular protest vehicle. The number one song in September 1965 was "Eve of Destruction," in which singer Barry McGuire stressed the ironic fact that young men could be drafted at age 18 but had to be 21 to vote. Perhaps the most popular antiwar song of the time was "I-Feel-Like-I'm-Fixin'-to-Die Rag" by Country Joe and the Fish. Written by bandleader Joe McDonald, a Vietnam veteran, this song sarcastically encouraged young men, politicians, businesses, and even parents to give their whole-hearted support to the war.
FROM PROTEST TO RESISTANCE
By 1967, the antiwar movement had intensified, with no sign of slowing down. "We were having no effect on U.S. policy," recalled one protest leader, "so we thought we had to up the ante. In the spring of 1967, nearly half a million protesters of all ages gathered in New York's Central Park. Shouting Burn cards, not people!" and "Hell, no, we won't go!" hundreds tossed their draft cards into a bonfire. A woman from New Jersey told a reporter, "So many of us are frustrated. We want to criticize this war because we think it s wrong, but we want to do it in the framework of loyalty.
HISTORICAL SPOTLIGHT
BALLAD OF THE GREEN BERETS”
Not every Vietnam-era pop song about war was an antiwar song.
At the top of the charts for five weeks in 1966 was "The Ballad of the Green Berets” by Staff Sergeant Barry Sadler of the U.S. Army Special Forces, known as the Green Berets:
Fighting soldiers from the sky,
Fearless men who jump and die,
Men who mean just what they say,
The brave men of the Green Beret.
The recording sold over a million copies in its first two weeks of release and was Billboard magazine’s song of the year.
DIFFICULT
DECISIONS
RESIST THE DRAFT OR SERVE YOUR COUNTRY?
As the fighting in Vietnam intensified, young men of draft age who opposed the war found themselves considering one of two options: register with the draft board and risk heading off to war, or find a way to avoid military service. Ways to avoid service included medical and educational deferments. But a great many men did not qualify for these. The choices that remained, such as fleeing the country, going to jail, or giving in and joining the ranks, came with a high price. Once a decision was made, there was no turning back.
1.	Imagine you oppose the war and are called to serve in Vietnam. What decision would you make? Would you feel guilty if you avoided the draft? If you chose to serve, how would you view those who did not serve your country?
2.	Do you think more young men would have been willing to serve had this been a different war? Explain.
Others were more radical in their view. David Harris, who would spend 20 months in jail for refusing to serve in Vietnam, explained his motives.
A
Personal Voice david Harris “Theoretically, I can accept the notion that there are circumstances in which you have to kill people. I could not accept the notion that Vietnam was one of those circumstances. And to me that left the option of either sitting by and watching what was an enormous injustice ... or [finding] some way to commit myself against it. And the position that I felt comfortable with in committing myself against it was total noncooperation—I was not going to be part of the machine. ”
—quoted in The War Within
Draft resistance continued from 1967 until President Nixon phased out the draft in the early 1970s. During these years, the U.S. government accused more than 200,000 men of draft offenses and imprisoned nearly 4,000 draft resisters. (Although some were imprisoned for four or five years, most won parole after 6 to 12 months.) Throughout these years, about 10,000 Americans fled, many to Canada.
In October of 1967, a demonstration at Washington's Lincoln Memorial drew about 75,000 protesters. After listening to speeches, approximately 30,000 demonstrators locked arms for a march on the Pentagon in order "to disrupt the center of the American war machine," as one organizer explained. As hundreds of protesters broke past the military police and mounted the Pentagon steps, they were met by tear gas and clubs. About 1,500 demonstrators were injured and at least 700 arrested.
WAR DIVIDES THE NATION
By 1967, Americans increasingly found themselves divided into two camps regarding the war. Those who strongly opposed the war and believed the United States should withdraw were known as doves. Feeling just as strongly that America £ should unleash much of its greater military force to win the war were the hawks. Despite the visibility of the antiwar protesters, a majority of American citizens in 1967 still remained committed to the war. Others, while less certain about the proper U.S. role in Vietnam, were shocked to see protesters publicly criticize a war in which their fellow Americans were fighting and dying. A poll taken in December of 1967 showed that 70 percent of Americans believed the war protests were "acts of disloyalty." A firefighter who lost his son in Vietnam articulated the bitter feelings a number of Americans felt toward the antiwar movement.
A
Personal Voice “ I’m bitter.... It’s people like us who give up our sons for the country. ... The college types, the professors, they go to Washington and tell the government what to do... . But their sons, they don’t end up in the swamps over there, in Vietnam. No sir. They’re deferred, because they’re in school. Or they get sent to safe places... . What bothers me about the peace crowd is that you can tell from their attitude, the way they look and what they say, that they don’t really love this country.”
—a firefighter quoted in Working-Class War
MAIN IDEA
Evaluating
Do you think it was right for the government to imprison draft resisters? Explain.
This sign reflects the view of many Americans that the antiwar protests undermined the war effort in Vietnam. ►
MAIN IDEA
Responding to antiwar posters, Americans who supported the government's Vietnam policy developed their own slogans: "Support our men in Vietnam" and Evaluating	"America—love it or leave it " ej
|| What were the	’
key issues that	JOHNSON REMAINS DETERMINED Throughout the turmoil and division
divided America?	that engulfed the country during the early years of the war, President Johnson
remained firm. Attacked by doves for not withdrawing and by hawks for not increasing military power rapidly enough, Johnson was dismissive of both groups
and their motives. He continued his policy of slow escalation.
A
Personal Voice lyndon b. Johnson “There has always been confusion, frustration, and difference of opinion in this country when there is a war going on. . . . You know what President Roosevelt went through, and President Wilson in World War I. He had some senators from certain areas . . . that gave him serious problems until victory was assured. . . .
We are going to have these differences. No one likes war. All people love peace. But you can’t have freedom without defending It.”
—quoted in No Hail, No Farewell
However, by the end of 1967, Johnson's policy—and the continuing stalemate—had begun to create turmoil within his own administration. In November, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, a key architect of U.S. escalation in Vietnam, quietly announced he was resigning to become head of the World Bank. "It didn't add up," McNamara recalled later. "What I was trying to find out was how ... the war went on year after year when we stopped the infiltration [from North Vietnam] or shrunk it and when we had a very high body count and so on. It just didn't make sense."	ir-................-
As it happened, McNamara's resignation came on the threshold of the most tumultuous year of the sixties. In 1968 the war—and Johnson's presidency—would take a drastic turn for the worse.
ASSESSMENT
1. TERMS & NAMES For each of the following, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•draft	•Students for a	•Free Speech Movement
• New Left	Democratic Society (SDS) • dove
• hawk
main idea
USING YOUR NOTES
Re-create the tree diagram below on your paper. Then fill it in with examples of student organizations, issues, and demonstrations of the New Left.
CRITICAL THINKING
DEVELOPING HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Imagine it is 1967. Do you think you would ally yourself with the hawks or the doves? Give reasons that support your position.
4.	EVALUATING
Do you agree that antiwar protests were “acts of disloyalty”? Why or why not?
ANALYZING VISUAL SOURCES
This antiwar poster is a parody of the World War I Uncle Sam poster (shown on page 382), which states, "I want you for the U.S. Army.” Why might the artist have chosen this American character to express the antiwar message?
TEKS8E,8F
1968:
A
Tumultuous Year MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
An enemy attack in Vietnam, two assassinations, and a chaotic political convention made 1968 an explosive year.
Disturbing events in 1968 accentuated the nation’s divisions, which are still healing in the 21st century.
•Tet offensive •Clark Clifford •Robert Kennedy
• Eugene McCarthy •Hubert Humphrey •George Wallace
OneAmerican'sStory
4#
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the major events of 1968.
On June 5, 1968, John Lewis, the first chairman of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, fell to the floor and wept. Robert F. Kennedy, a leading Democratic candidate for president, had just been fatally shot. Two months earlier, when Martin Luther King, Jr., had fallen victim to an assassin's bullet, Lewis had told himself he still had Kennedy. And now they both were gone. Lewis, who later became a congressman from Georgia, recalled the lasting impact of these assassinations.
A
Personal Voice john lewis 66There are people today who are afraid, in a sense, to hope or to have hope again, because of what happened in .. . 1968. Something was taken from us. The type of leadership that we had in a sense invested in, that we had helped to make and to nourish, was taken from us. . . . Something died in all of us with those assassinations. ”
—quoted in From Camelot to Kent State
These violent deaths were but two of the traumatic events that rocked the nation in 1968. From a shocking setback in
Vietnam to a chaotic Democratic National Convention in Chicago, the events of 1968 made it the most tumultuous year of a turbulent decade.
John Lewis
The Tet Offensive Turns the War
The year 1968 began with a daring surprise attack by the Vietcong on numerous cities in South Vietnam. The simultaneous strikes, while ending in military defeat for the Communist guerrillas, stunned the American public. Many people with moderate views began to turn against the war.
A SURPRISE ATTACK
January 30 was the Vietnamese equivalent of New Year’s Eve, the beginning of the lunar new year festivities known in Vietnam as Tet. 748 Chapter 22
Tet Offensive, Jan. 30-Feb. 24,1968
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
Location What were the geographical destinations of the Tet offensive attacks? What does this suggest about the Vietcong forces?
♦	Major battle
□	U.S. base
□	Demilitarized zone
0	75	150 miles
0	75	150 kilometers
17th Parallel
f~MAIN IDEA
Analyzing Issues
Why did
American support for the war change after the Tet offensive?
Throughout that day in 1968, vil-
lagers taking advantage of a week-
long truce proclaimed for Tet_____
streamed into cities across South
Vietnam to celebrate their new year.
At the same time, many funerals were being held for war victims.
Accompanying the funerals were the traditional firecrackers, flutes, and, of course, coffins.
The coffins, however, contained weapons, and many of the villagers were Vietcong agents. That night the Vietcong launched an overwhelming attack on over 100 towns and cities in South Vietnam, as well as 12 U.S. air bases. The fighting was especially fierce in Saigon and the former capital of Hue. The Vietcong even attacked the U.S. embassy in Saigon, killing five Americans. The Tet offensive continued for about a month before U.S. and South Vietnamese forces re-gained control of the cities.
General Westmoreland declared the attacks an overwhelming defeat for the Vietcong, whose "well-laid plans went afoul." From a purely
military standpoint, Westmoreland was right. The Vietcong lost about 32,000 soldiers during the month-long battle, while the American and ARVN forces lost little more than 3,000.
TET CHANGES PUBLIC OPINION
From a psychological—and political—standpoint, Westmoreland's claim could not have been more wrong. The Tet offensive greatly shook the American public, which had been told repeatedly and had come to believe that the enemy was close to defeat. Now the Pentagon's continued reports of favorable body counts—or massive Vietcong casualties—rang hollow. Daily, Americans saw the shocking images of attacks by an enemy that seemed to be everywhere. In a matter of weeks, the Tet offensive changed millions of minds about the war. Despite the years of antiwar protest, a poll taken just before Tet showed that only 28 percent of Americans called themselves doves, while 56 percent claimed to be hawks. After Tet, both sides tallied 40 percent. The mainstream media, which had reported the war in a skeptical but generally balanced way, now openly criticized the war. One of the nation's most respected journalists, Walter Cronkite, told his viewers that it now seemed "more certain than ever that the bloody experience of Vietnam is to end in a stalemate."
Minds were also changing at the White House. To fill the defense secretary position left vacant by Robert McNamara's resignation, Johnson picked Clark Clifford, a friend and supporter of the president's Vietnam policy. However, after settling in and studying the situation, Clifford concluded that the war was unwinnable. "We seem to have a sinkhole," Clifford said. "We put in more-they match it. I see more and more fighting with more and more casualties on the U.S. side and no end in sight to the action."
I
Kl
HISTORY
VIDEO
Command Decisions: Tet Refugees

The Vietnam War Years
If I've lost Walter [Cronkite],
then it's over. I've lost Mr.
Average Citizen.”
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Following the Tet offensive, Johnson's popularity plummeted. In public opinion polls taken at the end of February 1968, nearly 60 percent of Americans disapproved of his handling of the war. Nearly half of the country now felt it had been a mistake to send American troops to Vietnam.
War weariness eventually set in, and 1968 was the watershed year. Johnson recognized the change, too. Upon learning of Cronkite's pessimistic analysis of the war, the president lamented, "If I've lost Walter, then it's over. I've lost Mr. Average Citizen."
Days of Loss and Rage
The Vietnam War and the divisiveness it caused took its toll on President Johnson.
The growing division over Vietnam led to a shocking political development in the spring of 1968, a season in which Americans also endured two assassinations, a series of urban riots, and a surge in college campus protests.
JOHNSON WITHDRAWS
Well before the Tet offensive, an antiwar coalition within the Democratic Party had sought a Democratic candidate to challenge Johnson in the 1968 primary elections. Robert Kennedy, John F. Kennedy's brother and a senator from New York, decided not to run, citing party loyalty. However, in November of 1967, Minnesota senator Eugene McCarthy answered the group's call, declaring that he would run against Johnson on a platform to end the war in Vietnam. McCarthy's early campaign attracted little notice, but in the weeks following Tet it picked up steam. In the New Hampshire Democratic primary in March 1968, the little-known senator captured 42 percent of the vote. While Johnson won the primary with 48 percent of the vote, the slim margin of victory was viewed as a defeat for the president. Influenced by Johnson's perceived weakness at the polls, Robert Kennedy declared his candidacy for president. The Democratic Party had become a house divided.
In a televised address on March 31, 1968, Johnson announced a dramatic change in his Vietnam policy—the United States would seek negotiations to end the war. In the meantime, the policy of U.S. escalation would end, the bombing would eventually cease, and steps would be taken to ensure that the South Vietnamese played a larger role in the war.
The president paused and then ended his speech with a statement that shocked the nation. Declaring that he did not want the presidency to become "involved in the partisan divisions that are developing in this political year," Lyndon Johnson announced, "Accordingly, I shall not seek, and I will not accept, the nomination of my party for another term as your president." The president was stepping down from national politics, his grand plan for domestic reform done in by a costly and divisive war. "That . . . war," Johnson later admitted, "killed the lady I really loved—the Great Society."
VIOLENCE AND PROTEST GRIP THE NATION
The Democrats—as well as the nation—were in for more shock in 1968. On April 4, America was rocked by the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr. Violence ripped through more than 100 U.S. cities as enraged followers of the slain civil rights leader burned buildings and destroyed neighborhoods. Just two months later, a bullet cut down yet another popular national figure.
Robert Kennedy had become a strong candidate in the Democratic primary, draw-
ing support from minorities and urban Democratic voters. On June 4, Kennedy won
the crucial California primary. Just after midnight of June 5, he gave a victory
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Motives
Why did
President Johnson decide not to run again?
750 Chapter 22
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Issues
Why was
1968 characterized as a year of “lost control” in America?
Vocabulary Platform: a formal declaration of the Pnnciples on which a Political party ^akes its appeal t0 the public
speech at a Los Angeles hotel. On his way out he passed through the hotel's kitchen, where a young Palestinian immigrant, Sirhan Sirhan, was hiding with a gun. Sirhan, who later said he was angered by Kennedy's support of Israel, fatally shot the senator.
Jack Newfield, a speechwriter for Kennedy, described the anguish he and many Americans felt over the loss of two of the nation's leaders.
A
Personal Voice jack newfield “Things were not really getting better. . . we shall not overcome. ... We had already glimpsed the most compassionate leaders our nation could produce, and they had all been assassinated. And from this time forward, things would get worse: Our best political leaders were part of memory now, not hope. ” —quoted in Nineteen Sixty-Eight
Meanwhile, the nation's college campuses continued to protest. During the first six months of 1968, almost 40,000 students on more than 100 campuses took part in more than 200 major demonstrations. While many
of the demonstrations continued to target U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War, students also clashed with university officials over campus and social issues. A massive student protest at Columbia University in New York City held the nation's attention for a week in April. There, students protesting the university's community policies took over several buildings. Police eventually restored order and arrested nearly 900 protesters.
Recalling the violence and turmoil that plagued the nation in 1968, the journalist and historian Garry Wills wrote, "There was a sense everywhere . . . that things were giving way. That [people] had not only lost control of [their] history, but might never regain it." gj
A
Turbulent Race for President The chaos and violence of 1968 climaxed in August, when thousands of antiwar demonstrators converged on the city of Chicago to protest at the Democratic National Convention. The convention, which featured a bloody riot between protesters and police, fractured the Democratic Party and thus helped a nearly forgotten Republican win the White House.
TURMOIL IN CHICAGO
With Lyndon Johnson stepping down and Robert Kennedy gone, the 1968 Democratic presidential primary race pitted Eugene McCarthy against Hubert Humphrey, Johnson's vice-president. McCarthy, while still popular with the nation's antiwar segment, had little chance of defeating Humphrey, a loyal party man who had President Johnson s support. During the last week of August, the Democrats met at their convention in Chicago, supposedly to choose a candidate. In reality, Humphrey's nomination had already been determined, a decision that upset many antiwar activists. As the delegates arrived in Chicago, so, too, did nearly 10,000 protesters. Led by men such as SDS veteran Tom Hayden, many demonstrators sought to pressure the Democrats into adopting an antiwar platform. Others came to voice their
The Vietnam War Yet
Chicago police attempt to disperse antiwar demonstrators at the 1968 Democratic convention. Protesters shouted, “The whole world is watching!”
displeasure with Humphrey's nomination. Still others, known as Yippies (members of the Youth International Party), had come hoping to provoke violence that might discredit the Democratic Party. Chicago's mayor, Richard J. Daley, was determined to keep the protesters under control. With memories of the nationwide riots after King's death still fresh, Daley mobilized 12,000 Chicago police officers and over 5,000 National Guard. "As long as I am mayor," Daley vowed, "there will be law and order."
Order, however, soon collapsed. On August 28, as delegates cast votes for Humphrey, protesters were gathering in a downtown park to march on the convention. With television cameras focused on them, police moved into the crowd, sprayed the protesters with Mace, and beat them with nightsticks. Many protesters tried to flee, while others retaliated, pelting the riot-helmeted police with rocks and bottles. "The whole world is watching!" protesters shouted, as police attacked demonstrators and bystanders alike, jg)
The rioting soon spilled out of the park and into the downtown streets. One nearby hotel, observed a New York Times reporter, became a makeshift aid station.
A
Personal Voice j. anthony lukas “ Demonstrators, reporters, McCarthy workers, doctors, all began to stagger into the [hotel] lobby, blood streaming from face and head wounds. The lobby smelled from tear gas, and stink bombs dropped by the Yippies. A few people began to direct the wounded to a makeshift hospital on the fifteenth floor, the McCarthy staff headquarters. ”
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
What were the reasons protesters demonstrated in Chicago?
—quoted in Decade of Shocks
Disorder of a different kind reigned inside the convention hall, where delegates bitterly debated an antiwar plank in the party platform. When word of the riot filtered into the hall, delegates angrily shouted at Mayor Daley, who was present as a delegate himself. Daley returned their shouts with equal vigor. The whole world indeed was watching—on their televisions. The images of the Democrats—both inside and outside the convention hall—as a party of disorder became etched in the minds of millions of Americans.
752 Chapter 22
f
Not shown:
■ Alaska SI Hawaii
ffi District of Columbia
NIXON TRIUMPHS
One beneficiary of this turmoil was Republican presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon, who by 1968 had achieved one of the greatest political comebacks in American politics. After his loss to Kennedy in the presidential race of 1960, Nixon tasted defeat again in 1962 when he ran for governor of California. His political career all but dead, Nixon joined a New York law firm, but he never strayed far from politics. In 1966, Nixon campaigned for Republican candidates in congressional elections, helping them to win back 47 House seats and 3 Senate seats from Democrats. In 1968, Nixon announced his candidacy for president and won the party's nomination.
During the presidential race, Nixon campaigned on a promise to restore law and order, which appealed to many middle-class Americans tired of years of riots and protests. He also promised, in vague but appealing terms, to end the war in Vietnam. Nixon's candidacy was helped by the entry of former Alabama governor George Wallace into the race as a
third-party candidate. Wallace, a Democrat running on the American Independent Party ticket, was a longtime champion of school segregation and states' rights. Labeled the "white backlash" candidate, Wallace captured five Southern states. In addition, he attracted a surprisingly high number of Northern white working-class voters disgusted with inner-city riots and antiwar protests.
In the end, Nixon defeated Humphrey and inherited the quagmire in Vietnam. He eventually would end America's involvement in Vietnam, but not before his war policies created even more protest and uproar within the country.
Election of 1968			
		Electoral	Popular
Party	Candidate	votes	votes
■ Republican	Richard M. Nixon	301	31,785,480
Democratic	Hubert H. Humphrey	191	31,275,166
■ American	George C. Wallace	46	9,906,473
Independent
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Charts 1. In what region did Wallace carry states?
2- By how many electoral votes did Nixon defeat Humphrey?
ASSESSMENT
i I
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. •Tet offensive	• Robert Kennedy	• Hubert Humphrey
• Clark Clifford	• Eugene McCarthy	• George Wallace
main idea
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a time line of major events that occurred in 1968. Use the months already plotted on the time line below as a guide.
I
January | 1 April | | August | 	it—	„L
March
June
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING EVENTS
Why do you think the Tet offensive turned so many Americans against the war? Support your answer with reasons.
MAKING INFERENCES
Refer to President Johnson’s quote on page 750. What do you think he meant when he said "If I've lost Walter [Cronkite], then it’s over, ,’ve lost Mr. Average Citizen"? Explain.
MAKING INFERENCES
Describe responses to the Vietnam War. Do you think there might have been a relationship between the violence of the Vietnam War and the growing climate of violence in the United States during 1968? Why or why not?
Which event do you think was most
significant? Explain.
The Vietnam War
TEKS8D,8E,8F, 17C,20A,23B
The End of the War and Its Legacy
MAINjD^2~J ( WHY IT MATTERS NOW ~ | j	Terms & Names
President Nixon instituted	Since Vietnam, the United States	• Richard Nixon
his Vietnamization policy,	considers more carefully the risks	’Henry Kissinger
and America’s longest war	to its own interests before inter-	’Vietnamization
finally came to an end.	vening in foreign affairs.	’silent majority
•My Lai
Kent State University Pentagon Papers War Powers Act
One American's
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the impact that the Vietnam War had on the United States.
Alfred S. Bradford served in Vietnam from September 1968 to August 1969. A member of the 25th Infantry Division, he was awarded several medals, including the Purple Heart, given to soldiers wounded in battle. One day, Bradford’s eight-year-old daughter, Elizabeth, inquired about his experience in Vietnam. "Daddy, why did you do it?" she asked. Bradford recalled what he had told himself.
A
Personal Voice Alfred s. Bradford “Vietnam was my generation’s adventure. I wanted to be part of that adventure and I believed that it was my duty as an American, both to serve my country and particularly not to stand by while someone else risked his life in my place. I do not regret my decision to go, but I learned in Vietnam not to confuse America with the politicians elected to administer America, even when they claim they are speaking for America, and I learned that I have a duty to myself and to my country to exercise my own judgment based upon my own conscience.99
—quoted in Some Even Volunteered
The legacy of the war was profound; it dramatically affected the way AUS soldier sits Americans viewed their government and the world. Richard Nixon had promised	near Quang Tri,
in 1968 to end the war, but it would take nearly five more years—and over 20,000	Vietnam, during
more American deaths—to end the nation's involvement in Vietnam.	a break in the
_____________________________ fighting.
President Nixon and Vietnamization
In the summer of 1969, newly elected president Richard Nixon announced the first U.S. troop withdrawals from Vietnam. "We have to get rid of the nightmares we inherited," Nixon later told reporters. "One of the nightmares is war without end." However, as Nixon pulled out the troops, he continued the war against North Vietnam, a policy that some critics would charge prolonged the "war without end" for several more bloody years.
754 Chapter 22
MAIN IDEA
Synthesizing
$ What was the impact of Vietnamization on the United States?
THE PULLOUT BEGINS
As President Nixon settled into the White House in January of 1969, negotiations to end the war in Vietnam were going nowhere. The United States and South Vietnam insisted that all North Vietnamese forces withdraw from the South and that the government of Nguyen Van Thieu, then South Vietnam s ruler, remain in power. The North Vietnamese and Vietcong demanded that U.S. troops withdraw from South Vietnam and that the Thieu government step aside for a coalition government that would include the Vietcong. In the midst of the stalled negotiations, Nixon conferred with National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger on a plan to end America's involvement in Vietnam. Kissinger, a German emigrant who had earned three degrees from Harvard, was an expert on international relations. Their plan, known as Vietnamization, called for the gradual withdrawal of U.S. troops in order for the South Vietnamese to take on a more active combat role in the war. By August of 1969, the first 25,000 U.S. troops had returned home from Vietnam. Over the next three years, the number of American troops in Vietnam dropped from more than 500,000 to less than 25,000.
WITH HONOR”
Part of Nixon and Kissinger's Vietnamization policy was aimed at establishing what the president called a "peace with honor." Nixon intended to maintain U.S. dignity in the face of its withdrawal from war. A further goal was to preserve U.S. clout at the negotiation table, as Nixon still demanded that the South Vietnamese government remain intact. With this objective—and even as the pullout had begun—Nixon secretly ordered a massive bombing campaign against supply routes and bases in North Vietnam. The president also ordered that bombs be dropped on the neighboring countries of Laos and Cambodia, which held a number of Vietcong sanctuaries. Nixon told his aide H. R. Haldeman that he wanted the enemy to believe he was capable of anything. A
Personal Voice richard m. nixon “ I call It the madman theory, Bob. ... I want the North Vietnamese to believe I’ve reached the point where I might do anything to stop the war. We’ll just slip the word to them that ‘for God’s sake, you know Nixon is obsessed about Communists. We can’t restrain him when he’s angry—and he has his hand on the nuclear button’ —and Ho Chi Minh himself will be in Paris in two days begging for peace. ”
—quoted in The Price of Power
Total U.S. Bomb Tonnage
World War II and Korean War
Vietnam War
2.6 million tons
Source: Vietnam War Almanac
8 million tons
U.S.	ierial Bomb Tonnage, 1965-1971						
1,600 I	1,400							
							
							
o? 1,200 I 1,000 5 800 600 <Z) £	400 200							
							
							
							
							
							
1965	1966	1967	1968	1969	1970	1971 Source: The Air War in Indochina							
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs- 1.	Examine the graph. How did the Vietnam conflict change over time?
2.	Based on the chart, what type of war would you : fought in Vietnam? 
The Vietnam War Yi
Trouble Continues on the Home front
HISTORY
▲
President Nixon points to a map of Cambodia during a televised speech on April 30,1970.
VIDEO
Nixon's "Secret Plan" to End Vietnam War
Seeking to win support for his war policies, Richard Nixon appealed to what he called the silent majority—moderate, mainstream Americans who quietly supported the U.S. efforts in Vietnam. While many average Americans did support the president, the events of the war continued to divide the country.
THE MY LAI MASSACRE
In November of 1969, Americans learned of a shocking event. That month, New York Times correspondent Seymour Hersh reported that on March 16, 1968, a U.S. platoon under the command of Lieutenant William Calley, Jr., had massacred innocent civilians in the small village of My Lai (me" IT") in northern South Vietnam. Calley was searching for Vietcong rebels. Finding no sign of the enemy, the troops rounded up the villagers and shot more than 200 innocent Vietnamese—mostly women, children, and elderly men. "We all huddled them up," recalled 22-year-old Private Paul Meadlo. "I poured about four clips into the group.... The mothers was hugging their children. . . . Well, we kept right on firing." The troops insisted that they were not responsible for the shootings because they were only following Lieutenant Calley's orders. When asked what his directive had been, one soldier answered, "Kill anything that breathed." Twenty-five army officers were charged with some degree of responsibility, but only Calley was convicted and imprisoned.
THE INVASION OF CAMBODIA
Despite the shock over My Lai, the country's mood by 1970 seemed to be less explosive. American troops were on their way home, and it appeared that the war was finally winding down. On April 30, 1970, President Nixon announced that U.S. troops had invaded Cambodia to clear out North Vietnamese and Vietcong supply centers. The president defended his action: "If when the chips are down, the world's most powerful nation acts like a pitiful, helpless giant, the forces of totalitarianism and anarchy will threaten free nations . . . throughout the world."
Upon hearing of the invasion, college students across the country burst out in protest. In what became the first general student strike in the nation's history, more than 1.5 million students closed down some 1,200 campuses. The president of Columbia University called the month that followed the Cambodian invasion "the most disastrous month of May in the history of . . . higher education."
VIOLENCE ON CAMPUS
Disaster struck hardest at Kent State University in Ohio, where a massive student protest led to the burning of the ROTC building. In response to the growing unrest, the local mayor called in the National Guard. On May 4, 1970, the Guards fired live ammunition into a crowd of campus protesters who were hurling rocks at them. The gunfire wounded nine people and killed four, including two who had not even participated in the rally. Ten days later, similar violence rocked the mostly all-black college of Jackson State in Mississippi. National Guardsmen there confronted a group of antiwar demonstrators and fired on the crowd after several bottles were thrown. In the hail of bullets, 12 students were wounded and 2 were killed, both innocent bystanders.
In a sign that America still remained sharply divided about the war, the coun-
try hotly debated the campus shootings. Polls indicated that many Americans
supported the National Guard; respondents claimed that the students "got what
Background
Calley was imprisoned only a short time before President Nixon granted him house arrest. Calley was paroled in 1974, having served three years.
756 Chapter 22
Photojournalism J
History Through
KENT STATE
Photographer John Filo was a senior at Kent State University when antiwar demonstrations rocked the campus. When the National Guard began firing at student protesters,
Filo began shooting pictures, narrowly escaping a bullet himself.
As he continued to document the horrific scene, a girl running to the side of a fallen student caught his eye. Just as she dropped to her knees and screamed, Filo snapped a photograph that would later win the Pulitzer Prize and become one of the most memorable images of the decade.
Mary Ann Vecchio grieves over the I body of Jeffrey Glenn Miller, a student shot by National Guard troops at Kent State. In the original photograph, a fence post appeared behind the woman’s head. It is believed that
someone manipulated the image in the early 1970s to make it more visually appealing.
SKILLBUILDER
Analyzing Visual Sources 1.	Why do you think this photograph remains a symbol of the Vietnam War era today? Explain your answer with specific details of the photograph.
2.	What do you think is the most striking element of this photograph? Why?
j main idea I
Analyzing
Issues
How did the campus shootings demonstrate the continued divisions within the country?
they were asking for." The weeks following the campus turmoil brought new attention to a group known as "hardhats," construction workers and other blue-collar Americans who supported the U.S. government's war policies. In May of 1970, nearly 100,000 members of the Building and Construction Trades Council of New York held a rally outside city hall to support the government.
THE PENTAGON PAPERS
Nixon and Kissinger's Cambodia policy, however, cost Nixon significant political support. By first bombing and then invading Cambodia without even notifying Congress, the president stirred anger on Capitol Hill. On December 31,1970, Congress repealed the Tonkin Gulf Resolution, which had given the president near independence in conducting policy in Vietnam. Support for the war eroded even further when in June of 1971 former Defense Department worker Daniel Ellsberg leaked what became known as the Pentagon Papers. The 7,000-page document, written for Defense Secretary Robert McNamara in 1967-1968, revealed among other things that the government had drawn up plans for entering the war even as President Lyndon Johnson promised that he would not send American troops to Vietnam. Furthermore, the papers showed that there was never any plan to end the war as long as the North Vietnamese persisted.
For many Americans, the Pentagon Papers confirmed their belief that the government had not been honest about its war intentions. The document, while not particularly damaging to the Nixon administration, supported what opponents of the war had been saying.
The Vietnam War Years
HENRY KISSINGER 1923-
Henry Kissinger, who helped negotiate America’s withdrawal from Vietnam and who later would help forge historic new relations with China and the Soviet Union, held a deep interest in the concept of power. “You know,” he once noted, “most of these world leaders, you wouldn’t want to know socially. Mostly they are intellectual mediocrities. The thing that is interesting about them is . . . their power.”
At first, Kissinger seemed an unlikely candidate to work for Richard Nixon. Kissinger declared, “That man Nixon is not fit to be president.” However, the two became trusted colleagues.
The Long War Ends
In March of 1972, the North Vietnamese launched their largest attack on South Vietnam since the Tet offensive in
1968.	President Nixon responded by ordering a massive bombing campaign against North Vietnamese cities. He also ordered that mines be laid in Haiphong harbor, the North's largest harbor, into which Soviet and Chinese ships brought supplies. The Communists "have never been bombed like they are going to be bombed this time," Nixon vowed. The bombings halted the North Vietnamese attack, but the grueling stalemate continued. It was after this that the Nixon administration took steps to finally end America's involvement in Vietnam.
IS AT HAND”
By the middle of 1972, the country's growing social division and the looming presidential election prompted the Nixon administration to change its negotiating policy. Polls showed that more than 60 percent of Americans in 1971 thought that the United States should withdraw all troops from Vietnam by the end of the year. Henry Kissinger, the president's adviser for national security affairs, served as Nixon's top negotiator in Vietnam. Since
1969,	Kissinger had been meeting privately with North Vietnam's chief negotiator, Le Due Tho. Eventually, Kissinger dropped his insistence that North Vietnam withdraw all its troops from the South before the complete withdrawal of American troops. On October 26, 1972, days before the presidential election, Kissinger announced, "Peace is at hand."
THE FINAL PUSH
President Nixon won reelection, but the promised peace proved to be elusive. The Thieu regime, alarmed at the prospect of North Vietnamese troops stationed in South Vietnam, rejected Kissinger's plan. Talks broke off on December 16. Two days later, the president unleashed a ferocious bombing campaign against Hanoi and Haiphong, the two largest cities in North Vietnam. In what became known as the "Christmas bombings," U.S. planes dropped 100,000 bombs over the course of eleven straight days, pausing only on Christmas Day. At this point, calls to end the war resounded from the halls of Congress as well as from Beijing and Moscow. Everyone, it seemed, had finally grown weary of the war. The warring parties returned to the peace table, and on January 27, 1973, the United States signed an "Agreement on Ending the War and Restoring Peace in Vietnam." Under the agreement, North Vietnamese troops would remain in South Vietnam. However, Nixon promised to respond "with full force" to any violation of the peace agreement. On March 29, 1973, the last U.S. combat troops left for home. For America, the Vietnam War had ended.
THE FALL OF SAIGON
The war itself, however, raged on. Within months of the United States' departure, the cease-fire agreement between North and South Vietnam collapsed. In March of 1975, after several years of fighting, the North Vietnamese launched a full-scale invasion against the South. Thieu appealed to the United States for help. America provided economic aid but refused to send troops. Soon thereafter, President Gerald Ford—who assumed the presidency after the Watergate scandal forced President Nixon to resign—gave a speech in which he captured the nation's attitude toward the war: MAIN IDEA
Chronological
Order
Cj Summarize what led to the agreement to end the war in Vietnam.
758 Chapter 22
MAIN IDEA
Evaluating
Decisions
Why might the United States have refused to reenter the war?
America can regain its sense of pride that existed before Vietnam. But it cannot be achieved by refighting a war that is finished as far as America is concerned." On April 30, 1975, North Vietnamese tanks rolled into Saigon and captured the city. Soon after, South Vietnam surrendered to North Vietnam.
The War Leaves a Painful Legacy
The Vietnam War exacted a terrible price from its participants. In all, 58,000 Americans were killed and some 303,000 were wounded. North and South Vietnamese deaths topped 2 million. In addition, the war left Southeast Asia highly unstable, which led to further war in Cambodia. In America, a divided nation attempted to come to grips with an unsuccessful war. In the end, the conflict in Vietnam left many Americans with a more cautious outlook on foreign affairs and a more cynical attitude toward their government.
AMERICAN VETERANS COPE BACK HOME
While families welcomed home their sons and daughters, the nation as a whole extended a cold hand to its returning Vietnam veterans. There were no brass bands, no victory parades, no cheering crowds. Instead, many veterans faced indifference or even hostility from an America still torn and bitter about the war. Lily Jean Lee Adams, who served as an army nurse in Vietnam, recalled arriving in America in 1970 while still in uniform. A
Personal Voice lily jean lee adams “ In the bus terminal, people were staring at me and giving me dirty looks. I expected the people to smile, like, ‘Wow, she was in Vietnam, doing something for her country—wonderful.’ I felt like I had walked into another country, not my country. So I went into the ladies’ room and changed. ”
—quoted in A Piece of My Heart
Many Vietnam veterans readjusted successfully to civilian life. However, about 15 percent of the 3.3 million soldiers who served developed post-traumatic stress disorder. Some had recurring nightmares about their war experiences, while many suffered from severe headaches and memory lapses. Other veterans became
Lieutenant Colonel Robert Stirm, a returning POW, receives a warm welcome from his family in 1973. The longest-held Vietnam POW was Lieutenant Everett Alvarez, Jr., of California. He was imprisoned for more than eight years.
THV'Vietnam War Years
VIETNAM VETERANS MEMORIAL: THE WALL
In 1981, a national competition was held to determine the Vietnam memorial’s design. Maya Ying Lin, above, a 21-year-old architecture student of Chinese descent, submitted the winning design—two long, black granite walls on which are etched the names of the men and women who died or are missing in action.
“I didn’t want a static object that people would just look at,”
Lin said, “but something they could relate to as on a journey, or passage, that would bring each to his own conclusions.” Lin’s design became known simply as “the Wall."
A
Each year, over two million people visit the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. Many leave remembrances that are collected nightly by park rangers and stored in a museum. Inscribed on the memorial are over 58,000 names of Americans who died in the war or were then still listed as missing in action. highly apathetic or began abusing drugs or alcohol. Several thousand even committed suicide.
In an effort to honor the men and women who served in Vietnam, the U.S. government unveiled the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C., in 1982. Many Vietnam veterans, as well as their loved ones, have found visiting the memorial a deeply moving, even healing, experience.
FURTHER TURMOIL IN SOUTHEAST ASIA
The end of the Vietnam War ushered in a new period of violence and chaos in Southeast Asia. In unifying Vietnam, the victorious Communists initially held out a conciliatory hand to the South Vietnamese. "You have nothing to fear," declared Colonel Bui Tin of the North Vietnamese Army.
However, the Communists soon imprisoned more than
400,000 South Vietnamese in harsh "reeducation," or labor, camps. As the Communists imposed their rule throughout the land, nearly 1.5 million people fled Vietnam. They included citizens who had supported the U.S. war effort, as well as business owners, whom the Communists expelled when they began nationalizing the country's business sector.
Also fleeing the country was a large group of poor Vietnamese, known as boat people because they left on anything from freighters to barges to rowboats. Their efforts to reach safety across the South China Sea often met with tragedy; nearly 50,000 perished on the high seas due to exposure, drowning, illness, or piracy.
The people of Cambodia also suffered greatly after the war. The U.S. invasion of Cambodia had unleashed a brutal civil war in which a communist group known as the Khmer Rouge, led by Pol Pot, seized power in 1975. In an effort to transform the country into a peasant society, the Khmer Rouge executed professionals and anyone with an education or foreign ties. During its reign of terror the Khmer Rouge is believed to have killed at least 1 million Cambodians.
THE LEGACY OF VIETNAM
Even after it ended, the Vietnam War remained a subject of great controversy for Americans. Many hawks continued to insist that
the war could have been won if the United States had employed more military
760 Chapter 22
1
MAIN IDEA
Contrasting
U
Contrast the two viewpoints regarding the legacy of the Vietnam War. power. They also blamed the antiwar movement at home for destroying American morale. Doves countered that the North Vietnamese had displayed incredible resiliency and that an increase in U.S. military force would have resulted only in a continuing stalemate. In addition, doves argued that an unrestrained war against North Vietnam might have prompted a military reaction from China or the Soviet Union, jy
The war resulted in several major U.S. policy changes. First, the Twenty-sixth Amendment passed in 1971, lowering the voting age for all elections from 21 to 18. Young Americans had protested that if they were old enough to be drafted, they should be old enough to vote. Also, the government abolished the draft, which had stirred so much antiwar sentiment.
The country also took steps to curb the president's war-making powers. In November 1973, Congress passed the War Powers Act, which stipulated that a president must inform Congress within 48 hours of sending forces into a hostile area without a declaration of war. In addition, the troops may remain there no longer than 90 days unless Congress approves the president's actions or declares war. Since its passage, the resolution's constitutionality has been a subject of debate. Some observers believe that it misinterprets the intention of the Founders in granting Congress the power to declare war, taking too much power from the executive branch. Others feel it simply serves to clarify the separation of powers between the executive and legislative branches that the Founders intended all along.
In a broader sense, the Vietnam War significantly altered America's views on foreign policy. In what has been labeled the Vietnam syndrome, Americans now pause and consider possible risks to their own interests before deciding whether to intervene in the affairs of other nations.
Finally, the war contributed to an overall cynicism among Americans about their government and political leaders that persists today. Americans grew suspicious of a government that could provide as much misleading information or conceal as many activities as the Johnson and Nixon administrations had done. Coupled with the Watergate scandal of the mid-1970s, the war diminished the optimism and faith in government that Americans felt during the Eisenhower and Kennedy years.
I ;
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•Richard Nixon	•Vietnamization	*My Lai
•Henry Kissinger	-silent majority	*Kent State University
•Pentagon Papers •War Powers Act
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a web like the one shown, list the effects of the Vietnam War on America.
Vietnam War’s Effect on America
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING EFFECTS
In your opinion, what was the main effect of the U.S. government’s deception about its policies and military conduct in Vietnam? Support your answer. Think About:
•	the Pentagon Papers
•	Nixon’s secrecy in authorizing military maneuvers
MAKING INFERENCES
How would you account for the cold
homecoming American soldiers
received when they returned from
Vietnam? Support your answer.
5.	SYNTHESIZING
In the end, do you think the United States’ withdrawal from Vietnam was a victory for the United States or a defeat? Explain your answer.
6.	EVALUATING
How effective was the Twenty-sixth Amendment in responding to wartime concerns and extending political rights?
Choose one effect to further explain
in a paragraph.
The Vietnam War Yei
ECONOMICS SPOTLIGHT
Defense Spending
During World War II, the United States increased its defense spending dramatically over prewar levels. The military needed to gear up to fight in Europe and the Pacific, and the federal government spent hundreds of billions of dollars on the war effort. Not surprisingly, military spending often increased during periods of war and other military conflicts throughout the 20th century. Tensions of the Cold War also affected the U.S. defense budget. Defense spending tended to decrease when those conflicts ended. Some economists have observed the impact of defense spending on the nation's economy.
BUSINESS CYCLES
Economic changes often follow a broad pattern made up of a series of periods of expanding and contracting economic activity known as the business cycle. The business cycle is measured by increases or decreases in real gross domestic product (GDP), or the market value of all the goods and services produced in a nation within a specific time period. The business cycle generally consists of four phases—expansion, peak, contraction, and trough. An expansion is marked by increased business activity. The unemployment rate falls, businesses produce more, and consumers buy more goods and services. A peak is a transition period in which expansion slows. A contraction or recession occurs when business activity decreases. The unemployment rate rises, while both production and consumer spending fall. A deep, long-lasting recession is called a depression. Business activity reaches its lowest point during a trough, after which activity starts to increase and a new cycle begins.
U.S.
Defense Spending, 1945-2000 Federal Defense Spending
(in billions of dollars)
Source: www.usgovernmentspending.com
DEFENSE SPENDING
As one might expect, defense spending in the United States has, for the most part been tied to U.S. involvement in global conflicts. As you can see from the graph above the defense budget, which had dropped considerably after World War II ended increased from 1949 to 1953. The period from 1965 to 1969 saw another increase Then, from 1976 to 1989, defense spending increased dramatically. These time periods coincide roughly with the periods of military preparation for and involvement in the Korean War, the Vietnam War, and the increase in military spending in response to Cold War-era global conflicts during the Carter and Reagan administrations. Except for these general periods of increase, defense spending as a percentage of GDP declined gradu ally until the early 2000s, following a post-World War II peak of 14 percent in 1953
762 Chapter 22
■ Recession periods ■ Real GDP (in 2000 dollars)
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis; National Bureau of Economic Research
IMPACT ON THE BUSINESS CYCLE
Some economists have noted that defense spending has an economic impact on the United States. The military, as both an employer and a consumer, funnels money into the economy, thereby contributing to the GDP As you can see in the graph at left, the growth of the U.S. GDP has been relatively steady since 1945. However, as the U.S. economy has gone through a series of business cycles, it has experienced periods of recession. The National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) has tracked business cycles in the United States for the past several decades. According
to NBER, there have been about a dozen economic contractions and expansions in the U.S. economy since the Great Depression. In the period from 1945 to 2000, the economy experienced nine recession periods, as indicated by the blue bars on the graph. It is worth noting that four of these recessions occurred during periods when defense spending declined: 1945-1946,1953-1954, 1969-1970, and 1990-1991. The private sector cannot immediately make up for the drop in government spending that occurs when the defense budget declines. Thus, the more sudden and dramatic the decline in defense spending, the deeper the recession that occurred. During two of the previously identified periods of rising defense spending, 1949-1953 and 1965-1969, there were no recessions. However, a recession did occur during the 1976 to 1989 period. The increase in purchases was not enough to prevent a recession, in part because defense spending made up a smaller portion of the overall economy than it had before.
impact on education priorities
The economic impact of defense spending on education priorities in the United States during this period is less clear. Obviously any money from the federal budget that is dedicated to defense spending is money that cannot be used for education. On the other hand, federal funding for elementary, secondary, and higher education has risen overall since 1962. In one sense, the nation’s defense priorities are a reason for an increased focus on education. Since the Soviet Union launched its satellite Sputnik in 1957, the quality of education has been recognized as an issue of national security. In 1958, in an effort to ensure that the Soviet Union would not surpass the United States in technological achievement, Congress passed the National Defense Education Act. This legislation included funding for additional loans for college students and improved science, math, and for-e'gn language instruction in elementary and secondary schools. Providing a solid foundation in technical subjects such as science and math remains a priority of the U.S. educational system, not only because of national security concerns but also to allow Americans to stay competitive in a global economy.
THINKING CRITICALLY


’’i
1.	Summarizing Write a paragraph summarizing the economic impact of defense spending on the business cycles from 1945 to 2000.
2.	Creating a Graph Use Internet resources to gather data on defense and education spending as a percentage of GDP from 1945 to 2000. Create a graph to display the data. Use your completed graph to draw conclusions about these two spending priorities. What factors might explain changes over time?
X hmhsocialstudies.com
I RESEARCH WEB LINKS
The Vietnam War Years
CHAPTER
ASSESSMENT
TERMS AND NAMES
For each term or name below, write a sentence explaining its connection to the Vietnam War years.
1.	Ho Chi Minh	6.
2.	Ngo Dinh Diem	7.
3.	Vietcong	8.
4.	William Westmoreland	9.
5.	napalm	10.
Tet offensive Robert Kennedy Henry Kissinger Vietnamization Pentagon Papers
1964
Congress passes the Tonkin Gulf Resolution, giving the president broad military powers in Vietnam.

	1966
•	1967	1967
Antiwar protests 1	
in the United	1^^
States intensify.	
1965
First major U.S. combat troops arrive in Vietnam to fight the Vietcong and North Vietnamese Army.
1968
Vietcong launch massive Tet offensive on numerous South Vietnamese cities.
1969
Paris peace talks begin in earnest; President Nixon announces Vietnamization of war—gradual withdrawal of U.S. troops.

1970
1971
1970
President Nixon orders invasion of Cambodia to destroy: enemy supply bases;: American college campuses erupt In protest.
1972
Nixon unleashes “Christmas bombings” on North Vietnamese cities after peace talks break off.

1973
1974
1975
1973
United States and North Vietnam sign a truce; the U.S. withdraws the last of its troops from Vietnam.
MAIN IDEAS
Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
Moving Toward Conflict (pages 730-735)
1.	How did the Tonkin Gulf Resolution lead to greater U.S. involvement in Vietnam?
2.	Explain the relationship of the Vietnam War to the domino theory.
U.S.
Involvement and Escalation (pages 736-741) 3.	Why did so much of the American public and many in the Johnson administration support U.S. escalation in Vietnam?
4.	Why did the war begin to lose support at home? What contributed to the sinking morale of the U.S. troops?
A
Nation Divided (pages 742-747) 5.	What race-related problems existed for African-American soldiers who served in the Vietnam War?
6.	Summarize the ways in which the United States was sharply divided between hawks and doves.
A
Tumultuous Year (pages 748-753) 7.	What circumstances set the stage for President Johnson's public announcement that he would not seek another term as president?
8.	What acts of violence occurred in the United States during 1968 that dramatically altered the mood of the country?
The End of the War and Its Legacy (pages 754-761)
9.	Briefly describe the military conflict in Vietnam soon after the last U.S. combat troops departed in 1973.
10. List the immediate effects and the more lasting legacies of America’s involvement in the Vietnam War.
CRITICAL THINKING
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a cause-and-effect diagram like the one below for the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution and the War Powers Act. Then explain the impact of each event on the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government. cause	( Congressional"'"''..
———p/ '^"JVIeasure  /
effect
DEVELOPING HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Read the Economic Spotlight feature on pages 762-763. Describe thr economic impact of defense spending on the business cycle and education priorities from 1945 to the 1990s.
784 Chapter 22
TEXAS TEST PRACTICE
Use the cartoon and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 1.
1. In which of the following ways did the Vietnam War affect Americans’ attitudes towards their government?
A
Americans tried to change their government from representative democracy to Communism. B
Americans lost confidence that those in government would tell the truth. C
Americans took new pride in their country's reputation abroad. D
Americans worried that the United States would start another world war. Use the quotation and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 2.
66 Perhaps the place to start looking for a credibility gap is not in the offices of the government in Washington, but in the studios of the networks in New York. ”
T.
Agnew 2.	During the Vietnam War, the term “credibility gap” referred to the American people’s lack of trust in —
F
Presidents Johnson and Nixon. G television news reporters.
H antiwar protesters.
J
Ho Chi Minh. 3.	What happened to Vietnam after the U.S. pullout in 1973?
A
The North and South remained divided and at peace. B
The North and South remained enemies, separated by a United Nations-controlled demilitarized zone. C
The North became a Chinese puppet state; the South experienced continual violent rebellions. D
The North defeated the South and incorporated it under a communist government. 71 hmhsocialstudies.com
TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests • Tutorials
!' i
INTERACT WITH HISTORY
"’J'WriteSmart
COLLABORATIVE LEARN
Recall the issues that you recorded in myNotebook as you read the chapter. What lessons do you think can be learned from the ways in which Americans reacted to the draft? Write a paragraph expressing and giving reasons for your judgments. Consider how the draft affected Americans’ views on the Vietnam War, how the draft affected Americans’ participation in the Vietnam War, and how draft protests affected other Americans. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your paragraph.
XCBffW
icehtury
Organize two teams for debate. One team should argue for the side of the hawks, and the other team should argue on behalf of the doves. Research the arguments put forth by both sides and debate the issue before the class.

"’J'WriteSmart
--
Imagine you are a television news journalist. Write a script for a brief news report analyzing the events of the Vietnam War. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your script.
T7ie Vietnam War Years
End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Drawing Conclusions
DEFINING THE SKILL
Drawing conclusions involves considering the implications of what you have read and forming a final statement about its meaning or consequences. To draw conclusions, you need to look closely at facts and then use your own experience and common sense to decide what those facts mean. Historical writing often features cause-and-effect relationships between and among events. In some cases, however, outcomes in the text are implied. In such instances, you can use facts and your own knowledge and experience to draw conclusions about the reading.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: HOW TO DRAW CONCLUSIONS
When you draw a conclusion, you identify the main idea and supporting details. Next, you connect the reading with your prior knowledge. Then, you summarize the reading and draw a conclusion that states an opinion or makes a judgment about what the reading means to you. The passage below talks about some events that led to the Vietnam War. Causes Leading Up to the Vietnam War
After World War II was over, France reclaimed Vietnam as a colony. ©The Communist-led Vietminh soon began fighting against French rule.
By the early 1950s, President Dwight D. Eisenhower warned that if Vietnam fell to communism, other southeast Asian countries would quickly follow, ©a belief that was called the domino theory. ©The United States sent arms, ammunition, supplies, and money to French forces in Vietnam.
Despite U.S. aid, French rule of Vietnam ended in 1954.
After French surrender, Vietnam wastemporarily divided.The Vietminh controlled North Vietnam.The United States feared that a general election would install North Vietnam's Communist leader Ho Chi Minh as the leader of both parts of Vietnam. Instead,© U.S. leaders supported Ngo Dinh Diem as president of South Vietnam. Diem opposed communism but was a corrupt and brutal leader.The United States disliked his policies but preferred his leadership to a Communist takeover.
By the late 1950s, Diem's opponents in South Vietnam, known as the Vietcong, were in open revolt. In 1959,©Communist leaders in North Vietnam began supplying weapons to the Vietcong.
Some peasants joined the Vietcong because they opposed Diem's government, but others did so because they feared retaliation from the Vietcong if they did not. The country was in the midst of a civil war.	[
President Eisenhower decided to intervene in the conflict in 1955. The United States began supplying South Vietnam with money and weapons. Soon, the United States started supporting the South Vietnamese with military advisors and later with troops.

© Use the facts to draw a conclusion. Identify the facts in the passage you are reading. Fact: The Vietminh soon began fighting against French rule. Conclusion: The Vietminh wanted independence.
0 Read carefully to understand all the facts. For example, in this passage, you learn that President Eisenhower was worried about the domino theory and that the United States supported French rule with money and supplies. Conclusion: The United States feared that communism would spread into multiple Asian countries.
0 Ask questions of the material. Why did U.S. leaders support Ngo Dinh Diem? (They wanted to keep communism out of South Vietnam.) Why were Communist leaders in the North supplying weapons to the Vietcong? (They wanted to take over South Vietnam.)
765 SKI
STRATEGY. MAKE A DIAGRAM
Making a diagram can help you draw conclusions. Summarize the data and your conclusion about the passage in the diagram. The diagram below shows how to organize the facts and inferences to draw a conclusion about the passage you just read. Facts
Conclusions
General Conclusion
APPLYING THE SKILL
Turn to Chapter 22, Section 3, pages 745-747 and read the passage headed, "The Protest Movement Emerges." Draw conclusions based on the facts in the passage. Using the model as a guide, create your own diagram, showing the facts and conclusions you have used to arrive at a general conclusion.
1.	Use the facts to draw a conclusion.
Why did many colleges have “teach-ins” to protest the war?
2.	Read carefully to understand all the facts.
How many students protested in Washington? Who else besides students protested the war?
3.	Ask questions of the material.
Why did the Johnson administration change the policy about deferments o college students? Why did so many youth oppose the war?
7651
I960
1966
USAS
WORLD'
: 1962 Chinese : forces invade : India.
•	tl963) Civil war
: breaks out between
•	Greeks and Turks
•	on Cyprus.
[19671 Six-Day War between Israel and Arab nations.
