766 Chapter 23
VIDEO
7T hmhsocialstudies.com
1969 President Charles de Gaulle of France resigns.
[1972 i
Earthquake kills 10,000 in Nicaragua.
11970 Anwar el-Sadat becomes president of Egypt.
An Era of Social Change
Latinos and Native Americans Seek Equality
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
Latinos and Native Americans confronted injustices in the 1960s.
Campaigns for civil rights and economic justice won better representation and opportunity for Latinos and Native Americans.
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on issues faced by Latinos and Native Americans in the 1960s.
•Cesar Chdvez •Dolores Huerta • United Farm Workers Organizing
Committee
•La Raza Unida •American Indian Movement (AIM)
Carrying signs that say “Strike” (huelga), Mexican-American farm workers protest poor working conditions.
One American's Story
Jessie Lopez de la Cruz's life changed one night in 1962, when Cesar Chavez came to her home. Chavez, a Mexican-American farm worker, was trying to organize a union for California's mostly Spanish-speaking farm workers. Chavez said, "The women have to be involved. They're the ones working out in the fields with their husbands." Soon Jessie was in the fields, talking to farm workers about the union.
A
Personal Voice jessie lopez de la cruz “Wherever I went to speak ... I told them about.. . how we had no benefits, no minimum wage, nothing out in the fields—no restrooms, nothing. ... I said, 'Weil! Do you think we should be putting up with this in this modern age? ... We can stand up! We can talk back!.. . This country is very rich, and we want a share of the money those growers make [off] our sweat and our work by exploiting us and our children!’”
—quoted in Moving the Mountain: Women Working for Social Change
The efforts of Jessie Lopez de la Cruz were just part of a larger rights movement during the turbulent and revolutionary 1960s. As African Americans were fighting for civil rights,
Latinos and Native Americans rose up to assert their own rights and improve their lives.
The Latino Presence Grows
Latinos, or Americans of Latin American descent, are a large and diverse group.
During the 1960s, the Latino population in the United States grew from 3 million
to more than 9 million. Today the Latino population includes people from sever-
al different areas, primarily Mexico, Puerto Rico, Cuba, the Dominican Republic,
Central America, and South America. Each of these groups has its own history, its
768 Chapter 23
r

In the 1920s, thousands of Mexican people came to the U.S. and settled in barrios. Shown here, Hispanic men gather in a park in California
MAIN IDEA
Identifying Problems
Aj What problems did different groups of Latino immigrants share?
own pattern of settlement in the United States, and its own set of economic, social, cultural, and political concerns.
LATINOS OF VARIED ORIGINS
Mexican Americans, the largest Latino group, have lived mostly in the Southwest and California. This group includes descendants of the nearly 100,000 Mexicans who had lived in territories ceded by Mexico to the United States in 1848. Another million or so Mexicans came to the United States in the 1910s, following Mexico's revolution. Still others came as braceros, or temporary laborers, during the 1940s and 1950s. In the 1960s close to half a million Mexicans immigrated, most in search of better paying jobs. Puerto Ricans began immigrating to the United States
after the U.S. occupation of Puerto Rico in 1898. As of 1960, almost 900,000 Puerto Ricans were living in the continental United States, including almost half a million on New York City's West Side.
Large Cuban communities also formed in New York City and in Miami and New Jersey. This is because hundreds of thousands of Cubans, many of whom were academics and professionals, fled to the United States in 1959 to escape Fidel Castro's Communist rule. In addition, tens of thousands of Salvadorans, Guatemalans, Nicaraguans, and Colombians immigrated to the United States after the 1960s to escape civil war and chronic poverty.
Wherever they had settled, during the 1960s many Latinos encountered ethnic prejudice and discrimination in jobs and housing. Most lived in segregated barrios, or Spanish-speaking neighborhoods. The Latino jobless rate was nearly 50 percent higher than that of whites, as was the percentage of Latino families living in poverty, /y
HISTORICAL
SPOTLIGHT
DESPERATE JOURNEYS
In the 1960s and 1970s, thousands of poor Mexicans illegally crossed the 2,000-mile border between the United States and Mexico each year. The journey these illegal aliens undertook was often made more difficult by “coyotes,” guides who charged large amounts of money to help them cross the border, but who often didn’t deliver on their promises.
Illegal immigrants’ problems didn’t end when they entered the United States, where they were denied many social services, including unemployment insurance and food stamps. In addition, the Immigration and Naturalization Service urged businesses to refrain from hiring them. As a result, some owners stopped employing people with Latino names, including legal immigrants
Latinos Fight for Change
As the presence of Latinos in the United States grew, so too
did their demand for greater representation and better treat-
ment. During the 1960s, Latinos demanded not only equal
opportunity, but also a respect for their culture and heritage.
An Era of Social Chai

ytY PLAYER
CESAR CHAVEZ 1927-1993
Cesar Chavez spoke from experience when he said, “Many things in farm labor are terrible.”
As a teenager, Chavez moved with his family from farm to farm, picking such crops as grapes, apricots, and olives. “The worst crop was the olives,” Chavez recalled. “The olives are so small you can never fill the bucket.”
The seeds of protest grew early in Chavez. As a teenager, he once went to see a movie, only to find that the theater was segregated—whites on one side of the aisle and Mexicans on the other side. “I really hadn’t thought much about what I was going to do, but I had to do something,” Chavez recalled. The future union leader sat down in the whites-only section and stayed there until the police arrived and arrested him.
THE FARM WORKER MOVEMENT
As Jessie Lopez de la Cruz explained, thousands working on California's fruit and vegetable farms did backbreaking work for little pay and few benefits. Cesar Chavez believed that farm workers had to unionize, that their strength would come from bargaining as a group. In 1962, Chavez and Dolores Huerta established the National Farm Workers Association. Four years later, this group merged with a Filipino agricultural union (also founded by Huerta) to form the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee (UFWOC). Chavez and his fellow organizers insisted that California's large fruit and vegetable companies accept their union as the bargaining agent for the farm workers. In 1965, when California's grape growers refused, Chavez launched a nationwide boycott of the companies' grapes. Chavez, like Martin Luther King, Jr., believed in using nonviolence to reach his goal. The union sent farm workers across the country to convince consumers not to buy California grapes. Chavez then went on a three-week fast in which he lost 35 pounds. He ended his fast by attending Mass with Senator Robert F. Kennedy. The efforts of the farm workers eventually paid off. In 1970, Huerta negotiated a contract between the grape growers and the UFWOC. Union workers would finally be guaranteed higher wages and other benefits long
denied them.
CULTURAL PRIDE
The activities of the California farm workers helped to inspire other Latino "brown power" movements across the country. In New York, members of the Puerto Rican population began to demand that schools offer Spanish-speaking children classes taught in their own language as well as programs about their culture. In 1968, Congress enacted the Bilingual Education Act, which provided funds for schools to develop bilingual and cultural heritage programs for non-English-speaking children. Young Mexican Americans started to call themselves Chicanos or Chicanas—a shortened version of "Mexicanos" that expressed pride in their heritage. A Chicano community action group called the Brown Berets formed under the leadership of David Sanchez. In 1968, they organized walkouts in East Los Angeles high schools. About 15,000 Chicano students walked out of class demanding smaller classes, more Chicano teachers and administrators, and programs designed to reduce the high Latino dropout rate. Militant Mexican-American students also won the establishment of Chicano studies programs at colleges and universities.
Art was another outlet to express cultural pride. Chicano murals began to appear on buildings in cities across the Southwest. These murals reinvigorated a sense of shared cultural heritage. Some also conveyed political messages.
POLITICAL POWER
Latinos also began organizing politically during the 1960s. Some worked within the two-party system. For example, the Mexican American Political Association (MAPA) helped elect Los Angeles politician Edward Roybal to the House of Representatives. During the 1960s, eight Hispanic Americans served in the House, and one Hispanic senator was elected—Joseph Montoya of New Mexico. Others, like Texan Jose Angel Gutierrez, sought to create an independent Latino political movement. In 1970, he established La Raza Unida (The People United). In the 1970s, La Raza Unida ran Latino candidates in five states and won races for mayor, as well as other local political offices.
MAM IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
,g| What impact did the grape boycott have?
Background
Prior to I960,
32 Hispanics had been elected to Congress, beginning with Joseph Hernandez in 1822.
770 Chapter 23
Still other Latinos took on a more confrontational tone. In 1963, one-time zr 'Cal. Preac^er Reies Tijerina founded the Alianza Federal de Mercedes (Federal Alliance of Land Grants) to help reclaim U.S. land taken from Mexican landholders in the 19th century. He and his followers raided the Rio Arriba County Courthouse in Tierra Amarilla, New Mexico, in order to force authorities to recognize the plight of New Mexican small farmers. They were later arrested.
Vocabulary
homogeneous:
uniform or similar throughout
I MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Motives
$ Why did Native Americans resist assimilation?
Native Americans Struggle for Equality
As are Latinos, Native Americans are sometimes viewed as a single homogeneous group, despite the hundreds of distinct Native American tribes and nations in the United States. One thing that these diverse tribes and nations have shared is a mostly bleak existence in the United States and a lack of autonomy, or ability to control and govern their own lives. Through the years, many Native Americans have clung to their heritage, refusing to assimilate, or blend, into mainstream society. Native American nationalist Vine Deloria, Jr.,
expressed the view that mainstream society was nothing more than "ice cream bars and heart trouble and . . . getting up at six o'clock in the morning to mow your lawn in the suburbs."
NATIVE AMERICANS SEEK GREATER AUTONOMY
Despite their cultural diversity, Native Americans as a group have been the poorest of Americans and have suffered from the highest unemployment rate. They have also been more likely than any other group to suffer from tuberculosis and alcoholism. Although the Native American population rose during the 1960s, the death rate among Native American infants was nearly twice the national average, while life expectancy was several years less than for other Americans.
In 1954, the Eisenhower administration enacted a "termination" policy to deal with these problems, but it did not respect Native American culture. Native Americans were relocated from isolated reservations into mainstream urban American life. The plan failed miserably. Most who moved to the cities remained desperately poor.
In 1961, representatives from 61 Native American groups met in Chicago and drafted the Declaration of Indian Purpose, which stressed the determination of Native Americans to "choose our own way of life. The declaration called for an end to the termination program in favor of new policies designed to create economic opportunities for Native Americans on their reservations. In 1968, President Lyndon Johnson established the National Council on Indian Opportunity to "ensure that programs reflect the needs and desires of the Indian people."
VOICES OF PROTEST
Many young Native Americans were dissatisfied with the slow pace of reform. Their discontent fueled the growth of the American Indian Movement (AIM), an often militant Native American rights organization. While AIM began in 1968 largely as a self-defense group against police brutality, it soon branched out to include protecting the rights of large Native American populations in northern and western states. BEN NIGHTHORSE CAMPBELL
Whereas many Native Americans rejected assimilation, Ben Nighthorse Campbell chose to work within the system to improve the lives of Native Americans. Campbell's father was a North Cheyenne, and his great-grandfather, Black Horse, fought in the 1876 Battle of the Little Bighorn-in which the Cheyenne and the Sioux defeated Lieutenant Colonel George Custer.
In 1992, Campbell was elected to the U.S. Senate from Colorado, marking the first time since 1929 that a Native American had been elected to the Senate. Campbell stated that while he served the entire nation, the needs of Native Americans would always remain a priority. He retired from the Senate in 2004.
An Era of Social G
AIM leader Dennis Banks speaks at the foot of Mount Rushmore, in South Dakota, during a 1970s rally.
For some, this new activism meant demanding that Native American lands, burial grounds, and fishing and timber rights be restored. Others wanted a new respect for their culture. Mary Crow Dog, a Lakota Sioux, described AIM's impact.
A
Personal Voice mary crow dog 66 My first encounter with AIM was at a pow-wow held in 1971. . . . One man, a Chippewa, stood up and made a speech. I had never heard anybody talk like that. He spoke about genocide and sovereignty, about tribal leaders selling out. . . .
He had himself wrapped up in an upside-down American flag, telling us that every star in this flag represented a state stolen from the Indians. . . . Some people wept. An old man turned to me and said, 'These are the words I always wanted to speak, but had kept shut up within me.’ ”
—Lakota Women
“ If the government doesn't start living up to its obligations, armed resistance . . . will have to become a regular thing. ” CHIPPEWA PROTESTER
CONFRONTING THE GOVERNMENT
In its early years, AIM, as well as other groups, actively—and sometimes violently—confronted the government. In 1972, AIM leader Russell Means organized the "Trail of Broken Treaties" march in Washington, D.C., to protest the U.S. government's treaty violations throughout history. Native Americans from across the country joined the march. They sought the restoration of 110 million acres of land. They also pushed for the abolition of the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), which many believed was corrupt. The marchers temporarily occupied the BIA building, destroyed records, and caused $2 million in property damage. A year later, AIM led nearly 200 Sioux to the tiny village of Wounded Knee, South Dakota, where the U.S. cavalry had massacred a Sioux village in 1890. In protest against both tribal leadership and
federal policies, the Sioux seized the town, taking hostages. After tense negotiations with the FBI and a shootout that left two Native Americans dead and others wounded, the confrontation ended with a government promise to reexamine Native American treaty rights.
NATIVE AMERICAN VICTORIES
Congress and the federal courts did make some reforms on behalf of Native Americans. In 1972, Congress passed the Indian
Education Act. In 1975, it passed the Indian Self-Determination and Education
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
What tactics did AIM use in its attempts to gain reforms?
772 Chapter 23
Native American Legal Victories
1970	1971	1979	1980	1988
Taos of New Mexico	Alaska Native Claims	Maine Implementing	U.S. awards Sioux	U.S. awards Puyallup
regain possession of	Settlement Act gives	Act provides $81.5	$106 million for	tribe $162 million for
Blue Lake as well as	Alaskan natives 44	million for native	illegally taken land	land claims in
surrounding forestland.	million acres and more than $962 million.	tribes, including Penobscot and Passamaquoddy, to buy back land.	in South Dakota.	Washington.
Assistance Act. These laws gave tribes greater control over their own affairs and over their children's education.
Armed with copies of old land treaties that the U.S. government had broken, Native Americans went to federal court and regained some of their rights to land. In 1970, the Taos of New Mexico regained possession of their sacred Blue Lake, as well as a portion of its surrounding forestland. Land claims by natives of Alaska resulted in the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971. This act gave more than 40 million acres to native peoples and paid out more than $962 million in cash. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, Native Americans won settlements that provided legal recognition of their tribal lands as well as financial compensation.
While the 1960s and the early 1970s saw a wave of activism from the nation's minority groups, another group of Americans also pushed for changes. Women, while not a minority group, were in many ways treated like second-class citizens, and many joined together to demand equal treatment in society.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. •Cesar Chavez	•United Farm Workers	*La Raza Unida
•Dolores Huerta	Organizing Committee
American Indian Movement (AIM)
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a Venn diagram like the one below to show the broad similarities between the issues faced by Latinos and Native Americans during the 1960s, as well as the unique concerns of the two groups.
Issues Faced by Latinos and Native Americans
Which group do you think had more to gain by fighting for what they wanted?
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	EVALUATING
What were the roles of political organizations that promoted Chicano and American Indian civil rights? Explain the actions these organizations took to expand political rights for ethnic minorities and evaluate their effectiveness. Think About:
UFWOC, MAPA,
and La Raza Unida •	AIM
•	the leaders and activities of these organizations
4.	SUMMARIZING
Describe the impact of the movement to increase awareness of Chicano culture.
ANALYZING EFFECTS
In what ways did the Latino campaign for economic and social equality affect non-Latino Americans?
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
Vine Deloria, Jr., said,
“When you get far enough away from the reservation, you
can see it’s the urban man who has no identity. ”
What do you think he meant by this?
a
An Era of Social Changt

$
I I
REYNOLDS v. SIMS (1964)
ORIGINS OF THE CASE
In 1901, seats in the Alabama state legislature were apportioned, or assigned to districts, based on population. By the early 1960s, each Alabama county still had the same number of representatives as it did in 1901, even though the populations of the counties had changed. A group of voters sued to make representation proportional to the changed populations. When the suit succeeded, state legislators who were threatened with losing their seats appealed to the Supreme Court. THE RULING
The Supreme Court upheld the principle of “one person, one vote” and ruled that the equal protection clause required representation in state legislatures to be based on population. LEGAL REASONING
Prior to Reynolds, the Court had already applied the "one person, one vote" principle to federal congressional elections (see Legal Sources). In Reynolds, Chief Justice Earl Warren extended this principle to state legislatures. He argued that when representation does not reflect population, some people's votes are worth more than others'.
66 The fundamental principle of representative government in this country is one of equal representation for equal numbers of people, without regard to . . . place of residence within a State. . . .
Legislators represent people, not trees or acres. Legislators are elected by voters, not farms or cities or economic interests.99
Warren concluded that Alabama's apportionment scheme discriminated against people because of where they live.
For these reasons, the Court ruled that any acceptable apportionment plan must provide an equal number of legislative seats for equally populated areas. A plan that does not is unconstitutional because it denies some voters the equal protection of the laws.
LEGAL SOURCES
U.S. CONSTITUTION
U.S. CONSTITUTION, FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT
(1868) “No state shall . . . deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.”
RELATED CASES
BAKER v. CARR (1962)
The Court decided that federal courts could settle issues of apportionment. Previously, federal courts had refused to address such issues on the grounds that they were political issues.
GRAY v. SANDERS (1963)
The Court ruled that states must follow the principle of “one person, one vote” in primary elections.
WESBERRY v. SANDERS (1964)
The Court applied the “one person, one vote” rule to congressional districts.
I ◄ Chief Justice Warren (front, center) and members of tl 1	1964 Supreme Court.
WHY IT MATTERED
The voters who initiated the suit against Alabama's apportionment were part of America's tremendous urban growth in the 20th century. During and after World War II, tens of thousands of Americans—including large numbers of African Americans—moved from rural areas to cities and suburbs. Voters in Alabama's more urban areas found that they were underrepresented. Likewise, before Reynolds, urban residents as a whole paid far more in taxes than they received in benefits. A great deal was at stake.
The "one person, one vote" principle increased the influence of urban residents by forcing legislatures to create new election districts in the cities to reflect their large populations. As more legislators representing urban and suburban needs were elected, they were able to change funding formulas, tunneling more money into their districts. In addition, minorities, immigrants, and professionals, who tend to make up a large proportion of urban populations, gained better representation.
On the other hand, the power of farmers was eroded as election districts in rural areas were combined and incumbents had to campaign against each other for a single seat.
HISTORICAL IMPACT
The Warren Court's reapportionment decisions in Baker v. Carr, Gray v. Sanders, Wesberry v. Sanders, and Reynolds were a revolution in U.S. politics. The lawsuit that culminated in the Reynolds decision was also part of a broader movement in the 1960s to protect voting rights. Largely because of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, voter registration among African Americans in Mississippi, for instance, climbed from 6.7 percent to 59.8 percent. Viewed together, the combination of increased protection of voting rights and acceptance of the "one person, one vote" principle brought the United States several steps closer to fulfilling its democratic ideals.
In the 1990s, the Court revisited reapportionment. A 1982 act of Congress had required states to create districts with "minority majorities" in order to increase the number of nonwhite representatives. As a result, following the 1990 census, a record number of African Americans were elected to Congress. But opponents contended that defining districts by race violated equal protection and "one person, one vote." In a series of decisions, the Court agreed and abolished minority districting.
ALABAMA 1901
Huntsville
ALABAMA 1973
Huntsville
Birmingham
Birmingham
These two apportionment maps show Alabama’s 35 state senatorial districts in 1901 (left) and 1973 (right). The 1973 map shows how the districts were redrawn after the Reynolds decision, based on the 1970 census. Notice how the 1973 map reflects the growth of Alabama cities.
O
Montgomery
O
Montgomery
Mobile
Mobile,
THINKING CRITICALLY
CONNECT TO TODAY
1. Analyzing Maps Obtain a map of the state legislative districts in your state. Then compare the map created following the 2000 census with the map based on the 1990 census. Study the differences in the size and location of the districts. Write a paragraph explaining which regions of the state gained representatives and which lost representatives.
CONNECT TO HISTORY
2. Visit the links for Historic Decisions of the Supreme Court to research minority redistricting decisions such as Shawv. Hunt (1996). Write a summary of the rulings and how they have affected elections._________
hmhsocialstudies.com
INTERNET ACTIVITY
An Era of Social Change
Women Fight for Equality
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
Through protests and marches, women confronted social and economic barriers in American society.
Betty Friedan feminism National Organization for Women (NOW)
•Gloria Steinem • Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) •Phyllis Schlafly
The rise of the women’s movement during the 1960s advanced women’s place in the work force and in society.
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on key events of the women’s movement.
Betty Friedan, November 1967
During the 1950s, writer Betty Friedan seemed to be living the American dream. She had a loving husband, healthy children, and a house in the suburbs. According to the experts—doctors, psychologists, and women's magazines— that was all a woman needed to be fulfilled. Why, then, wasn't she happy? In 1957, after conducting a survey of her Smith College classmates 15 years after graduation, she found she was not alone. Friedan eventually wrote a book, The Feminine Mystique, in which she addressed this "problem that has no name."
A
Personal Voice betty friedan “The problem lay buried, unspoken. ... It was a strange stirring, a sense of dissatisfaction, a yearning that women suffered in the middle of the twentieth century in the United States. Each suburban wife struggled with it alone. As she made the beds, shopped for groceries, matched slipcover material, ate peanut butter sandwiches with her children, chauffeured Cub Scouts and Brownies, lay beside her husband at night—she was afraid to ask even of herself the silent question—‘Is this all?’ ”
—The Feminine Mystique
During the 1960s, women answered Friedan's question with a resounding "no." In increasing numbers they joined the nation's African Americans, Latinos, and Native Americans in the fight for greater civil rights and equality in society.
A
New Women’s Movement Arises The theory behind the women's movement of the 1960s was feminism, the belief that women should have economic, political, and social equality with men. Feminist beliefs had gained momentum during the mid-1800s and in 1920 won women the right to vote. While the women's movement declined after this achievement, it reawakened during the 1960s, spurred by the political activism of the times.
776 Chapter 23
r
Women In the Workplace, 1950-2000
Working Women and Percent of Labor Force
1950	I960	1970	1980	1990	2000
Median Incomes for Working Women and Men
= $2000 $953	S2.57Q	$6,670 $2,237	$33,592 $25,532
Women Men	Women Men	Women Men
1950	1970	2000
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs 1.	For each year shown, what percentage of men’s income did women make?
2.	About how many more women were working in 1990 than in 1960?
Vocabulary
ideological:
concerned with a certain set of ideas
main idea
Analyzing
Effects
& What effects did the civil rights and the antiwar Movements have °n many women?
This 1960s pin displays a slogan used by Betty Friedan at the National Women’s Political Caucus. ▼
WOMEN IN THE WORKPLACE
In 1950, only one out of three women worked for wages. By 1960, that number had increased to about 40 percent. Still, during this time, certain jobs were considered "men's work" and women were shut out. The jobs available to women—mostly clerical work, domestic service, retail sales, social work, teaching, and nursing—paid poorly.
The country largely ignored this discrimination until President Kennedy appointed the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women in 1961. In 1963, the commission reported that women were paid far less than men, even when doing the same jobs. Furthermore, women were seldom promoted to management positions, regardless of their education, experience, and ability. These newly publicized facts awakened many women to their unequal status in society.
WOMEN AND ACTIVISM
Ironically, many women felt the sting “Move OH little girl; of discrimination when they became involved in the civil rights and antiwar movements—movements that toted the ideological banner of protecting people's rights. Within some of these organizations, such as SNCC and SDS, men led most of the activities, while women were assigned lesser roles. When women protested this arrangement, the men usually brushed them aside. Such experiences led some women to organize small groups to discuss their concerns. During these discussions, or "consciousness-raising" sessions, women shared their lives with each other and discovered that their experiences were not unique. Rather, they reflected a much larger pattern of sexism, or discrimination based on gender. Author Robin Morgan delineated this pattern.
A
Personal Voice robin Morgan “ It makes you very sensitive—raw, even, this consciousness. Everything, from the verbal assault on the street, to a ‘well-meant’ sexist joke your husband tells, to the lower pay you get at work (for doing the same Job a man would be paid more for), to television commercials, to rock-song lyrics, to the pink or blue blanket they put on your infant in the hospital nursery, to speeches by male ‘revolutionaries’ that reek of male supremacy—everything seems to barrage your aching brain. ... You begin to see how all-pervasive a thing is sexism. ’
-quoted in Sisterhood Is Powerful: An Anthology of Writings from the Women’s Liberation Movement
we have more important issues to talk about here than women's liberation/9 A MALE ANTIWAR ACTIVIST
An Era of Social Change*
THE WOMEN’S MOVEMENT EMERGES
The Feminine Mystique, which captured the very discontent that many women were feeling, quickly became a bestseller and helped to galvanize women across the country. By the late 1960s, women were working together for change. "This is not a movement one 'joins,'" observed Robin Morgan. "The Women's Liberation Movement exists where three or four friends or neighbors decide to meet regularly ... on the welfare lines, in the supermarket, the factory, the convent, the farm, the maternity ward." The Movement Experiences Gains and Losses
As the women's movement grew, it achieved remarkable and enduring political and social gains for women. Along the way, however, it also suffered setbacks, most notably in its attempt to ensure women's equality in the Constitution.
THE CREATION OF NOW
The women's movement gained strength with the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibited discrimination based on race, religion, national origin, and gender and created the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) to handle discrimination claims. By 1966, however, some women argued that the EEOC didn't adequately address women's grievances. That year, 28 women, including Betty Friedan, created the National Organization for Women (NOW) to pursue women's goals. "The time has come," the founders of NOW declared, "to confront with concrete action the conditions which now prevent women from enjoying the equality of opportunity . . . which is their right as individual Americans and as human beings." B, NOW members pushed for the creation of child-care facilities that would enable mothers to pursue jobs and education. NOW also pressured the EEOC to enforce more vigorously the ban on gender discrimination in hiring. NOW's efforts prompted the EEOC to declare sex-segregated job ads illegal and to issue guidelines to employers, stating that they could no longer refuse to hire women for traditionally male jobs. A DIVERSE MOVEMENT
In its first three years, NOW's ranks swelled to 175,000 members. A number of other women’s groups sprang up around the country, too. In 1968, a militant group known as the New York Radical Women staged a well-publicized demonstration at the annual Miss America Pageant. The women threw bras, girdles, wigs, and other "women's garbage" into a "Freedom Trash Can." They then crowned a sheep "Miss America." Around this time, Gloria Steinem, a journalist, political activist, and ardent supporter of the women's liberation movement, made her voice heard on the subjects of feminism and equality. Steinem's grandmother had served as president of the Ohio Woman's Suffrage Association from 1908 to 1911; Steinem had inherited her passion and conviction. In 1971, Steinem helped found the National Women's Political Caucus, a moderate group that encouraged women to seek political office. In 1972, she and other women created a new women's magazine, Ms., designed to treat contemporary issues from a feminist perspective. LEGAL AND SOCIAL GAINS
As the women's movement progressed, women began to question all sorts of gender-based distinctions. People protested that a woman's physical PLAY£r

GLORIA STEINEM 1934-
Gloria Steinem became one of the more prominent figures of the women’s movement after she and several other women founded Ms. magazine in 1972. The magazine soon became a major voice of the women’s movement.
Steinem said that she decided to start the feminist magazine after editors in the mainstream media continually rejected her stories about the women's movement:
“Editors who had assumed I had some valuable biological insight into food, male movie stars, and textured stockings now questioned whether I or other women writers were biologically capable of writing objectively about feminism. That was the beginning.”
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
g/ What prompted women to establish NOW'
778 Chapter 23
◄ Thousands of women march through the streets of New York City during the summer of 1970 to promote women’s equality.
MAIN IDEA
Making
Generalizations
What sort of gains did the women’s movement make by the early 1970s?
main idea
appearance was often considered a job qualification. Girls' exclusion from sports such as baseball and football came into question. Some women began using the title Ms., and refused to adopt their husband's last name upon marriage.
These changes in attitude were paralleled by numerous
legal changes. In 1972, Congress passed a ban on gender discrimination in "any education program or activity receiving federal financial assistance," as part of the Higher Education Act. As a result, several all-male colleges opened their doors to women. That same year, Congress expanded the powers of the EEOC and gave working parents a tax break for child-care expenses.
ROE v. WADE One of the more controversial positions that NOW and other feminist groups supported was a woman's right to have an abortion. In 1973, the Supreme Court ruled in Roe v. Wade that women do have the right to choose an abortion during the first three months of pregnancy. Some thought the ruling might "bring to an end the emotional and divisive public argument. . . ." However, the issue still divides Americans today.
THE EQUAL RIGHTS AMENDMENT (ERA)
In what seemed at first to be another triumph for the women's movement, Congress passed the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) in 1972. The amendment then needed ratification by 38 states to become part of the Constitution. First introduced to Congress in 1923, the ERA would guarantee that both men and women would enjoy the same rights and protections under the law. It was, many supporters said, a matter of "simple justice." The amendment scared many people, and a Stop-ERA campaign was launched in 1972. Conservative Phyllis Schlafly, along with conservative religious groups, political organizations, and many anti-feminists, felt that the ERA would lead to "a parade of horribles," such as the drafting of women, the end of laws protecting homemakers, the end of a husband's responsibility to provide for his family, and same-sex marriages. Schlafly said that radical feminists "hate men, marriage, and children" and were oppressed "only in their distorted minds."
A
Personal Voice phyllis schlafly U.S.
Constitution is not the place for symbols or slogans, it is not the proper device to alleviate psychological problems of personal inferiority. Symbols and slogans belong on bumper strips—not in the Constitution. It would be a tragic mistake for our nation to succumb to the tirades and demands of a few women who are seeking a constitutional cure for their personal problems. ” — quoted in The Equal Rights Amendment: The History and the Movement
THE NEW RIGHT EMERGES
In order to combat the ERA and the pro-abortion supporters, conservatives built what they called a new "pro-family" movement. In the 1970s this coalition—which focused on social, cultural, and moral problems—came to be known as the New Right. Phyllis Schlafly became a leader within the New Right movement. In 1972, she founded the Eagle Forum, a conservative interest group focused primarily on social issues. The group also uses donations to support conservative political candidates. Throughout the 1970s the New Right built grassroots support for social conservatism. It would later play a key role m the election of Ronald Reagan to the presidency in 1980. D, Phyllis Schlafly in 1977.

Analyzing Motives
fi/ What concerns
motivated those
who opposed the
ERA?
An Era of Social Char
The Movement’s Legacy
As this poster shows, women have made significant political strides by being elected to the U.S. Congress.
▼
AWOMANS PLACE,SIN THEHOUSE..
.AH&&SO1N THE 5£>WJSi<
The New Right and the women's movement clashed most dramatically over the ERA. By 1977 it had won approval from 35 of the 38 states needed for ratification, but the New Right gained strength. By June of 1982—the deadline for ratification—not enough states had approved the amendment. The ERA went down in defeat.
Despite ERA'S defeat, the women's movement altered society in countless ways, such as by transforming women's conventional roles and their attitudes toward career and family. Interviews with women graduates at Stanford University reflect the change. Of graduates in 1965, 70 percent planned not to work at all when their children were of preschool age. When the class of 1972 was surveyed, only 7 percent said they would stop working to raise children.
The women's movement also succeeded in expanding career opportunities for women. For instance, as of 1970, 8 percent of all medical school graduates and 5 percent of all law school graduates were women. By 1998, those proportions had risen to 42 and 44 percent, respectively. Yet many women ran into a "glass ceiling"—an invisible, but very real, resistance to promoting women into top positions.
By 1983 women held 13.5 percent of elected state offices as well as 24 seats in the U.S. Congress. More importantly, as historian Sara Evans has noted, by 1980 "feminist concerns were firmly on the national political agenda and clearly there to stay." Most of all, the women's movement helped countless women open their lives to new possibilities. "For we have lived the second American revolution," wrote Betty
Friedan in 1976, "and our very anger said a 'new YES' to life."
^ ), ASSESSMENT
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
• Betty Friedan • National Organization • Equal Rights •feminism	for Women (NOW)
•Gloria Steinem
Amendment (ERA) Phyllis Schlafly
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a time line of key events relating to the women’s movement.
1964
1973
									
	1966			1971			1972		
Explain which event you think best demonstrates progressive reform.
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	HYPOTHESIZING
What if the Equal Rights Amendment had been ratified? Speculate on how women’s lives might have been different.
Think About:
•	rights and legal support that the amendment could have provided
•	possible reactions from groups opposing the amendment
4.	SUMMARIZING
Describe how Phyllis Schlafly contributed to the conservative resurgence of the 1970s and 1980s.
ANALYZING VISUAL SOURCES
Examine the drawing on this 1972 cover of Ms. The woman shown has eight arms and is holding a different object in each hand. What do you think these objects symbolize in terms of women’s roles? What do you think this drawing says about women in the 1960s? Explain.
780 Chapter 23

Culture and Counterculture
MAIN IDEA
The ideals and lifestyle of the counterculture challenged the traditional views of Americans.
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
The music, art, and politics of the counterculture have left enduring marks on American society.
OneAmerican's Story
hmhsocialstudies.com
F IHKINU NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the counterculture of the 1960s.
In 1966, Alex Forman left his conventional life in mainstream America and headed to San Francisco.
Arriving there with little else but a guitar, he joined thousands of others who were determined to live in a more peaceful and carefree environment. He recalled his early days in San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury district, the hub of hippie life.
A
Personal Voice alex forman “ It was like paradise there. Everybody was In love with life and in love with their fellow human beings to the point where they were just sharing in incredible ways with everybody. Taking people in off the street and letting them stay in their homes. .. . You could walk down almost any street in Haight-Ashbury where I was living, and someone would smile at you and Just go, ‘Hey, it’s beautiful, isn’t It?’. .. It was a very special time. ”
—quoted in From Camelot to Kent State
Forman was part of the counterculture—a movement made up mostly of white, middle-class college youths who had grown disillusioned with the war in Vietnam and injustices in America during the 1960s. Instead of challenging the system, they turned their backs on traditional America and tried to establish a whole new society based on peace and love. Although their heyday was shortlived, their legacy remains.
Members of the counterculture relax in a California park.

The Counterculture
In the late 1960s the historian Theodore Roszak deemed these idealistic youths
the counterculture. It was a culture, he said, so different from the mainstream
"that it scarcely looks to many as a culture at all, but takes on the alarming
appearance of a barbarian intrusion."
An Era of Social Chi
IN, TURN ON, DROP OUT”
Members of the counterculture, known as hippies, shared some of the beliefs of the New Left movement. Specifically, they felt that American society—and its materialism, technology, and war—had grown hollow. Influenced by the nonconformist beat movement of the 1950s, hippies embraced the credo of Harvard psychology professor and counterculture philosopher Timothy Leary: "Tune in, turn on, drop out." Throughout the mid- and late 1960s, tens of thousands of idealistic youths left school, work, or home to create what they hoped would be an idyllic community of peace, love, and harmony. “ How does it feel to he without a home . . . like a rolling stone?” BOB DYLAN
i
HIPPIE CULTURE
The hippie era, sometimes known as the Age of Aquarius, was marked by rock 'n' roll music, outrageous clothing, sexual license, and illegal drugs—-in particular, marijuana and a new hallucinogenic drug called LSD, or acid. Timothy Leary, an early experimenter with the drug, promoted the use of LSD as a "mind-expanding" aid for self-awareness. Hippies also turned to Eastern religions such as Zen Buddhism, which professed that one could attain enlightenment through meditation rather than the reading of scriptures.
Hippies donned ragged jeans, tie-dyed T-shirts, military garments, love beads, and Native American ornaments. Thousands grew their hair out, despite the fact that their more conservative elders saw this as an act of disrespect. Signs across the country said, "Make America beautiful—give a hippie a haircut."
Hippies also rejected conventional home life. Many joined communes, in which the members renounced private property to live communally. By the midsixties, Haight-Ashbury in San Francisco was known as the hippie capital, mainly because California did not outlaw hallucinogenic drugs until 1966.
DECLINE OF THE MOVEMENT
After only a few years, the counterculture's peace and harmony gave way to violence and disillusionment. The urban communes eventually turned seedy and dangerous. Alex Forman recalled, "There were ripoffs, violence . . . people living on the street with no place to stay." Having dispensed with society's conventions and rules, the hippies had to rely on each other. Many discovered that the philosophy of "do your own thing" did not provide enough guidance for how to live. "We were together at the level of peace and love," said one disillusioned hippie. "We fell apart over who would cook and wash dishes and pay the bills." By 1970, many had fallen victim to the drugs they used, experiencing drug addiction and mental breakdowns. The rock singer Janis Joplin and the legendary guitarist Jimi Hendrix both died of drug overdoses in 1970. As the mystique of the 1960s wore off, thousands of hippies lined up at government offices to collect welfare and food stamps—dependent on the very society they had once rejected. A^
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
fly What events and other factors hastened the decline of the counterculture movement?
A prominent symbol of the counterculture movement was bright colors, ►
782
A
Changing Culture Although short-lived, some aspects of the counterculture—namely, its fine arts and social attitudes—left a more lasting imprint on the world.
ART
The counterculture's rebellious style left its mark on the art world. The 1960s saw the rise of pop art (popular art). Pop artists, led by Andy Warhol, attempted to bring art into the mainstream. Pop art was characterized by bright, simple, commercial-looking images often depicting everyday life. For instance, Warhol became famous for his bright silk-screen portraits of soup cans, Marilyn Monroe, and other icons of mass culture. These images were repeated to look mass-produced and impersonal, a criticism of the times implying that individual freedoms had been lost to a more conventional, "cookie-cutter" lifestyle. MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
$ What did rock ’n’ roll symbolize for American youth?
ROCK MUSIC
During the 1960s, the counterculture movement embraced rock 'n' roll as its loud and biting anthem of protest. The music was an offshoot of African-American rhythm and blues music that had captivated so many teenagers during the 1950s. The band that, perhaps more than any other, helped propel rock music into mainstream America was the Beatles. The British band, made up of four youths from working-class Liverpool, England, arrived in America in 1964 and immediately took the country by storm. By the time the Beatles broke up in 1970, the four "lads" had inspired a countless number of other bands and had won over millions of Americans to rock 'n' roll.
One example of rock 'n' roll's popularity occurred in August 1969 on a farm in upstate New York. More than 400,000 showed up for a music festival called "Woodstock Music and Art Fair." This festival represented, as one songwriter put it, "the '60s movement of peace and
love and some higher cultural cause." For three days, the most popular bands and musicians performed, including Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, Joe Cocker, Joan Baez, the Grateful Dead, and Jefferson Airplane. Despite the huge crowd, Woodstock was peaceful and well organized. However, Tom Mathews, a writer who attended the Woodstock festival, recalled his experience there as less than blissful.
The Beatles, shown here in 1967, influenced fashion with their long hair and psychedelic clothing.
A
Personal Voice tom mathews “ The last night of the concert I was standing in a narrow pit at the foot of the stage. I made the mistake of looking over the board fence separating the pit from Max Yasgur’s hillside. When I peered up I saw 400,000 . .. people wrapped in wet, dirty ponchos, sleeping bags and assorted, tie-dyed mufti slowly slipping toward the stage. It looked like a human mud slide. . . . After that night I couldn’t get out of there fast enough. ”
—“The Sixties Complex,” Newsweek, Sept. 5, 1988
ATTITUDES
While the counterculture movement faded, its casual -do vour own thing" philosophy left its mark. American attitudes toward sexual
,ehavior became more casual and permissive, leading to what became known as the
exuaVrevoTution. During the 1960s and 1970s, mass culture-including TV, books,
An Era of Social Change
History Through
Music y
PROTEST SONGS OF THE SIXTIES
During the turbulent climate of the sixties, hippies and other activists used music as a vehicle for political expression. In bus terminals, in the streets, and on the White House lawn, thousands united in song, expressing their rejection of mainstream society, their demand for civil rights, and their outrage over the Vietnam War. Musicians like Bob Dylan stirred up antiwar sentiment in songs like “The Times They Are A-Changin’,” while Joan Baez and Pete Seeger popularized the great African-American spiritual “We Shall Overcome,” which became the anthem of the Civil Rights Movement.
We Shall Overcome
(African-American Spiritual)
We shall overcome,
We shall overcome,
We shall overcome some day. (Chorus) Oh, deep in my heart
I do believe:
We shall overcome some day.
We’ll walk hand in hand. . .. We shall all be free. ...
We are not afraid. . ..
We are not alone. ...
The whole wide world around... We shall overcome....
A
Joined in harmony, African-American students in Selma, Alabama, gather on the steps of the Tabernacle Baptist Church to sing “We Shall Overcome.” (1963) from The Times They Are A-Changin’ (Bob Dylan, 1962)
Come senators, congressmen Please heed the call Don’t stand in the doorway Don’t block up the hall For he that gets hurt Will be he who has stalled There’s a battle outside And it is ragin’.
It’ll soon shake your windows And rattle your walls For the times they are a-changin’.
Come mothers and fathers Throughout the land
And don’t criticize What you can’t understand
Your sons and your daughters Are beyond your command
Your old road is Rapidly agin’.
Please get out of the new one If you can’t lend your hand For the times they are a-changin’
magazines, music, and movies—began to address subjects that had once been prohibited, particularly sexual behavior and explicit violence.
While some hailed the increasing permissiveness as liberating, others attacked it as a sign of moral decay. For millions of Americans, the new tolerance was merely an uncivilized lack of respect for established social norms. Eventually the counterculture movement would lead a great many Americans to more liberal attitudes about dress and appearance, lifestyle, and social behavior; yet in the short run it produced largely the opposite effect.	'
784 Chapter 23
MAIN IDEA
Forming
Generalizations
<y Why were conservatives angry about the counterculture?
MAKING INFERENCES
In your opinion, why didn’t the hippies succeed?
ANALYZING ISSUES
What role did the counterculture and antiwar movement play in helping Richard Nixon win the presidency?

The Conservative Response
In the late 1960s, many believed that the country was losing its sense of right and wrong. Increasingly, conservative voices began to express people's anger. At the 1968 Republican convention in Miami, candidate Richard M. Nixon expressed that anger.
A
Personal Voice richard nixon As we look at America we see cities enveloped in smoke and flame. We hear sirens in the night. . . .
We see Americans hating each other... at home....
Did we come all this way for this? ... die in Normandy and Korea and in Valley Forge for this? ”
—Speech at Republican convention, 1968
CONSERVATIVES ATTACK THE COUNTERCULTURE
Nixon was not the only conservative voice expressing alarm. FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover issued a warning that "revolutionary terrorism" was a threat on campuses and in cities. Other conservative critics warned that campus rebels posed a danger to traditional values and threatened to plunge American society into anarchy. Conservatives also attacked the counterculture for what they saw as its decadent values. In the view of psychiatrist Bruno Bettelheim, student rebels and members of the counterculture had been pampered in childhood; as young adults, they did not have the ability for delayed gratification. According to some conservative commentators, the counterculture had abandoned rational thought in favor of the senses and uninhibited self-expression. The angry response of mainstream Americans caused a profound change in the political landscape of the United States. By the end of the 1960s, conservatives were presenting their own solutions on such issues as lawlessness and crime, the size of the federal government, and welfare. This growing conservative movement would propel Nixon into the White House—-and set the nation on a more conservative course.
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Re-create the tree diagram below on your paper. Then fill in examples that illustrate the topics in the second row of boxes.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance •counterculture	• Haight-Ashbury	* *the Beatles
CRITICAL THINKING
3. DEVELOPING
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
A stereotype is a generalization made about a group. What stereotype do you think hippies might have formed about mainstream Americans? What stereotype do you think mainstream Americans might have formed about hippies? Why? Think About:
•	Alex Forman’s comments in “A Personal Voice” (page 781)
•	hippies’ values and lifestyle
•	mainstream Americans’ values and lifestyle
Which example do you think had the
biggest impact on society? Why?
An Era of Social Chai
DAILY LIFE
(1960-1970) Signs of the Sixties
The wave of social change that swept across America during the 1960s affected everyone, but especially the nation's teenagers. Abandoning the conservative and "clean-cut" look of the 1950s, many teens experimented with new and different appearances. In a declaration of their individuality and desire for more freedom, they also embraced a variety of new music and films during the 1960s.
FASHION: A NEW LOOK
During the 1960s, many youths wore a wide range of unconventional clothing. While most Americans did not adopt the outlandish look of hippies, many came out of the sixties wearing longer hair and blue jeans, which became a staple in nearly every wardrobe. Bright colors and psychedelic patterns also became wildly popular.
THE RISE OF SOUL MUSIC
African-American soul artists, whose music had inspired the more popular white rock ’n’ roll performers of the 1950s, grew widely popular themselves during the 1960s.
During this decade, Detroit’s Motown label produced the most popular and successful African-American artists, including Marvin Gaye, Stevie Wonder, and the Supremes (left)
A DIVERSE MUSIC SCENE
Scores of teenagers also tuned to surf music, a harmonic, light sound made popular by a California band, the Beach Boys.
Other teens listened to the poetic and socially conscious lyrics of folk rock. Heavy, or psychedelic, rock, sung by bands such as the Doors (whose 1967 concert advertisement appears to the right), also found its way into many album collections. In the later part of the decade, musicians like Jimi Hendrix (far right) took rock ’n’ roll in a new direction.
786 Chapter 23
DATA
FILE
POPULAR SONGS
POPULAR TV SHOWS
GOING TO THE SHOW
As the nation’s movie industry grew, more and more teenagers flocked to the cinema. Teens took in such diverse films as the counterculture classic Easy Rider and the science fiction classic 2001: A Space Odyssey (above), which tells the story of HAL, a spaceship computer that develops a mind of its own.
“Blowin’ in the Wind" (1962)
’ “Surfin’ USA" (1963)
•	“Where Did Our Love
Go?" (1964)
» “California Dreamin”'
(1966)
►	“Light My Fire” (1967)
►	“Mrs. Robinson”
(1967)
►	“Aquarius/Let the Sunshine In” (1968)
» “Come Together” (1969)
•	“Everyday People”
(1968)
i960: Alfred Hitchcock’s Psycho terrifies movie audiences across the nation.
1963: The movie Cleopatra, produced for $37 million, is the most expensive film to date.
1964: The Beatles arrive In America.
1966: The National Association of Broadcasters instructs disc jockeys to screen records for obscene or hidden meanings.
1968: The government mandates that ail new cars must be equipped with seat belts.
The Dick Van Dyke Show (1962-1966)
The Beverly Hillbillies (1962-1971)
Green Acres (1965-1971)
1 The Addams Family (1964-1966)
►	The Man from U.N.C.L.E. (1964-1968)
►	Mission: Impossible (1966-1973)
» Laugh-In (1968-1973)
» Bonanza (1959-1973)
1962: Wilt Chamberlain scores 100 points in a
. basketball game.
1963: Graphic Artist Harvey Bali invents the smiley face
j for an ad campaign aimed at
1 boosting workers’ morale.
1965: The miniskirt • • is introduced.
1967: The Green Bay Packers defeat the Kansas City Chiefs in the first Super Bowl.
1969: Pantsuits become I acceptable for everyday
F wear by women.



f I
thinking critically
CONNECT TO HISTORY
1. Drawing Conclusions What conclusions can you draw about teenagers in the 1960s from the images and information in this feature?
POP ART
Andy Warhol created this image of movie actress and popular icon Marilyn Monroe. A leader of the pop art movement, Warhol attempted to criticize the conventional lifestyle of the mass culture through commercial-looking images that depicted the loss of individuality.
CONNECT TO TODAY
2. The Role of Culture Do the arts merely reflect social change, or can art, music, fashion, etc. help to bring about social change? Think about how music and fashions affect your actions and opinions. Discuss your thoughts with a small group of classmates.
hmhsocialstudies.com
I RESEARCH WEB LINKS
An Era of Social Cha\
CHAPTER
TERMS & NAMES
ASSESSMENT
For each term or name below, write a sentence explaining its connection to the 1960s.
1.	Cesar Chavez
2.	La Raza Unida
3.	American Indian Movement (AIM)
4.	feminism
5.	Betty Friedan
MAIN IDEAS
6.	Equal Rights Amendment (ERA)
7.	Phyllis Schlafly
8.	counterculture
9.	Haight-Ashbury 10. Woodstock
Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
Latinos and Native Americans Seek Equality
(pages 768-773)
1.	What strategies did both Cesar Chavez and the UFWOC use to achieve their goals? How did they successfully apply these tactics?
2.	What were the demands of the American Indian Movement (AIM) organizers who staged “The Trail of Broken Treaties” march on Washington in 1972?
Women Fight for Equality (pages 776-780)
3.	Describe the roles of political organizations that promoted women’s civil rights.
4.	What was the Supreme Court’s decision in the Roe v. Wade case?
Culture and Counterculture (pages 781-785)
5.	Briefly explain the role Timothy Leary played in the counterculture movement.
6.	What unintended impact did the counterculture have on many mainstream Americans?
CRITICAL THINKING
USING YOUR NOTES
Re-create the diagram shown below. Then fill in the appropriate areas with key individual and shared achievements of Latinos, Native Americans, and feminists. the organizations that Latinos, Native Americans, and women formed during the 1960s. Which do you think was the most influential? Why?
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
Reread the song lyrics of Bob Dylan’s “The Times They Are A-Changin’” on page 784. How do you think this song captured the main message of the counterculture movement? VISUAL SUMMARY
An Era of Social Change POLITICAL
protests against Vietnam War NOW fuels feminism
the New Right emerges ERA defeated
Roe v. Wade
more women in the work force
AIM wins reforms and land rights
La Raza Unida and MAPA fight for
more rights for Latinos
bilingual education
Latino farm workers unionize
MUSIC
music as political expression
Motown label produces African-American artists rock music; the Beatles; Woodstock festival
SOCIAL
hippies reject mainstream society" more communal living
new fashion trends reflect freedom of expression
traditional forms of worship rejected Jn favor of Eastern religious teachings
1 more drug use
■ women and minorities seek equality ' more permissive sexual behavior 1 books, magazines, and movies show explicit violence
ART AND
FASHION
•	pop art movement
•	long hair as rebellion
•	hippies popularize bright, colorful clothing, beads, and blue jeans
788 Chapter 23
TEXAS TEST PRACTICE
Use the flowchart and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 1.
1.	Which event accurately completes the cause-and-effect chain?
A EEOC
rules that unhealthful working conditions amount to illegal discrimination. B UFWOC
disbands. C
Grape boycott is extended to apricots and olives. D
Working conditions for migrant farm workers are improved. 2.	In the 1960s, women fought in Congress, in the courts, and in their everyday lives for treatment as political and social equals. Today, job discrimination against women is illegal because of—
F the Fourteenth Amendment.
G the ERA.
H the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
J the Roe v. Wade decision.
3.	Which of the following statements is a fact?
A
Hippies believed that everyone should love each other. B
Hippies spoiled the Woodstock festival. C
The hippie movement failed because the hippies’ beliefs were too radical.
D
Hippies invented rock music in Liverpool, England.
4.	The women’s rights movement largely grew out of—
F the counterculture movement.
G the civil rights movement.
H the movement to organize farm workers.
J reaction to the Warren Court decisions.
71 hmhsocialstudies.com
TEST PRACTICE

For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests • Tutorials
INTERACT WITH HISTORY
"’t'WriteSmart MULTIMEDIA ACTIVITY Think about the issues you recorded in myNotebook as you read the chapter. Write a script in which five characters—a Latino activist, a Native American activist, a member of the women’s movement, a member of the counterculture, and a conservative politician who wants to preserve the status quo debate the following question: How much can a society change? Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your script.
Visit the Chapter Assessment links to
find examples of 1960s culture, such as songs, paintings, posters, clothing, cars, and so on. Prepare an electronic museum exhibit of several artifacts that display a trend or theme discussed in the chapter. Write captions for the artifacts explaining their historical context and relating them to your chosen theme.
hmhsocialstudies.com
"'VWriteSmart
Cesar Chcivez received the Presidential Medal of Honor in 1994. Imagine that you have been asked to introduce Chavez at the presentation ceremony. Write a short speech highlighting his achievements as a labor organizer and Latino activist. You may wish to do additional research to help you. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your speech.
An Era of Social Chi
End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Creating Multimedia Presentations
DEFINING THE SKILL
A visual presentation of social studies information uses visual sources to explain a particular historical event. Such sources include photographs, maps, charts and graphs, paintings, costume drawings, political cartoons, and advertisements.
An oral presentation is a speech or talk given before an audience. In a multimedia presentation, the oral presentation accompanies and explains the visual presentation. The oral component of the presentation helps inform an audience about a certain topic or persuade an audience to think or act in a certain way.
A multimedia presentation is a speech or talk that uses a variety of media to present information to an audience. Such a presentation usually includes oral and visual components. A multimedia presentation can incorporate computer applications, but it does not have to.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: ASSEMBLE A MULTIMEDIA PRESENTATION
The image below shows one part of a multimedia presentation. The student is using a computer application that allows the user to create slides with text and visuals. These slides can be shown to others to present information. Use the strategies listed below to help you plan out the steps needed to compile a clear, engaging, and informative presentation. O
Identify a historical topic you would like to present. Choose a central idea or theme on which to focus your research. Q
Conduct research to determine what visual sources are available. Research the topic to gather relevant facts and vivid details. Include visual aids, such as maps, charts, or photographs, to add to your presentation. Some topics may have more visual source material than others. You can create your own visual, such as a graph or chart, to accompany what you find. © Decide how you want to organize the information for your presentation. Think about the best way to present your introduction, the body of your content, and your conclusion. This can include headings, bulleted text, charts, tables, and other visuals. The slide above shows one part of a presentation about the ways women’s lives changed in the late 20th century. Also think about the order in which you arrange your slides to provide a clear, organized presentation that your audience can easily follow.
i The Changing Role of Women
EDUCATION ANO EARNINGS | 1970 [ 2002 |
	Number of female college students (approximate)	3,000,000	9,300,000
* ii	Percentage of college students who were women	40.5%	56.4%
■ 4	Percentage of undergraduate and graduate	40.8%	57.8%
	degrees received by women		
Education	Percentage of doctoral degrees received by women	13.3%	45.5%
2	Women’s earnings compared to every dollar earned by men	59.4 cents	76.6 cents
F3?9I			
a fH	athletics .	'			[		1970 “1	2002 J
	Number of female participants in high school	294,000	2,856,350
	athletics		
Athletics	Percentage of participants in high school athletics who were women	7.4%	41.7%
			
CORPORATEANDGOVERNMENT LEADERSHIP
f 1970 | .	Number of female chief executive officers of	0	6
*•	Fortune 500 companies		
	Percentage of female federal civilian employees	30.3%	45%
	Number of women elected to the U.S. House of	10	59
Leadership	Representatives		
	Number of women elected to the U.S. Senate	1	13 J
I!
STRATEGY: WRITE A SCRIPT
Once your visual presentation is created, think about the best way to deliver it to others. The best presenters don't just read what is on screen but summarize and expand upon what is shown. •	The movement had many notable successes in the 1970s.
•	By the end of the decade, the number of women holding professional jobs had increased, though most women still held low-paying jobs. For example, in 1970 just 5 percent of the nation’s lawyers were women. A decade later, 12 percent of American lawyers were women.
•	In the field of at-hletico, the passage of Title IX, which prohibits gender discrimination in sports, dramatically increased female participation in athletics.
•	Another dramatic change was the increase of movement of women into senior positions in government and business.
V
Write a script for the presentation. A narration of events to accompany the visuals will tie the various sources together and aid you in telling the story. Consider the words and images on each part of your presentation and think about how best to discuss this content with the audience. Use varied sentence structures and connecting words to engage your audience. Q
Make sure your arguments support your central idea or theme. Express arguments clearly and persuasively. Write key words and clues in your notes to use as talking points. It may be helpful to structure this section in outline form. Also, think about how an interesting opening sentence could catch the listeners’ attention. 0 Practice your presentation aloud. Make sure that you are comfortable speaking and that your statements are clear. Keep the following tips in mind as you rehearse: maintain eye contact with your audience; use gestures and body language and vary your tone to emphasize your main points and express your ideas; and pace yourself. Don't rush to finish your presentation.
APPLYING THE SKILL
Turn to Chapter 23, page 774 and study the "Historic Decisions of the Supreme Court" feature about Reynolds v. Sims (1964). Choose a point of view about this case and create an outline for a presentation that supports that side. Use the strategies to make a multimedia presentation.
To Assemble the Presentation
1.	Identify a historical topic you would like to present.
Would you support or oppose the ruling of the Supreme Court?
2.	Conduct research to determine what visual sources are available.
What visuals will help you present this topic?
3.	Decide how you want to organize the information for your presentation.
What is the best way to present your information? Will you use a slide show? What headings will help the audience understand the topic?
To Write the Script
1.	Write a script for the presentation.
View each part of your presentation. What can you say for each part to help readers understand what you are trying to convey?
2.	Make sure your arguments support your central idea or theme.
What is one especially interesting fact about your research? Can you use this as part of your opening to get the listeners’ attention.
3.	Practice your presentation aloud.
781
...... -
4a^‘” .-^<?

