632 Chapter 19
1958i NASA-
You have returned home from serving in World War II to find that your country is changing. The cities have swelled. Outlying suburbs are being built up with almost identical homes. America produces more and cheaper goods. In a booming economy, couples marry and start families in record numbers. As you watch clever ads on TV for the newest labor-saving gadgets, you feel nostalgia for a simpler time. As you read the chapter and explore the issues below, use the
thoughts.
Explore the Issues
•	How does pressure to conform affect the American dream?
•	Who might be excluded from the new prosperity?
•	How does advertising promote certain lifestyles and ideals?
: 1953 Korean : War cease-fire : *s signed.
: 1954j
: Brown v. Board of • Education of : Topeka outlaws : school segregation.
[1956] Eisenhower is reelected.
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration— is established.
1954
1956
’1956] Soviets crush uprising in Hungary.
; [1959] Alaska
•	and Hawaii
: become the : 49th and 50th
•	states.
119601 John F. Kennedy is elected president.
1960
|l959j Fidel Castro comes to power in Cuba.
1957 Soviets
launch Sputnik I.
! 1954 USSR
: opens the first
: small nuclear
: power plant.
Postwar America
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
The Truman and Eisenhower administrations led the nation to make social, economic, and political adjustments following World War II.
In the years after World War II, the United States became the economic and military power that it still is today.
•Gl Bill of Rights •Dixiecrat •suburb	• Fair Deal
S.
Truman OneAmerican's Story

TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on key events in postwar America.
Sam Gordon had been married less than a year when he was shipped overseas in July 1943. As a sergeant in the United States Army, he fought in Belgium and France during World War II. Arriving back home in November 1945, Sam nervously anticipated a reunion with his family. A friend,
Donald Katz, described Sam's reactions.
A
Personal Voice donald katz “ Sam bulled through the crowd and hailed a taxi. The cab motored north through the warm autumn day as he groped for feelings appropriate to being back home alive from a terrible war. . . . [He was] nearly panting under the weight of fear.. . . Back home alive . . . married to a girl I haven’t seen since 1943 . . . father of a child I’ve never seen at all. ”
— Home Fires
Sam Gordon met his daughter, Susan, ' ’	\
for the first time the day he returned home
from the war, and he went to work the next morning. Like many other young couples, the Gordons began to put the nightmare of the war behind them and to return to normality.
GIs returned home to their families after World War II with new hope, but also with new problems.
Readjustment and Recovery
By the summer of 1946, about 10 million men and women had been released from the armed forces. Veterans like Sam Gordon-along with the rest of American society—settled down to rebuild their lives.
634 Chapter 19
r
main idea
THE IMPACT OF THE
Gl BILL To help ease veterans' return to civilian life. Congress passed the Servicemen's Readjustment Act, or the Gl Bill of Rights, in 1944. In addition to encouraging veterans to get an education by paying part of their tuition, the Gl Bill guaranteed them a year's worth of unemployment benefits while job hunting. It also offered low-interest, federally guaranteed loans. Millions of young families used these benefits to buy homes and farms or to establish businesses. HOUSING CRISIS
In 1945 and 1946, returning veterans faced a severe housing shortage. Many families lived in cramped apartments or moved in with relatives. In response to this housing crisis, developers like William Levitt and Henry Kaiser used efficient, assembly-line methods to mass-produce houses. Levitt, who bragged that his company could build a house in 16 minutes, offered homes in small residential communities surrounding cities, called suburbs, for less than $7,000. Levitt's first postwar development—rows of standardized homes built on treeless lots—was located on New York's Long Island and named Levittown. These homes looked exactly alike, and certain zoning laws ensured that they would stay the same. Despite their rigid conformity, Americans loved the openness and small-town feel to the planned suburbs. With the help of the Gl Bill, many veterans and their families moved in and cultivated a new lifestyle.
REDEFINING THE FAMILY
Tension created by changes in men's and women's roles after the war contributed to a rising divorce rate. Traditionally, men were the breadwinners and heads of households, while women were expected to stay home and care for the family. During the war, however, about 8 million women, 75 percent of whom were married, entered the paid work force. These women supported their families and made important household decisions. Many were reluctant to give up their newfound independence when their husbands returned. Although most women did leave their jobs, by 1950, more than a million war marriages had ended in divorce. ECONOMIC READJUSTMENT
After World War II, the United States converted from a wartime to a peacetime economy. The U.S. government immediately canceled war contracts totaling $35 billion. Within ten days of Japan’s surrender, more than a million defense workers were laid off. Unemployment increased as veterans joined laid-off defense workers in the search for jobs. At the peak of postwar unemployment, in March 1946, nearly 3 million people were seeking work. Rising unemployment was not the nation's only postwar economic problem, however. During the war, the Office of Price Administration (OPA) had halted inflation by imposing maximum prices on goods. When these controls ended on June 30 1946, prices skyrocketed. In the next two weeks, the cost of consumer products soared 25 percent, double the increase of the previous three years. In some cities, consumers stood in long lines, hoping to buy scarce items, such as sugar, coffee, and beans. Prices continued to rise for the next two years until the supply of goods caught up with the demand.
While prices spiraled upward, many American workers also earned less than they had earned during the war. To halt runaway inflation and to help the nation convert to a peacetime economy, Congress eventually reestablished controls similar to the wartime controls on prices, wages, and rents. &



▲
The suburbs were a mass phenomenon, even on moving day.
Identifying Problems
fH What
Problems did
Americans face
after World War II?
The Postwar Boom 631
A
Dynamic Economy REMARKABLE RECOVERY
Most economists who had forecast a postwar depression were proved wrong because they had failed to consider consumers pent-up accumulation of needs and wants. People had gone without many goods for so long that by the late 1940s, with more than $135 billion in savings from defense work, service pay, and investments in war bonds, Americans suddenly had money to spend. They snatched up everything from automobiles to houses. The G.I. Bill contributed to this period of prosperity by aiding veterans in purchasing homes and businesses. After a brief period of postwar economic readjustment, the American economy boomed. The demand for goods and services outstripped the supply and increased production, which created new jobs. Judging from the graphs (shown left), many Americans prospered in the 1950s in what the economist John Kenneth Galbraith called "the affluent society." The Cold War also contributed to economic growth. Concern over Soviet expansion kept American defense spending high and people employed. Foreign-aid programs, such as the Marshall Plan, provided another boost to the American economy. By helping nations in Western Europe recover from the war, the United States helped itself by creating strong foreign markets for its exports, jEp
Meeting Economic Challenges
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
What factors contributed to the American postwar economic boom?
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial times to 1970
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs
1.	From 1950 to 1960, by what percentage did each of the economic indicators shown above increase?
2.	Which years show the biggest increases for each of the graphs above?
Despite an impressive recovery, Americans faced a number of economic problems. Their lives had been in turmoil throughout the war, and a desire for stability made the country more conservative.
PRESIDENT TRUMAN’S INHERITANCE
When Harry S. Truman suddenly became president after Franklin D. Roosevelt’s death in 1945, he asked Roosevelt’s widow, Eleanor, whether there was anything he could do for her. She replied, "Is there anything we can do for you? For you are the one in trouble now. ’’ In many ways, President Truman was in trouble. A
Personal Voice harry s. truman “ I don’t know whether you fellows ever had a load of hay fall on you, but when they told me yesterday what had happened [Roosevelt’s death], I felt like the moon, the stars, and all the planets had fallen on me. ”
—excerpt from a speech, April 13, 1945
Despite his lack of preparation for the job, Truman was widely viewed as honorable, down-to-earth, and self-confident. Most important of all, he had the ability to make difficult decisions and to accept full responsibility for their consequences. As the plaque on his White House desk read, "The Buck Stops Here." Truman faced two huge challenges: dealing with the rising threat of communism, as discussed in Chapter 26, and restoring the American economy to a strong footing after the war's end.	6
636 Chapter 19
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
Cj What actions did President Truman take to avert labor strikes?
TRUMAN FACES STRIKES
One economic problem that Truman had to address was strikes. Facing higher prices and lower wages, 4.5 million discontented workers, including steelworkers, coal miners, and railroad workers, went on strike in 1946. Although he generally supported organized labor, Truman refused to let strikes cripple the nation. He threatened to draft the striking workers and to order them as soldiers to stay on the job. He authorized the federal government to seize the mines, and he threatened to take control of the railroads as well. Truman appeared before Congress and asked for the authority to draft the striking railroad workers into the army. Before he could finish his speech, the unions gave in. ENOUGH?”
Disgusted by shortages of goods, rising inflation, and labor strikes, Americans were ready for a change. The Republicans asked the public, "Had enough?" Voters gave their answer at the polls: in the 1946 congressional elections, the Republican Party won control of both the Senate and the House of Representatives for the first time since 1928. The new 80th Congress ignored Truman's domestic proposals. In 1947, Congress passed the Taft-Hartley Act over Truman's veto. This bill overturned many rights won by the unions under the New Deal.
HISTORICAL SPOTLIGHT
Vocabulary
discrimination:
treatment based °n class or category rather than individual merit
Social Unrest Persists
Problems arose not only in the economy but in the very fabric of society. After World War II, a wave of racial violence erupted in the South. Many African Americans, particularly those who had served in the armed forces during the war, demanded their rights as citizens.
TRUMAN SUPPORTS CIVIL RIGHTS
Truman put his presidency on the line for civil rights. "I am asking for equality of opportunity for all human beings," he said, "... and if that ends up in my failure to be reelected, that failure will be in a good cause." In 1946, Truman created a President's Commission on Civil Rights. Following the group's recommendations, Truman asked Congress for several measures including a federal antilynching law, a ban on the poll tax as a voting requirement, and a permanent civil rights commission. Congress refused to pass these measures, or a measure to integrate the armed forces. As a result, Truman himself took action. In July 1948, he issued an executive order for integration of the armed forces, calling for "equality of treatment and opportunity in the armed forces without regard to race, color, religion, or national origin." In addition, he ordered an end to discrimination in the hiring of government employees. The Supreme Court also ruled that the lower courts could not bar
In 1947, Jackie Robinson joined the ►
Brooklyn Dodgers, angering some fans but winning the hearts, and respect, of many others.
JACKIE ROBINSON
Jackie Robinson took a brave step when he turned the Brooklyn Dodgers into an integrated baseball team in 1947. But he—and the country—had a long way to go.
Unhappy fans hurled insults at Robinson from the stands. Some players on opposing teams tried to hit him with pitches or to injure him with the spikes on their shoes. He even received death threats. But he endured this with poise and restraint, saying,
“Plenty of times, I wanted to haul off when somebody insulted me for the color of my skin but I had to hold to myself. I knew I was kind of an experiment.”
In 1949, Robinson was voted
the National League’s most valuable player. He later became the first African American to be inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame.

A

WIPE OUT
CIO says “WIPE OUT DISCRIMINATION”
Wipe Out Discrimination (1949), a poster by Milton Ackoff, depicts the civil rights consciousness that angered the Dixiecrats.
' ; I
African Americans from residential neighborhoods. These actions represented the beginnings of a federal commitment to dealing with racial issues.
THE 1948 ELECTION Although many Americans blamed Truman for the nation's inflation and labor unrest, the Democrats nominated him for president in 1948. To protest Truman's emphasis on civil rights, a number of Southern Democrats—who became known as Dixiecrats—formed the States' Rights Democratic Party, and nominated their own presidential candidate, Governor J. Strom Thurmond of South Carolina. Discontent reigned at the far left of the Democratic spectrum as well. The former vice-president Henry A. Wallace led his supporters out of mainstream Democratic ranks to form a more liberal Progressive Party.
As the election approached, opinion polls gave the Republican candidate, New York Governor Thomas E. Dewey, a comfortable lead. Refusing to believe the polls, Truman poured his energy into the campaign. First, he called the Republican-dominated Congress into a special session. He challenged it to pass laws supporting such elements of the Democratic Party platform as public housing, federal aid to education, a higher minimum wage, and extended Social Security coverage. Not one of these laws was passed. Then he took his campaign to the people. He traveled from one end of the country to the other by train, speaking from the rear platform in a sweeping "whistlestop campaign." Day after day, people heard the president denounce the "do-nothing, 80th Congress."
STUNNING UPSET
Truman's "Give 'em hell, Harry" campaign worked. He won the election in a close political upset. The Democrats gained control of Congress as well, even though they suffered losses in the South, which had been solidly Democratic since Reconstruction. MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
$ How did Truman use his executive power to advance civil rights?
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Region In which regions of the country did Truman carry states? Dewey? Thurmond?
2.	Region In which regions was support for Truman the weakest?
Party	Candidate	Electoral Votes	Popular Votes
O
Democratic Harry S. Truman 303 24,179,000 O
Republican Thomas E. Dewey 189 21,991,000 O
States’ Rights J. Strom Thurmond 39 1,176,000 Progressive	Henry A. Wallace	—	1,157,000
638 Chapter 19
MAIN IDEA
Evaluating
Leadership
§ What were some of Truman’s achievements as president?
A R DEAL
After his victory, Truman continued proposing an ambitious economic program. Truman's Fair Deal, an extension of Roosevelt's New Deal, included proposals for a nationwide system of compulsory health insurance and a crop-subsidy system to provide a steady income for farmers. In Congress, some Northern Democrats joined Dixiecrats and Republicans in defeating both measures. In other instances, however, Truman's ideas prevailed. Congress raised the hourly minimum wage from 40 cents to 75 cents, extended Social Security coverage to about 10 million more people, and initiated flood control and irrigation projects. Congress also provided financial support for cities to clear out slums and build 810,000 housing units for low-income families, jy
Vocabulary slush fund: a fund often designated for corrupt Practices, such as bribery
Republicans Take the Middle Road
Despite these social and economic victories, Truman's approval rating sank to an all-time low of 23 percent in 1951. The stalemate in the Korean War and the rising tide of McCarthyism, which cast doubt on the loyalty of some federal employees, became overwhelming issues. Truman decided not to run for reelection. The Democrats nominated the intellectual and articulate governor Adlai Stevenson of Illinois to run against the Republican candidate, General Dwight D. Eisenhower, known popularly as "Ike."
I LIKE IKE!
During the campaign, the Republicans accused the Democrats of "plunder at home and blunder abroad." To fan the anti-Communist hysteria that was sweeping over the country, Republicans raised the specter of the rise of communism in China and Eastern Europe. They also criticized the growing power of the federal government and the alleged bribery and corruption among Truman's political allies.
Eisenhower's campaign hit a snag, however, when newspapers accused his running mate, California Senator Richard M. Nixon, of profiting from a secret slush fund set up by wealthy supporters. Nixon decided to reply to the charges. In an emotional speech to an audience of 58million, now known as the "Checkers speech," he exhibited masterful use of a new medium—television. Nixon denied any wrongdoing, but he did admit to accepting one gift from a political supporter.
A
Personal Voice richard m. nixon “ You know what it was? It was a little cocker spaniel dog In a crate, that he’d [the political supporter] sent all the way from Texas. Black and white spotted. And our little girl—Tricia, the six-year-old—named it Checkers. And you know the kids, like all kids, love the dog and I Just want to say this right now, that regardless of what they say about it, we’re going to keep it. ”
__"Checkers speech," September 23,1952
The Postwar Boom 63
t
♦
Countering slush fund charges, Richard Nixon speaks to TV viewers about his daughters and their dog, Checkers.
HISTORY
VIDEO
Nixon's Checkers Speech
Nixon's speech saved his place on the Republican ticket. In November 1952, Eisenhower won 55 percent of the popular vote and a majority of the electoral college votes, while the Republicans narrowly captured Congress.
WALKING THE MIDDLE OF THE ROAD
President Eisenhower's style of governing differed from that of the Democrats. His approach, which he called "dynamic conservatism," was also known as "Modern Republicanism." He called for government to be "conservative when it comes to money and liberal when it comes to human beings."
Eisenhower followed a middle-of-the-road course and avoided many controver-
sial issues, but he could not completely sidestep a persistent domestic issue—civil rights—that gained national attention due to court rulings and acts of civil disobedience in the mid-1950s. The most significant judicial action occurred in 1954, when the Supreme Court ruled in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka that public schools must be racially integrated. (See page 708.) In a landmark act of civil disobedience a year later, a black seamstress named Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat on a bus to a white man. Her arrest sparked a boycott of the entire Montgomery, Alabama, bus system. The civil rights movement had entered a new era.
Although Eisenhower did not assume leadership on civil rights issues, he accomplished much on the domestic scene. Shortly after becoming president, Eisenhower pressed hard for programs that would bring around a balanced budget and a cut in taxes. During his two terms, Ike's administration raised the minimum wage, extended Social Security and unemployment benefits, increased funding for public housing, and backed the creation of interstate highways and the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. His popularity soared, and he won reelection in 1956.
711 hmhsocialstudies.com
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•Gl Bill of Rights	• Harry S. Truman	•Dixiecrat	•Fair Deal
•suburb
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a time line of key events relating to postwar America. Use the dates below as a guide.
1946 1947 1948 1949	1952
Write a paragraph describing the effects of one of these events.
CRITICAL THINKING
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
Do you think Eisenhower’s actions reflected his philosophy of dynamic conservatism? Why or why not?
Think About:
•	the definition of dynamic conservatism
•	Eisenhower’s actions on civil rights policies
•	Eisenhower’s accomplishments on other domestic issues
EVALUATING LEADERSHIP
What actions did the Truman and Eisenhower administrations take to create economic opportunities for citizens? Which administration had more success in achieving its goals?
5.	SUMMARIZING
Describe Truman’s actions to address minority rights in the United States, including desegregation of the armed forces.
640 Chapter 19


TEKS17B, 27B
The American Dream in the Fifties
MAIN IDEA
During the 1950s, the economy boomed, and many Americans enjoyed material comfort.
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
The “American dream,” a notion that was largely shaped by the 1950s, is still pursued today.
Terms & Names
•conglomerate •franchise •baby boom •Dr. Jonas Salk
•consumerism
•planned
obsolescence
American's Story

Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the American dream in the 1950s.
Settled into her brand new house near San Diego, California,
Carol Freeman felt very fortunate. Her husband Mark had his own law practice, and when their first baby was born, she became a full-time homemaker. She was living the American dream, yet Carol felt dissatisfied—as if there were "something wrong" with her because she was not happy.
A
Personal Voice carol freeman “ As dissatisfied as I was, and as restless, I remember so well this feeling [we] had at the time that the world was going to be your oyster. You were going to make money, your kids were going to go to good schools, everything was possible if you just did what you were supposed to do. The future was rosy. There was a tremendous feeling of optimism. . . . Much as I say it was hateful, it was also hopeful. It was an innocent time. ” —quoted in The Fifties: A Women’s Oral History
After World War II ended, Americans turned their attention to their families and jobs. The economy prospered. New technologies and business ideas created fresh opportunities for many, and by the end of the decade Americans were enjoying the highest standard of living in the world. The American dream of a happy and successful life seemed within the reach of many people.


j i
The Organization and the Organization Man
During the 1950s, businesses expanded rapidly. By 1956, the majority of Americans no longer held blue-collar, or industrial, jobs. Instead, more people worked in higher-paid, white-collar positions—clerical, managerial, or professional occupations. Unlike blue-collar workers, who manufactured goods for sale, white-collar workers tended to perform services in fields like sales, advertising, insurance, and communications.
The dream woman of the 1950s was depicted in advertising and on TV as doing constant housework, but always with a smile.
The Postwar Boom 6i
CONGLOMERATES
Many white-collar workers performed their services in large corporations or government agencies. Some of these corporations continued expanding by forming conglomerates. (A conglomerate is a major corporation that includes a number of smaller companies in unrelated industries.) For example, one conglomerate, International Telephone and 
FRANCHISES
In the decades since Ray Kroc opened his first McDonald’s restaurant (shown below), franchising has become all but a way of life in the United States. Today, there are thousands of franchised companies with almost 750,000 franchise establishments throughout the country. Officials estimate that franchises account for nearly one-third of all U.S. retail sales. American franchises provide a wide array of goods and services, from car maintenance to hair care. In an attempt to tap into the international market, hundreds of U.S. companies have established overseas franchises.
The franchise with perhaps the greatest global reach is the one that started it all. In addition to its more than 14,000 U.S. franchises, McDonald’s now operates over 33,000 franchises in 118 countries around the world.
Telegraph (ITT), whose original business was communications, bought car-rental companies, insurance companies, and hotel and motel chains. Through this diversification, or investment in various areas of the economy, ITT tried to protect itself from declines in individual industries. Other huge parent companies included American Telephone and Telegraph, Xerox, and General Electric.
FRANCHISES
In addition to diversifying, another strategy for business expansion—franchising—developed at this time. A franchise is a company that offers similar products or services in many locations. (Franchise is also used to refer to the right, sold to an individual, to do business using the parent company's name and the system that the parent company developed.) Fast-food restaurants developed some of the first and most successful franchises. McDonald's, for example, had its start when the McDonald brothers developed unusually efficient service, based on assembly-line methods, at their small drive-in restaurant in San Bernardino, California. They simplified the menu, featured 15-cent hamburgers, and mechanized their kitchen.
Salesman Ray Kroc paid the McDonalds $2.7 million for the franchise rights to their hamburger drive-in. In April 1955, he opened his first McDonald's restaurant in Des Plaines, Illinois, where he further improved the assembly-line process and introduced the trademark arches that are now familiar all over the world.
j MAIN IDEA
Comparing
How were conglomerates and franchises alike and how were they different?
A
Personal Voice ray kroc “ It requires a certain kind of mind to see the beauty In a hamburger bun. Yet is it any more unusual to find grace in the texture and softly curved silhouette of a bun than to reflect lovingly on the . . . arrangements and textures and colors in a butterfly's wings? . . . Not if you view the bun as an essential material in the art of serving a great many meals fast. ” —quoted in The Fifties
SOCIAL CONFORMITY
While franchises like McDonald's helped standardize what people ate, some American workers found themselves becoming standardized as well. Employees who were well paid and held secure jobs in thriving companies sometimes paid a price for economic advancement: a loss of their individuality. In general, businesses did not want creative thinkers, rebels, or anyone who would rock the corporate boat. ' 7 I
642 Chapter 19
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
$ What effects did the climate in many corporations have on some workers?
In The Organization Man, a book based on a classic 1956 study of suburban Park Forest, Illinois, and other communities, William H. Whyte described how the new, large organizations created "company people." Companies would give personality tests to people applying for jobs to make sure they would "fit in" the corporate culture. Companies rewarded employees for teamwork, cooperation, and loyalty and so contributed to the growth of con-
formity, which Whyte called "belongingness." Despite their success, a number of workers questioned whether pursuing the American dream exacted too high a price, conformity replaced individuality.
The Suburban Lifestyle
Though achieving job security did take a psychological toll on some Americans who resented having to repress their own personalities, it also enabled people to provide their families with the so-called good things in life. Most Americans worked in cities, but fewer and fewer of them lived there. New highways and the availability and affordability of automobiles and gasoline made commuting possible. By the early 1960s, every large city in the United States was surrounded by suburbs. Of the 13 million new homes built in the 1950s, 85 percent were built in the suburbs. For many people, the suburbs embodied the American dream of an affordable single-family house, good schools, a safe, healthy environment for children, and congenial neighbors just like themselves.
THE BABY BOOM
As soldiers The “organization man” had to step lively to keep up with the Joneses.
returned from World War II and settled into family life, they contributed to an unprecedented population explosion known as the baby boom. During the late 1940s and through the early 1960s, the birthrate (number of live births per 1,000 people) in the United States soared. At the height of the baby boom, in 1957, one American infant was born every seven seconds—a total of 4,308,000 that year. The result was the largest generation in the nation's history.
American Birthrate, 1940-1970
* First year for which figures include Alaska and Hawaii.
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970
.4 Some of the 40 million new Americans who were born during the baby boom.
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs 1.	What was the overall trend in the birthrate at the start of World War II, and after the war ended?
2.	What was the difference in the birthrate between 1960
and 1970?	....... ..............
The Postwar Boom 6-
Contributing to the size of the baby-boom generation were many factors, including: reunion of husbands and wives after the war, decreasing marriage age, desirability of large families, confidence in continued economic prosperity, and advances in medicine.
The baby boom affected the nation's educational system. During the decade, 10 million new students entered elementary school. The sharp increase in enrollment caused overcrowding and teacher shortages in many parts of the country.
The baby boom affected the American economy as well, by increasing demand for certain consumer goods. For instance, in 1958, toy sales alone reached $1.25 billion. Also, larger families created demand for larger cars. In this way, the increased demand caused by the baby boom contributed to the prosperity of the 1950s.
ADVANCES IN MEDICINE AND CHILDCARE
In the early 20th century, diseases such as typhoid fever and polio MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
& How did the baby boom affect American life in the 1950s?
JONAS SALK 1914-1995
One of the most feared diseases in the 1950s was polio, the disease that had partially paralyzed President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Polio afflicted 58,000 American children in 1952, killing some and making others reliant on crutches, wheelchairs, or iron lungs (machines that helped people with paralyzed chest muscles to breathe).
In the early 1950s, Dr. Jonas Salk (at right in photo above), a Jewish scientist, developed a vaccine to prevent the disease, and the government sponsored a free inoculation program for children. The vaccine was extremely effective. By 1974, thanks to Salk’s vaccine and a new oral vaccine developed by Dr. Albert Sabin, only seven new polio cases were reported in the country.
claimed the lives of hundreds of thousands of children. The need to prevent this loss of life led to the discovery of drugs to fight these diseases. The worst year on record for polio was 1952, when more than 57,000 people contracted the disease. Three years later, Dr. Jonas Salk developed a new polio vaccine.
Many parents raised their children according to guidelines devised by the author and pediatrician Dr. Benjamin Spock. His Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care, published in 1946, sold nearly 10 million copies during the 1950s. In it, he advised parents not to spank or scold their children and suggested family meetings in which children could express themselves.
WOMEN’S ROLES
During the 1950s, the role of homemaker and mother was glorified in popular magazines, movies, and TV programs such as Father Knows Best and The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet. Time magazine described the homemaker as "the key figure in all suburbia, the thread that weaves between family and community—the keeper of the suburban dream." In contrast to the ideal portrayed in the media, however, some women, like Carol Freeman, were not happy with their roles; they felt isolated, bored, and unfulfilled. According to one survey in the 1950s, more than one-fifth of suburban wives were dissatisfied with their lives. Betty Friedan, author of the groundbreaking 1963 book about women and society, The Feminine Mystique, described the problem.
Background
The percentage of women college students in the 1950s was smaller than in the 1920s.
A
Personal Voice betty friedan “ For the first time in their history, women are becoming aware of an identity crisis in their own lives, a crisis which ... has grown worse with each succeeding generation. ... I think this is the crisis of women growing up—a turning point from an Immaturity that has been called femininity to full human identity. ”
—The Feminine Mystique
The number of women working outside the home rose steadily during the decade. By 1960, almost 40 percent of mothers with children between ages 6 and 17 held paying jobs.	5
644 Chapter 19
MAIN IDEA
Contrasting
$ How did women’s roles and opportunities in the 1950s differ from women’s roles today?
History Through
But having a job didn't necessarily contribute to a woman s happiness. A woman's career opportunities tended to be limited to fields such as nursing, teaching, and office support, which paid less than other professional and business positions did. Women also earned less than men for comparable work. Although increasing numbers of women attended four-year colleges, they generally received little financial, academic, or psychological encouragement to pursue their goals, jjy
LEISURE IN THE FIFTIES
Most Americans of the 1950s had more leisure time than ever before. Employees worked a 40-hour week and earned several weeks' vacation per year. People owned more labor- saving devices, such as washing machines, clothes dryers, dishwashers, and power lawn mowers, which allowed more time for leisure activities.
Fortune magazine reported that, in 1953, Americans spent more than $30 billion on leisure goods and activities.
Americans also enjoyed a wide variety of recreational pursuits—both active and passive. Millions of people participated in such sports as fishing, bowling, hunting, boating, and golf. More fans than ever attended baseball, basketball, and football games; others watched professional sports on television.
Americans also became avid readers. They devoured books about cooking, religion, do-it-yourself projects, and homemaking. They also read mysteries, romance novels, and fiction by popular
writers such as Ernest Hemingway, John Steinbeck,
Daphne du Maurier, and J. D. Salinger. Book sales doubled, due in part to a thriving paperback market. The circulation of popular magazines like Reader's Digest and Sports Illustrated steadily rose, from about 148 million to more than 190 million readers. Sales of comic books also reached a peak in the mid-1950s.
3-D comics and 3-D movies were two >
of the many fads that mesmerized
the nation in the 1950s.
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA AND THE AUTOMOBILE
No state has exemplified automania in the U.S. more than California. By the late 1990s, Californians owned more cars, held more driver’s licenses, and traveled more miles on their roads than the people of any other state. The center of this automobile culture is the metropolitan area of Los Angeles.
Contributing to the importance of the automobile is Southern California’s suburban lifestyle. This dependence on cars has contributed to problems of air pollution and traffic jams. But, California is addressing these problems by reviving public transportation systems and promoting the use of electric cars that produce no pollution.
The Automobile Culture
During World War II, the U.S. government had rationed gasoline to curb inflation and conserve supplies. After the war, however, an abundance of both imported and domestically produced petroleum—the raw material from which gasoline is made—led to inexpensive, plentiful fuel for consumers. Easy credit terms and extensive advertising persuaded Americans to buy cars in record numbers. In response, new car sales rose from 6.7 million in 1950 to 7.9 million in 1955. The total number of private cars on the road jumped from 40 million in 1950 to over 60 million in 1960.
AUTOMANIA
Suburban living made owning a car a necessity. Most of the new suburbs, built in formerly rural areas, did not offer public transportation, and people had to drive to their jobs in the cities. In addition, many of the schools, stores, synagogues, churches, and doctors' and dentists' offices were not within walking distance of suburban homes. THE INTERSTATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM
The more cars there were, the more roads were needed. "Automania" spurred local and state governments to construct roads linking the major cities while connecting schools, shopping centers, and workplaces to residential suburbs. The Interstate Highway Act, which President Eisenhower signed in 1956, authorized the building of a nationwide highway network—41,000 miles of expressways. The new roads, in turn, encouraged the development of new suburbs farther from the cities. Interstate highways also made high-speed, long-haul trucking possible, which contributed to a decline in the commercial use of railroads. Towns along the new highways prospered, while towns along the older, smaller roads experienced hard times. The system of highways also helped unify and homogenize the nation. As John Keats observed in his 1958 book, The Insolent Chariots, "Our new roads, with their ancillaries, the motels, filling stations, and restaurants advertising Eats, have made it possible for you to drive from Brooklyn to Los Angeles without a change of diet, scenery, or culture." With access to cars, affordable gas, and new highways, more and more Americans hit the road. They flocked to mountains, lakes, national parks, historic sites, and amusement parks for family vacations. Disneyland, which opened in California in July 1955, attracted 3 million visitors the next year.
MOBILITY TAKES ITS TOLL
As the automobile industry boomed, it stimulated production and provided jobs in other areas, such as drive-in movies, restaurants and shopping malls. Yet cars also created new problems for both society and the environment. Noise and exhaust polluted the air. Automobile accidents claimed more lives every year. Traffic jams raised people's stress levels, and heavy use damaged the roads. Because cars made it possible for Americans to live in suburbs, many upper-class and middle-class whites left the crowded cities. Jobs and businesses eventually followed them to the suburbs. Public transportation declined, and poor people in the inner cities were often left without jobs and vital services. As a result, the economic gulf between suburban and urban dwellers and between the middle class and the poor widened, MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
£ Why did auto sales surge in the 1950s?
Vocabulary homogenize: to
make the same or similar
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
What positive and negative effects did the mass availability of the automobile have on American life in the 1950s?
646 Chapter 19
i
Americans Hit the Road
In the 1950s Americans loved their cars—big, powerful, and flashy. Some car owners spent their leisure time maintaining their automobiles for the daily commute to work or for the annual family vacation on any one of the nation’s 22 new interstate highways.
▲ The Drive-In
Young suburban families piled into their cars to see a movie at one of the country’s 5,000 or so drive-in theaters.
Car Ads ►
Not just for transport, cars were marketed for fashion and fun. Car ads used words like ’’fresh" and "frisky."
NBAftiy EVERYONE KNOWS By NOW -	,
<4 Cruising Teens
Often teenagers drove around familiar neighborhoods ending up at popular teen meeting places to see and be seen.
The Postwar Boom
Consumerism Unbound
Now! In a full console at only *299.95*, Zenith'* revolutionary
ToPTummf
By the mid-1950s, nearly 60 percent of Americans were members of the middle class, about twice as many as before World War II. They wanted, and had the money to buy, increasing numbers of products. Consumerism, buying material goods, came to be equated with success.
NEW PRODUCTS
One new product after another appeared in the marketplace, as various industries responded to consumer demand. Newsweek magazine reported in 1956 that "hundreds of brand-new goods have become commonplace overnight." Consumers purchased electric household appliances—such as washing machines, dryers, blenders, freezers, and dishwashers—in record numbers. With more and more leisure time to fill, people invested in recreational items. They bought televisions, tape recorders, and the new hi-fi (high-fidelity) record players. They bought casual clothing to suit their suburban lifestyles and power lawn mowers, barbecue grills, swimming pools, and lawn decorations for their suburban homes.
««

How/does kitchen
a
In the 1950s, advertisers made "keeping up with the Joneses" a way of life for consumers.
PLANNED OBSOLESCENCE
In addition to creating new products, manufacturers began using a marketing strategy called planned obsolescence. In order to encourage consumers to purchase more goods, manufacturers purposely designed products to become obsolete—that is, to wear out or become outdated—in a short period of time. Carmakers brought out new models every year, urging consumers to stay up-to-date. Because of planned obsolescence, Americans came to expect new and better products, and they began to discard items that were sometimes barely used. Some observers commented that American culture was on its way to becoming a "throwaway society." $$ BUY NOW, PAY LATER
Many consumers made their purchases on credit and therefore did not have to pay for them right away. The Diner's Club issued the first credit card in 1950, and the American Express card was introduced in 1958. In addition, people bought large items on the installment plan and made regular payments over a fixed time. Home mortgages rate
vour
on the electrical living seal© P
’KWct fcrflT fc.hw Thm ore »	pw owd	Is	i • Gtrets	Jtf ' h	
	
	sign
	
“ 'XX	
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
How did manufacturers influence Americans to become a “throwaway society”?
(loans for buying a house) and automobile loans worked the same way. During the decade, the total private debt grew from $73 billion to $179 billion. Instead of saving money, Americans were spending it, confident that prosperity would continue.
THE ADVERTISING AGE
The advertising industry capitalized on this runaway consumerism by encouraging even more spending. Ads were everywhere-in newspapers and magazines, on radio and television, and on billboards along the 648 Chapter 19
highways prompting people to buy goods that ranged from cars to cereals to cigarettes. Advertisers spent about $6 billion in 1950; by 1955, the figure was up to $9 billion. Since most Americans had satisfied their basic needs, advertisers tried to convince them to buy things they really didn't need.
A
Personal Voice vance Packard On May 18,1956, The New York Times printed a remarkable interview with a young man named Gerald Stahl, executive vice-president of the Package Designers Council. He stated: 4Psychiatrists say that people have so much to choose from that they want help—they will like the package that hypnotizes them into picking It.’ He urged food packers to put more hypnosis into their package designing, so that the housewife will stick out her hand for it rather than one of many rivals.
Mr. Stahl has found that it takes the average woman exactly twenty seconds to cover an aisle In a supermarket if she doesn’t tarry; so a good package design should hypnotize the woman like a flashlight waved in front of her eyes. ”
—The Hidden Persuaders
More and more, ad executives and designers turned to psychology to create new strategies for selling. Advertisers appealed to people's desire for status and "belongingness" and strived to associate their products with those values.
Television became a powerful new advertising tool. The first one-minute TV commercial was produced in 1941 at a cost of $9. In 1960, advertisers spent a total of $1.6 billion for television ads. By 2001, a 30-second commercial during the Superbowl cost an advertiser $2.2 million. Television had become not only the medium for mass transmission of cultural values, but a symbol of popular culture itself.
2 \ ASSESSMENT
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•conglomerate •franchise
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a graphic organizer like the one below, list examples of specific goals that characterized the American dream for suburbanites in the 1950s.
The American Dream		
		
Values	Home/ Family	Work
		
Examples Examples Examples
What do you think the most important goal was?
•baby boom	•consumerism
•Dr. Jonas Salk	• planned obsolescence
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING EFFECTS
In what ways do you think current environmental consciousness is related to the “throwaway society” of the 1950s? Support your answer.
Think About:
•	the purchasing habits of 1950s consumers
•	the effects of planned obsolescence
•	today’s emphasis on recycling
4.	EVALUATING
How did a specific need result in
the scientific discovery of the polio 5
vaccine?
THE FINAL FROST BARRIER!
INTERPRETING VISUAL SOURCES
This ad is typical of how the advertising industry portrayed housewives in the 1950s. What message about women is conveyed by this ad?
The Postwar Boom
/
/
7
P A
GEOGRAPHY SPOTLIGHT
The Road to Suburbia
"Come out to Park Forest where small-town friendships grow—and you still live so close to a big city." Advertisements like this one for a scientifically planned Chicago suburb captured the lure of the suburbs for thousands of growing families in the 1950s. The publicity promised affordable housing, congenial neighbors, fresh air and open spaces, good schools, and easy access to urban jobs and culture. Good transportation was the lifeline of suburban growth a half century ago, and it continues to spur expansion today.
P » OPOS L D 811 A N R K ' F O h E S
!	J
V i 11 f A C t
B IL IL. 0 N
a i
'C/,COMPIETELY PLANNED
/
io* F°r®st W9S planned from its conceptio o to be a "complete community for mid income families with children." The setting rura amidst cornfields and forest preserves mrA 6+S s°uth °f Chica§°- But it was conver and ?nUt6r ineS’ llke the lllin°is Central (1C) F major roads, such as Western Aveni
650 Chapter 19
Q THE COMMUTER CRUSH
Men commuted to work on the 1C railroad, while their wives usually stayed home to take care of the children, who thrived in Park Forest's safe, wholesome family environment.





ziTrA
<v?Xr ■‘Au.,*
Jr
SSreSSBsS
„ ’tep -* ““
S&^se,
■t &*?**? •»
SHOPPING CENTERS
Consumerism became a driving force in the 1950s, and Park Forest kept up with the trend. The central shopping center served the community well until the late 1960s. When Interstate 57 was built, a mammoth mall, built just off the highway, caused the original shopping area to decline. Park Forest is still struggling to revive its centra, shopping area.
THINKING CRITICALLY
1.	Analyzing Patterns How did the availability of transportation influence the creation and ongoing development of Park Forest?
2.	Creating a Database Pose a historical question about a suburb near you. Collect statistics about changes in population, living patterns, income, and economic development in that suburb. Use those statistics to create a database that will help answer your questions.




SHARED PRIVACY
1952, development in Park Forest, ed to include both low-cost rental units and single-fam y homes. All the streets were curved to slow traffic, p e a Pleasing sweep of space, and give residents Privacy and space for yards.
hmhsocialstudies.com
RESEARCH WEB LINKS
The Postwar Booi
Popular Culture
MAIN IDEA
Mainstream Americans, as well as the nation’s subcultures, embraced new forms of entertainment during the 1950s.
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Television and rock ‘n’ roll, integral parts of the nation’s culture today, emerged during the postwar era.
Tennis & Names
>	mass media
>	Federal
Communications
Commission
(FCC)
•	beat movement
•	rock ‘n’ roll •Jazz
One American's Story;
! hmhsocialstudies.com
»TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the popular culture idols of the 1950s.
H. B.
Barnum, a 14-year-old saxophone player who later became a music producer, was one of many teenagers in the 1950s drawn to a new style of music that featured hard-driving African-American rhythm and blues. Barnum described the first time he saw the rhythm-and-blues performer Richard Wayne Penniman, better known as Little Richard. A
Personal Voice h. b. barnum 66 He’d just burst onto the stage from anywhere, and you wouldn’t be able to hear anything but the roar of the audience. . . . He’d be on the stage, he’d be off the stage, he’d be Jumping and yelling, screaming, whipping the audience on. . . . Then when he finally did hit the piano and just went into di-di-di-di-di-dl-di, you know, well nobody can do that as fast as Richard. It just took everybody by surprise.”
—quoted in The Rise and Fall of Popular Music
Born poor, Little Richard wore flashy clothes on stage, curled his hair, and shouted the lyrics to his songs. As one writer observed,
"In two minutes [he] used as much energy as an all-night party."
The music he and others performed became a prominent part of the American culture in the 1950s, a time when both mainstream America and those outside it embraced new and innovative forms of entertainment.
Little Richard helped change rhythm and blues into a new musical genre—rock ‘n’ roll.
New Era of the Mass Media
Compared with other mass media-means of commu^on that "reach large
Wlth lightnin§ SPeed- First widelV available in 1948, television had reached 9 percent of American homes by 1950 and 55 per-
“nt Of?°,mtes by.1954’ In 1960' almost 90 percent—45 million—of American homes had television sets. Clearly, TV was the entertainment and information marvel of the postwar years.
652 Chapter 19
S II
‘I	;
j MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
$ How did the emergence of television affect American culture in the 1950s?
THE RISE OF TELEVISION
Early television sets were small boxes with round screens. Programming was meager, and broadcasts were in black and white. The first regular broadcasts, beginning in 1949, reached only a small part of the East Coast and offered only two hours of programs per week. Post—World War II innovations such as microwave relays, which could transmit television waves over long distances, sent the television industry soaring. By 1956, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)—the government agency that regulates and licenses television, telephone, telegraph, radio, and other communications industries—had allowed 500 new stations to broadcast. This period of rapid expansion was the "golden age" of television entertainment—and entertainment in the 1950s often meant comedy. Milton Berle attracted huge audiences with The Texaco Star Theater, and Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz's early situation comedy, I Love Lucy, began its enormously popular run in 1951.
At the same time, veteran radio broadcaster Edward R. Murrow introduced two innovations: on-the-scene news reporting, with his program, See It Now (1951-1958), and interviewing, with Person to Person (1953-1960). Westerns, sports events, and original dramas shown on Playhouse 90 and Studio One offered entertainment variety. Children's programs, such as The Mickey Mouse Club and The Howdy Doody Show, attracted loyal young fans.
American businesses took advantage of the opportunities offered by the new television industry. Advertising expenditures on TV, which were $170 million in 1950, reached nearly $2 billion in 1960.
Sales of TV Guide, introduced in 1953, quickly outpaced sales of other magazines. In 1954, the food industry introduced a new convenience item, the frozen TV dinner. Complete, ready-to-heat individual meals on disposable aluminum trays, TV dinners made it easy for people to eat without missing their favorite shows.
HISTORICAL
SPOTLIGHT
TV QUIZ SHOWS
Beginning with The $64,000 Question in 1955, television created hit quiz shows by adopting a popular format from radio and adding big cash prizes.
The quiz show Twenty-One made a star of a shy English professor named Charles Van Doren. He rode a wave of fame and fortune until 1958, when a former contestant revealed that, to heighten the dramatic impact, producers had been giving some of the contestants the right answers.
A scandal followed when a congressional subcommittee confirmed the charges. Most of the quiz shows soon left the air.
I; i! It
J i i
Vocabulary
stereotypical:
conventional, formulaic, and oversimplified
Lucille Ball had to fight to have her real-life husband, Cuban-born Desi Arnaz, cast in the popular TV series I Love Lucy.
James Dean, seen here in the movie Giant, had a self-confident indifference that made him the idol of teenagers. He died in a car accident at age 24.
▼

STEREOTYPES AND GUNSLINGERS
Not everyone was thrilled with television, though. Critics objected to its effects on children and its stereotypical portrayal of women and minorities. Women did, in fact, appear in stereotypical roles, such as the ideal mothers of Father Knows Best and The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet. Male characters outnumbered women characters three to one. African Americans and Latinos rarely appeared in television programs at all. Television in the 1950s portrayed an idealized white America. For the most part, it omitted references to poverty, diversity, and contemporary conflicts, such as the struggle of the civil rights movement against racial discrimination. Instead, it glorified the historical conflicts of the Western frontier in hit shows such as Gunsmoke and Have Gun Will Travel. The level of violence in these popular shows led to ongoing
concerns about the effect of television on children. In 1961, Federal Communications Commission chairman Newton Minow voiced this concern to the leaders of the television industry.
A
Personal Voice newton minow “ When television Is bad, nothing is worse. I invite you to sit down in front of your television set when your station goes on the air. . . and keep your eyes glued to that set until the station signs off. I can assure you that you will observe a vast wasteland/’
—speech to the National Association of Broadcasters, Washington, D.C., May 9,1961
RADIO AND MOVIES
Although TV turned out to be wildly popular, radio and movies survived. But instead of competing with television's mass market for drama and variety shows, radio stations turned to local programming of news, weather, music, and community issues. The strategy paid off. During the decade, radio advertising rose by 35 percent, and the number of radio stations increased by 50 percent. From the beginning, television cut into the profitable movie market. In 1948, 18,500 movie theaters had drawn nearly 90 million paid admissions per week. As more people stayed home to watch TV, the number of moviegoers decreased by nearly half. As early as 1951, producer David Selznick worried about Hollywood:
“It'll never come back. It'll just keep on crumbling until finally the wind blows the last studio prop across the sands."
But Hollywood did not crumble and blow away. Instead, it capitalized on the advantages that movies still held over television—size, color, and stereophonic sound. Stereophonic sound, which surrounded the viewer, was introduced in 1952. By 1954, more than 50 percent of movies were in color. By contrast, color television, which became available that year, did not become widespread until the
MAIN IDEA
Evaluating
$ Do you think the rise of television had a positive or a negative effect on Americans? Explain.

i
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
$ How did radio and movies maintain their appeal in the 1950s?
next eca e. In 1953, 20th Century Fox introduced Cinemascope, which projected a wide-angle image on a broad screen. The industry also tried novelty features: Smell-O-Vision and Aroma-Rama piped smells into the theaters to coincide with events shown on the screen. Three-dimensional images, viewed through special glasses supplied by the theaters, appeared to leap into the audience.
A
Subculture Emerges Although the mass media found a wide audience for their portrayals of mostly white popular culture, dissenting voices rang out throughout the 1950s. The messages of the beat movement in literature, and of rock 'n' roll in music, clashed with the tidy suburban view of life and set the stage for the counterculture that would burst forth in the late 1960s.
THE BEAT MOVEMENT
Centered in San Francisco, Los Angeles, and New York City's Greenwich Village, the beat movement expressed the social and literary nonconformity of artists, poets, and writers. The word beat originally meant "weary" but came to refer as well to a musical beat. Followers of this movement, called beats or beatniks, lived nonconformist lives. They tended to shun regular work and sought a higher consciousness through Zen Buddhism, music, and, sometimes, drugs.
Many beat poets and writers believed in imposing as little structure as possible on their artistic works, which often had a free, open form. They read their poetry aloud in coffeehouses and other gathering places. The beat movement produced some significant literary works, such as Allen Ginsberg's long, free-verse poem, Howl, published in 1956, and Jack Kerouac's novel,
On the Road, published in 1957. This novel describes a nomadic search across America for authentic experiences, people, and values.
A
Personal Voice jack kerouac “ [T]he only people for me are the mad ones, the ones who are mad to live, mad to talk, mad to be saved ... the ones who never yawn or say a commonplace thing, but burn, burn, burn like fabulous yellow roman candles exploding like spiders across the stars. ”
—On the Road
main idea
Analyzing Causes ft Why do you think many young Americans were attracted to the beat movement?
Some saw their rebellious attitudes as a threat to traditional American values. Look magazine proclaimed, “There's nothing really new about the beat philosophy. It consists merely of the average American's value scale—turned inside out. The goals of the Beat are not watching TV, not wearing gray flannel, not owning a home in the suburbs, and especially—not working. Nonetheless, the beatnik attitudes, way of life, and literature attracted the attention of the media and fired the imaginations of many college students, cy
Novelist Jack Kerouac's On the Road, published in 1957, sold over 500,000 copies.
African Americans and Rock ‘if Roll
While beats expressed themselves in unstructured literature, musicians in the 1950s added electronic instruments to traditional blues music, creating rhythm and blues. In 1951, a Cleveland, Ohio, radio disc jockey named Alan Freed was among the first to play the music. This audience was mostly white but the music usually was produced by African-American musicians. Freed's listeners responded enthusiastically and Freed began promoting the new music that grew out of rhythm and blues and country and pop. He called it rock n' roll, and it reflected a reaction by 1950s youth against the conformity that marked the postwar era.
The Postwar Boom
Chuck Berry is as much known for his “duck walk” as for his electric guitar-playing heard on hit records including “Johnny B. Goode” and “Maybellene.”
ROCK ‘N’ ROLL
In the early and mid-1950s, Richard Penniman, Chuck Berry, Bill Haley and His Comets, and especially Elvis Presley brought rock 'n' roll to a frantic pitch of popularity among the newly affluent teens who bought their records. The music's heavy rhythm, simple melodies, and lyrics—featuring love, cars, and the problems of being young— captivated teenagers across the country. Elvis Presley, the unofficial "King of Rock 'n' Roll," first developed his musical style by singing in church and listening to gospel, country, and blues music on the radio in Memphis, Tennessee. When he was a young boy, his mother gave him a guitar, and years later he paid four dollars of his own money to record two songs in 1953. Sam Phillips,
a rhythm-and-blues producer, discovered Presley and produced his first records. In 1955, Phillips sold Presley's contract to RCA for $35,000.
Presley's live appearances were immensely popular, and 45 of his records sold over a million copies, including "Heartbreak Hotel," "Hound Dog," "All Shook Up," "Don't Be Cruel," and "Burning Love." Although Look magazine dismissed him as "a wild troubadour who wails rock 'n' roll tunes, flails erratically at a guitar, and wriggles like a peep-show dancer," Presley's rebellious style captivated young audiences. Girls screamed and fainted when he performed, and boys tried to imitate him.
Not surprisingly, many adults condemned rock 'n' roll. They believed that the new music would lead to teenage delinquency and immorality. In a few cities, rock 'n' roll concerts were banned. But despite this controversy, television and radio exposure helped bring rock 'n' roll into the mainstream, and it became more acceptable by the end of the decade. Record sales, which were 189 million in 1950, grew with the popularity of rock 'n' roll, reaching 600 million in 1960.
MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
Based on Elvis Presley’s song titles, what do you think were teenagers’ concerns in the 1950s?
History Through
Music
“HOUND DOG”—
A ROCK ‘N’ ROLL CROSSOVER
Few examples highlight the influence African Americans had on rock ‘n’ roll—and the lack of credit and compensation they received for their efforts—more than the story of Willie Mae “Big Mama” Thornton.
In 1953, she recorded and released the song
“Hound Dog” to little fanfare. She received a mere $500 in royalties. Only three years later, Elvis Presley recorded a version of the tune, which sold millions of records. Despite her contributions, Thornton reaped few rewards and struggled her entire career to make ends meet. SKILLBUILDER
Developing Historical Perspective
1,	Why might black musicians have been commercially less successful than white musicians in the 1950s? Explain.
2.	What concerns of the current generation are reflected in today’s popular music?
656 Chapter 19

THE RACIAL GAP
African-American music had inspired the birth of rock 'n' roll, and many of the genre's greatest performers were—like Berry and Penniman—African Americans. In other musical genres, singers Nat King Cole and Lena Horne, singer and actor Harry Belafonte, and many others paved the way for minority representation in the entertainment fields. Musicians like Miles Davis, Sonny Rollins, Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie, and Thelonius Monk played a style of music characterized by the use of improvisation, called jazz. These artists entertained audiences of all races.
But throughout the 1950s, African-American shows were mostly broadcast on separate stations. By 1954, there were 250 radio stations nationwide aimed specifically at African-American listeners. African-American stations were part of radio's attempt to counter the mass popularity of television by targeting specific audiences. These stations also served advertisers who wanted to reach a large African-American
audience. But it was the black listeners—who had fewer television sets than whites and did not find themselves reflected in mainstream programming—who appreciated the stations most. Thulani Davis, a poet, journalist, and playwright, expressed the feelings of one listener about African-American radio (or "race radio" as the character called it) in her novel 19S9.
A
Personal Voice thulani davis “ Billie Holiday died and I turned twelve on the same hot July day. The saddest singing in the world was coming out of the radio, race radio that is, the radio of the race. The white stations were on the usual relentless rounds of Pat Boone, Teresa Brewer, and anybody else who couldn’t sing but liked to cover songs that were once colored. . . . White radio was at least honest—they knew anybody in the South could tell Negro voices from white ones, and so they didn’t play our stuff/9
—1959
At the end of the 1950s, African Americans were still largely segregated from the dominant culture. This ongoing segregation—and the racial tensions it fed would become a powerful force for change in the turbulent 1960s.
Innovative American jazz trumpeter and composer Miles Davis, shown during a recording session in 1959, continued to blaze musical trails throughout his career.
\ ASSESSMENT
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term, write a sentence explaining its significance, •mass media	*beat movement	•rock 'n’ roll
•Federal Communications
Commission (FCC)
•jazz
main idea
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a “Who’s Who” chart of popular culture idols of the 1950s. Identify the art form and major achievements associated with each person.
Person	Art Form	Achievements
		
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	EVALUATING
Do you agree with Newton Minow’s statement, on page 654, that TV was “a vast wasteland”? Support your answer with details from the text.
4.	SUMMARIZING
How did rock ‘n’ roll and jazz reflect the characteristics and issues of the 1950s?
COMPARING AND CONTRASTING
In what ways were the rock ‘n’ roll musicians and the beat poets of the 1950s similar and different? Support your answer with details from the text. Think About:
•	the values the musicians and poets believed in
•	people’s reactions to the musicians, poets, and writers
• the positive and negative impacts of each cultural movement
Why do you think they appealed to
the young people of the 1950s?
The Postwar Boom
DAILY LIFE
(1950-1960) The Emergence of the Teenager
Life after World War II brought changes in the family. For the first time, the teenage years were recognized as an important and unique developmental stage between childhood and adulthood. The booming postwar economy made it possible for teenagers to stay in school instead of working to help support their families, and allowed their parents to give them generous allowances. American business, particularly the music and movie industries, rushed to court this new consumer group.
TEENS AS CONSUMERS
Comic books, pimple creams, and soft drinks were just a few of the products aimed at teenagers with money to spend.
658 Chapter 19
TEENAGE TIDBITS
A
Life magazine survey showed that, during the 1950s, teens spent $20 million on lipstick alone. •	In 1956, a total of 42,000 drive-in movie theaters—heavily frequented by teenagers—took in one-quarter of the year’s total box-office receipts.
•	College enrollments more than doubled between 1946 and 1960.
•	A weekly credit payment for a record player was $1.
THE TEEN MOVIE SCENE
Teenagers with money in their pockets often found themselves at the movies. Hollywood responded by producing films especially for teens. Rebel Without a Cause (1955) told the story of a troubled youth driven by anger and fear.
It starred teen heart-throbs James Dean and Natalie Wood.
U.S.
School Enrollments, 1950-1990 35,000 | 30,000 g 25,000 £ 20,000 | 15,000 8 10,000 1	5,000
1950	1960	1970	1980
■■ Elementary High School "■ Ci
Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1995
1990
Teenagers and Employment, 1950-1990
6
					>. (		
							
		r '	r				
T <1	r						
							
BANDSTAND performers
American Bandstand showcased young performers who played music ranging from doo-wop (shown ; above) to hard-driving rhythm and blues. The songs s they sang underscored themes of alienation and
1950	1960	1970	1980	1990
Males 16-19 years ■“ Females 16-19 years
Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1995

TEKS9C, 2JB, 26A
The Other America
MAIN IDEA | ( WHY IT MATTERS NOW |
Terms & Names Amidst the prosperity of the 1950s, millions of Americans lived In poverty.	America today continues to experience a marked Income gap between affluent and nonaffluent people.	•urban renewal •bracero	•termination policy
		One American's Story ^		
hmhsocialstudies.coml
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on problems faced by African Americans, Mexican Americans, and Native Americans in the 1950s.
James Baldwin was born in New York City, the eldest of nine children, and grew up in the poverty of the Harlem ghetto. As a novelist, essayist, and playwright, he eloquently portrayed the struggles of African Americans against racial injustice and discrimination. He wrote a letter to his young nephew to mark the 100th anniversary of emancipation, although, in his words, "the country is celebrating one hundred years of freedom one hundred years too soon."
A
Personal Voice james Baldwin 66 [TJhese innocent and well-meaning people, your countrymen, have caused you to be born under conditions not very far removed from those described for us by Charles Dickens in the London of more than a hundred years ago. . . . This innocent country set you down in a ghetto in which, in fact, it intended that you should perish. . . . You were born where you were born and faced the future that you faced because you were black and for no other reason.99
▲
James Baldwin
—The Fire Next Time
For many Americans, the 1950s were a time of unprecedented prosperity. But not everyone experienced this financial well-being. In the "other" America, about 40 million people lived in poverty, untouched by the economic boom.
The Urban Poor
....   ■ •' i""'—J-	«	DW
Despite the portrait painted by popular culture, life in postwar America did not live up to the "American dream." In 1962, nearly one out of every four Americans was living below the poverty level. Many of these poor were elderly people single women and their children, or members of minority groups, including African Americans, Latinos, and Native Americans.
WHITE FLIGHT
In the 1950s, millions of middle-class white Americans left the cities for the suburbs, taking with them precious economic resources and isolating themselves from other races and classes. At the same time, the rural poor migrated to the inner cities. Between the end of World War II and 1960 nearly 5 million African Americans moved from the rural South to urban areas ' 660 Chapter 19
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing Effects $ What effect did white flight have on America’s cities?
The urban crisis prompted by the "white flight" had a direct impact on poor whites and nonwhites. The cities lost not only people and businesses but also the property they owned and income taxes they had paid. City governments could no longer afford to properly maintain or improve schools, public transportation, and police and fire departments—and the urban poor suffered.
THE INNER CITIES
While poverty grew rapidly in the decaying inner cities, many suburban Americans remained unaware of it. Some even refused to believe that poverty could exist in the richest, most powerful nation on earth. Each year, the federal government calculates the minimum amount of income needed to survive—the poverty line. In 1959, the poverty line for a family of four was $2,973. In 2000, it was $17,601. Ay After living among the nation's poor across America, Michael Harrington published a shocking account that starkly illuminated the issue of poverty. In The Other America: Poverty in the United States (1962), he not only confirmed that widespread poverty existed but also exposed its brutal reality.
A
Personal Voice Michael Harrington “ The poor get sick more than anyone else in the society. . . . When they become sick, they are sick longer than any other group in the society. Because they are sick more often and longer than anyone else, they lose wages and work, and find It difficult to hold a steady job. And because of this, they cannot pay for good housing, for a nutritious diet, for doctors. ”
—The Other America
in
main idea
Analyzing Effects W Why were tempts at urban renewal viewed as less than successful?
URBAN RENEWAL
Most African Americans, Native Americans, and Latinos xxx the cities had to live in dirty, crowded slums. One proposed solution to the housing problem in inner cities was urban renewal. The National Housing Act of 1949 was passed to provide "a decent home and a suitable living environment for every American family." This act called for tearing down rundown neighborhoods and constructing low-income housing. Later, the nation's leaders would create a new cabinet position, Housing and Urban Development (HUD), to aid in improving conditions in the inner city.
Although dilapidated areas were razed, parking lots, shopping centers, highways, parks, and factories were constructed on some of the cleared land, and there was seldom enough new housing built to accommodate all the displaced people. For example, a barrio in Los Angeles was torn down to make way for Dodger Stadium, and poor people who were displaced from their homes simply moved from one ghetto to another. Some critics of urban renewal claimed that it had merely become urban removal. Bi
Income Gap in America
(Ratio of Black Male Earnings to White Male Earnings*)
♦Figures are for year-round, full-time employment.
Source: The First Measured Century, Theodore Caplow, 2001
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs 1.	What trend does the graph show from 1940-1980?
2.	What factors affecting people’s lives might contribute to the income gap?
The Postwar Boot
Poverty Leads to Activism
Despite ongoing poverty, during the 1950s, African Americans began to make sig-nificant strides toward racial equality. Inspired by the African-American civil rig ts movement, other minorities also began to develop a deeper political awareness and worked to expand their economic opportunities. Mexican-American activism gathered steam after veterans returned from World War II, and a major change in government policy fueled Native American protest.
MEXICANS SEEK EMPLOYMENT
Many Mexicans had become U.S. citizens during the 19th century, when the United States had annexed the Southwest after the War with Mexico. Large numbers of Mexicans had also crossed the border to work in the United States during and after World War I. When the United States entered World War II, the shortage of agricultural laborers spurred the federal government to initiate, in 1942, a program in which Mexican braceros (bre-sar'bs), or hired hands, were allowed into the United States to harvest crops. Hundreds of thousands of braceros entered the United States on a short-term basis between 1942 and 1947. When their employment was ended, the braceros were expected to return to Mexico. However, many remained in the United States illegally. In addition, hundreds of thousands of Mexicans entered the country illegally to escape poor economic conditions in Mexico.
In 1942, Mexican farm workers on their way to California bid farewell to their families.
Background
In 1954, the U.S. launched a program designed to find and return undocumented immigrants to Mexico. Between 1953 and 1955, the U.S. deported more than 2 million illegal Mexican immigrants.
THE LONGORIA INCIDENT
One of the more notorious instances of prejudice against Mexican Americans involved the burial of Felix Longoria. Longoria was a Mexican-American war hero killed in the Philippines. The only undertaker in his Texas hometown refused to provide Longoria's family with funeral services. In the wake of the Longoria incident, outraged Mexican Americans stepped up their efforts to end discrimination. In 1948, several hundred Hispanic veterans formed the American G.I. Forum. They won national attention for their efforts when their Texas leader, Hector P. Garcia, accepted Senator Lyndon Johnson's offer that Longoria be buried at Arlington National Cemetery. The Forum also worked to win full access to military benefits for Hispanic veterans. Meanwhile, activist Ignacio Lopez founded the Unity League of California to register Mexican-American voters and to promote candidates who would represent their interests. ,g,
NATIVE AMERICANS CONTINUE THEIR STRUGGLE
Native Americans also fought for their rights and identity. With the passage of the Dawes Act in 1887
the policy of the federal government toward Native Americans became one of
"Americanization" and assimilation. In 1924, the Snvdpr Art	....
,, KT ..	.	. u . .u	anyaer Act granted citizenship
to all Native Americans, but they remained second-class citizens
In 1934, the Indian Reorganization Act moved official policy away from
assimilation and toward Native American autonomy. Its passage signaled a change in federal policy. In addition, because the government waf reeling from
| MAINIDEAJ
Analyzing
Issues
How did the Longoria incident motivate Mexican Americans to increase their political and social activism?
662 Chapter 19
Vocabulary
subsidizing:
financial
assistance given by a government to a person or group to support an undertaking regarded as being in the public interest
the Great Depression, it wanted to stop subsidizing the Native Americans. Native Americans also took the initiative to improve their lives. In 1944, they established the National Congress of American Indians. The congress had two main goals: (1) to ensure for Native Americans the same civil rights that white Americans had, and (2) to enable Native Americans on reservations to retain their own customs.
During World War II, over 65,000 Native Americans left their reservations for military service and war work. As a result, they became very aware of discrimination. When the war ended, Native Americans stopped receiving family allotments and wages. Outsiders also grabbed control of tribal lands, primarily to exploit their deposits of minerals, oil, and timber.
THE TERMINATION POLICY
In 1953, the federal government announced that it would give up its responsibility for Native American tribes. This new approach, known as the termination policy, eliminated federal economic support, discontinued the reservation system, and distributed tribal lands among individual Native Americans. In response to the termination policy, the Bureau of Indian Affairs began a voluntary relocation program to help Native Americans resettle in cities.
The termination policy was a dismal failure, however. Although the Bureau of Indian Affairs helped relocate 35,000 Native Americans to urban areas during the 1950s, they were often unable to find jobs in their new locations because of poor training and racial prejudice. They were also left without access to medical care when federal programs were abolished. In 1963, the termination policy was abandoned.
Native Americans like the man above received job training from the Bureau of Indian Affairs to help them settle in urban areas.
1.	TERMS & NAMES For each term, write a sentence explaining its significance, •urban renewal	*bracero	•termination policy
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In overlapping circles like the ones below, fill in the common problems that African Americans, Mexican Americans, and Native Americans faced during the 1950s.
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	EVALUATING
Do you think that urban renewal was an effective approach to the housing problem in inner cities? Why or why not? Think About:
•	the goals of the National Housing Act of 1949
•	the claims made by some critics of urban renewal
•	the residents’ best interest
4.	SUMMARIZING
What was Hector P Garcia’s role in the movement for increased rights for Mexican Americans?
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
Which major population shift— "white flight,” migration from Mexico, or relocation of Native Americans—do you think had the greatest impact on U.S. society? Why? Think About:
•	the impact of “white flight"
•	the influx of “braceros"
•	the effects of the termination policy
ANALYZING ISSUES
Explain the actions taken by
various minority groups during
this period to expand their
economic opportunities.
What do these problems illustrate
about life in the 1950s?
The Postwar Booi
ASSESSMENT
TERMS & NAMES
For each item below, write a sentence explaining its historical significance in the 1950s.	
1. suburb	6. mass media
2. Dixiecrat	7. beat movement
3. Fair Deal	8. rock ‘n’ roll
4. conglomerate	9. urban renewal
5. baby boom	10. bracero
6.	How did African-American performers influence American popular culture in the 1950s?
The Other America (pages 660-663)
7.	How did many major cities change in the 1950s?
8.	What obstacles to improving their lives did Native Americans face in the 1950s?
CRITICAL THINKING
MAIN IDEAS
Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
Postwar America (pages 634-640)
1.	How did the Gl Bill of Rights help World War II veterans?
2.	What domestic and foreign issues concerned voters during the 1952 presidential election?
The American Dream in the Fifties
(pages 641-649)
3.	What shift in employment trends had occurred by the mid-1950s?
4.	How did life in the suburbs provide the model for the American dream?
Popular Culture (pages 652-657)
5.	What strategies did radio stations use to counteract the mass popularity of television?
USING YOUR NOTES
In a web like the one below, show the postwar technological advances you consider most influential. HYPOTHESIZING
During America’s first two centuries, the national character was marked by individualism. Why do you think conformity became the norm in the 1950s? ANALYZING CAUSES AND EFFECTS
What factors caused the economic prosperity of the 1950s? What were the effects of that prosperity? Did all Americans benefit equally? Explain. ■H
Highways and affordable homes make suburban living desirable.
Equal rights remains a problem.
The Cold War creates fear and anxiety.
Life in Postwar America
1945-1960
Rock 'n' roll and jazz pave the way for minority representation.
The beat movement rejects conformity. Recreation and consumerism flourish. Television portrays an idealized white
America.

Urban areas fall into decay. Minorities experience prejudice and discrimination.
1 Minorities establish organizations to improve civil rights.

^4/? Culture
664 Chapter 19

<
TEXAS TEST PRACTICE
Use the chart and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer questions 1 and 2.
Geographic Distribution of U.S. 1930-1970			Population,
	Central		Rural Areas and
Yfear	Cities	Suburbs	Small Towns
1930	31.8%	18.0%	50.2%
1940	31.6%	19.5%	48.9%
1950	32.3%	23.8%	43.9%
1960	32.6%	30.7%	36.7%
1970	31.4%	37.6%	31.0%
Source: Adapated from U.S. Bureau of the Census, Decennial Censuses, 1930-1970			
i.	Which of the following statements supports the information in the chart?
A
From 1940-1960, more people lived in cities than in rural areas. B
In 1960, twice as many people lived in cities as in suburbs. C
By 1960, suburbs had surpassed cities in total population. D
From 1930-1970, the percentage of U.S. population in rural areas decreased every decade. 2.	From 1940-1970 the distribution doubled —
F in cities and suburbs.
G only in suburbs.
H only in cities.
J only in rural areas.
Use the song lyric below and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 3.
“Little Boxes”
Little boxes on the hillside,
Little boxes made of ticky-tacky,
Little boxes on the hillside,
Little boxes all the same.
There’s a pink one and a green one And a blue one and a yellow one,
And they’re all made out of ticky-tacky And they all look just the same.
—Malvina Reynolds
3.	This popular song of the era describes —
A planned obsolescence.
B urban renewal.
C suburban communities.
D beatnik life style.
711 hmhsocialstudies.com
TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests • Tutorials
interact with history
"’J'WriteSmart
MULTIMEDIA ACTIVITY
Think about the issues you recorded in myNote-book as you read the chapter. Suppose you are a beat poet and have been asked to write an original poem entitled A Postwar American Dream. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to create a poem that reflects a range of lifestyles, based on information from Chapter 19 and your knowledge of American history.
4
,>i my^VriteSmart
__________________________________
XCEHTURY
Review the graph on page 643. Convert the graph into chart form. Then review the chart above. Use the chart to create a graph showing the same information in visual form. Use the charts and graphs to pose and answer a series of questions about geographic patterns and distributions in the United States from 1940 to 1970. Consider how the population was changing and where people were living. Create a website to share your findings.
■ hmhsocialstudies.com
In 1956, President Eisenhower signed the Interstate Highway Act that led to the construction of a nationwide highway network. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write a persuasive essay supporting the law. In the first part of your essay, clearly outline the benefits created by the law. In the second part of your essay, address the concerns of those who oppose the law.

End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Interpreting Graphs and Charts
DEFINING THE SKILL
Graphs show statistical information in a visual manner. Historians use graphs to visualize and compare amounts, ratios, economic trends, and changes over time. Line graphs typically show quantities on the vertical axis (up the left side) and time in various units on the horizontal axis (across the bottom). Pie graphs are useful for showing relative proportions. The circle represents the whole and the slices represent the parts belonging to various subgroups. Bar graphs are commonly used to display information about quantities.
Charts, including simple charts, tables, and diagrams, are visual representations of information, such as facts and statistics. Historians use charts to organize, condense, simplify, and summarize information. Tables classify information by groups. Numbers, percentages, dates, and other data can be classified in the columns and rows of a table for easy reference and comparison.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: INTERPRET GRAPHS AND CHARTS
Graphs and charts can be useful tools for answering questions about geographic patterns and distributions. To learn more about changes in population density in different regions, review the graph and chart below. Identify the type of information presented in the graph or chart and how it is organized. Then analyze the information in order to pose and answer questions. L U.S.
Population Density by Region, 1900-2000 ■ Northeast ■ Midwest ■ South BWest
Source: Demographic Trends in the 20th Century, U.S. Census Bureau
© Identify the subject of the graph. Read the title to identify the main idea of the graph. When more than one subject is shown, such as different regions, the graph will probably show a relationship between them.
Look at the way the information is organized. Examine the labels. Read the horizontal and vertical axis laheis These tell what the line graph measures and the unit of measurement. Look at the legend. Find out the each symbol or color in the graph represents.	5	0Ul wnat eacn
Analyze the graph. Summarize the information shown in each part of the graph and pose questions What trends do you see ,n the line graph over certain years? When did the population in certain egics grow the most? What can you infer about geographic patterns and distributions?	8 g ™
1 Percentage of Total Population Living in Metropolitan Areas by Size of Metropolitan Area Population: 1950 to 2000						
©	1950	1960	1970	1980	1990	2000
5 million +	12.2	15.8	15.2	20.4	21.2	29.9
1 million to 4,999,999	17.3	19.5	25.5	25.5	28.9	27.5
20,000 to 999,999	17.9	18.9	19.9	19.4	18.7	16
Less than 250,000	8.7	9.1	8.4	9.8	8.7	6.9
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
0 Identify the subject of the chart. Read the title to get the main idea of the chart.
0 Look at the way the Information Is organized. Read the row and column headings. Charts can be organized alphabetically, chronologically, or in other ways. Identify the entries included under each heading.
0 Analyze the graph. Interpret, compare, and contrast the information to draw inferences and conclusions and make predictions. Determine what the statistics indicate about how the number of people living in metropolitan areas changed over time. Use this information to pose historical questions such as “In what way has the population in metropolitan areas changed between 1950 and 2000?”
STRATEGY: WRITE A SUMMARY
Write a paragraph to summarize what you learned from the chart or graph. This example summarizes what you can learn from the chart above. The percentage of people living in metropolitan areas over 5 million increased steadily between 1950 and 2000.	.
It rose almost 250 percent! From the chart, it appears that population in smaller metropolitan areas rises and falls over time, but population rises consistently in larger metropolitan areas.	j
applying the skill
Turn to Chapter 19, Section 1, page 636 and look at the visuals in "A Dynamic Economy." Study the graphs and write a paragraph in which you summarize what you learned from them.
1.	Identify the subject of the graph or chart.
What information do the graphs show?
2.	Look at the way the information Is organized.	. «hare anv
What do the labels reveal about what is shown. Do the grap	y
common labels?
conclusions and pose questions. What pp 1950 and 1962?
665 SI
UNIT
6
'"‘.‘APTER 20
The New Frontier and the Great Society
1960-1968
FAAFTER 21
Civil Rights 1954-1968
...::.TPf£R 22
The Vietnam War
Years
1954-1975
;.JAPrER 23
An Era of Social Change	j
1960-1975	i
Living with Great Turmoil
1954-1975










J/‘ „.,
; ...

, Fiigit
W J/.-:
• ■ • 4'
' 7
y ‘^Sf
-s W”	p, t - *	,

......................................................................... ............... ............................................................................................................................................................................................c......................................................................................F.. ............................................................„...&....i.,,/v





1
UNIT PROJECT
In this unit, you will read about a turbulent time in American history, when many groups were seeking equality. Use your knowledge of historical eras, the unit’s content, and the major characteristics of history to identify the eras in this unit. Then create a webpage that describes the defining characteristics of each era.
Civil Rights March, 1965 by James Karales

V"’
&	f
T
r ‘ y
V
Mki ,UL * 666
5? -
; K
|l960l John F. Kennedy is elected president.
[1961; U.S. launches the Bay of Pigs invasion.
1962 John Glenn becomes the first American to orbit the earth.
1962 U.S. and USSR face off in the Cuban missile crisis.
[19631 President Kennedy is assassinated; Lyndon B. Johnson becomes president.
USA
WORLD
I960
1961
1962
1963
[i960] Seventeen African countries gain independence.
[i96lj Soviet cosmonaut YuriGagarin becomes the first human in outer space.
[1962] The drug thalidomide is pulled from the market after it is found responsible for thousands of birth defects in Europe.
