698 Chapter 21

Taking on Segregation
MAIN IDEA
Activism and a series of Supreme Court decisions advanced equal rights for African Americans in the 1950s and 1960s.
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the civil rights movement’s efforts.
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Landmark Supreme Court decisions beginning in 1954 have guaranteed civil rights for Americans today.
?On^A'rtetiOdh’s^tOfy4
Terms & Names
•Thurgood
Marshall
•	Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka
•	Rosa Parks •Martin Luther
King, Jr.
•Southern Christian
Leadership Conference (SCLC) •Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) •sit-in
Jo Ann Gibson Robinson
Jo Ann Gibson Robinson drew back in self-defense as the white bus driver raised his hand as if to strike her. "Get up from there!" he shouted. Robinson, laden with Christmas packages, had forgotten the rules and sat down in the front of the bus, which was reserved for whites.
Humiliating incidents were not new to the African Americans who rode the segregated buses of Montgomery, Alabama, in the mid-1950s. The bus company required them to pay at the front, exit, and reboard at the rear.
"I felt like a dog," Robinson later said. A professor at the all-black Alabama State College, Robinson was also president of the Women's Political Council, a group of professional African-American women determined to increase black political power.
A
Personal Voice jo ann gibson robinson 6 4 We had members in every elementary, junior high, and senior high school, and in federal, state, and local
jobs. Wherever there were more than ten blacks employed, we had a member there. We were prepared to the point that we knew that in a matter of hours, we could corral the whole city/’
—quoted in Voices of Freedom: An Oral History of the Civil Rights Movement
On December 1, 1955, police arrested an African-American woman for refusing to give up her seat on a bus. Robinson promptly sent out a call for all African Americans to boycott Montgomery buses.
The Segregation System
Segregated buses might never have rolled through the streets of Montgomery if the Civil Rights Act of 1875 had remained in force. This act outlawed segregation in public facilities by decreeing that "all persons . . . shall be entitled to the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations ... of inns, public conveyances on land or water, theaters, and other places of public amusement." In 1883, however, the all-white Supreme Court declared the act unconstitutional.
700 Chapter 21
Background
SeeP/essyv. Ferguson on page 290.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
What were the effects of the Supreme Court decision Plessy v. Ferguson?
PLESSY V. FERGUSON
During the 1890s, a number of other court decisions and state laws severely limited African-American rights. In 1890, Louisiana passed a law requiring railroads to provide "equal but separate accommodations for the white and colored races." In the Plessy v. Ferguson case of 1896, the Supreme Court ruled that this "separate but equal" law did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment, which guarantees all Americans equal treatment under the law. Armed with the Plessy decision, states throughout the nation, but especially in the South, passed what were known as Jim Crow laws, aimed at separating the races. These laws forbade marriage between blacks and whites and established many other restrictions on social and religious contact between the races. There were separate schools as well as separate streetcars, waiting rooms, railroad coaches, elevators, witness stands, and public restrooms. The facilities provided for blacks were always inferior to those for whites. Nearly every day, African Americans faced humiliating signs that read: "Colored Water"; "No Blacks Allowed"; "Whites Only!" fly
SEGREGATION CONTINUES INTO THE 20TH CENTURY
After the Civil War, some African Americans tried to escape Southern racism by moving north. This migration of Southern African Americans speeded up greatly during World War I, as many African-American sharecroppers abandoned farms for the promise of industrial jobs in Northern cities. However, they discovered racial prejudice and segregation there, too. Most could find housing only in all-black neighborhoods. Many white workers also resented the competition for jobs. This sometimes led to violence. APARTHEID—SEGREGATION IN SOUTH AFRICA
In 1948, the white government of South Africa passed laws to ensure that whites would stay in control of the country. Those laws established a system called apartheid, which means “apartness.” The system divided South Africans into four segregated racial groups—whites, blacks, coloreds of mixed race, and Asians. It restricted what jobs nonwhites could hold, where they could live, and what rights they could exercise. Because of apartheid, the black African majority were denied the right to vote.
In response to worldwide criticism, the South African government gradually repealed the apartheid laws, starting in the late 1970s. In 1994, South Africa held its first all-race election and elected as president Nelson Mandela, a black anti-apartheid leader whom the white government had imprisoned for nearly 30 years.
I—l Segregation required CZ3 Segregation permitted n~l Segregation prohibited [—~l No specific legislation, or local option
These photos of the public schools for white children (top) and for black children (above) in a Southern town in the 1930s show that separate facilities were often unequal in the segregation era.
U.S.
School Segregation, 1952 Maine
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
Region In which regions were schools segregated by law? In which were segregation expressly prohibited?
Civil Rights 7<
THURGOOD MARSHALL 1908-1993
Thurgood Marshall dedicated his life to fighting racism. His father had labored as a steward at an all-white country club, his mother as a teacher at an all-black school. Marshall himself was denied admission to the University of Maryland Law School because of his race.
In 1961, President John F. Kennedy nominated Marshall to the U.S. Court of Appeals. Lyndon Johnson picked Marshall for U.S. solicitor general in 1965 and two years later named him as the first African-American Supreme Court justice. In that role, he remained a strong advocate of civil rights until he retired in 1991.
After Marshall died in 1993, a copy of the Brown v. Board of Education decision was placed beside his casket. On it, an admirer wrote: "You shall always be remembered.”
A DEVELOPING CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT
In many ways, the events of World War II set the stage for the civil rights movement. First, the demand for soldiers in the early 1940s created a shortage of white male laborers. That labor shortage opened up new job opportunities for African Americans, Latinos, and white women. Second, nearly one million African Americans served in the armed forces, which needed so many fighting men that they had to end their discriminatory policies. Such policies had previously kept African Americans from serving in fighting units. Many African-American soldiers returned from the war determined to fight for their own freedom now that they had helped defeat fascist regimes overseas.
Third, during the war, civil rights organizations actively campaigned for African-American voting rights and challenged Jim Crow laws. In response to protests, President Roosevelt issued a presidential directive prohibiting racial discrimination by federal agencies and all companies that were engaged in war work. The groundwork was laid for more organized campaigns to end segregation throughout the United States. &
Challenging Segregation in Court
The desegregation campaign was led largely by the NAACP, which had fought since 1909 to end segregation. One influential figure in this campaign was Charles Hamilton Houston, a brilliant Howard University law professor who also served as chief legal counsel for the NAACP from 1934 to 1938.
THE NAACP LEGAL STRATEGY
In deciding the NAACP's legal strategy, Houston focused on the inequality between the separate schools that many states provided. At that time, the nation spent ten times as much money educating a white child as an African-American child. Thus, Houston focused the organization's limited resources on challenging the most glaring inequalities of segregated public education. In 1938, he placed a team of his best law students under the direction of Thurgood Marshall. Over the next 23 years, Marshall and his NAACP lawyers would win 29 out of 32 cases argued before the Supreme Court.
Several of the cases became legal milestones, each chipping away at the segregation platform of Plessyv. Ferguson. In the 1946 case Morgan v. Virginia, the Supreme Court declared unconstitutional those state laws mandating segregated seating on interstate buses. In 1950, the high court ruled in Sweatt v. Painter that state law schools must admit black applicants, even if separate black schools exist.
BROWN V. BOARD OF EDUCATION
Marshall's most stunning victory came on May 17, 1954, in the case known as Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka. (See page 708.) In this case, the father of eight-year-old Linda Brown had charged the board of education of Topeka, Kansas, with violating Linda's rights by denying her admission to an all-white elementary school four blocks from her house. The nearest all-black elementary school was 21 blocks away. In a landmark verdict, the Supreme Court unanimously struck down segregation in schooling as an unconstitutional violation of the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection
MAIN IDEA
Developing
Historical
Perspective
How did events during World War II lay the groundwork for African Americans to fight for civil rights in the 1950s?
702 Chapter 21
MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
How did the Brown decision affect schools outside of Topeka?
pli
main idea
Analyzing
Causes
5/ Why weren’t schools in all regions
desegregated immediately after the Brown II decision?
Clause. Chief Justice Earl Warren wrote that, "[I]n the field of public education, the doctrine of separate but equal has no place." The Brown decision was relevant for some 12 million schoolchildren in 21 states.
Reaction to the Brown Decision
Some officials complied with the ruling, but others worked to maintain the status quo. In Kansas and Oklahoma, state officials said they expected segregation to end with little trouble. In Texas the governor warned that plans might "take years" to work out. He actively prevented desegregation by calling in the Texas Rangers. In Mississippi and Georgia, officials vowed total resistance. Governor Herman Talmadge of Georgia said "The people of Georgia will not comply with the decision of the court. . . . We're going to do whatever is necessary in Georgia to keep white children in white schools and colored children in colored schools."
RESISTANCE TO SCHOOL DESEGREGATION
Within a year, more than 500 school districts had desegregated their classrooms. In Baltimore, St. Louis, and Washington, D.C., black and white students sat side by side for the first time in history. However, in many areas where African Americans were a majority, whites resisted desegregation. In some places, the Ku Klux Kian reappeared and White Citizens Councils boycotted businesses that supported desegregation. To speed things up, in 1955 the Supreme Court handed down a second ruling, known as Brown II, that ordered school desegregation implemented "with all deliberate speed." Initially President Eisenhower refused to enforce compliance. "The fellow who tries to tell me that you can do these things by force is just plain nuts," he said. Events in Little Rock, Arkansas, would soon force Eisenhower to go against his personal beliefs.
CRISIS IN LITTLE ROCK
In 1948, Arkansas had become the first Southern state to admit African Americans to state universities without being required by a court order. By the 1950s, some scout troops and labor unions in Arkansas had quietly ended their Jim Crow practices. Little Rock citizens had elected two men to the school board who publicly backed desegregation—and the school superintendent, Virgil Blossom, began planning for desegregation soon after Brown. However, Governor Orval Faubus publicly showed support for segregation. In September 1957, he ordered the National Guard to turn away the "Little Rock Nine"—nine African-American students who had volunteered to integrate Little Rock's Central High School as the first step in Blossom's plan. A federal judge ordered Faubus to let the students into school.
NAACP members called eight of the students and arranged to drive them to school. They could not reach the ninth student, Elizabeth Eckford, who did not have a phone, and she set out alone. Outside Central High, Eckford faced an abusive crowd. Terrified, the 15-year-old made it to a bus stop where two friendly whites stayed with her.
As white students jeer her and Arkansas National Guards look on, Elizabeth Eckford enters Little Rock Central High School in 1957.
▼
The crisis in Little Rock forced Eisenhower to act. He placed the Arkansas National Guard under federal control and ordered a thousand paratroopers into Little Rock. The nation watched the televised coverage of the event. Under the watch of soldiers, the nine African-American teenagers attended class.
But even these soldiers could not protect the students from troublemakers who confronted them in stairways, in the halls, and in the cafeteria. Throughout the year African-American students were regularly harassed by other students. At the end of the year, Faubus shut down Central High rather than let integration continue.
On September 9, 1957, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1957, the first civil rights law since Reconstruction. Shepherded by Senator Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas, the law gave the attorney general greater power over school desegregation. It also gave the federal government jurisdiction—or authority—over violations of African-American voting rights.
!
ytY PLAYEft
ROSA PARKS 1913-2005
Long before December 1955, Rosa Parks (shown being finger printed) had protested segregation through everyday acts. She refused to use drinking fountains labeled “Colored Only.” When possible, she shunned segregated elevators and climbed stairs instead.
Parks joined the Montgomery chapter of the NAACP in 1943 and became the organization’s secretary. A turning point came for her in the summer of 1955, when she attended a workshop designed to promote integration by giving the students the experience of interracial living.
Returning to Montgomery, Parks was even more determined to fight segregation. As it happened, her act of protest against injustice on the buses inspired a whole community to join her cause.
MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
sS) What effect do you think television coverage of the Little Rock incident had on the nation?
The Montgomery Bus Boycott
The face-to-face confrontation at Central High School was not the only showdown over segregation in the mid-1950s. Impatient with the slow pace of change in the courts, African-American activists had begun taking direct action to win the rights promised to them by the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitution. Among those on the frontline of change was Jo Ann Robinson.
BOYCOTTING SEGREGATION
Four days after the Brown decision in May 1954, Robinson wrote a letter to the mayor of Montgomery, Alabama, asking that bus drivers no longer be allowed to force riders in the "colored" section to yield their seats to whites. The mayor refused. Little did he know that in less than a year another African-American woman from Alabama would be at the center of this controversy, and that her name and her words would far outlast segregation. On December 1, 1955, Rosa Parks, a seamstress and an NAACP officer, took a seat in the front row of the "colored" section of a Montgomery bus. As the bus filled up, the driver ordered Parks and three other African-American passengers to empty the row they were occupying so that a white man could sit down without having to sit next to any
African Americans. "It was time for someone to stand up_
or in my case, sit down," recalled Parks. "I refused to move."
As Parks stared out the window, the bus driver said, "If you don't stand up, I'm going to call the police and have you arrested." The soft-spoken Parks replied, "You may do that."


Robinson and NAACP leader E. D. Nixon suggested a bu boycott. The leaders of the African-American community including many ministers, formed the Montgomer Improvement Association to organize the boycott. The elected the pastor of the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church 26-year-old Martin Luther King, Jr., to lead the group An ordained minister since 1948, King had just earned Ph.D. degree in theology from Boston University. "Well I'm not sure I'm the best person for the position," Kin confided to Nixon, "but if no one else is going to serve I'd be glad to try/'
During the bus boycott, Montgomery’s black citizens relied on an efficient car pool system that ferried people between more than forty pickup stations like the one shown.
WALKING FOR JUSTICE
On the night of December 5, 1955, Dr. King made the following declaration to an estimated crowd of between 5,000 and 15,000 people. A
Personal Voice martin luther king, jr. “ There comes a time when people get tired of being trampled over by the iron feet of oppression. ... I want it to be known—that we’re going to work with grim and bold determination—to gain justice on buses in this city. And we are not wrong. ... If we are wrong—the Supreme Court of this nation is wrong. If we are wrong—God Almighty is wrong. ... If we are wrong—justice is a lie. ”
—quoted in Parting the Waters: America in the King Years, 1954-63
I MAIN IDEA
Synthesizing
& Why was Rosa Parks’s action on December 1,
1955, significant?
King's passionate and eloquent speech brought people to their feet and filled the audience with a sense of mission. African Americans filed a lawsuit and for 381 days refused to ride the buses in Montgomery. In most cases they had to find other means of transportation by organizing car pools or walking long distances. Support came from within the black community—workers donated one-fifth of their weekly salaries—as well as from outside groups like the NAACP, the United Auto Workers, Montgomery's Jewish community, and sympathetic white southerners. The boy-cotters remained nonviolent even after a bomb ripped apart King's home (no one was injured). Finally, in 1956, the Supreme Court outlawed bus segregation,
Martin Luther King and the SCLC
main idea
Summarizing
& What were the central points of Dr- King’s Philosophy?
The Montgomery bus boycott proved to the world that the African-American community could unite and organize a successful protest movement. It also proved the power of nonviolent resistance, the peaceful refusal to obey unjust laws. Despite threats to his life and family, King urged his followers, "Don't ever let anyone pull you so low as to hate them."
CHANGING THE WORLD WITH SOUL FORCE
King called his brand of nonviolent resistance "soul force." He based his ideas on the teachings of several people. From the teachings of Jesus, he learned to love one's enemies. From writer Henry David Thoreau he took the concept of civil disobedience—the refusal to obey an unjust law. From labor organizer A. Philip Randolph he learned to organize massive demonstrations. From Mohandas Gandhi, the leader who helped India throw off British rule, he learned to resist oppression without violence. "We will not hate you," King said to white racists, "but we cannot . . . obey your unjust laws. . . . We will soon wear you down by our capacity to suffer. And in winning our freedom, we will so appeal to your heart and conscience that we will win you in the process."
Civil Rights >
yt.Y PLAYf#

King held steadfast to his philosophy, even when a wave of racial violence swept through the South after the Brown decision. The violence included the 1955 murder of Emmett Till—a 14-year-old African-American boy who had allegedly flirted with a white woman. There were also shootings and beatings, some fatal, of civil rights workers.
FROM THE GRASSROOTS UP
After the bus boycott ended, King joined with ministers and civil rights leaders in 1957 to found the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). Its purpose was "to carry on nonviolent crusades against the evils of second-class citizenship." Using African-American churches as a base, the SCLC planned to stage protests and demonstrations throughout the South. The leaders hoped to build a movement from the grassroots up and to win the support of ordinary African Americans of all ages. King, president of the SCLC, used the power of his voice and ideas to fuel the movement's momentum. The nuts and bolts of organizing the SCLC was handled by its first director, Ella Baker, the granddaughter of slaves. While with the NAACP, Baker had served as national field secretary, traveling over 16,000 miles throughout the South. From 1957 to 1960, Baker used her contacts to set up branches of the SCLC in Southern cities. In April 1960, Baker helped students at Shaw University, an African-American university in Raleigh, North Carolina, to organize a national protest group, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, or SNCC, pronounced "snick" for short.
It had been six years since the Brown decision, and many college students viewed the pace of change as too slow. Although these students risked a great deal—losing college scholarships, being expelled from college, being physically harmed—they were determined to challenge the system. SNCC hoped to harness the energy of these student protesters; it would soon create one of the most important student activist movements in the nation's history.
The Movement
Although SNCC adopted King's Ideas in part, its members had ideas of their own. Many people called for a more confrontational strategy and set out to reshape the civil rights movement.
DEMONSTRATING FOR FREEDOM
The founders of SNCC had models to build on. In 1942 in Chicago, the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) had staged the first sit-ins, in which African-American protesters sat down at segregated lunch counters and refused to leave until they were served. In February 1960, African-American students from North Carolina's Agricultural and Technical College staged a sit-in at a whites-only lunch counter at a Woolworth's store in Greensboro. This time, television crews brought coverage of the protest into homes throughout the United States. There was no denying the ugly face of racism. Day after day, news reporters captured the scenes of whites beating, jeering at, and pouring food over students who refused to strike back. The coverage sparked many other sit-ins across the South. Store managers called MAIN IDEA
MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. 1929-1968
Born Michael Luther King, Jr.,
King had to adjust to a new name in 1934. In that year, his father— Rev. Michael King, Sr.—returned home from a trip to Europe, where he had toured the site where Martin Luther had begun the Protestant Reformation. Upon his return home, the elder King changed his and his son’s names to Martin.
Like Luther, the younger King became a reformer. In 1964, he won the Nobel Peace Prize. Yet there was a side of King unknown to most people—his inner battle to overcome his hatred of the white bigots. As a youth, he had once vowed “to hate all white people.” As leader of the civil rights movement, King said all Americans had to be freed: “Negroes from the bonds of segregation and shame, whites from the bonds of bigotry and fear.”
Evaluating
What was the role of the SCLC?
706 Chapter 21
1
◄ Sit-in demonstrators, such as these at a Jackson,
Mississippi, lunch counter in 1963, faced intimidation and humiliation from white segregationists.

in the police, raised the price of food, and removed counter seats. But the movement continued and spread to the North. There, students formed picket lines around national chain stores that maintained segregated lunch counters in the South.
By late 1960, students had descended on and desegregated lunch counters in some 48 cities in 11 states. They endured arrests, beatings, suspension from college, and tear gas and fire hoses, but the army of nonviolent students refused to back down. "My mother has always told me that I'm equal to other people," said Ezell Blair, Jr., one of the students who led the first SNCC sit-in in 1960. For the rest of the 1960s, many Americans worked to convince the rest of the country that blacks and whites deserved equal treatment.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•Thurgood Marshall	• Martin Luther King, Jr.
• Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka • Southern Christian Leadership
•Rosa Parks
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Fill in a spicier diagram like the one below with examples of tactics, organizations, leaders, and Supreme Court decisions of the civil rights movement up to 1960.
Conference (SCLC)
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	EVALUATING
Do you think the nonviolence used by civil rights activists was a good tactic? Explain. Think About:
•	the Montgomery bus boycott
•	television coverage of events
•	sit-ins
4.	CONTRASTING
How did the tactics of the student protesters from SNCC differ from those of the boycotters in Montgomery?
•Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee (SNCC)
•sit-in
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
After the Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka ruling, what do you think was the most significant event of the civil rights movement prior to 1960? Why? Think About:
•	the role of civil rights leaders
•	the results of confrontations and boycotts
•	the role of grassroots organizations
6.	SUMMARIZING
Describe how litigation played a role in protecting minority rights during^ the civil rights movement.
Civil Rights

0 ^2^3815!^ N $
wain-up
^SUPREME
CO^
BROWN v. BOARD OF EDUCATION OF TOPEKA (1954)
ORIGINS OF THE CASE
In the early 1950s, the school system of Topeka, Kansas, like all Southern elementary school systems, operated separate schools for "the two races"—blacks and whites. Reverend Oliver Brown protested that this was unfair to his eight-year-old daughter Linda. Although the Browns lived near a "white" school, Linda was forced to take a long bus ride to her "black" school across town. THE RULING
The Court ruled that segregated public schools were “inherently” unequal and therefore unconstitutional. LEGAL REASONING
While the correctness of the Brown ruling seems obvious today, some justices had difficulty agreeing to it. One reason was the force of legal precedent. Normally, judges follow a policy of stare decisis, "let the decision stand." The Plessy v. Ferguson decision endorsing segregation (see page 290) had stood for over 50 years. It clearly stated that "separate but equal" facilities did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment.
Thurgood Marshall, the NAACP lawyer who argued Brown, spent years laying the groundwork to chip away at Jim Crow-—the local laws that required segregated facilities. Marshall had recently won two Supreme Court decisions in 1950 (McLaurin and Sweatt; see Legal Sources at right) that challenged segregation at graduate schools. Then in 1952, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the Browns' case. The Court deliberated for two years deciding how to interpret the Fourteenth Amendment.
In the end, Chief Justice Earl Warren carefully sidestepped Plessy, claiming that segregated schools were not and never could be equal. On Monday, May 17, 1954, Warren read the unanimous decision:
“ Does segregation of children in public schools . . . deprive children of. . . equal opportunities? We believe it does.... To separate them ... solely because of their race generates a feeling of inferiority . .. that may affect their hearts and minds in a way unlikely ever to be undone. ”
—Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka
Linda Brown’s name headed a list of five school desegregation cases heard by the Supreme Court. ►
LEGAL SOURCES
U.S. CONSTITUTION
FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT, EQUAL PROTECTION CLAUSE
(1868) “No state shall . . . deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.”
RELATED CASES
PLESSY v. FERGUSON (1896)
•	Upheld Louisiana’s laws requiring that train passengers be segregated by race.
•	Established the doctrine of “separate but equal.”
MCLAURIN v. OKLAHOMA STATE (1950)
Ruled that Oklahoma State University violated the Constitution by keeping its one “Negro” student in the back of the class and the cafeteria.
SWEATT v. PAINTER (1950)
Required the University of Texas to admit an African-American student to its previously all-white law school.
708 Chapter 21
WHY IT MATTERED
The Court's decision in Brown had an immediate impact on pending rulings. In a series of cases after Brown, the Supreme Court prohibited segregation in housing, at public beaches, at recreation facilities, and in restaurants. Later decisions extended equal access to other groups, including women and resident aliens.
The decision encountered fierce resistance, however. It awakened the old battle cry of states' rights. Directly following Brown, some Congress members circulated the "Southern Manifesto," claiming the right of the states to ignore the ruling. In taking a stand on a social issue, they said, the Court had taken a step away from simply interpreting legal precedents. Critics charged that the Warren Court had acted as legislators and even as sociologists.
The Brown case strengthened the Civil Rights movement, however, and paved the way for the end of Jim Crow. The NAACP had fought and won the legal battle and had gained prestige and momentum. Americans got the strong message that the federal government now took civil rights seriously.
HISTORICAL IMPACT
Three of the parties involved in Brown—Delaware, Kansas, and the District of Columbia—began to integrate schools in 1954. Topeka County informed the Court that 123 black students were already attending formerly all-white schools. Even so, the Supreme Court was well aware that its decision would be difficult to enforce. In a follow-up ruling, Brown II (1955), the Court required that integration take place with "all deliberate speed." To some this meant quickly. Others interpreted deliberate to mean slowly.
Only two Southern states even began to integrate classrooms in 1954: Texas and Arkansas opened one and two districts, respectively. By 1960, less than one percent of the South's students attended integrated schools. Many school districts were ordered to use aggressive means to achieve racial balance. Courts spent decades supervising forced busing, a practice that often pitted community against community.
Still, despite the resistance and the practical difficulties of implementation, Brown stands today as a watershed, the single point at which breaking the "color barrier" officially became a federal priority.
Thurgood Marshall was appointed the first African-American Supreme Court justice by President Johnson in 1967.
“All the News That’s Fit to Print”
V0UGIU...N#. J5JW.
Near jJork Stmts.
NEW YORK. TUESOAY,
h UTE CITY EDITION
HIGH COURT BANS SCHOOL SEGREGATION;
DECISION GRANTS TIME TO COMPLY
McCarthy Hearing Off a Week as Eisenhower Bars Report
SENATOR IS
[mCommanistArmsUnloadeduiGuatemala ' By Vessel From Polish Port, U. S. Learns President Orders Aides Not to Disclose Details of Top-Level Meeting
WASHIKTOX. *
fey	FeUM
Stall Ditattmwt Vittst
Stmt Cravtlf Btcetut j 0/ ffat Miltralian I
City Colleges' Board Can't Pick Chairman
Sayt Nattaa of Ctntrel America Mat Bat Maniliant Aatahtrt

CEASE INTRIGUES’
Envoy Worm Austritn Chid an toeitfoj E»»t Risb Otnict Charges
IN ESTIMATE BOARD
Bwr Levy and Mon PwdRU Collections Killed— Payroll )mg»s1 Still Weighed
’Breathing Spell’ tor Adjustment Tempers1 Region's Feelings
^etteinm. «T t*»w<W ••
IS SRCIUXMTION
VlfiUT: lw'» «• rJ'ctolSS. «. >». >«>“ Oft" KC.lt.rw. Ttautni	ItaaM- h
RUL1HGT0F1GURE 3-r. MWIMMaiaa
I il896 RULING UPSET
‘Separate but Equal’ Doctrine Held Out ot Place in Education

THINKING CRITICALLY
CONNECT TO HISTORY
1. Analyzing Primary Sources Legal precedents are set not only by rulings but also by dissenting opinions, in which justices explain why they disagree with the majority. Justice John Marshall Harlan was the one dissenting voice in Plessy v. Ferguson. Read his opinion and comment on how it might apply to Brown.
CONNECT TO TODAY
2. Visit the links for Historic Decisions of the Supreme Court to research the Supreme Court’s changing opinions on civil rights. Compile a chart or time line to present the facts—date, plaintiff, defendant, major issue, and out-come—of several major cases. Then give an oral presentation explaining the Supreme Court’s role in civil rights.
*7? hmhsodalstudies.com
INTERNET ACTIVITY
TEKS9E,9F,9G,9H,19B,23B,26A
The Triumphs of a Crusade

MAIN IDEA
Civil rights activists broke through racial barriers. Their activism prompted landmark legislation.
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Activism pushed the federal government to end segregation and ensure voting rights for African Americans.
Terms & Names
hmhsocialstudies.com 1
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the steps taken to challenge segregation from 1962 to 1965.

In 1961, James Peck, a white civil rights activist, joined other CORE members on a historic bus trip across the South. The two-bus trip would test the Supreme Court decisions banning segregated seating on interstate bus routes and segregated facilities in bus terminals. Peck and other freedom riders expected a violent reaction. They hoped that this would convince the Kennedy administration to enforce the law. The violence was not long in coming.
At the Alabama state line, white racists got on Bus One carrying chains, brass knuckles, and pistols. They brutally beat African-American riders and white activists who tried to intervene. Still the riders managed to go on. Then on May 4, 1961—Mother's Day—the bus pulled into the Birmingham bus terminal. James Peck saw a hostile mob waiting, some holding iron bars.
A
Personal Voice james peck •freedom riders •James Meredith •Civil Rights Act of 1964
•	Freedom Summer
•	Fannie Lou Hamer •Voting Rights Act
of 1965
“I looked at them and then I looked at Charles Person, who had been designated as my team mate. . . . When I looked at him, he responded by saying simply, ‘Let’s go.’ As we entered the white waiting room,... we were grabbed bodily and pushed toward the alleyway .. . and out of sight of onlookers in the waiting room, six of them started swinging at me with fists and pipes. Five others attacked Person a few feet ahead. ”
—Freedom Ride
The ride of Bus One had ended, but Bus Two continued southward on a journey that would shock the Kennedy administration into action.
Three days after being beaten unconscious in Birmingham, freedom rider James Peck demonstrates in New York City to pressure national bus companies to support desegregation.
Riding for Freedom
In Anniston, Alabama, about 200 angry whites attacked Bus Two. The mob followed the activists out of town. When one of the tires blew, they smashed a window and tossed in a fire bomb. The freedom riders spilled out just before the bus exploded.
710 Chapter 21
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Issues
& What did the freedom riders hope to achieve?
NEW VOLUNTEERS
The bus companies refused to carry the CORE freedom riders any farther. Even though the determined volunteers did not want to give up, they ended their ride. However, CORE director James Farmer announced that a group of SNCC volunteers in Nashville were ready to pick up where the others had left off. When a new band of freedom riders rode into Birmingham, policemen pulled them from the
bus, beat them, and drove them into Tennessee. Defiantly, they returned to the Birmingham bus terminal. Their bus driver, however, feared for his life and refused to transport them. In protest, they occupied the whites-only waiting room at the terminal for eighteen hours until a solution was reached. After an angry phone call from U.S. Attorney General Robert Kennedy, bus company officials convinced the driver to proceed. The riders set out for Montgomery on May 20.
ARRIVAL OF FEDERAL MARSHALS
Although Alabama officials had promised Kennedy that the riders would be protected, a mob of whites—many carrying bats and lead pipes—fell upon the riders when they arrived in Montgomery. John Doer, a Justice Department official on the scene, called the attorney general to report what was happening. "A bunch of men led by a guy with a bleeding face are beating [the passengers]. There are no cops. It's terrible. There's not a cop in sight. People are yelling. 'Get 'em, get 'em.' It's awful."
The violence provoked exactly the response the freedom riders wanted. Newspapers throughout the nation and abroad denounced the beatings.
President Kennedy arranged to give the freedom riders direct support. The Justice Department sent 400 U.S. marshals to protect the rid-
ers on the last part of their journey to Jackson, Mississippi. In addition, the attorney general and the Interstate Commerce Commission banned segregation in all interstate travel facilities, including waiting rooms, restrooms, and lunch counters.
In May 1961, a mob firebombed this bus of freedom riders outside Anniston, Alabama, and attacked passengers as they tried to escape.
We will continue our journey one way or another. . . . We are prepared to die. ”
JIM ZWERG, FREEDOM RIDER
Standing Firm
With the integration of interstate travel facilities under way, some civil rights workers turned their attention to integrating some Southern schools and pushing the movement into additional Southern towns. At each turn they encountered opposition and often violence.
INTEGRATING OLE MISS
In September 1962, Air Force veteran James Meredith won a federal court case that allowed him to enroll in the all-white University of Mississippi, nicknamed Ole Miss. But when Meredith arrived on campus, he faced Governor Ross Barnett, who refused to let him register as a student. President Kennedy ordered federal marshals to escort Meredith to the registrar's office. Barnett responded with a heated radio appeal: "I call on every Mississippian to keep his faith and courage. We will never surrender." The broadcast turned out white demonstrators by the thousands.
On the night of September 30, riots broke out on campus, resulting in two deaths. It took thousands of soldiers, 200 arrests, and 15 hours to stop the rioters. In the months that followed, federal officials accompanied Meredith to class and protected his parents from nightriders who shot up their house.
Civil Rights
News photos and television coverage of police dogs in Birmingham attacking African Americans shocked the nation.
HEADING INTO BIRMINGHAM
The trouble continued in Alabama. Birmingham, a city known for its strict enforcement of total segregation in public life, also had a reputation for racial violence, including 18 bombings from 1957 to 1963. Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth, head of the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights and secretary of the SCLC, decided something had to be done about Birmingham and that it would be the ideal place to test the power of nonviolence. He invited Martin Luther King, Jr., and the SCLC to help desegregate the city. On April 3, 1963, King flew into Birmingham to hold a planning meeting with members of the African-American community. "This is the most segregated city in America," he said. "We have to stick together if we ever want to change its ways."
After days of demonstrations led by Shuttlesworth and others, King and a small band of marchers were finally arrested during a demonstration on Good Friday, April 12th. While in jail, King wrote an open letter to white religious leaders who felt he was pushing too fast.
A
Personal Voice martin luther king, jr. “ I guess it is easy for those who have never felt the stinging darts of segregation to say, 'Wait/ But when you have seen vicious mobs lynch your mothers and fathers at whim; when you have seen hate-filled policemen curse, kick, brutalize and even kill your black brothers and sisters; . . . when you see the vast majority of your twenty million Negro brothers smothering in the air-tight cage of poverty;
. . . when you have to concoct an answer for a five-year-old son asking: . . .
'Daddy, why do white people treat colored people so mean?’ . . . then you will understand why we find it difficult to wait. ”
—“Letter from a Birmingham Jail”
On April 20, King posted bail and began planning more demonstrations. On May 2, more than a thousand African-American children marched in Birmingham. Police commissioner Eugene "Bull" Connor's men arrested 959 of them. On May 3, a second "children's crusade" came face to face with a helmeted police force. Police swept the marchers off their feet with high-pressure fire hoses, set attack dogs on them, and clubbed those who fell. TV cameras captured all of it, and millions of viewers heard the children screaming.
Continued protests, an economic boycott, and negative media coverage finally convinced Birmingham officials to end segregation. This stunning civil rights victory inspired African Americans across the nation. It also convinced President Kennedy that only a new civil rights act could end racial violence and satisfy the demands of African Americans—and many whites—for racial justice.
main idea
Chronologic01
Order
What events
led to desegrega-
tion in
Birmingham?
712 Chapter 21
History Through
Phatojoumalisinj-
ERNEST WITHERS
Born in Memphis in 1922, photographer Ernest Withers believed that if the struggle for equality could be shown to people, things would change. Armed with only a camera, he braved violent crowds to capture the heated racism during the Montgomery bus boycott, the desegregation of Central High in Little Rock, and the 1968 Memphis sanitation workers strike (below) led by Martin Luther King, Jr. The night before the Memphis march, Withers had helped make some of the signs he photographed.
C.
Brown printed those ‘I AM A MAN’ signs right over there. ... I had a car and it was snowing, so we went and rented the saw and came back that night and cut the sticks. ” -•v
▲
Withers in 1950

IlM

1AMIU1
im.

Mini
lOlAi
Ml
<10
I AMI
i.-nHH

itfl



Withers had to be careful about his involvement in groups like the NAACP and COME (Community On the Move for Equality), for he had a wife and children to support. He went to several meetings a night, sometimes taking pictures, other times offering a suggestion. “I always had FBI agents looking over my shoulder and wanting to question me. I never tried to learn any high-powered secrets.”
Withers in 1992
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Visual Sources 1.	What do the signs tell you about African Americans' struggle for civil rights?
2.	What kind of treatment do you suppose these men had experienced? Why do you think so?
Civil Rights
KENNEDY TAKES A STAND
On June 11, 1963, the president sent troops to force Governor George Wallace to honor a court order desegregating the University of Alabama. That evening, Kennedy asked the nation: "Are we to say to the world—and much more importantly, to each other—that this is the land of the free, except for the Negroes?" He demanded that Congress pass a civil rights bill. A tragic event just hours after Kennedy's speech highlighted the racial tension in much of the South. Shortly after midnight, a sniper murdered Medgar Evers, NAACP field secretary and World War II veteran. Police soon arrested a white supremacist, Byron de la Beckwith, but he was released after two trials resulted in hung juries. His release brought a new militancy to African Americans.
Marching to Washington
The civil rights bill that President Kennedy sent to Congress guaranteed equal access to all public accommodations and gave the U.S. attorney general the power to file school desegregation suits. To persuade Congress to pass the bill, two veteran organizers—labor leader A. Philip Randolph and Bayard Rustin of the SCLC—summoned Americans to a march on Washington, D.C.
Civil Rights Acts of the 1950s and 1960s
Background
Beckwith was finally convicted in 1994, after the case was reopened based on new evidence.
THE DREAM OF EQUALITY
On August 28, 1963, more than 250,000 people-including about 75,000 whites—converged on the nation's capital. They assembled on the grassy lawn of the Washington Monument and marched to the Lincoln Memorial. There, people listened to speakers demand the immediate passage of the civil rights bill. When Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., appeared, the crowd exploded in applause. In his now famous speech, "I Have a Dream," he appealed for peace and racial harmony. As with his other writings, he brought national attention to the movement and the important progress that still needed to be made.
A
Personal Voice martin luther king, jr. “I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of Its creed: ‘We hold these truths to be self-evident; that all men are created equal.’ ... I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.... I have a dream that one day the state of Alabama ... will be transformed into a situation where little black boys and black girls will be able to Join hands with little white boys and white girls and walk together as sisters and brothers. ”
CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1957
•	Established federal Commission on Civil Rights
•	Established a Civil Rights Division in the Justice Department to enforce civil rights laws
•	Enlarged federal power to protect voting rights
CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964
•	Banned most discrimination in employment and in public accommodations
•	Enlarged federal power to protect voting rights and speed up school desegregation
•	Established Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to ensure fair treatment in employment
VOTING RIGHTS ACT OF 1965
•	Eliminated voter literacy tests
•	Enabled federal examiners to register voters
CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1968
•	Prohibited discrimination in the sale or rental of most housing
•	Strengthened antilynching laws
•	Made it a crime to harm civil rights workers
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Events
Why did civil rights organizers ask their supporters to march on Washington?
—“I Have a Dream”
MORE VIOLENCE
Two weeks after King's historic speech four young Birmingham girls were killed when a rider in a car hurled a bomb through their church window. Two more African Americans died in the unrest that followed. Two months later, an assassin shot and killed John F Kennedy. His successor, President Lyndon B. Johnson, pledged to carry on Kennedy's work. On July 2, 1964, Johnson signed the Civ« Rights Act of 1964,	„ piohMted Ulscri^,^
because of race, religion, national origin, and gender. It gave all citizens the right to enter libraries, parks, washrooms, restaurants theaters, and other public accommodations.
I
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Charts
Which law do you think benefited the
most people? Explain your choice.
714 Chapter 21
<4 In the summer of 1964, college students volunteered to go to Mississippi to help register that state’s African-American voters.

Fighting for Voting Rights
I MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Motives
Why did civil rights groups organize Freedom Summer?
Meanwhile, the right of all African Americans to vote remained elusive. In 1964, CORE and SNCC workers in the South began registering as many African Americans as they could to vote. They hoped their campaign would receive national publicity, which would in turn influence Congress to pass a voting rights act. Focused in Mississippi, the project became known as Freedom Summer.
FREEDOM SUMMER
To fortify the project, civil rights groups recruited college students and trained them in nonviolent resistance. Thousands of student volunteers—mostly white, about one-third female—went into Mississippi to help register voters. For some, the job proved deadly. In June of 1964, three civil rights workers disappeared in Neshoba County, Mississippi. Investigators later learned that Klansmen and local police had murdered the men, two of whom were white. Through the summer, the racial beatings and murders continued, along with the burning of businesses, homes, and churches. g) A NEW POLITICAL PARTY
African Americans needed a voice in the political arena if sweeping change was to occur. In order to gain a seat in Mississippi's all-white Democratic Party, SNCC organized the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP). Fannie Lou Hamer, the daughter of Mississippi sharecroppers, would be their voice at the 1964 Democratic National Convention. In a televised speech that shocked the convention and viewers nationwide, Hamer described how she was jailed for registering to vote in 1962, and how police forced other prisoners to beat her. A
Personal Voice fannie lou hamer “The first [prisoner] began to beat [me], and I was beat by the first until he was exhausted. . . . The second [prisoner] began to beat. ... I began to scream and one white man got up and began to beat me in my head and tell me to 'hush/ . . . All of this on account we want to register, to become first-class citizens, and if the Freedom Democratic Party is not seated now, I question America. ”
—quoted in The Civil Rights Movement: An Eyewitness History
pMAiN IDEA |	In response to Hamer's speech, telegrams and telephone calls poured in to the
hev i •	convention in support of seating the MFDP delegates. President Johnson feared
Historical8 losing the Southern white vote if the Democrats sided with the MFDP, so his Perspective administration pressured civil rights leaders to convince the MFDP to accept a «& Why did young compromise. The Democrats would give 2 of Mississippi's 68 seats to the MFDP, People m SNCC	witla a promise to ban discrimination at the 1968 convention.
betraye^y^ome'	When Hamer learned of the compromise, she said, "We didn't come all this way
civil rights lead- for no two seats." The MFDP and supporters in SNCC felt that the leaders had ers?	betrayed them. g)
Civil Rights
THE SELMA CAMPAIGN
At the start of 1965, the SCLC conducted a major voting rights campaign in Selma, Alabama, where SNCC had been working for two years to register voters. By the end of 1965, more than 2,000 African Americans had been arrested in SCLC demonstrations. After a demonstrator named Jimmy Lee Jackson was shot and killed, King announced a protest march from Selma to Montgomery, the state capital. On March 7, 1965, about 600 protesters set out for Montgomery. That night, mayhem broke out. Television cameras captured the scene. The nation watched in horror as police swung whips and clubs through clouds of tear gas. Demonstrators poured into Selma by the hundreds. Ten days later, President Johnson presented Congress with a new voting rights act and asked for its swift passage. $
On March 21, 3,000 marchers again set out for Montgomery, this time with federal protection. Soon the number grew to an army of 25,000.
VOTING RIGHTS ACT OF 1965
That summer, Congress finally passed Johnson's Voting Rights Act of 1965. The act eliminated the so-called literacy tests that had disqualified many voters. It also allowed federal examiners to enroll voters who had been denied suffrage by local officials. In Selma, the proportion of African Americans registered to vote rose from 10 percent in 1964 to 60 percent in 1968. Overall the percentage of registered African-American voters in the South tripled. Another step toward ensuring voting rights for African Americans had occurred on January 24, 1964, when South Dakota became the 38th state to ratify the Twenty-fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The key clause of the amendment reads: "The right of citizens of the United States to vote in any primary or other election . . . shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or any State by reason of failure to pay any poll tax or other tax." Poll taxes were often used to keep poor African Americans from voting, and five Southern states still had such laws on the books in 1964. By making these laws unconstitutional, the Twenty-fourth Amendment guaranteed millions the right to vote.
Together, the Twenty-fourth Amendment and the Voting Rights Act marked significant federal policy changes. These actions abolished many of the barriers that had prevented African Americas from exercising their constitutionally protected right to vote. However, some felt that the laws did not go far enough. Anger over social and economic inequalities produced by centuries of discrimination led to a series of violent disturbances in the cities of the North.
MAIN IDEA
Comparing
In what ways was the civil rights campaign in Selma similar to the one in Birmingham?
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance, •freedom riders	• Civil Rights Act of 1964	-Fannie Lou Hamer
•James Meredith	• Freedom Summer	• Voting Rights Act of 1965
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a graphic like the one shown, use relative chronology to arrange the individuals that you learned about in this chapter based on when their most significant contributions to the civil rights movement occurred.
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING ISSUES
What assumptions and beliefs do you think guided the fierce opposition to the civil rights movement in the South? Describe the role of groups and individuals that sought to maintain the status quo. Think About:
•	the social and political structure of the South
•	Governors Ross Barnett and George Wallace
•	the actions of police and some white Southerners
4. EVALUATING
What actions were taken by people during this period to expand political rights for racial minorities in American society? How effective were these actions as means of achieving equality of political rights? How did they resolve constitutional issues? Think About:
•	the Twenty-fourth Amendment
•	the Voting Rights Act of 1965
716 Chapter 21
TEKS 2D, 9D, 26A
Challenges and Changes in the Movement
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
Disagreements among civil rights groups and the rise of black nationalism created a violent period in the fight for civil rights.
From the fight for equality came a resurgence of racial pride for African Americans, a legacy that influences today’s generations.
•de facto segregation
•	de jure segregation
•	Malcolm X
•	Nation of Islam •Stokely
Carmichael
•	Black Power
•	Black Panthers
•	Kerner Commission
•Civil Rights Act of 1968
•affirmative action
1^ hnihsocialstudies.com
^TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on key events of the civil rights movement.
Alice Walker, the prize-winning novelist, became aware of the civil rights movement in 1960, when she was 16. Her mother had recently scraped together enough money to purchase a television.
A
Personal Voice Alice walker “ Like a good omen for the future, the face of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., was the first black face I saw on our new television screen. And, as in a fairy tale, my soul was stirred by the meaning for me of his mission—at the time he was being rather ignomin-iously dumped into a police van for having led a protest march in Alabama—and I fell in love with the sober and determined face of the Movement. ” —In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens
The next year, Walker attended the all-black Spelman College. In 1963, Walker took part in the March on Washington and then traveled to Africa to discover her spiritual roots. After returning home in 1964, she worked on voter registration, taught African American history and writing, and wrote poetry and fiction.
Walker's interest in her heritage was part of a growing trend among African Americans in the mid-1960s. But millions of African Americans were still living in poverty. Angry and frustrated over the difficulty in finding jobs and decent housing, some participated in riots that broke out between 1964 and 1966.
Alice Walker during an interview in New York’s Central Park in August 1970
African Americans Seek Greater Equality
What civil rights groups had in common in the early 1960s were their calls for a
newfound pride in black identity and a commitment to change the social and
economic structures that kept people in a life of poverty. However, by 1965, the
Civil Rights 7:
J
h
leading civil rights groups began to drift apart. New leaders emerged as the movement turned its attention to the North, where African Americans faced not legal segregation but deeply entrenched and oppressive racial prejudice.
NORTHERN SEGREGATION
The problem facing African Americans in the North was de facto segregation—segregation that exists by practice and custom. De facto segregation can be harder to fight than de jure (de joor'e) segregation, or segregation by law, because eliminating it requires changing people's attitudes rather than repealing laws. Activists in the mid-1960s would find it much more difficult to convince whites to share economic and social power with African Americans than to convince them to share lunch counters and bus seats. & De facto segregation intensified after African Americans migrated to Northern cities during and after World War II. This began a "white flight," in which great numbers of whites moved out of the cities to the nearby suburbs. By the mid-1960s, most urban African Americans lived in decaying slums, paying rent to landlords who didn't comply with housing and health ordinances. The schools for African-American children deteriorated along with their neighborhoods. Unemployment rates were more than twice as high as those among whites.
In addition, many blacks were angry at the sometimes brutal treatment they received from the mostly white police forces in their communities. In 1966, King spearheaded a campaign in Chicago to end de facto segregation there and create an "open city." On July 10, he led about 30,000 African Americans in a march on City Hall.
In late July, when King led demonstrators through a Chicago neighborhood, angry whites threw rocks and bottles. On August 5, hostile whites stoned King as he led 600 marchers. King left Chicago without accomplishing what he wanted, yet pledging to return.
MAIN IDEA
Comparing
How were civil rights problems in Northern cities similar to those in the South?
URBAN VIOLENCE ERUPTS
In the mid 1960s, clashes between white authority and black civilians spread like wildfire. In New York City in July 1964, an encounter between white police and African-American teenagers ended in the death of a 15-year-old student. This sparked a race riot in central Harlem. On August 11, 1965, only five days after President Johnson signed the Voting 718 Chapter 21
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing Causes $ What were some of the causes of urban rioting in the 1960s?
Background
See “Islam” on page 9.
main idea
Synthesizing
®Why did some Americans find Malcolm X’s views alarming?
Rights Act into law, one of the worst race riots in the nation's history raged through the streets of Watts, a predominantly African-American neighborhood in Los Angeles. Thirty-four people were killed, and hundreds of millions of dollars worth of property was destroyed. The next year, 1966, saw even more racial disturbances, and in 1967 alone, riots and violent clashes took place in more than 100 cities.
The African-American rage baffled many whites. "Why would blacks turn to violence after winning so many victories in the South?" they wondered. Some realized that what African Americans wanted and needed was economic equality of opportunity in jobs, housing, and education.
Even before the riots in 1964, President Johnson had announced his War on Poverty, a program to help impoverished Americans. But the flow of money needed to fund Johnson's Great Society was soon redirected to fund the war in Vietnam. In 1967, Dr. King proclaimed, "The Great Society has been shot down on the battlefields of Vietnam."
New Leaders Voice Discontent
The anger that sent rioters into the streets stemmed in part from African-American leaders who urged their followers to take complete control of their communities, livelihoods, and culture. One such leader, Malcolm X, declared to a Harlem audience, "If you think we are here to tell you to love the white man, you have come to the wrong place." AFRICAN-AMERICAN SOLIDARITY Malcolm X, born Malcolm Little, went to jail at age 20 for burglary. While in prison, he studied the teachings of Elijah Muhammad, the head of the Nation of Islam, or the Black Muslims. Malcolm changed his name to Malcolm X (dropping what he called his "slave name") and, after his release from prison in 1952, became an Islamic minister. As he gained a following, the brilliant thinker and engaging speaker openly preached Elijah Muhammad's views that whites were the cause of the black condition and that blacks should separate from white society.
Malcolm's message appealed to many African Americans and their growing racial pride. At a New York press conference in March 1964, he also advocated armed self-defense.
va,Y play£R
MALCOLM X 1925-1965
Malcolm X’s early life left him alienated from white society. His father was allegedly killed by white racists, and his mother had an emotional collapse, leaving Malcolm and his siblings in the care of the state. At the end of eighth grade, Malcolm quit school and was later jailed for criminal behavior. In 1946, while in prison, Malcolm joined the Nation of Islam. He developed a philosophy of black superiority and separatism from whites.
In the later years of his life, he urged African Americans to identify with Africa and to work with world organizations and even progressive whites to attain equality. Although silenced by gunmen, Malcolm X is a continuing inspiration for many Americans.
A
Personal Voice malcolm x “Concerning nonviolence: it is criminal to teach a man not to defend himself when he Is the constant victim of brutal attacks. It is legal and lawful to own a shotgun or a rifle. We believe in obeying the law. . . . [T]he time has come for the American Negro to fight back in self-defense whenever and wherever he Is being unjustly and unlawfully attacked.
—quoted in Eyewitness: The Negro in American History
The press gave a great deal of publicity to Malcolm X because his controversial statements made dramatic news stories. This had two effects. First, his call for armed self-defense frightened most whites and many moderate African Americans. Second, reports of the attention Malcolm received awakened resentment in some other members of the Nation of Islam.
Civil Rights
BALLOTS OR BULLETS?
In March 1964, Malcolm broke with Elijah Muhammad over differences in strategy and doctrine and formed another Muslim organization. One month later, he embarked on a pilgrimage to Mecca, in Saudi Arabia, a trip required of followers of orthodox Islam. In Mecca, he learned that orthodox Islam preached racial equality, and he worshiped alongside people from many countries. Wrote Malcolm, "I have [prayed] . . . with fellow Muslims whose eyes were the bluest of blue, whose hair was the blondest of blond, and whose skin was the whitest of white." When he returned to the United States, his attitude toward whites had changed radically. He explained his new slogan, "Ballots or bullets," to a follower: "Well, if you and I don't use the ballot, we're going to be forced to use the bullet. So let us try the ballot." Because of his split with the Black Muslims, Malcolm believed his life might be in danger. "No one can get out without trouble," he confided. On February 21, 1965, while giving a speech in Harlem, the 39-year-old Malcolm X was shot and killed. BLACK POWER In early June of 1966, tensions that had been building between SNCC and the other civil rights groups finally erupted in Mississippi. Here, James Meredith, the man who had integrated the University of Mississippi, set out on a 225-mile "walk against fear." Meredith planned to walk all the way from the Tennessee border to Jackson, but he was shot by a white racist and was too injured to continue.
Martin Luther King, Jr., of the SCLC, Floyd McKissick of CORE, and Stokely Carmichael of SNCC decided to lead their followers in a march to finish what Meredith had started. But it soon became apparent that SNCC and CORE members were quite militant, as they began to shout slogans similar to those of the black separatists who had followed Malcolm X. When King tried to rally the marchers with the refrain of "We Shall Overcome," many SNCC workers—bitter over the violence they'd suffered during Freedom Summer—began singing, "We shall overrun."
Police in Greenwood, Mississippi, arrested Carmichael for setting up a tent on the grounds of an all-black high school. When Carmichael showed up at a rally later, his face swollen from a beating, he electrified the crowd.
Stokely
Carmichael
(1968).
The slogan “Black Power” became the battle-cry of militant civil rights activists.
A
Personal Voice stokely carmichael “This is the twenty-seventh time I have been arrested—and I ain’t going to jail no more!... We been saying freedom for six years—and we ain’t got nothin’. What we’re gonna start saying now is BLACK POWER. ’’
—quoted in The Civil Rights Movement: An Eyewitness History
Black Power, Carmichael said, was a "call for black people to begin to define their own goals... [and] to lead their own organizations.” King urged him to stop using the phrase because he believed it would provoke African Americans to violence and antagonize whites. Carmichael refused and urged SNCC to stop recruiting whites and to focus on
developing African-American pride.
BLACK PANTHERS
Later that year, another development demonstrated the growing radicalism of some segments of the African-American community. In Oakland, California, in October 1966, Huey Newton and Bobby Seale founded a political party known as the Black Panthers to fight police brutality in the ghetto. The party advocated self-sufficiency for African-American communities, as well as full employment and decent housing. Members maintained that African Americans should be exempt from military service because an unfair number of black youths had been drafted to serve in Vietnam. j main idea
Analyzing
Motives
Why did some leaders of SCLC disagree with SNCC tactics?
720
1
MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
Jy Why was the public reaction to the Black Panthers mixed?
Vocabulary
polarization:
separation into opposite camps
Dressed in black leather jackets, black berets, and sunglasses, the Panthers preached self-defense and sold copies of the writings of Mao Zedong, leader of the inese Communist revolution. Several police shootouts occurred between the Panthers and police, and the FBI conducted numerous investigations of group members (sometimes using illegal tactics). Even so, many of the Panthers' activities-the establishment of daycare centers, free breakfast programs, free medical clinics, assis-tance to the homeless, and other services—won support in the ghettos. jEy
1968—A Turning Point in Civil Rights
Martin Luther King, Jr., objected to the Black Power movement. He believed that preaching violence could only end in grief. King was planning to lead a Poor People's March on Washington, D.C. However, this time the people would have to march without him.
KING’S DEATH
Dr. King seemed to sense that death was near. On April 3, 1968, he addressed a crowd in Memphis, where he had gone to support the city's striking garbage workers. "I may not get there with you but ... we as a people will get to the Promised Land." He added, "I'm not fearing any man. Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord." The next day as King stood on his hotel balcony, James Earl Ray thrust a high-powered rifle out of a window and squeezed the trigger. King crumpled to the floor. REACTIONS TO KING’S DEATH
The night King died, Robert F. Kennedy was campaigning for the Democratic presidential nomination. Fearful that King’s death would spark riots, Kennedy's advisers told him to cancel his appearance in an African-American neighborhood in Indianapolis. Kennedy attended anyway, making a plea for nonviolence. A
Personal Voice Robert f. Kennedy “ For those of you who are black—considering the evidence ... that there were white people who were responsible—you can be filled with bitterness, with hatred, and a desire for revenge. We can move in that direction as a country, in great polarization—black people amongst black, white people amongst white, filled with hatred toward one another.
Or we can make an effort, as Martin Luther King did, to understand and comprehend, and to replace that violence, that stain of bloodshed that has spread across our land, with an effort to understand [with] compassion and love. ”
—“A Eulogy for Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.”
Despite Kennedy's plea, rage over King's death led to the worst urban rioting in United States history. Over 100 cities exploded in flames. The hardest-hit cities included Baltimore, Chicago, Kansas City, and Washington, D.C. Then in June 1968, Robert Kennedy himself was assassinated by a Jordanian immigrant who was angry over Kennedy's support of Israel.
The Poor People's Campaign went ahead, but without King's eloquence and leadership, it failed to clearly express its goals and ended in disaster. The SCLC and its role in the civil rights movement declined.
Civil Rights
Legacy of the Civil Rights Movement
On March 1, 1968, the Kerner Commission, which President Johnson had appointed to study the causes of urban violence, issued its 200,000-word report. In it, the panel named one main cause: white racism. Said the report: "This is our basic conclusion: Our nation is moving toward two societies, one black, one white—separate and unequal." The report called for the nation to create new jobs, construct new housing, and end de facto segregation in order to wipe out the destructive ghetto environment. However, the Johnson administration ignored many of the recommendations because of white opposition to such sweeping changes. So what had the civil rights movement accomplished?
HISTORICAL
SPOTLIGHT

SHIRLEY CHISHOLM
African-American women such as Shirley Chisholm exemplified the advances won in the civil rights movement. In 1968, Chisholm became the first African-American woman in the United States House of Representatives.
In the mid-1960s, Chisholm served in the New York state assembly, representing a district in New York City. While there, she supported programs to establish public day-care centers and provide unemployment insurance to domestic workers.
In 1972, Chisholm gained national prominence by running for the Democratic presidential nomination. Despite the fact that she never won more than 10% of the vote in the primaries, she controlled 152 delegates at the Democratic convention in Miami.
CIVIL RIGHTS GAINS
The civil rights movement ended de jure segregation by bringing about legal protection for the civil rights of all Americans. Congress passed the most important civil rights legislation since Reconstruction, including the Civil Rights Act of 1968, which ended discrimination in housing. After school segregation ended, the numbers of African Americans who finished high school and who went to college increased significantly. This in turn led to better jobs and business opportunities. Another accomplishment of the civil rights movement was to give African Americans greater pride in their racial identity. Many African Americans adopted African-influenced styles and proudly displayed symbols of African history and culture. College students demanded new Black Studies programs so they could study African-American history and literature. In the entertainment world, the "color bar” was lowered as African Americans began to appear more frequently in movies and on television shows and commercials.
In addition, African Americans made substantial political gains. By 1970, an estimated two-thirds of eligible African Americans were registered to vote, and a significant increase in African-American elected officials resulted. The number of African Americans holding elected office grew from fewer than 100 in 1965 to more than 7,000 in 1992. Many civil rights activists went on to become political leaders, among them Reverend Jesse Jackson, who sought the Democratic nomination for president in 1984 and 1988; Vernon Jordan, who led voter-registration drives that enrolled about 2 million African Americans; and Andrew Young, who has served as UN ambassador and Atlanta's mayor. &
UNFINISHED WORK
The civil rights movement was successful in changing many discriminatory laws. Yet as the 1960s turned to the 1970s, the challenges for the movement changed. The issues it confronted—housing and job discrimination, educational inequality, poverty, and racism________ involved the difficult task of changing people's attitudes and behavior. Some of the proposed solutions, such as more tax monies spent in the inner cities and the forced busing of schoolchildren, angered some whites, who resisted further changes. Public support for the civil rights movement declined because some whites were frightened by the urban riots and the Black Panthers.
By 1990, the trend of whites fleeing the cities for the suburbs had reversed much of the progress toward school
MAIN IDEA
Evaluating
jy What were some accomplishments of the civil rights movement?
722 Chapter 21
1
2008
Changes in Poverty and Education
Vocabulary
quota:
requirement that a certain number of positions are filled by minorities
integration. In 1996-1997, 28 per-
cent of blacks in the South and
50 percent of blacks in the
Northeast were attending schools
with fewer than 10 percent whites.
Lack of jobs also remained a serious problem for African Americans, who had a poverty rate three times that of whites.
To help equalize education and job opportunities, the government in the 1960s began to promote affirmative action. Affirmative-action programs involve making special efforts to hire or enroll groups that have suffered discrimination.
Many colleges and almost all companies that do business with the federal government adopted such programs. But in the late 1970s, some people began to criticize affirmative-action programs as "reverse discrimination" that set minority hiring or enrollment quotas and deprived whites of opportunities. In the 1980s, Republican administrations eased affirmative-action requirements for some government contractors. The fate of affirmative action is still to be decided.
Today, African Americans and whites interact in ways that could have only been imagined before the civil rights movement. In many respects, Dr. King's dream has been realized—yet much remains to be done.
Poverty Status1
African Americans 1959	2008
56%
24.7%
i Persons living in poverty
1959
Whites
16.5%	8.6%
I
Persons not living in poverty Source: U.S. Bureau of Census
Persons in families
College Education2
African Americans 1959	2008
3.3%	19.
8 Persons with four or more years of college
o
Persons 25 years of age or older
1959
Whites
2008
8.6%	29.8%
■ All other persons Source: U.S. Bureau of Census
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs 1.	Did the economic situation for African Americans get better or worse between 1959 and 2008?
2.	About how much greater was the percentage of whites completing four or more years of college in 2008 than the percentage of African Americans?
) assessment
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•de facto segregation •de jure segregation • Malcolm X
•Nation of Islam •Stokely Carmichael • Black Power
•	Black Panthers
•	Kerner Commission
•Civil Rights Act of 1968 • affirmative action
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a timeline of key events of the civil rights movement.
In your opinion, which event was most significant? Why?
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING ISSUES
What factors contributed to the outbreak of violence in the fight for civil rights? Think About:
•	different leaders’ approach to civil rights issues
•	living conditions in urban areas
•	de facto and de jure segregation
COMPARING AND CONTRASTING
Compare and contrast the civil rights strategies of Martin Luther King, Jr., Malcolm X, and the Black Panthers. Whose strategies do you think were more effective? Explain and support your response.
Civil Rights
TRACING THEMES
Civil Rights
Thomas Jefferson asserted in the Declaration of Independence that "all men are created equal" and are endowed with the "unalienable rights" of "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." With these words, a new nation was founded on the principle that citizens have certain fundamental civil rights. These include the right to vote, the right to enjoy freedom of speech and religion, and others. For more than 200 years, the United States has stood as a worldwide example of a country committed to securing the rights of its people.
However, throughout the nation's history, some Americans have had to struggle to obtain even the most basic civil rights. Laws or customs prevented certain people from voting freely, from speaking their minds on political issues, and from living and going where they wish. Over time, many of these barriers have been torn down.
In recent years, the United States has tried to promote human rights in other countries through its foreign policy. Even as it does so, the United States continues to struggle to fulfill for all Americans the lofty ideals established by the nation's founders.
BILL OF RIGHTS
During the Constitutional Convention, the question of a bill of rights arose, but none was included. During the process of ratification, many people argued that the Constitution needed to list the basic civil rights and liberties that the federal government could not take away from the people.
Accordingly, the nation ratified ten amendments to the Constitution—the Bill of Rights. It establishes such rights as freedom of speech, religion, and assembly, freedom of the press, and the right to a trial by jury. While these rights have been subject to interpretation over the nation’s history, the Bill of Rights serves as the cornerstone of American democracy.
THE FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT
In the engraving above, a crowd of black and white Americans celebrates the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1866. This act recognized the citizenship of African Americans and granted the same civil rights to all people born in the United States except Native Americans.
i i i Vr i vui	I I LI I /\l I IC? I IUI 11CI IL i IQti
fied two years later, made these changes part of the Constitution. The Amendment declared that states cannot deny anyone “equal protection of the laws” and extended the right to vote to all 21-year-old males, including former slaves.
Despite these provisions, African Americans and other groups would still struggle to claim their full rights as U.S. citizens.

the civil rights movement
Despite the Fourteenth Amendment and later the Fifteenth Amendment, which forbade states from denying anyone the right to vote on account of race, African Americans continued to live as second-class citizens, especially in the South.
During the 1950s and 1960s, African Americans and other Americans led a powerful movement to fight for racial equality. The movement often met with strong resistance, such as in Birmingham, Alabama, where police sprayed demonstrators with high-pressure fire hoses (right). Nevertheless, it succeeded in securing for African Americans the civil rights promised by the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence. The civil rights movement has also been the basis for other groups gaining equal rights, including other minorities, women, and people with disabilities.

THINKING CRITICALLY
HUMAN RIGHTS
President Jimmy Carter considered human rights an important foreign policy issue. Human rights are what Americans think of as their civil rights, including the right to vote and to receive a fair trial. The Carter administration tried to encourage greater freedom abroad by taking such steps as cutting off military aid to countries with poor human rights records.
While these efforts met with mixed results, the issue of human rights has continued to influence U.b. foreign policy. In the 1990s, for example, the U.S. government tried to push China toward increasing human rights while keeping alive its trade ties with that country.
As a private citizen, Jimmy Carter has also contl"‘ , ued to champion human rights causes. In iy » his wife, Rosalynn, founded the Carter Center, w o programs seek to end human rights abuses an p mote democracy worldwide.
CONNECT TO HISTORY
1.	Analyzing Issues The Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments both provided for the voting rights of African Americans. Based on what you have read in the chapter, how were these rights denied African Americans? How were they finally secured?
CONNECT TO TODAY
2.	Writing About Rights Have you or anyone you’ve known had their civil rights denied them in any way? Research a current-day instance of an alleged civil rights injustice. Write an account of the issue and share it with your class.
hmhsocialstudies.com
RESEARCH WEB LINKS
Civil Rights
CHAPTER
ASSESSMENT

TERMS & NAMES
For each term or name below, write a sentence explaining its connection to the civil rights movement.
1.	Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka
2.	Rosa Parks
3.	Martin Luther King, Jr.
4.	Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee
5.	freedom rider
6.	Civil Rights Act of 1964
7.	Fannie Lou Hamer
8.	de facto segregation
9.	Malcolm X 10. Black Power
1954
Brawn v. Board of Education of .Topeka
1955
1956	boycott
1957	1957 School desegregation crisis in Arkansas
1958	1957 Southern Christian
	Leadership
	Conference (SCLC) is formed to “carry on nonviolent
crusades.”
1961
Freedom riders begin a bus ride through the South to protest segregation.
MAIN IDEAS
Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
Taking on Segregation (pages 700-707)
1.	Analyze the effects of the Brown v. Board of Education decision.
2.	What was the role of Martin Luther King, Jr. within the civil rights movement?
The Triumphs of a Crusade (pages 710-716)
3.	What was the significance of the federal court case won by James Meredith in 1962?
4.	Cite three examples of violence committed between 1962 and 1964 against African Americans and civil rights activists.
Challenges and Changes in the Movement
(pages 717-723)
5.	What were some of the key beliefs advocated by Malcolm X?
6.	Why did some civil rights leaders urge Stokely Carmichael to stop using the slogan “Black Power”?
CRITICAL THINKING
1964
Congress passes the Civil Rights Act.
1963
More than 250,000 people march on Washington to demand immediate passage of the civil rights bill.
USING YOUR NOTES
On your own paper, draw a cluster diagram like the one shown below. Then, fill it in with four events from the civil rights movement that were broadcast on nationwide television and that you find the most compelling. <^^ampie?^>
TV
Coverage of Civil Rights Movement 
1967
Rioting in Detroit and more than 100 other cities.
1968
Martin Luther King, Jr., is assassinated.
1965
Malcolm X is assassinated.
1965
March from Selma to Montgomery to fight for voting rights 1965
Congress passes the Voting Rights Act.
(^exampieT^
^j^ampleT^
SUMMARIZING
Describe the roles of political organizations during the African American civil rights movement. DEVELOPING HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
What events prompted presidential and congressional action on behalf of minority rights? Describe the efforts to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1957, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 and how they affected minority rights. EXPLAINING TURNING POINTS
What is the significance of the years 1968-1969 as a turning point in American history? Explain. 726 Chapter 21
TEXAS TEST PRACTICE
Use the diagram and your knowledge of United States history to answer question 1.
Civil Rights Strategies and Actions, 1954-1968
Use the quotation as well as your knowledge of United States history to answer question 2.
1.	The Venn diagram is partially filled in with the strategies of various civil rights groups in the 1960s. Which of the following could be added to the area of the diagram labeled X?
A provide social services to the needy B boycotts
C nonviolent demonstrations D armed self-defense
“An illegal attack, an unjust attack, and an immoral attack can be made against you by any one. Just because a person has on a [police] uniform does not give him the right to come and shoot up your neighborhood. No, this is not right, and my suggestion would be that as long as the police department doesn’t use those methods in white neighborhoods, they shouldn’t come .. . and use them in our neighborhood....”
—MALCOLM X, 'Prospects for Freedom in 1965”
2.	Which of the following events justifies Malcolm X’s concerns about police brutality?
F the Rosa Parks incident in 1955 G the 1963 Birmingham demonstrations
H the desegregation of Little Rock’s Central High in 1957
J the first sit-ins in 1942
hmhsocialstudies.com'
TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests • Tutorials


INTERACT WITH HISTORY
^WriteSmart COLLABORATIVE LEARN

Think about the issues you recorded in myNotebook as you read the chapter. Choose one participant in the civil rights movement. Write a speech from that person’s perspective in which you evaluate your role in the movement. Consider what civil rights you worked for, why those rights are important, how sucessful you were, and the costs of your struggle. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your speech.
XCEHTURY
Working with a small group, use library or Internet sources to learn more about the impact of the writings of Martin Luther King, Jr. on the civil rights movement. Choose one of his works, such as “Letter from a Birmingham Jail,” the “I Have a Dream” speech, or a different piece, and consider its impact. Share your piece with the class and facilitate a discussion about how it impacted the civil rights movement.

"vWriteSmart
Imagine you are a leader of the civil rights movement. Write a persuasive speech urging citizens to support the movement, explaining why civil rights for all people are necessary and evaluating how the civil rights movement increased participation of minorities in the political process. Support your argument by describing the other beneficial changes that have resulted from the movement and explaining the benefits that civil rights provide for all citizens. Use vivid details and descriptive language. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your speech.
End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Analyzing Presentations and Speeches
DEFINING THE SKILL
When you analyze presentations and speeches, you interpret them, or decide what they tell you about history. Presentations, speeches, and lectures can be primary sources, materials written or made by people who lived through and witnessed historical events. They can also be secondary sources about an event made by observers after the fact. Analyzing social studies information such as presentations, speeches, and lectures will help you deepen your understanding of historical events. You can apply these strategies whether you are reading a transcript of a historical speech or listening to a presentation given by a classmate.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: HOW TO ANALYZE A SPEECH
Think about the author and historical context of the speech when you analyze the information. Consider what you have learned about an event or time period to help you interpret the social studies information you read or hear. This passage is a section of President Johnson's speech to Congress urging members to pass the Voting Rights Act. Q
Speech Before Congress on Voting Rights "Many of the issues of civil rights are very complex and most difficult. But about this there can and should be no argument. Every American citizen must have an equal right to vote.There is no reason which can excuse the denial of that right. There is no duty which weights more heavily on us than the duty we have to ensure that right....
Experience has clearly shown that the existing process of law cannot overcome systematic and ingenious discrimination. No law that we now have on the books... can ensure the right to vote when local officials are determined to deny it....
©Wednesday I will send to Congress a law designed to eliminate illegal barriers to the right to vote....
There is no constitutional issue here. The command of the Constitution is plain.
There is no moral issue. It is wrong—deadly wrong—to deny any of your fellow Americans the right to vote in this country.
There is no issue of States rights or national rights. There is only the struggle for human rights." 0 —President Lyndon Baines Johnson, Speech Before Congress on Voting Rights, March 15,1965
0 Identify the author or creator of the source. Thinking about the author or creator can help you place the presentation or speech into context and identify any issues that could affect your analysis. Why might a president give a speech to Congress? What do you know about how Johnson became president and what issues were important to him?
0 Determine the historical event the source is describing. What historical event does this speech precede? Why did Johnson want Congress to pass a law about voting rights?
0 Analyze the information. Compare what you already know to details in the source. Both primary and secondary sources can enhance your knowledge of an event. For example, you can use the information in this speech to make inferences about what the experience of voting was like for African Americans at the time. If you are attending a presentation or speech, ask questions to clarify confusing language or ideas.
727 SKI
STRATEGY. MAKE A CHART
Making a chart will help you analyze information from social studies sources such as presentations, speeches, and lectures. The chart below provides an analysis of the passage you just read. Author. President Lyndon dairies Johnson
Type of source: presidential speech
Date: March 15,1965
Title: Speech Before Congress on Voting Rights
Historical events: Voting Rights Act, Civil Rights Act
Author’s purpose: to urge lawmakers in Congress to create laws that protected people’s righT to vote
Audience: lawmakers in Congress
What it tells you about history: Although African Americans were allowed to vote, people created obstacles to prevent them from doing so. President Johnson felt that a law needed to be created in order to protect people’s right to vote and provide equal rights for all.
applying the skill
Turn to Chapter 21, Section 1, "Taking on Segregation." Read "One American's Story" on page 700 and analyze the quotation to understand the historical context that inspired Jo Ann Gibson Robinson to say those words.
1.	Identify the author or creator of the source.
Who is featured in this section? What do you know about her background?
2.	Determine the historical event the source is describing.
What historical event is the text describing?
3.	Analyze the Information.
Compare this speech to what you already know about segregation. What details in the quotation tell you something you may not already know?
721
9

SECTION 1: Moving Toward Conflict Main Idea To stop the spread of communism in Southeast Asia, the United States used its military to support South Vietnam.
SECTION 2: U.S. Involvement and Escalation
Main Idea The United States sent troops to fight in Vietnam, but the war quickly turned into a stalemate.
SECTION 3: A Nation Divided
Main Idea An antiwar movement in the U.S. pitted supporters of the government's war policy against those who opposed it.
SECTION 4:1968: A Tumultuous Year Main Idea An enemy attack in Vietnam, two assassinations, and a chaotic political convention made 1968 an explosive year.
SECTION 5: The End of the War and Its Legacy
Main Idea President Nixon instituted his Vietnamization policy, and America's longest war finally came to an end.
USA;
WORLD?
[1963, Kennedy is assassinated; Lyndon B. Johnson becomes president.
: [1964[ Lyndon : B.Johnson • is elected : president.
: 03601 The National : Liberation Front forms : In South Vietnam.
19651 First major U.S. combat units arrive in Vietnam.
1965
: 196?j The : African nation of :* Uganda becomes £ : independent. *
: 1966 Mao : Zedong begins : the Cultural : Revolution : in China.
: 1967 Israel : captures Gaza : Strip and : West Bank in • Six-Day War.
