44 Chapter 2 Revolution and the Early Republic
...................

UICTADV
The Declaration Of HISTORY
Independence El
7\ hmhsocialstudies.com
VIDEO
The year is 1787. You have recently helped your fellow patriots overthrow decades of oppressive British rule. However, it is easier to destroy an old system of government than to create a new one. In a world of kings and tyrants, your new republic struggles to find its place. As you read the chapter and explore the issues below, use the annotation tools in your eBook to record your thoughts.
Explore the Issues
•	Which should have more power, the states or the national government?
•	How can the new nation avoid a return to tyranny?
•	How can the rights of all people be protected?
1781
The British surrender at Yorktown.
1786 Daniel Shays leads a rebellion against higher taxes.
1788 The Constitution is ratified.
:; i?831
; WasbihgtOf; : is elected : president
117921 George Washington is reelected.
'	’ -J

: 1781 Joseph II	: 1785 British
: allows religious	: preacher Edmund
• toleration in	: Cartwright invents
: Austria.	: the first power
	: loom.
1787 Sierra Leone in Africa is made a haven for freed American slaves.
; 1789 ; The : French : Revolution : starts.
1793 French king Louis XVI is executed.
Review Unit 45
Colonial Resistance and Rebellion
MAIN IDEA I [ WHY IT MATTERS NOW |
j~ Terms & Names Conflicts between Great Britain and the American colonies escalated, until the colonists finally declared their independence.
The ideas put forth by the colonists in the Declaration of Independence remain the guiding principles of the United States today.
•King George III	’John Locke
• Sugar Act	• Common Sense
•Stamp Act	•Thomas Jefferson
•Samuel Adams	•Declaration of
•Boston Massacre Independence •Boston Tea Party
^^^^^^^^POneAmerican's Story■
hmhsocialstudies.com!
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the major events of the conflict between Great Britain and the American colonies.
Crispus Attucks was a sailor of African and Native-American ancestry. On the night of March 5, 1770, he was part of a large and angry crowd that had gathered at the Boston Customs House to harass the British soldiers stationed there. More soldiers soon arrived, and the mob began hurling stones and snowballs at them. Attucks then stepped forward.
A
Personal Voice John adams “ This Attucks ... appears to have undertaken to be the hero of the night; and to lead this army with banners ... up to King street with their clubs .... This man with his party cried, ‘Do not be afraid of them,’ . .. He had hardiness enough to fall in upon them, and with one hand took hold of a bayonet, and with the other knocked the man down. ”
—quoted in The Black Presence in the Era of the American Revolution
▲
Crispus Attucks
Attucks's action ignited the troops. Ignoring orders not to shoot civilians, one soldier and then others fired on the crowd. Five people were killed; several were wounded. Crispus Attucks was, according to a newspaper account, the first to die.
The Colonies Organize to Resist Britain
Because the Proclamation of 1763 sought to halt expansion by the colonists west of the Appalachian Mountains, it convinced the colonists that the British government did not care about their needs. A second result of the French and Indian War—Britain's financial crisis—brought about new laws that reinforced the colonists' opinion.
THE SUGAR ACT
Great Britain had borrowed so much money during the war that it nearly doubled its national debt. King George III, who had succeeded his grandfather in 1760, hoped to lower that debt. To do so, in 1763 the king chose a financial expert, George Grenville, to serve as prime minister. Revolution and the Early Republic
Chapter 2
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Issues
How did the Sugar Act cause tension between the colonists and Britain?
j MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
JBj How did the colonists respond to the Stamp Act and the
Townshend Acts?
By the time Grenville took over, tensions between Britain and one colony, Massachusetts, were on the rise.
During the French and Indian War, the British had cracked down on colonial smuggling to ensure that merchants were not doing business in any French-held territories. In 1761, the royal governor of Massachusetts authorized the use of the writs of assistance, a general search warrant that allowed British customs officials to search any colonial ship or building they believed to be holding smuggled goods. Because many merchants worked out of their residences, the writs enabled British officials to enter and search colonial homes whether there was evidence of smuggling or not. The merchants of Boston were outraged.
Grenville's actions, however, soon angered merchants throughout the colonies. The new prime minister noticed that the American customs service, which collected duties, or taxes on imports, was losing money. Grenville concluded that the colonists were smuggling goods into the country without paying duties. In 1764 he prompted Parliament to enact a law known as the Sugar Act.
The Sugar Act did three things. It halved the duty on foreign-made molasses in the hopes that colonists would pay a lower tax rather than risk arrest by smuggling. It placed duties on certain imports that had not been taxed before.
Most important, it provided that colonists accused of violating the act would be tried in a vice-admiralty court rather than a colonial court. There, each case would be decided by a single judge rather than by a jury of sympathetic colonists.
Colonial merchants complained that the Sugar Act would reduce their profits. Merchants and traders further claimed that Parliament had no right to tax the colonists because the colonists had not elected representatives to the body. The new regulations, however, had little effect on colonists besides merchants and traders.
THE STAMP ACT
In March 1765 Parliament passed the Stamp Act. This act imposed a tax on documents and printed items such as wills, newspapers, and playing cards. A stamp would be placed on the items to prove that the tax had been paid. It was the first tax that affected colonists directly because it was levied on goods and services. Previous taxes had been indirect, involving duties on imports. In May of 1765, the colonists united to defy the law. Boston shopkeepers, artisans, and laborers organized a secret resistance group called the Sons of Liberty to protest the law. Meanwhile, the colonial assemblies declared that Parliament lacked the power to impose taxes on the colonies because the colonists were not represented in Parliament. In October 1765, merchants in New York, Boston, and Philadelphia agreed to a boycott of British goods until the Stamp Act was repealed. The widespread boycott worked, and in March 1766 Parliament repealed the law.
But on the same day that it repealed the Stamp Act, Parliament passed the Declaratory Act, which asserted Parliament's full right "to bind the colonies and people of America in all cases whatsoever." Then, in 1767, Parliament passed the Townshend Acts, named after Charles Townshend, the leading government minister The Townshend Acts taxed goods that were imported into the colony from Britain, such as lead, glass, paint, and paper. The Acts also imposed a tax on tea, the most popular drink in the colonies. Led by men such as Samuel Adams, one of the founders of the Sons of Liberty, the colonists again boycotted British goods. E£>
SOW
THEjy PROPOSITION 13
A more recent tax revolt occurred in California on June 6,1978, when residents voted in a tax reform law known as Proposition 13. By the late 1970s, taxes in California were among the highest in the nation. The property tax alone was fifty-two percent above the national norm.
Proposition 13, initiated by ordinary citizens, limited the tax on real property to one percent of its assessed value in 1975-1976. It passed with sixty-five percent of the vote.
Because of the resulting loss of revenue, many state agencies were scaled down or cut. In 1984, California voters approved a state lottery that provides supplemental funds for education.
But Proposition 13 still remains a topic of heated debate, as Californians—like other Americans across the country-struggle with conflicting desires: more government services vs. less taxes.
Review Unit 47
British Actions and Colonial Reactions, 1765-1775
STAMP ACT
British Action Britain passes the Stamp Act, a tax law requiring colonists to purchase special stamps to prove payment of tax.
Colonial Reaction
Colonists harass stamp distributors, boycott British goods, and prepare a Declaration of Rights and Grievances.
TOWNSHEND ACTS
BOSTON MASSACRE
British Action
Britain taxes certain colonial imports and stations troops at major colonial ports to protect customs officers,
Colonial Reaction
Colonists protest “taxation without representation” and organize a new boycott of imported goods.
British Action
Taunted by an angry mob, British troops fire into the crowd, killing five colonists.
Colonial Reaction
Colonial agitators label the conflict a massacre and publish a dramatic engraving depicting the violence.
This colonial engraving was meant to warn of the effects of the Stamp Act.
Tension Mounts in Massachusetts
As hostilities between the colonists and the British mounted, the atmosphere in Boston grew increasingly tense. The city soon erupted in bloody clashes and later in a daring tax protest, all of which pushed the colonists and Britain closer to war.
VIOLENCE ERUPTS IN BOSTON
On March 5, 1770, a mob gathered in front of the Boston Customs House and taunted the British soldiers standing guard there. Shots were fired and five colonists, including Crispus Attucks, were killed or mortally wounded. Colonial leaders quickly labeled the confrontation the Boston Massacre.
Despite strong feelings on both sides, the political atmosphere relaxed somewhat during the next three years. Lord Frederick North, who later followed Grenville as the prime minister, realized that the Townshend Acts were costing more to enforce than they would ever bring in: in their first year, for example, the taxes raised only 295 pounds, while the cost of sending British troops to Boston
History Through
Background
Pounds are the basic monetary unit of British currency.
| Art}--------------------------
THE BOSTON MASSACRE
(1770) Paul Revere was not only a patriot, but a silversmith and an engraver as well. One of the best known of his engravings, depicting the Boston Massacre, is a masterful piece of anti-British propaganda. Widely circulated, Revere’s engraving played a key role in rallying revolutionary fervor.
•	The sign above the soldiers reads “Butcher’s Hall.”
•	The British commander, Captain Preston (standing at the far right of the engraving) appears to be inciting the troops to fire.
In fact, he tried to calm the situation.
•	At the center foreground is a small dog, a detail that gave credence to the rumor that, following the shootings, dogs licked the blood of the victims from the street.
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Visual Sources 1.	According to the details of the engraving, what advantages do the soldiers have that the colonists do not? What point does the artist make through this contrast?
2.	What do you think is the intended message behind the artist’s use of smoke spreading out from the soldiers’ rifles?
48 Chapter 2 Revolution and the Early Republic
H
TEA ACT
British Action Britain gives the East India Company special concessions in the colonial tea business and shuts out colonial tea merchants.
Colonial Reaction
Colonists in Boston rebel, dumping 18,000 pounds of East India Company tea into Boston harbor
INTOLERABLE ACTS
British Action
King George III tightens control over Massachusetts by closing Boston Harbor and quartering troops.
LEXINGTON AND CONCORD
Colonial Reaction
Colonial leaders form the First Continental Congress and draw up a declaration of colonial rights.
British Action
General Gage orders troops to march to Concord, Massachusetts, and seize colonial weapons.
Colonial Reaction
Minutemen intercept the British and engage in battle-first at Lexington, and then at Concord.
A
This bottle contains tea that
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Charts In what ways did colonial reaction to British rule intensify between 1765 and 1775?
was over 170,000 pounds. North persuaded Parliament to repeal the Townshend Acts, except for the tax on tea.
Tensions rose again in 1772 when a group of Rhode Island colonists attacked a British customs schooner that patrolled the coast for smugglers. The colonists boarded the vessel, which had accidentally run aground near Providence, and burned it to the waterline. In response, King George named a special commission to seek out the suspects and bring them to England for trial.
The plan to haul Americans to England for trial ignited widespread alarm. The assemblies of Massachusetts and Virginia set up committees of correspondence to communicate with other colonies about this and other threats to American liber-
ties. By 1774, such committees formed a buzzing communication network linking leaders in nearly all the colonies.
colonists threw into Boston harbor during the Boston Tea Party.
THE BOSTON TEA PARTY
In 1773, Lord North devised the Tea Act in order to save the nearly bankrupt British East India Company. The act granted the company the right to sell tea to the colonies free of the taxes that colonial tea sellers had to pay. This action would have cut colonial merchants out of the tea trade by enabling the East India Company to sell its tea directly to consumers for less. North hoped the American colonists would simply buy the cheaper tea; instead, they protested dramatically. On the moonlit evening of December 16, 1773, a large group of Boston rebels disguised themselves as Native Americans and proceeded to take action against three British tea ships anchored in the harbor. In this incident, later known as the Boston Tea Party, the "Indians" dumped 18,000 pounds of the East India Company's tea into the waters of Boston harbor.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Motives
$ What do you think King George set out to achieve when he disciplined Massachusetts?
THE INTOLERABLE ACTS
An infuriated King George III pressed Parliament to act. In 1774, Parliament responded by passing a series of measures that colonists called the Intolerable Acts. One law shut down Boston harbor. Another, the Quartering Act, authorized British commanders to house soldiers in vacant private homes and other buildings. In addition to these measures, General Thomas Gage, commander-in-chief of British forces in North America, was appointed the new governor of Massachusetts. To keep the peace, he placed Boston under martial law, or rule imposed by military forces. In response to Britain's actions, the committees of correspondence assembled the First Continental Congress. In September 1774, 56 delegates met in Philadelphia and drew up a declaration of colonial rights. They defended the colonies' right to run their own affairs and stated that, if the British used force against the colonies, the colonies should fight back.
Review Unit 49
▲
The Battle of
Lexington, as depicted in a mid-nineteenth-century painting.
The Road to Revolution
After the First Continental Congress met, colonists in many eastern New England towns stepped up military preparations. Minutemen—civilian soldiers who pledged to be ready to fight against the British on a minute's notice—quietly stockpiled firearms and gunpowder. General Thomas Gage soon learned about these activities. In the spring of 1775, he ordered troops to march from Boston to nearby Concord, Massachusetts, and to seize illegal weapons.
FIGHTING AT LEXINGTON AND CONCORD
Colonists in Boston were watching, and on the night of April 18, 1775, Paul Revere, William Dawes, and Samuel Prescott rode out to spread word that 700 British troops were headed for Concord. The darkened countryside rang with church bells and gunshots—prearranged signals, sent from town to town, that the British were coming. The king's troops, known as "redcoats" because of their uniforms, reached Lexington, Massachusetts, five miles short of Concord, on the cold, windy dawn of April 19. As they neared the town, they saw 70 minutemen drawn up in lines on the village green. The British commander ordered the minutemen to lay down their arms and leave, and the colonists began to move out without laying down their muskets. Then someone fired, and the British soldiers sent a volley of shots into the departing militia. Eight minutemen were killed and ten more were wounded, but only one British soldier was injured. The Battle of Lexington, the first battle of the Revolutionary War, lasted only 15 minutes.
The British marched on to Concord, where they found an empty arsenal. After a brief skirmish with minutemen, the British soldiers lined up to march back to Boston, but the march quickly became a slaughter. Between 3,000 and 4,000 minutemen had assembled by now, and they fired on the marching troops from behind stone walls and trees. British soldiers fell by the dozen. Bloodied and humiliated, the remaining British soldiers made their way back to Boston that night. Colonists had become enemies of Britain and now held Boston and its encampment of British troops under siege.
MAIN IDEA
Evaluating
4© Do you think the British underestimated the colonists in 1770-1775?
50 Chapter 2 Revolution and the Early Republic
Vocabulary reconciliation: the
restoration of a former state of harmony or friendship
MAIN IDEA
Developing
Historical
Perspective
Do you think that the Olive Branch Petition was too little too late?
THE SECOND CONTINENTAL CONGRESS
In May of 1775, colonial leaders called the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia to debate their next move. The loyalties that divided colonists sparked endless debates at the Second Continental Congress. Some delegates called for independence, while others argued for reconciliation with Great Britain. Despite such differences, the Congress agreed to recognize the colonial militia as the Continental Army and appointed George Washington as its commander. THE BATTLE OF BUNKER HILL
Cooped up in Boston, British general Thomas Gage decided to strike at militiamen on Breed's Hill, north of the city and near Bunker Hill. On June 17, 1775, Gage sent 2,400 British soldiers up the hill. The colonists held their fire until the last minute and then began to mow down the advancing redcoats before finally retreating. By the time the smoke cleared, the colonists had lost 450 men, while the British had suffered over 1,000 casualties. The misnamed Battle of Bunker Hill would prove to be the deadliest battle of the war. By July, the Second Continental Congress was readying the colonies for war though still hoping for peace. Most of the delegates, like most colonists, felt deep loyalty to George III and blamed the bloodshed on the king's ministers. On July 8, Congress sent the king the so-called Olive Branch Petition, urging a return to "the former harmony" between Britain and the colonies,
King George flatly rejected the petition. Furthermore, he issued a proclamation stating that the colonies were in rebellion and urged Parliament to order a naval blockade to isolate a line of ships meant for the American coast.
Contributions of Select Founding Fathers	
Charles Carroll	Served as a delegate to the Continental Congress and signed the Declaration of Independence; helped to write Maryland’s Constitution of 1776; served in the U.S. Senate from 1789 to 1792
John Hancock	Served as president of the Continental Congress and became the first member to sign the Declaration of Independence; commissioned George Washington to lead the Continental Army; as governor, led Massachusetts to ratify the U.S. Constitution
John Peter Muhlenberg	Member of the Virginia House of Burgesses and the Pennsylvania Assembly; commissioned as a general in the Continental Army in 1777; elected to the U.S. Senate
Benjamin Rush	Author of an anti-slavery pamphlet; member of the Continental Congress and signer of the Declaration of Independence; served as surgeon-general of the Continental Army; appointed treasurer of the U.S. Mint in 1797
Jonathan Trumbull Sr.	As governor of the colony of Connecticut, sided with the colonists, the only governor of an English colony to do so; provided much-needed personnel and supplies for the Continental Army
John Witherspoon	A Presbyterian minister who moved to America to be the president of the College of New Jersey (later Princeton University) and became a social and religious leader; served as a delegate to the Continental Congress and signed the Declaration of Independence
SKILLBUILDER
Choose one indivic to lead the colonie ; Interpreting Charts jual from the chart above and explain how his contributions helped !S to independence and to develop the new democratic republic. j u
i!
Review Unit 51

Thomas Paine’s pamphlet Common Sense helped to overcome many colonists’ doubts about separating from Britain.
COMMON
T« TB.
^HABITANTS
A • M E R I C A,
Ob Uib followiog	'
SUB
1 w *•
3 5»
tfMMighd on A* parent Stitt. of Amuitu Afctn,, Of Af -pnftnt Ability at Astrin, witk (Saw aiif.

H »*»«", iaL,. ■	Ttiottto*/
IbADUPHU,
ti« Ijr M. BELL, fa TW-SmBt.
The Patriots Declare Independence
Despite the growing crisis, many colonists were uncertain about the idea of independence. Following the Olive Branch Petition, public opinion began to shift.
THE IDEAS BEHIND THE REVOLUTION
This shift in public opinion occurred in large part because of the Enlightenment ideas that had spread throughout the colonies in the 1760s and 1770s. One of the key Enlightenment thinkers was English philosopher John Locke. Locke maintained that people have natural rights to life, liberty, and property. Furthermore, he contended, every society is based on a social contract—an agreement in which the people consent to choose and obey a government so long as it safeguards their natural rights. If the government violates that social contract by taking away or interfering with those rights, people have the right to resist and even overthrow the government. Other influences on colonial leaders who favored independence were religious traditions that supported the cause of liberty. One preacher of the time, Jonathan Mayhew, wrote that he had learned from the holy scriptures that wise, brave, and virtuous men were always friends of liberty. Some ministers even spoke from their pulpits in favor of liberty.
Yet the ideas of limited government and civil rights had been basic to English law since even before a.d. 1215, when the English nobility had forced King John to sign Magna Carta, or the Great Charter. Magna Carta acknowledged certain specific rights of the barons against the king, including some rights to due process, a speedy trial, and trial by a jury of one's peers. Its main significance, though, was to recognize that the sovereign did not have absolute authority, but was subject like all men and women to the rule of law. This principle was reaffirmed by the English Bill of Rights, accepted by King William and Queen Mary in 1689. To the colonists, however, various Acts of Parliament between 1763 and 1775 had clearly violated their rights as Englishmen. In addition to due process, a speedy trial, and trial by a jury of one's peers, those rights included taxation only by consent of property owners, a presumption of innocence, no standing army in peacetime without consent, no quartering of troops in private homes, freedom of travel in peacetime, and the guarantee of regular legislative sessions.
THOMAS PAINE’S COMMON SENSE
Just as important were the ideas of Thomas Paine. In a widely read 50-page pamphlet titled Common Sense, Paine attacked King George and the monarchy. Paine, a recent immigrant, argued that responsibility for British tyranny lay with "the royal brute of Britain." Paine explained that his own revolt against the king had begun with Lexington and Concord. A
Personal Voice thomas paine “No man was a warmer wisher for a reconciliation than myself, before the fetal nineteenth of April, 1775, but the moment the event of that day was made known, I rejected the hardened, sullen tempered Pharaoh of England for ever... the wretch, that with the pretended title of Father of his people can unfeelingly hear of their slaughter, and composedly sleep with their blood upon his soul/5
—Common Sense
MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
Why might the ideals of the Enlightenment appeal to the colonists?
Paine declared that independence would allow America to trade more freely. He also stated that independence would give American colonists the chance to create a better society—one free from tyranny, with equal social and economic opportunities for all. Common Sense sold nearly 500,000 copies in 1776 and was widely applauded. In April 1776, George Washington wrote, "I find Common Sense is working a powerful change in the minds of many men."
52 Chapter 2 Revolution and the Early Republic
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
G/
What reasons did Jefferson give to justify revolt by the colonies? DECLARING INDEPENDENCE
By the early summer of 1776, the wavering Continental Congress finally decided to urge each colony to form its own government. On June 7, Virginia delegate Richard Henry Lee moved that “these United Colonies are, and of a right ought to be, free and independent States/' While talks on this fateful motion were under way, the Congress appointed a committee to prepare a formal Declaration of Independence. Virginia lawyer Thomas Jefferson was chosen to prepare the final draft.
Drawing on Locke's ideas of natural rights, Jefferson's document declared the rights of "Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness" to be "unalienable" rights— ones that can never be taken away. Jefferson then asserted that a government's legitimate power can only come from the consent of the governed, and that when a government denies their unalienable rights, the people have the right to "alter or abolish" that government. Jefferson provided a long list of violations committed by the king and Parliament against the colonists' unalienable rights. On that basis, the American colonies declared their independence from Britain, Gj
The Declaration states flatly that "all men are created equal." When this phrase was written, it expressed the common belief that free citizens were political equals. It did not claim that all people had the same ability or ought to have equal wealth. It was not meant to embrace women, Native Americans, or African-American slaves—a large number of Americans. However, Jefferson's words presented ideals that would later help these groups challenge traditional attitudes. In his first draft, Jefferson included an eloquent attack on the cruelty and injustice of the slave trade. However, South Carolina and Georgia, the two colonies most dependent on slavery, objected. In order to gain the votes of those two states, Jefferson dropped the offending passage.
On July 2, 1776, the delegates voted unanimously that the American colonies were free, and on July 4, 1776, they adopted the Declaration of Independence. The colonists had declared their freedom from Britain. They would now have to fight for it.


1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•King George III	•Samuel Adams	•John Locke
•Sugar Act	• Boston Massacre	• Common Sense
•Stamp Act	• Boston Tea Party	-Thomas Jefferson
•Declaration of Independence
t
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a cluster diagram like the one shown and fill it with events that demonstrate the conflict between Great Britain and the American colonies.
Choose one event to further explain in a paragraph.
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	EVALUATING
Explain whether you think the British government acted wisely in its dealings with the colonies between 1765 and 1775. Support your explanation with examples from the text. Think About:
•	the reasons for British action
•	the reactions of colonists
•	the results of British actions
ANALYZING EFFECTS
While Jefferson borrowed John Locke’s ideas, he changed Locke’s definition of the rights of men from “life, liberty, and property” to “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.” How do you think Jefferson’s rewording of Locke’s words has affected American life? Think About:
•	the experience of immigrants seeking new lives
•	the experience of African Americans and Native Americans
•	the socioeconomic groups living in America
Review Unit 53

The Declaration of Independence
Thomas Jefferson’s Declaration of Independence is one of the most important and influential legal documents of modern times. Although the text frequently refers to eighteenth-century events, its Enlightenment philosophy and politics have continuing relevance today. For more than 200 years the Declaration of Independence has inspired leaders of other independence movements and has remained a crucial document in the struggle for civil rights and human rights.
In Congress, July 4, 1776.
Jefferson begins the Declaration by attempting to legally and philosophically justify the revolution that was already underway. Here Jefferson is saying that, now that the colonists have begun to separate themselves from British rule, it is time to explain why the colonists have taken this course of action.
These passages reveal the influence of the English philosopher John Locke. In Two Treatises of Government (1690), Locke argued that if a government does not allow its citizens to enjoy certain rights and freedoms, the people have a right to replace that government.
A
Declaration by the Representatives of the United States of America, in General Congress assembled. When in the Course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to assume among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which the Laws of Nature and of Nature's God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that
among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness; that, to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed; that whenever any Form of Government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the Right of the People to alter or to abolish it, and to institute new Government, laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their Safety and Happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate that Governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes; and accordingly all experience hath shewn that mankind are more disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same Object, evinces a design to reduce them under absolute Despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such Government, and to provide new Guards for their future security.
Such has been the patient sufferance of these Colonies; and such is now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former Systems of Government. The history of the present King of Great Britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute Tyranny over these States. To prove this, let facts be submitted to a candid world.
Here begins the section in which ------------
Jefferson condemns the behavior of King George, listing the king’s many tyrannical actions that have forced his American subjects to rebel.
He has refused his Assent to Laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the public good.
He has forbidden his Governors to pass Laws of immediate and pressing importance, unless suspended in their operation till his assent should be obtained; and, when so suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend to them.
He has refused to pass other Laws for the accommodation of large districts of people, unless those people would relinquish the right of Representation in the Legislature, a right inestimable to them, and formidable to tyrants only.
54 Chapter 2
He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfortable, and distant from the depository of their public Records, for the sole purpose of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.
He has dissolved Representative Houses repeatedly, for opposing with manly firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.
He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to cause others to be elected; whereby the Legislative powers, incapable of Annihilation, have returned to the people at large for their exercise; the State remaining in the mean time exposed to all the dangers of invasions from without, and convulsions within.
He has endeavoured to prevent the population of these States; for that purpose obstructing the Laws for Naturalization of Foreigners; refusing to pass others to encourage their migration hither, and raising the conditions of new Appropriations of Lands.
He has obstructed the Administration of Justice, by refusing his Assent to Laws for establishing Judiciary powers.
He has made Judges dependent on his Will alone, for the tenure of their offices, and the amount and payment of their salaries.
He has erected a multitude of New Offices, and sent hither swarms of Officers to harass our people and eat out their substance.
He has kept among us, in times of peace, Standing Armies, without the I Consent of our legislatures.	|
He has affected to render the Military independent of and superior to the Civil power.
He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our constitution and unacknowledged by our laws; giving his Assent to their Acts of pretended Legislation:
For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us;
For protecting them, by a mock Trial, from punishment for any Murders which they should commit on the Inhabitants of these States;
For cutting off our Trade with all parts of the world;
For imposing Taxes on us without our Consent;
For depriving us, in many cases, of the benefits of Trial by Jury;
For transporting us beyond Seas to be tried for pretended offenses;
For abolishing the free System of English Laws in a neighboring Province, establishing therein an Arbitrary government, and enlarging its Boundaries so as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same absolute rule into these Colonies;
For taking away our Charters, abolishing our most valuable laws, and altering fundamentally the Forms of our Governments;
For suspending our own Legislatures, and declaring themselves invested with power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.
HISTORICAL
SPOTLIGHT
INDEPENDENCE AND SLAVERY
The Declaration of Independence went through many revisions before the final draft. Jefferson, a slaveholder himself, regretted having to eliminate one passage in particular—a condemnation of slavery and the slave trade. However, in the face of opposition of delegates from Southern states, the anti-slavery passage was deleted.
This is a reference to the 10,000 troops that the British government stationed in North America after the French and Indian War. Although the British government saw the troops as protection for the colonists, the colonists themselves viewed the troops as a standing army that threatened their freedom.
Here Jefferson condemns both the king and Parliament for passing the Intolerable Acts. Most of these laws were intended to punish the people of Massachusetts for the Boston Tea Party. For example, the Quartering Act of 1774 forced colonists to provide lodging for British troops. Another act allowed British soldiers accused of murder to be sent back to England for trial. The Boston Port Bill closed the port of Boston, “cutting off our Trade with all parts of the world.”
Here Jefferson refers to the Quebec Act, which extended the boundaries of the province. He then refers to another act that changed the charter of Massachusetts and restricted town meetings.
Review Unit 55
vV.RSPICI/V;
MEN WOULD BE TYRANTS IF THEY COULD.”
Although the Declaration dealt with issues of equality, justice, and independence, it did not address conditions of inequality within the colonies themselves. Husbands dominated their wives, for example, and slaves lived under complete control of their owners. Speaking on behalf of women, Abigail Adams (above) had this to say to her husband John, who served in the Continental Congress:
“Remember the Ladies, and be more generous and favourable to them than your ancestors.
Do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the Husbands. Remember all Men would be tyrants if they could. If particular care ... is not paid to the Ladies, we are determined to foment a Rebellion.”
Here Jefferson turns his attention away from the king and toward the British people. Calling the British the "common kindred" of the colonists, Jefferson reminds them how often the Americans have appealed to their sense of justice. Reluctantly the colonists are now forced to break their political connections with their British kin.
In this passage, the delegates declare independence.
He has abdicated Government here, by declaring us out of his Protection and waging War against us.
He has plundered our seas, ravaged our Coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed the lives of our people.
He is at this time transporting large Armies of foreign Mercenaries to com-pleat the works of death, desolation, and tyranny, already begun with circumstances of Cruelty & perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous ages, and totally unworthy the Head of a civilized nation.
He has constrained our fellow Citizens, taken Captive on the high Seas, to bear Arms against their Country, to become the executioners of their friends and Brethren, or to fall themselves by their Hands.
He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavoured to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers the merciless Indian Savages, whose known rule of warfare is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and conditions.
In every stage of these Oppressions We have Petitioned for Redress in the most humble terms; Our repeated Petitions have been answered only by repeated injury. A Prince, whose character is thus marked by every act which may define a Tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.
Nor have We been wanting in attentions to our British brethren. We have warned them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have reminded them of the circumstances of our emigration and settlement here. We have appealed to their native justice and magnanimity, and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred, to disavow these usurpations, which would inevitably interrupt our connections and correspondence. They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, which denounces our Separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, Enemies in War, in Peace Friends.
We, therefore, the Representatives of the United States of America, in General Congress, Assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of our intentions, do, in the name, and by the Authority of the good People of these Colonies solemnly publish and declare, That these United Colonies are, and of Right ought to be, Free and Independent States; that they are Absolved from all Allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political connection between them and the State of Great Britain is, and ought to be, totally dissolved; and that as Free and Independent States, they have full Power to levy War, conclude Peace, contract Alliances, establish Commerce, and do all other Acts and Things which Independent States may of right do.
56 Chapter 2
, congress.
And for the support of this Declaration, with a firm reliance on the pro-— tection of divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our Lives, our . Fortunes, and our sacred Honor.
[Signed by]
John Hancock [President of the Continental Congress]
[Georgia]	[Maryland]	[Delaware]
Button Gwinnett	Samuel Chase	Caesar Rodney
Lyman Hall	William Paca	George Read
George Walton	Thomas Stone Charles Carroll	Thomas McKean
[Rhode Island]		[New York]
Stephen Hopkins	[Virginia]	William Floyd
William Ellery	George Wythe	Philip Livingston
	Richard Henry Lee	Francis Lewis
[Connecticut]	Thomas Jefferson	Lewis Morris
Roger Sherman	Benjamin Harrison	
Samuel Huntington	Thomas Nelson, Jr.	[New Jersey]
William Williams	Francis Lightfoot Lee	Richard Stockton
Oliver Wolcott	Carter Braxton	John Witherspoon Francis Hopkinson
[North Carolina]	[Pennsylvania]	John Hart
William Hooper	Robert Morris	Abraham Clark
Joseph Hewes	Benjamin Rush	
John Penn	Benjamin Franklin	[New Hampshire]
	John Morton	Josiah Bartlett
[South Carolina]	George Clymer	William Whipple
Edward Rutledge	James Smith	Matthew Thornton
Thomas Heyward, Jr.	George Taylor	
Thomas Lynch, Jr.	James Wilson	[Massachusetts]
Arthur Middleton	George Ross	Samuel Adams John Adams Robert Treat Paine Elbridge Gerry
The Declaration ends with the delegates’ pledge, or pact. The delegates at the Second Continental Congress knew that, in declaring their independence from Great Britain, they were committing treason—a crime punishable by death. "We must all hang together," Benjamin Franklin reportedly said, as the delegates prepared to sign the Declaration, "or most assuredly we shall all hang separately."
yV.Y PLAY£fi

-At
JOHN HANCOCK 1737-1793
Born in Braintree, Massachusetts, and raised by a wealthy uncle, John Hancock became one of the richest men in the colonies. He traveled around Boston in a luxurious carriage and dressed only in the finest clothing. “He looked every inch an aristocrat,” noted one acquaintance, “from his dress and powdered wig to his smart pumps of grained leather.”
Beneath Hancock’s refined appearance, however, burned the heart of a patriot. He was only too glad to lead the Second Continental Congress. When the time came to sign the Declaration of Independence, Hancock scrawled his name in big, bold letters. “There,” he reportedly said, “I guess King George will be able to read that.”
Review Unit 57
The War for Independence
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
Key American victories reversed British advances during the American Revolutionary War.
The American Revolution is today a national, even international, symbol of the fight for freedom.
•Loyalists •Patriots •Saratoga •Valley Forge •inflation •Marquis de Lafayette
•Charles
Cornwallis
•Yorktown •Treaty of Paris •egalitarianism

hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the significant events of the Revolutionary War.
Benjamin Franklin, the famous American writer, scientist, statesman, and diplomat, represented the colonies in London throughout the growing feud with Britain. As resistance in the colonies turned to bloodshed, however, Franklin fled London in 1775 and sailed home to Philadelphia.
Ironically, the issue of loyalty versus independence that was dividing the American colonies from their mother country was also dividing Franklin's own family. Franklin's son William, the royal governor of New Jersey, was stubbornly loyal to King George and opposed the rebellious atmosphere in the colonies. In one of his many letters to British
authorities regarding the conflict in the colonies,
William stated his position and that of others who resisted revolutionary views.
A
Personal Voice william franklin “There is indeed a dread in the minds of many here that some of the leaders of the people are aiming to establish a republic. Rather than submit... we have thousands who will risk the loss of their lives in defense of the old Constitution. [They] are ready to declare themselves whenever they see a chance of its being of any avail. ” —quoted in A Little Revenge: Benjamin Franklin and His Son
Because of William's stand on colonial issues, communication between him and his father virtually ceased. The break between Benjamin Franklin and his son mirrored the chasm that now divided the colonies from Britain. The notion of fighting Britain frightened and horrified some colonists even as it inspired others. Both sides believed that they were fighting for their country and being loyal to what was best for America.
A
William Franklin
S8
Chapter 2 Revolution and the Early Republic MAIN IDEA
Forming
Generalizations
How did the thinking of Loyalists differ from that of Patriots?
HISTORY
VIDEO
Saratoga: Force Surrender
7\ hmhsocialstudies.com
Weaknesses
•	large distance separating Britain from battlefields
•	troops unfamiliar with terrain
•	weak military leaders
•	sympathy of certain British
politicans for the American cause
UNITED STATES
Strengths •	familiarity of home ground
•	leadership of George Washington and other officers
•	inspiring cause-independence
GREAT BRITAIN
Strengths •	strong, well-trained army and navy
•	strong central government with available funds
•	support of colonial Loyalists and Native Americans
65°W
The War Begins
As they took on the mighty British Empire, the colonists suffered initial losses in the Middle States, which served as the Revolutionary War's early battleground. In time, however, the colonists would battle their way back.
LOYALISTS AND PATRIOTS
As the war began, Americans found themselves on different sides of the conflict. Loyalists—those who opposed independence and remained loyal to the British king—included judges and governors, as well as people of more modest means. Many Loyalists thought that the British were going to win and wanted to avoid punishment as rebels. Still others thought that the Crown would protect their rights more effectively than the new colonial governments would. Patriots—the supporters of independence—drew their numbers from people who saw political and economic opportunity in an independent America. Many Americans remained neutral,
The conflict presented dilemmas for other groups as well. Many African Americans fought on the side of the Patriots, but others joined the Loyalists because the British promised freedom to slaves who would fight for the Crown. Most Native Americans supported the British because they viewed colonial settlers as a greater threat to their lands.
EARLY VICTORIES AND DEFEATS
As part of a plan to stop the rebellion by isolating New England, the British quickly attempted to seize New York City. The British sailed into New York harbor in the summer of 1776 with a force of about 32,000 soldiers. They included thousands of German mercenaries, or hired soldiers, known as Hessians because many of them came from the German region of Hesse.
Weaknesses
•	most soldiers untrained and undisciplined
•	shortage of food and ammunition
•	inferior navy
•	no central government to enforce wartime policies
Revolutionary War, 1775-1778
75 W
70°W
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
Location From which city did General Burgoyne march his troops to Saratoga?
Place What characteristic did many of the battle sites have in common? Why do you think this was so?
Although the Continental Army attempted to defend New York in late August, the untrained and poorly equipped colonial troops soon retreated. By late fall, the British had pushed Washington's army across the Delaware River into Pennsylvania.
Desperate for an early victory, Washington risked everything on one bold stroke set for Christmas night, 1776. In the face of a fierce storm, he led 2,400 men in small rowboats across the ice-choked Delaware River. They then marched to their objective—Trenton, New Jersey—and defeated a garrison of Hessians in a surprise attack. The British soon regrouped, however, and in September of 1777, they captured the American capital at Philadelphia.
SARATOGA AND VALLEY FORGE
In the meantime, one British general was marching straight into the jaws of disaster. In a complex scheme, General John Burgoyne planned to lead an army down a route of lakes from Canada to Albany, where he would meet British troops as they arrived from New York City. The two regiments would then join forces to isolate New England from the rest of the colonies. As Burgoyne traveled through forested wilderness, militiamen and soldiers from the Continental Army gathered from all over New York and New England. While he was fighting off the colonial troops, Burgoyne didn't realize that his fellow British officers were preoccupied with holding Philadelphia and weren't coming to meet him. American troops finally surrounded Burgoyne at Saratoga, where he surrendered on October 17, 1777.
The surrender at Saratoga turned out to be one of the most important events of the war. Although the French had secretly aided the Patriots since early 1776, the Saratoga victory bolstered France's belief that the Americans could win the war. As a result, the French signed an alliance with the Americans in February 1778 and openly joined them in their fight.
While this hopeful turn of events took place in Paris, Washington and his Continental Army—desperately low on food and supplies—fought to stay alive at winter camp in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania. More than 2,000 soldiers died, yet the survivors didn't desert. Their endurance and suffering filled Washington's letters to the Congress and his friends.
MAIN IDEA
Developing
Historical
Perspective
Why were these early victories so important to the Continental Army?
BGEORGE WASHINGTON 1732-1799
During the Revolutionary War, Commander in Chief George Washington became a national hero. An imposing man, Washington stood six feet two inches tall. He was broad-shouldered, calm, and dignified, and he was an expert horseman. But it was Washington’s character that won hearts and, ultimately, the war.
Washington persistently roused dispirited men into a fighting force. At Princeton, he galloped on his white horse into the line of fire, shouting and encouraging his men. At Valley Forge, he bore the same cold and privation as every suffering soldier. Time and again, Washington’s tactics saved his smaller, weaker force to fight another day. By the end of the war, the entire nation idolized General Washington, and adoring soldiers crowded near him just to touch his boots when he rode by.
A
Personal Voice george Washington “It may be said that no history . . . can furnish an Instance of an Army’s suffering uncommon hardships as ours have done. ... To see the men without clothes to cover their nakedness, without blankets to lie upon, without shoes,. . . and submitting without a murmur, is a proof of patience and obedience which in my opinion can scarcely be paralleled/’ —quoted in Ordeal at Valley Forge
Life During the Revolution
One huge problem that the Continental Congress faced was paying the troops. When the Congress ran out of hard currency-silver and gold—it printed paper money called Continentals (like the Revolutionary soldiers). As Congress printed more and more money, its value plunged, causing rising prices, or inflation. The Congress also struggled against great odds to equip the beleaguered army.
60 Chapter 2 Revolution and the Early Republic
Molly Pitcher was the heroine of the Battle of Monmouth in New Jersey, which was fought in 1778. Afterward, General Washington appointed her as a noncommissioned officer to honor her brave deeds.
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
$ What important contributions did women make in the Revolutionary War?
In 1781, the Congress appointed a rich Philadelphia merchant named Robert Morris as superintendent of finance. His associate was Haym Salomon, a Jewish political refugee from Poland. Morris and Salomon begged and borrowed on their personal credit to raise money to provide salaries for the Continental Army. They raised funds from Philadelphia's Quakers and Jews. On September 8, 1781, a Continental major wrote in his diary, "This day will be famous in the Annals of History for being the first on which the Troops of the United States received one Month's Pay in Specie [coin]."
The demands of war also affected civilians. When men
marched off to fight, many wives stepped into their husbands' shoes, managing farms and businesses as well as households and families. Hundreds of women also followed their husbands to the battlefield, where they washed and cooked for the troops—while some, including Molly Pitcher, even risked their lives in combat. &
The war opened some doors for African Americans. Thousands of slaves escaped to freedom in the chaos of war. About 5,000 African Americans served in the Continental Army, where their courage, loyalty, and talent impressed white Americans. Native Americans, however, remained on the fringes of the Revolution, preferring to remain independent and true to their own cultures.
Winning the War
In February 1778, in the midst of the frozen winter at Valley Forge, American troops began an amazing transformation. Friedrich von Steuben, a Prussian captain and talented drill-master, helped to train the Continental Army. Other foreign military leaders, such as the Marquis de Lafayette (mar-ke' da laf'e-et'), also arrived to offer their help. Lafayette lobbied France for French reinforcements in 1779, and led a command in Virginia in the last years of the war. With the help of such European military leaders, the raw Continental Army became an effective fighting force.
HISTORICAL
SPOTLIGHT
JOHN PAUL JONES
As the Revolutionary War raged on land, Britain and the colonies also engaged each other at sea. The newly formed Continental navy was no match for the mighty British fleet. It was only after France and Spain joined the colonists’ cause that Britain lost its maritime supremacy.
Nonetheless, the colonists scored several morale-boosting victories over the British navy, due in large part to the heroics of American naval commander John Paul Jones. The Scottish-born Jones captured a number of British vessels, including the Serapis in 1779. It was during his epic battle against this ship that Jones rejected the British demand that he surrender by uttering the famous line, “I have not yet begun to fight.”
I
|S
Review Unit 61

GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Place Where were most of the later Revolutionary War battles fought?
2.	Movement Why might General Cornwallis’s choice of Yorktown as a base have left him at a military disadvantage?
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
	American/French campaign
	British campaign
*	American/French victory
*	British victory
□	Thirteen Colonies
n	Other British territory
0	100	200 miles
0	100	200 kilometers
35°N
THE BRITISH MOVE SOUTH
After their devastating defeat at Saratoga, the British began to shift their operations to the South. At the end of 1778, a British expedition easily took Savannah, Georgia. In their greatest victory of the war, the British under Generals Henry Clinton and Charles Cornwallis captured Charles Town, South Carolina, in May 1780. Clinton then left for New York, while Cornwallis continued to conquer land throughout the South. In early 1781, despite several defeats, the colonists continued to battle Cornwallis—hindering his efforts to take the Carolinas. The British general then chose to move the fight to Virginia. He led his army of 7,500 onto the peninsula between the James and York rivers and camped at Yorktown. Cornwallis planned to fortify Yorktown, take Virginia, and then move north to join Clinton's forces.
THE BRITISH SURRENDER AT YORKTOWN
Shortly after learning of Corwallis's actions, the armies of Lafayette and Washington moved south toward Yorktown. Meanwhile, a French naval force defeated a British fleet and then blocked the entrance to the Chesapeake Bay, thereby obstructing British sea routes to the bay. By late September, about 17,000 French and American troops surrounded the British on the Yorktown peninsula and began bombarding them day and night. Less than a month later, on October 19, 1781, Cornwallis finally surrendered. The Americans had shocked the world and defeated the British. Peace talks began in Paris in 1782. The American negotiating team included John Adams, John Jay of New York, and Benjamin Franklin. In September 1783, the delegates signed the Treaty of Paris, which confirmed U.S. independence and set the boundaries of the new nation. The United States now stretched from the Atlantic Ocean to the Mississippi River and from Canada to the Florida border.
Vocabulary peninsula: a
piece of land that projects into a body of water
MAIN IDEA
Evaluating
What was the most important challenge that faced the new United States?
62 Chapter 2 Revolution and the Early Republic
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
How had the American Revolution affected the lives of Native Americans?
The War Becomes a Symbol of Liberty
Revolutionary ideals set a new course for American society. During the war, social distinctions had begun to blur as the wealthy wore homespun clothing and as military leaders showed respect for all of their soldiers. Changes like these stimulated the rise of egalitarianism (i-gan-tar'e-e-niz'om)—a belief in the equality of all people. This belief fostered a new attitude: the idea that ability, effort, and virtue, not wealth or family background, defined one's worth.
The egalitarianism of the 1780s, however, applied only to white males. It did not bring any new political rights to women. A few states made it possible for women to divorce, but common law still dictated that a married woman's property belonged to her husband.
Moreover, most African Americans were still enslaved, and even those who were free usually faced discrimination and poverty. However by 1804, many New England and Middle states had taken steps to outlaw slavery.
For Native Americans, the Revolution brought uncertainty. During both the French and Indian War and the Revolution, many Native American communities had been either destroyed or displaced, and the Native American population living east of the Mississippi had declined by about 50 percent. Postwar developments further threatened Native American interests, as settlers began taking triballands left unprotected by the Treaty of Paris.
In the closing days of the Revolution, the Continental Congress had chosen a quotation from the works of the Roman poet Virgil as a motto for the reverse side of the Great Seal of the United States. The motto, Novus Ordo Seclorum, means "a new order of the ages." Establishing a government and resolving internal problems in that new order would be atremendous challenge for citizens of the newborn United States.
▲
English potter Josiah Wedgwood designed this anti-slavery cameo and sent copies of it to Benjamin Franklin.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
• Loyalists	’Valley Forge	’Charles Cornwallis	’Treaty of Paris
•Patriots	’Inflation	’Yorktown	’egalitarianism
•Saratoga	’Marquis de Lafayette
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
On a chart like the one below, list five significant events of the Revolutionary War in the column on the left. Note the significance of each event towards the American cause in the column on the right.
Event	Significance
	
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	EVALUATING
Do you think the colonists could have won their independence without aid from foreigners? Explain.
Think About:
•	the military needs of the Americans and the strengths of the French
•	the colonists’ military efforts
in the South
•	the Americans’ belief in their fight for independence
ANALYZING EFFECTS
What were the effects of the Revolutionary War on the American colonists? Think About:
•	political effects
•	economic effects
•	social effects
Review Unit 63
TRACING THEMES
Women and Political Power
In their families and in the workplace, in speeches and in print, countless American women have worked for justice for all citizens. Throughout the history of the United States, women have played whatever roles they felt were necessary to better this country. They also fought to expand their own political power, a power that throughout much of American history has been denied them.
PROTEST AGAINST BRITAIN
In the tense years leading up to the Revolution, American women found ways to participate in the protests against the British. Homemakers boycotted tea and British-made clothing. In the painting at right, Sarah Morris Mifflin, shown with her husband Thomas, spins her own thread rather than use British thread. Some businesswomen, such as printer Mary Goddard, who produced the official copies of the Declaration of Independence, took more active roles.
A WOMAN’S DECLARATION
SENECA FALLS

ELIZABETH CAD' '
the cruel and unju; the office of her f< s	child, to find a way
\	to the abolitionist 1
ly into the curren foundation for the for woman's right inspiring leader. 1
executed the first Falls, New York, J,
As America grew, women became acutely aware of their unequal status in society, particularly their lack of suffrage, or the right to vote.
In 1848, two women—Elizabeth Cady Stanton, shown above, and Lucretia Mott—launched the first woman suffrage movement in the United States at the Seneca Falls Convention in Seneca Falls, New York. During the convention, Stanton introduced her Declaration of Sentiments, in which she demanded greater rights for women, including the right to vote.
64 Chapter 2 Revolution and the Early Republic
THE EQUAL RIGHTS AMENDMENT MOVEMENT
During the mid-1900s, as more women entered the workforce, many women recognized their continuing unequal status, including the lack of equal pay for equal work. By passing an Equal Rights Amendment, some women hoped to obtain the same social and economic rights as men.
Although millions supported the amendment, many men and women feared the measure would prompt unwanted change. The ERA ultimately failed to be ratified for the Constitution.

WOMEN IN CONGRESS
In spite of the failure of the ERA, many women have achieved strong positions for themselves—politically as well as socially and economically.
In the 111th Congress, 73 women served in the House of Representatives and 17 served in the Senate. Shown above is Nancy Pelosi, the first woman to serve as Speaker of the House.
THE RIGHT TO VOTE
More than a half-century after organizing for the right to vote, women finally won their struggle. In 1920, the United States adopted the Nineteenth Amendment, which granted women the right to vote.
Pictured above is one of the many suffrage demonstrations of the early 1900s that helped garner public support for the amendment.
Review Unit 65
TEKS 1AZ21B,26E,26F
Confederation and the Constitution
MAIN IDEA
j | WHY IT MATTERS NOW j ' Terms & Names American leaders created the Constitution as a blueprint of government for the United States.
More than 200 years after its creation, the Constitution remains the nation’s guiding document for a working government.
•	republic	• federalism
•	Articles of	• checks and
Confederation	balances
•	Northwest	• ratification
Ordinance of 1787	• Federalists
•	Shays’s Rebellion	• Antifederalists
•James Madison • Bill of Rights
^3
hmhsodalstudies.com
■TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes about issues debated at the Constitutional Convention.
^^^^^^rOneAmerican's
John Dickinson understood, perhaps better than other delegates to the Continental Congress, the value of compromise. In 1776 Dickinson hoped for reconciliation with Britain and refused to sign the Declaration of Independence. Yet, eight days after the Declaration was adopted, Dickinson presented Congress with the first draft of a plan for setting up a workable government for the new states.
A
Personal Voice john dickinson 66 Two rules I have laid down for myself throughout this contest... first, on all occasions where I am called upon, as a trustee for my countrymen, to deliberate on questions Important to their happiness, disdaining all personal advantages to be derived from a suppression of my real sentiments . . . openly to avow [declare] them; and, secondly, . . . whenever the public resolutions are taken, to regard them though opposite to my opinion, as sacred . . . and to join in supporting them as earnestly as if my voice had been given for them.”
—quoted in The Life and Times of John Dickinson, 1732-1808
Dickinson’s two rules became guiding principles for the	John Dickinson
leaders who faced the formidable task of forming a new nation.
Experimenting with Confederation
As citizens of a new and independent nation, Americans had to create their own political system. Fighting the Revolutionary War gave the states a common goal, but they remained reluctant to unite under a strong central government.
66 Chapter 2 Revolution and the Early Republic
MAIN IDEA
Contrasting
What was the difference between the Land Ordinance of 1785 and the Northwest Ordinance of 1787?
f MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
Why do you think news of Shays’s Rebellion made states eager to participate in the Philadelphia convention?
After the Revolution, many Americans favored a republic—a government in which citizens rule through their elected representatives. However, many also feared that a democracy—government directly by the people—placed power in the hands of the uneducated masses. These fears and concerns deeply affected the planning of the new government.
THE ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION
The Second Continental Congress set up a new plan of government in a set of laws called the Articles of Confederation. The plan established a form of government called a confederation, or alliance, among the thirteen states. The Articles set up a Congress in which each state would have one vote regardless of population. Powers were divided between the states and the national government. The national government had the power to declare war, make peace, and sign treaties. It could borrow money, set standards for coins and for weights and measures, and establish a postal service. After approval by all thirteen states, the Articles of Confederation went into effect in March 1781.
One of the first issues the Confederation faced had to do with the the Northwest Territory, lands west of the Appalachians, where many people settled after the Revolutionary War. To help govern these lands, Congress passed the Land Ordinance of 1785, which established a plan for surveying the land. (See Geography Spotlight on page 72.) In the Northwest Ordinance of 1787, Congress provided a procedure for dividing the land into no fewer than three and no more than five states. The ordinance also set requirements for the admission of new states, which, however, overlooked Native American land claims, j
Weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation
•	Congress could not enact and collect taxes.
•	Each state had only one vote in Congress, regardless of population.
•	Nine out of thirteen states needed to agree to pass important laws.
•	Articles could be amended only if all states approved.
•	There was no executive branch to enforce laws of Congress.
•	There was no national court system to settle legal disputes.
•	There were thirteen separate states that lacked national unity.
The Land Ordinance of 1785 and the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 became the Confederation's most significant achievements. Overshadowing such successes, however, were the Confederation's many problems. The most serious problem was that each state functioned independently by pursuing its own interests rather than considering those of the nation as a whole. The government had no means of raising money or enforcing its laws. Moreover, there was no national court system to settle legal disputes. The Articles of Confederation created a weak central government and little unity among the states.
SHAYS’S REBELLION
The need for a stronger central government became obvious in 1786 when many farmers in western Massachusetts rose up in protest over increased state taxes. The farmers' discontent boiled over into mob action in January of 1787 when Daniel Shays, a fellow farmer, led an army of 1,200 farmers toward the arsenal at Springfield, Massachusetts. State officials hurriedly called out the militia to head off the army of farmers, killing four of the rebels and scattering the rest. Shays's Rebellion, as the farmers' protest came to be called, caused panic and dismay throughout the nation. It was clearly time to talk about a stronger national government. Because the states had placed such severe limits on the government to prevent abuse of power, the government was unable to solve many of the nation's problems. News of the rebellion spread throughout the states. The revolt persuaded twelve states to send delegates to a convention called by Congress in Philadelphia in May of 1787.
kl<
HISTORY
VIDEO
Shays's Rebellion
^DSBBBQ
Review Unit 67
i<tV PLAYER
JAMES MADISON 1751-1836
The oldest of 12 children, James Madison grew up in Virginia. He was a sickly child who suffered all his life from physical ailments. Because of a weak speaking voice, he decided not to become a minister and thus entered politics.
Madison’s Virginia Plan resulted from extensive research that he had done on political systems before the convention. He asked Edmund Randolph, a fellow delegate from Virginia, to present the plan because his own voice was too weak to be heard throughout the assembly.
Besides providing brilliant political leadership, Madison kept a record of the debates that took place at the convention. Because of his plan and his leadership, Madison is known as the Father of the Constitution.
Creating a New Government
Most of the delegates at the Constitutional Convention recognized the need to strengthen the central government. Within the first five days of the meeting, they gave up the idea of fixing the Articles of Confederation and decided to form an entirely new government that would replace the one created by the Articles.
CONFLICT AND COMPROMISE
One major issue that the delegates faced was giving fair representation to both large and small states. James Madison proposed the Virginia Plan, which called for a bicameral, or two-house, legislature, with membership based on each state's population. Delegates from the small states vigorously objected to the Virginia Plan because it gave more power to states with large populations. Small states supported William Paterson's New Jersey Plan, which proposed a single-house congress in which each state had an equal vote. The debate became deadlocked and dragged on through the hot and humid summer days. Eventually, Roger Sherman suggested the Great Compromise, which offered a two-house Congress to satisfy both small and big states. Each state would have equal representation in the Senate, or upper house. The size of the population of each state would determine its representation in the House of Representatives, or lower house. Voters of each state would choose members of the House. The state legislatures would choose members of the Senate.
The Great Compromise settled one major issue but led to conflict over another. Southern delegates, whose states had large numbers of slaves, wanted slaves included in the population count that determined the number of representatives in the House. Northern delegates, whose states had few slaves, disagreed. Not counting the slaves would give the Northern states more representatives than the Southern states in the House of Representatives. The delegates eventually agreed to the Three-Fifths Compromise, which called for three-fifths of a state's slaves to be counted as part of the population.
DIVISION OF POWERS
After the delegates reached agreement on the difficult questions of slavery and representation, they dealt with other issues somewhat more easily. They divided power between the states and the national government, and they separated the national government's power into three branches. Thus, they created an entirely new government. The new system of government that the delegates were building was a form of federalism, in which power is divided between a national government and several state governments. The powers granted to the national government by the Constitution are known as delegated powers, or enumerated powers. These include such powers as the control of foreign affairs and regulation of trade between the states. Powers not specifically granted to the national government but kept by the states are called reserved powers. These include powers such as providing for and supervising education. Some powers, such as the right to tax and establish courts, were shared by both the national and the state governments.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Issues
jgj In what ways did the Great Compromise resolve certain problems even as it created new ones?
68 Chapter 2 Revolution and the Early Republic
Key Conflicts in the Constitutional Convention
STRONG CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
vs. STRONG STATES •	Authority derives from the people.
•	The central government should be
stronger than the states.
•	Authority derives from the states.
•	The states should remain stronger
than the centra, government.
LARGE STATES
vs. SMALL STATES • Congress should be composed of two houses.
• Delegates should be assigned according to population.
A
Congress of one house should be preserved.
• Each state should have one vote.
NORTH vs. SOUTH
• Slaves should not be counted when deciding the number of delegates.
• Slaves should be counted when levying taxes.
• Slaves should be counted when determining congressional representation.
• Slaves should not be counted when levying taxes.
MAIN IDEA
MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
Why did the delegates fear that one branch of the government would gain too much power?
Making
Inferences
Why did the delegates fear that one branch of the government would gain too much power?
SEPARATION OF POWERS
The delegates also limited the authority of the national government. First, they created three branches of government—a legislative branch to make laws, an executive branch to carry out laws, and a judicial branch to interpret laws. Then the delegates established a system of checks and balances to prevent any one branch from dominating the other two. The procedure the delegates established for electing the president reflected their fear of placing too much power in the hands of the people. Instead of choosing the president directly, each state would choose a number of electors equal to the number of senators and representatives that the state had in Congress. This group of electors chosen by the states, known as the electoral college, would then cast ballots for the presidential candidates. Jg|
CHANGING THE CONSTITUTION
The delegates also provided a means of changing the Constitution through the amendment process. After four months of debate and compromise, the delegates succeeded in creating a Constitution that was an enduring document. The Constitution has been amended for a variety of reasons throughout history. Amendments help government change along with the values of the nation's people. For example, several amendments have expanded voting rights for various groups as society's expectations of equality have evolved (see "Tracing Themes" on pages 104-105). The Twenty-first Amendment was passed to cancel, or repeal, the Eighteenth Amendment after social values shifted. Other amendments have altered the structure of government, by establishing electoral procedures or setting limits on certain branches.
Ratifying the Constitution
George Washington adjourned the Constitutional Convention on September 17, 1787. The Convention's work was over, but the new government could not become a reality until at least nine states ratified, or approved, the Constitution. Thus, the battle over ratification began.
FEDERALISTS AND ANTIFEDERALISTS
Supporters of the Constitution called themselves Federalists, because they favored the new Constitution's balance of power between the states and the national government. Their opponents became known as Antifederalists because they opposed having such a strong central government and thus were against the Constitution. Review Unit 69
Both sides waged a war of words in the public debate over ratification. The Federalist, a series of 85 essays defending the Constitution, appeared in New York newspapers. These were essays written by three influential supporters of ratification: Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay.
All three writers felt that there were defects in the new Constitution, but they also felt that its stronger central government was superior to the weak Congress provided by the Articles of Confederation. Using the pen name "Publius," the authors addressed those who argued that ratification should be delayed until a more perfect document could be written. In the following excerpt from one of the essays (now known to be written by Madison), the author asks his readers to compare the admittedly flawed Constitution with its predecessor, the Articles.
A
Personal Voice james madison “ It Is a matter both of wonder and regret, that those who raise so many objections against the new Constitution should never call to mind the defects of that which is to be exchanged for it [The Articles]. It is not necessary that the former should be perfect; it is sufficient that the latter is more imperfect. ”
—The Federalist, Number 38, 1788
James Madison
The Antifederalists' main opposition to the new Constitution was that it contained no guarantee that the government would protect the rights of the people or of the states. Antifederalists included such notable figures as Patrick Henry, George Mason, and Richard Henry Lee. Letters from the Federal Farmer, most likely written by Lee, was the most widely read Antifederalist publication. Lee listed the rights that Antifederalists believed should be protected, such as freedom of the press and of religion, guarantees against unreasonable searches of people and their homes, and the right to a trial by jury.
The Antifederalists' demand for a bill of rights—a formal summary of citizens' rights and freedoms—stemmed from their fear of a strong central government. All state constitutions guaranteed individual rights, and seven of them included a bill of rights. The states believed they would serve as protectors of the people. Yet in the end, the Federalists yielded to people's overwhelming desire and promised to add a bill of rights if the states would ratify the Constitution. In June 1788, New Hampshire became the ninth state to approve the Constitution, making it the law of the land. JE/
ADOPTION OF A BILL OF RIGHTS
By December 1791, the states also had ratified ten amendments to the Constitution, which became known as the Bill of Rights. The first eight amendments spell out the personal liberties the states had requested. The First Amendment guarantees citizens' rights to freedom of religion, speech, the press, and political activity. According to the Second and Third Amendments, the government cannot deny citizens the right to bear arms as members of a militia of citizen-soldiers, nor can the government house troops in private homes in peacetime. The Fourth Amendment prevents the search of citizens' homes without proper warrants. The Fifth through Eighth Amendments guarantee fair treatment for individuals accused of crimes. The Ninth and Tenth Amendments impose general limits on the powers of the federal government. j MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
Why did the Antifederalists insist that the Constitution must have a bill of rights?
70 Chapter 2 Revolution and the Early Republic
The protection of rights and freedoms did not apply to all Americans at the time the Bill of Rights was adopted. Native Americans and slaves were excluded. Women were not mentioned in the Constitution. The growing number of free blacks did not receive adequate protection from the Constitution. Although many states permitted free blacks to vote, the Bill of Rights offered them no protection against whites' discrimination and hostility.
i
MAIN IDEA
Drawing
Conclusions
$ How did the adoption of the Bill of Rights show the flexibility of the Constitution?
Continuing Relevance of the Constitution
The United States Constitution is the oldest written national constitution still in use. It is a "living" document, capable of meeting the changing needs of Americans. One reason for this capability lies in Article I, Section 8, which gives Congress the power "To make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution" the powers that the Constitution enumerates. This clause is referred to as the "elastic clause" because it stretches the power of the government. The framers of the Constitution included these implied powers in order to allow the authority of the government to expand to meet unforeseen circumstances.
The Constitution also can be formally changed when necessary through amendments. The Constitution provides ways for amendments to be proposed and to be ratified. Only 27 amendments have been added to the Constitution. These amendments have helped the government meet the challenges of a changing world, while still preserving the rights of the American people.
Since its ratification, the U.S. Constitution has served as a model for other democracies. It has been one of our nation's most important exports, influencing the constitutions of dozens of other nations. It is a flexible document that continues to protect Americans and inspire people around the world.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance, •republic	• James Madison	•Federalists
•Articles of Confederation	•federalism	•Antifederalists
•Northwest Ordinance of	1787	• checks and balances	•Bill of Rights
•Shays’s Rebellion	•ratification
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Re-create the web below on your paper, and fill it in with specific issues that were debated at the Constitutional Convention.
Choose one issue and explain how the delegates resolved that issue.
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	EVALUATING
Do you think the Federalists or the Antifederalists had the more valid arguments? Support your opinion with examples from the text. Think About:
•	Americans’ experience with the Articles of Confederation
•	Americans’ experience with Great Britain
FORMING OPINIONS
Several states ratified the Constitution only after being assured that a bill of rights would be added to it. In your opinion, what is the most important value of the Bill of Rights? Why?
ANALYZING ISSUES
What was the intent of the Constitution? The Bill of Rights? How effective were these documents in fulfilling their intended purposes? Why are these documents so important?
Review Unit 71
CITIZENSHIP SPOTLIGHT
Symbols of Patriotism
Patriotism, or a love of and identification with one's country and its citizens, is an important characteristic. Feelings of patriotism make citizens willing to act in a way that benefits their nation. Since the formation of the United States following the Revolutionary War, Americans have found different symbols to represent their sense of patriotism. Some of these symbols have been long lasting and others have changed over time, but all have given Americans a sort of common ground. They have also served as a way to demonstrate that patriotism to others.
STARS AND STRIPES
Perhaps the most recognizable symbol of the United States is the American flag. In 1777, the Continental Congress passed an act that established an official flag for the new nation. The design of the flag has changed as new states have joined the nation, and today the flag consists of 13 red and white stripes representing the original colonies and 50 stars on a field of blue representing the states of the Union. Americans demonstrate their patriotism by honoring the flag as a symbol of freedom.
I
NEAREST RECRUITING STATION
FOR U.S.ARMY
UNCLE SAM
As the story goes, Uncle Sam made his first appearance during the War of 1812. Meatpacker Samuel Wilson supplied beef to the U.S. army during the war. He stamped his barrels of beef with “U.S.” for United States, but soldiers knew the food was supplied by “Uncle Sam.” A newspaper reported the story, and Uncle Sam became a widely accepted nickname for the United States. The most famous visual representation of Uncle Sam is probably from the World War I recruiting poster at left, which was created by artist James Montgomery Flagg. The image was repurposed for World War II, and has become well known as a symbol of the United States.
72 Chapter 2 Revolution and the Early Republic
THE MEDAL OF HONOR
One way to demonstrate patriotism is to serve in the Armed Services. The Armed Services award medals to soldiers to acknowledge the sacrifices they have made in defense of their country. The most prestigious of these awards is the Medal of Honor, shown below, which is the highest award for valor in action against an enemy force that an individual serving in the U.S. Armed Forces can earn. It is sometimes called the Congressional Medal of Honor because it is presented by the president on behalf of Congress. Medal of Honor recipients represent Americans of all races and genders. African American Vernon J. Baker was awarded the medal for his brave service in World War II, and the heroic actions of Hispanic American Roy Benavidez in Vietnam led to his medal. There has been only one female recipient, Mary Edwards Walker, who served as a surgeon during the Civil War. These brave men and women inspire others with their acts of heroism, and the Medal of Honor is an important way to call attention to their patriotism and gallantry.
NATIONAL MOTTOES
Mottoes are used to briefly convey principles or ideals. U.S. currency includes two mottoes that have historical significance to the nation. The motto E Pluribus Unum, meaning “out of many, one,” has appeared on the Great Seal of the United States since the seal was originally adopted by the Continental Congress in 1782. It represents the idea that many individual Americans make up one nation, which continues to be an important ideal. In 1956, President Eisenhower signed legislation adopting “In God We Trust” as the nation’s official motto. The phrase has appeared on U.S. coins since 1795. The motto’s adoption in 1956 reflects the tension of the Cold War and the desire to distinguish the United States from the Soviet Union and its policy of atheism. Today, though some Americans are uncomfortable with the religious nature of the motto, most support it. A 2003 Gallup Poll found that 90 percent of Americans approve of including the words “In God We Trust” on U.S. coins.
Review Unit 73
TEKS1C
Launching the New Nation
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
With George Washington as its first president, the United States began creating a working government for its new nation.
The country’s early leaders established precedents for organizing government that the United States still follows.
•Judiciary Act	•Democratic-
of 1789	Republican
• Alexander	• protective tariff
Hamilton	*XYZ Affair
•cabinet	•Alien and
•two-party system Sedition Acts
•nullification
hmhsocialstudies.com!
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the country’s first political parties.
American's
George Washington
As the hero of the Revolution, George Washington was the unanimous choice in the nation's first presidential election.
When the news reached him on April 14, 1789, Washington accepted the call to duty—despite his uncertainty about how to lead the new country. Two days later he set out for New York City to take the oath of office.
A
Personal Voice george Washington 66 About ten o’clock I bade adieu [farewell] to Mount Vernon, to private life, and to domestic felicity [happiness]; and with a mind oppressed with more anxious and painful sensations than I have words to express, set out for New York . . . with the best dispositions [intentions] to render service to my country in obedience to its call, but with less hope of answering its expectations.99 —The Diaries of George Washington
When Washington took office as the first president of the United States under the Constitution, he and Congress faced a
daunting task to create an entirely new government. The momentous decisions that these early leaders made have resounded through American history.
Washington Heads the New Government
Although the Constitution provided a strong foundation, it was not a detailed blueprint for governing. To create a working government, Washington and Congress had to make many practical decisions. Perhaps James Madison put it best: "We are in a wilderness without a single footstep to guide us."
JUDICIARY ACT OF 1789
One of the first tasks Washington and Congress faced was the creation of a judicial system. The Judiciary Act of 1789 provided for a Supreme Court and federal circuit and district courts. The Judiciary Act allowed state court decisions to be appealed to a federal court when constitutional issues 74
Chapter 2 Revolution and the Early Republic
were raised. It also guaranteed that federal laws would remain "the supreme law of the land."
WASHINGTON SHAPES THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH
The nation's leaders also faced the task of building an executive branch. To help the president govern, Congress created three executive departments: the Department of State, to deal with foreign affairs; the Department of War, to handle military matters; and the Department of the Treasury, to manage finances. To head these departments, Washington chose capable leaders—Thomas Jefferson as secretary of state, Alexander Hamilton as secretary of the treasury, Henry Knox as secretary of war. These department heads soon became the president's chief advisers, or cabinet.
MAIN IDEA
Contrasting
How did Jefferson’s and Hamilton’s views of government differ?
HAMILTON AND JEFFERSON: TWO CONFLICTING VISIONS
Hamilton and Jefferson held very different political ideas. Hamilton believed in a strong central government led by a prosperous, educated elite of upper-class citizens. Jefferson distrusted a strong central gov- ernment and the rich. He favored strong state and local governments rooted in popular participation. Hamilton believed that commerce and industry were the keys to a strong nation; Jefferson favored a society of farmer-citizens.
HAMILTON’S ECONOMIC PLAN
As secretary of the treasury, Hamilton's job was to put the nation's economy on a firm footing. To do this, he called on the nation to pay off its debts, a large amount of which was incurred during the Revolution. He also proposed the establishment of a national bank that would be funded by both the federal government and wealthy private investors. This bank would issue paper money and handle taxes and other government funds.
Opponents of a national bank, such as James Madison, argued that since the Constitution made no provision for such an institution, Congress had no right to authorize it. This argument began the debate between those, like Hamilton, who favored a loose interpretation of the Constitution and those, like Madison, who favored a strict interpretation—a vital debate that has continued throughout U.S. history.
KEY PLAYERS
THOMAS JEFFERSON 1743-1826
The writer of the Declaration of Independence, Thomas Jefferson began his political career at age 26, when he was elected to Virginia’s colonial legislature. In 1779 he was elected governor of Virginia, and in 1785 he was appointed minister to France. He served as secretary of state from 1790 to 1793.
A
Southern planter, Jefferson was also an accomplished scholar, the architect of Monticello (his Virginia house), an inventor (of, among other things, a machine that made copies of letters), and the founder of the University of Virginia in 1819. Despite his elite background and his ownership of slaves, he was a strong ally of the small farmer and average citizen. ALEXANDER HAMILTON 1755-1804
Born into poverty in the British West Indies, Alexander Hamilton was orphaned at age 13 and went to work as a shipping clerk. He later made his way to New York, where he attended King’s College (now Columbia University). He joined the army during the Revolution and became an aide to General Washington.
Intensely ambitious, Hamilton quickly moved up in society. Although in his humble origins Hamilton was the opposite of Jefferson, he had little faith in the common citizen and sided with the interests of upper-class Americans. Hamilton said of Jefferson's beloved common people: “Your people, sir, your people is a great beast!”
Review Unit 75
Contrasting Views of the Federal Government
HAMILTON
•	Concentrating power in federal government
•	Fear of mob rule
•	Republic led by a well-educated elite
•	Loose interpretation of the Constitution
•	National bank constitutional (loose interpretation)
•	Economy based on shipping and manufacturing
•	Payment of national and state debts (favoring creditors)
•	Supporters: merchants, manufacturers, landowners, investors, lawyers, clergy
JEFFERSON
•	Sharing power with state and local governments; limited national government
•	Fear of absolute power or ruler
•	Democracy of virtuous farmers and tradespeople
•	Strict interpretation of the Constitution
•	National bank unconstitutional (strict interpretation)
•	Economy based on farming
•	Payment of only the national debt (favoring debtors)
•	Supporters: the “plain people"
(farmers, tradespeople)
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Charts 1.	Whose view of the federal government was a wealthy person more likely to favor? Why?
2.	How do you think Jefferson differed from Hamilton in his view of people and human nature?
THE FIRST POLITICAL PARTIES
The differences within Washington's cabinet intensified and soon helped to give rise to a two-party system. Those who shared Hamilton's vision of a strong central government (mostly Northerners) called themselves Federalists. Those who supported Jefferson's vision of strong state governments (mostly Southerners) called themselves Democratic-Republicans. French
revolutionaries storm the Bastille, an infamous prison in Paris, France, on July 14,1789. ▼
THE WHISKEY REBELLION
During Washington's second term, an incident occurred that reflected the tension between federal and regional interests. Previously, Congress had passed a protective tariff, an import tax on goods produced abroad meant to encourage American production. To generate even more revenue, Secretary Hamilton pushed through an excise tax—a tax on a product's manufacture, sale, or distribution—to be levied on the manufacture of whiskey. In 1794, furious whiskey producers in western Pennsylvania refused to pay the tax and attacked the tax collectors. The federal government responded by sending some 13,000 militiamen to end the conflict. The Whiskey Rebellion, as it came to be known, marked the first use of armed force to assert federal authority.
Background
In addition to promoting American goods, the Tariff of 1789 as well as tariffs that followed, provided the majority of the federal government’s revenue until the 20th century.
Challenges at Home and Abroad
At the same time, the new government faced critical problems and challenges overseas as well as at home along the western frontier.
ADDRESSING FOREIGN AFFAIRS
In 1789 a stunning revolution in France ended the French monarchy and brought hope for a government based on the will of the people. By 1793, France was engaged in war with Great Britain as well as with other European countries.
In the United States, reaction to the conflict tended to split along party lines. Democratic-Republicans supported France.
MAIN IDEA
Developing
Historical
Perspective
Why did the United States want access to the Mississippi River?
Federalists wanted to back the British. President Washington took a middle position. He issued a declaration of neutrality, a statement that the United States would support neither side in the conflict. Washington remained wary of foreign involvement throughout his tenure in office. In his farewell address in 1796, he warned the nation to "steer clear of permanent Alliances with any portion of the foreign World."
In another significant foreign matter, Thomas Pinckney negotiated a treaty with Spain in 1795. According to Pinckney's Treaty, Spain agreed to give up all claims to land east of the Mississippi (except Florida) and recognized the 31st parallel as the northern boundary of Florida. Spain also agreed to open the Mississippi River to American traffic and allow traders to use the port of New Orleans. The treaty was important because it helped pave the way for U.S. expansion west of the Appalachians.
CHALLENGES IN THE NORTHWEST
Meanwhile, Americans faced trouble along their western border, where the British still maintained forts and Native Americans continued to resist white settlers. In 1794, after numerous skirmishes, the U.S. military led by General Anthony Wayne defeated a confederacy of Native Americans at the Battle of Fallen Timbers, near present-day Toledo, Ohio. The victory helped to establish the settlers' supremacy in the region. JAY’S TREATY
At the time of the Battle of Fallen Timbers, John Jay, the chief justice of the Supreme Court, was in London to negotiate a treaty with Great Britain. One of the disputed issues was which nation would control territories west of the Appalachian Mountains. When news of Wayne's victory at Fallen Timbers arrived, the British agreed to evacuate their posts in the Northwest Territory because they did not wish to fight both the United States and the French, with whom they were in conflict, at the same time. Although Jay's Treaty, signed on November 19, 1794, was a diplomatic victory, the treaty provoked outrage at home. For one thing, it allowed the British to continue their fur trade on the American side of the U.S.-Canadian border. This angered western settlers. Also, the treaty did not resolve a dispute over neutral American trade in the Caribbean. Americans believed that their ships had the right to free passage there. The British, however, had seized
a number of these ships, confiscating their crews and cargo.
Despite serious opposition, the treaty managed to pass the Senate.
The bitter political fight over Jay's Treaty, along with the growing division between the Federalists and Democratic-Republicans, convinced Washington not to seek a third term.
Adams Provokes Criticism
In the election of 1796, the United States faced a new situation: a contest between opposing parties. The Federalists nominated Vice President John Adams for president, while the Democratic-Republicans chose Thomas Jefferson.
In the election, Adams received 71 electoral votes, while Jefferson received 68. Because the Constitution stated that the runner-up should become vice-president, the country found itself with a Federalist president and a Democratic-Republican vice-president.
The election also underscored the growing danger of sectionalism—placing the interests of one region over those of the nation as a whole. Almost all the electors from the Southern states voted for Jefferson, while all the electors from the Northern states voted for Adams.
Portrait of a young John Adams by Joseph Badger
Review Unit 77
ADAMS TRIES TO AVOID WAR
Soon after taking office, President Adams faced his first crisis: a looming war with France. The French government regarded the U.S.-British agreement over the Northwest Territory a violation of the French-American alliance. In retaliation they began to seize American ships bound for Britain. Adams sent a three-man team to Paris to negotiate a solution. 4s# This team, which included future Chief Justice John Marshall, planned to meet with the French foreign minister, Talleyrand. Instead, the French sent three low-level officials, whom Adams in his report to Congress called X, Y, and Z. The French officials demanded a $250,000 bribe as payment for seeing Talleyrand. News of this insult, which became known as the XYZ Affair, provoked a wave of anti-French feeling at home. "Millions for defense, but not one cent for tribute" became the slogan of the day. In 1798, Congress created a navy department and authorized American ships to seize French vessels. For the next two years, an undeclared naval war raged between France and the United States.
The Federalists called for a full-scale war against France, but Adams refused to take that step. Through diplomacy, the two countries eventually smoothed over their differences. Adams damaged his standing among the Federalists, but he kept the United States out of war.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Motives
© Why did the French begin to seize U.S. ships?
THE ALIEN AND SEDITION ACTS
Although Democratic-Republicans cheered Adams for avoiding war with France, they criticized him mercilessly on many other issues. Tensions between Federalists and Democratic-Republicans rose to a fever pitch. Adams regarded Democratic-Republican ideas as dangerous to the welfare of the nation. He and other Federalists accused the Democratic-Republicans of favoring foreign powers. Many immigrants were active in the Democratic-Republican party. Some of the most vocal critics of the Adams administration were foreign-born. They included French and British radicals as well as recent Irish immigrants who lashed out at anyone who was even faintly pro-British, including the Federalist Adams.
To counter what they saw as a growing threat against the government, the Federalists pushed through Congress in 1798 four measures that became known as the Alien and Sedition Acts. Three of these measures, the Alien Acts, raised the residence requirement for American citizenship from 5 years to 14 years and allowed the president to deport or jail any alien considered undesirable.
Vocabulary alien: belonging to or coming from another country; foreign
sedition: rebellion against one’s country; treason
Analyzing
Political Cartoonsj-
PARIS MONSTER”
“Cinque-tetes, or the Paris Monster” is the title of this political cartoon satirizing the XYZ Affair. On the right, the five members of the French Directory, or ruling executive body, are depicted as a five-headed monster demanding money. The three American representatives, Elbridge Gerry, Charles Pinckney, and John Marshall, are on the left, exclaiming “Cease bawling, monster! We will not give you six-pence!”
SKILLBUILDER
Analyzing Political Cartoons 1.	How would you contrast the cartoon’s depiction of the U.S. representatives with its depiction of the French Directory?
2.	What other details in the cartoon show the cartoonist’s attitude toward the French?
78 Chapter 2 Revolution and the Early Republic
The fourth measure, the Sedition Act, set fines and jail terms for anyone trying to hinder the operation of the government or expressing "false, scandalous, and malicious statements" against the government. Under the terms of this act, the federal government prosecuted and jailed a number of Democratic-Republican editors, publishers, and politicians. Outraged Democratic-Republicans called the laws a violation of freedom of speech guaranteed by the First Amendment.
VIRGINIA AND KENTUCKY RESOLUTIONS
The two main Democratic-Republican leaders, Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, saw the Alien and Sedition Acts as a serious misuse of power on the part of the federal government. They decided to organize opposition to the Alien and Sedition Acts by appealing to the states. Madison drew up a set of resolutions that were adopted by the Virginia Legislature, while Jefferson wrote resolutions that were approved in Kentucky. The resolutions warned of the dangers that the Alien and Sedition Acts posed to a government of checks and balances guaranteed by the Constitution. A
Personal Voice “ Let the honest advocate of confidence [in government] read the alien and sedition acts, and say if the Constitution has not been wise in fixing limits to the government it created, and whether we should be wise in destroying those limits/’
—8th Resolution, The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions
J MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Issues
How did the Kentucky Resolutions challenge the authority of the federal government?
The Kentucky Resolutions in particular asserted the principle of nullification: the states had the right to nullify, or consider void, any act of Congress that they deemed unconstitutional. Virginia and Kentucky viewed the Alien and Sedition Acts as unconstitutional violations of the First Amendment that deprived citizens of their rights.
The resolutions also called for other states to adopt similar declarations. No other state did so, however, and the issue died out by the next presidential election. Nevertheless, the resolutions showed that the balance of power between the states and the federal government remained a controversial issue. In fact, the election of 1800 between Federalist John Adams and Democratic-Republican Thomas Jefferson would center on this critical debate.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•	Judiciary Act of 1789	• two-party system	• protective tariff
•Alexander Hamilton	•Democratic-Republican	• XYZ Affair
•	cabinet
•Alien and Sedition Acts • nullification
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart, list the leaders, beliefs, and goals of the country’s first political parties.
Federalists	Democratic-Republicans
	
If you had lived in that time, which party would you have favored? Why?
CRITICAL THINKING
EVALUATING LEADERSHIP
How would you judge the leadership qualities of President Washington in his decision to put two such opposed thinkers as Hamilton and Jefferson in his cabinet? Who do you think was the more significant member of the cabinet?
ANALYZING EVENTS
Do you agree with the Democratic-Republicans that the Alien and Sedition Acts were a violation of the First Amendment? Were they necessary? Support your opinion with evidence from the text.
Think About:
•	the intent of the First Amendment
•	what was happening in Europe
•	what was happening in the United States
Review Unit
REVIEW
CHAPTER
ASSESSMENT
TERMS & NAMES
Ml
Hi
The newly formed United States of America creates a new system of government, with a constitution and a bill of rights.
below, write a sentence explaining its
For each term or name significance.
1.	Stamp Act
2.	Thomas Jefferson
3.	Declaration of Independence
4.	Valley Forge
5.	Treaty of Paris
6.	Articles of Confederation
7.	checks and balances
8.	Antifederalists
9.	cabinet
10. Democratic-Republican
MAIN IDEAS
Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
Colonial Resistance and Rebellion (pages 46-53)
1.	How did the first Continental Congress prepare the way for an armed uprising against Britain?
2.	Why did Jefferson eliminate criticism of the slave trade from the Declaration of Independence?
The War for Independence (pages 58-63)
3.	Why did so many colonists remain loyal to Britain during the Revolutionary War?
4.	How did the American victory at Saratoga affect the war?
Confederation and the Constitution (pages 66-71)
5.	What were some of the problems with the kind of government set up by the Articles of Confederation?
6.	What are historical reasons the Constitution has been amended?
Launching the New Nation (pages 74-79)
7.	What events after 1789 helped to unify the nation?
8.	What issues led to the development of a two-party system?
CRITICAL THINKING
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one below, show the ideological differences between the two political groups. Federalists	Antifederalists
	
DEVELOPING HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Review the feature on pages 72-73. What is the meaning of the symbols of patriotism represented there? Why are they historically significant? EVALUATING
In your view, which compromise during the Constitutional Convention was more important, the Great Compromise or the Three-Fifths Compromise? Explain. 80 Chapter 2 Revolution and the Early Republic

MM

TEXAS TEST PRACTICE

Use the cartoon and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 1.
1.	This British cartoon was published during the winter of 1775-1776. In it, King George III and his ministers are shown killing the goose that laid the golden egg. The cartoon is criticizing —
A the killing of British soldiers at Concord and Bunker Hill.
B
British response to the Olive Branch Petition. C
John Locke’s theory of natural rights. D
Thomas Paine’s Common Sense. 2.	Both Shays’s Rebellion and the Boston Tea Party were the result of anger over —
F religious intolerance.
G the Boston Massacre.
H taxes.
J slavery.
Use the information in the box and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 3.
Declaration of Independence Battles of Lexington and Concord Second Continental Congress
3.	Which of the following lists the events in chronological order from first to last?
A
Declaration of Independence, Battles of Lexington and Concord, Second Continental Congress B
Battles of Lexington and Concord, Second Continental Congress, Declaration of Independence C
Second Continental Congress, Battles of Lexington and Concord, Declaration of Independence D
Second Continental Congress, Declaration of Independence, Battles of Lexington and Concord 71 hmhsocialstudies.com
TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests	• Tutorials
INTERACT WITH HISTORY
"^WriteSmart H COLLABORATIVE LEARNI Think about the issues you recorded in myNotebook as you read the chapter. Imagine you are living in the 1780s. Write an article for either The Federalist or Letters from the Federal Farmer, arguing either for or against giving the national government more power. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your article.
£7%
VgjjTUi
"^WriteSmart
Review the chart on page 51. Choose one of the Founding Fathers in this chapter and write him a letter thanking him for his contribution. Make sure to explain why his actions were important to the nation. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your letter.
tCEHTURY
In a small group, reread the Declaration of Independence together to enhance and confirm your understanding. Discuss the intent of the document and why it is so important. Then imagine what it would have been like to see or hear these words for the first time during the Revolutionary era. Work with your group to create a skit in which patriots are sharing the text of the document with other colonists. Make sure that your skit includes the full text of the first three paragraphs as well as an analysis of the text and its meaning.
Review Unit 81
End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Understanding Historians’
Interpretations of the Past
DEFINING THE SKILL
Historians ask questions to learn how or why something happened, why someone acted in a certain way, or how different conditions might have changed events. They use the answers to these questions in historiography, the interpretation and presentation of historical research. To write accurate information, historians review primary and secondary sources. They develop a historical perspective that reflects their understanding of events and people in the context of their time. An interpretation may reflect an extreme bias for one view or reflect two different schools of thought. Interpretations of history can change over time as new information is revealed and new sources become available. Historians are often faced with alternative interpretations of a period or event. When faced with opposing viewpoints, good historians do additional research to verify the information presented in each account.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: ANALYZE HISTORICAL INTERPRETATIONS
The two passages below show two alternate interpretations about the American Revolution. When comparing these interpretations, identify the source of the writing and note details and language that helps you identify each author's perspective. "Primarily the American Revolution was a political and constitutional movement and only secondarily one that was either financial, commercial or social. At bottom, the© fundamental issue was the political independence of the colonies, and in the last analysis the conflict lay between the British Parliament and the colonial assemblies...."
M.
Anderson (historian),"The American Revolution: An Interpretation," 1926 "The struggle was not over© high-sounding political and constitutional concepts; over the power of taxation or even, in the final analysis, over natural rights.© It was over colonial manufacturing, wild lands and furs, sugar, wine, tea, and currency, all of which meant, simply, the survival or collapse of English mercantile capitalism within the imperial-colonial framework of the mercantilist system."
M.
Hacker (economics professor), The Triumph of American Capitalism, 1940 © Define the main points in each argument. This will help you compare the interpretations.
© Discount rhetoric or emotional language that is not factual. Here Hacker uses rhetoric to demean the “political and constitutional concepts” that Andrews supports.
0 Consider reasons why the interpretations might differ. Look for information about the author or the source that may give clues. Do you see possible bias? Were the interpretations created in different time periods, so one might have relied on new, previously unavailable sources? In this case, Andrews is a historian while Hacker is an economics professor. How could their different careers affect the authors’ points of view?
O
Investigate how the interpretations differ. What is each author’s interpretation of the event? Summarize each interpretation to compare them. However, you should read additional information, opinions, or studies before you decide with which interpretation to agree. 81 SKI
STRATEGY: MAKE A CHART
In a chart, list the key information about each interpretation that your analysis revealed. Then write a short summary of each interpretation as well as a summary of how and why the interpretations differ. Interpretation #1 Charles M. Anderson (historian), “The American devolution: An Interpretation,” 1926	Interpretation #2 Louis M. Hacker (economics professor), The Triumph of American Capitalism, 1949
Key Information • Main point: The American devolution was caused by political issues.	Key Information •	Main point: The American devolution was caused by economic issues. •	dhetorical language: Author discounts political and constitutional causes by calling them “high-sounding”
Summary According to historian Charles M. Anderson, political issues were the primary cause of the American devolution. The colonies sought political independence. Economic causes were secondary.	Summary Economics professor Louis M. Hacker argues that political and constitutional causes were not at the root of the American devolution. He believes that economic issues led to the conflict.
Comparison Summary Anderson believes political issues were the cause of the American devolution, while Hacker points to economic issues. This difference in interpretation is likely because the two authors represent different schools of thought: Anderson is a historian and Hacker is an economics professor.	
APPLYING THE SKILL
Reread the two passages. Then, conduct research on the Internet or in print sources to find another, different interpretation of the reasons for the American Revolution. Compare this new interpretation to those of Charles M. Andrews and Louis M. Hacker. Recreate the chart above and use the steps on the previous page to add a column to summarize the new interpretation. Then revise the comparison summary to explain why this alternative interpretation might differ from the previous interpretations.
1.	Define main points In each argument.
What does the author think are the reasons for the American Revolution?
2.	Discount rhetoric or emotional language that Is not factual.
Does your source use any rhetoric or emotional language? If so, what?
3.	Consider reasons why the Interpretations might differ.
What makes the source you found qualified to interpret historical events? What reasons might explain any differences from the previous sources?
4.	Investigate how the Interpretations differ.
Does your new source agree with Anderson or Hackler or are new ideas presented? Explain the differences as well as the reasons for them.
81 SK2
iwmW
-
,.A^r
THE


REVOLUTION


V,

<sfc t ,


The American Revolution led to the formation of the United States of America in 1776. Beginning in the 1760s, tensions grew between American colonists and their British rulers when Britain started passing a series of new laws and taxes for the colonies. With no representation in the British government, however, colonists had no say in these laws, which led to growing discontent. After fighting broke out in 1775, colonial leaders met to decide what to
do. They approved the Declaration of Independence, announcing that the American colonies were free from British rule. In reality, however, freedom would not come until after years of fighting.
Explore some of the people and events of the American Revolution online. You can find a wealth of information, video clips, primary sources, activities, and more at i
hmhsocialstudies.com


“I know not what course others wtay take; but at -for nee, give wte Liberty
or give wee death!’
- Patrick Henry
Seeds of Revolution
Watch the video to learn about colonial discontent in the years before the Revolutionary War.
fp "Give Me Liberty or Give Me Death
Read an excerpt from Patrick Henry's famous speech, which urged the colonists to fight against the British.
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 81 MC2
0
The Living Constitution
Table of Contents for the Living Constitution	
Preamble	84
Article 1	84
Article 2	90
Article 3	92
Article 4	94
Article 5	94
Article 6	95
Article 7	95
Bill of Rights	96
Amendments 11-27	98
Tracing Themes:	
Voting Rights	104
Assessment	106
Projects for Citizenship	108
"0he Constitution was not made to fit us like a straight) acket. In its elasticity lies its chief greatness."
President Woodrow Wilson
Purposes of the Constitution
The official charge to the delegates who met in Philadelphia in 1787 was to amend the Articles of Confederation. They soon made a fateful decision, however, to ignore the Articles and to write an entirely new constitution. These delegates—the "framers"—set themselves five purposes to fulfill in their effort to create an effective
constitution.
1.	Establish Legitimacy
First, the framers of the Constitution had to establish the new government's legitimacy—its right to rule. The patriots' theory of government was set out in the Declaration of Independence, which explained why British rule over the colonies was illegitimate. Now the framers had to demonstrate that their new government met the standards of legitimacy referred to in the Declaration.
For the framers of the Constitution, legitimacy had to be based on a compact or contract among those who are to be ruled. This is why the Constitution starts with the words "We the people of the United States ... do ordain and establish this Constitution."
2.	Create Appropriate Structures
The framers' second purpose was to create appropriate structures for the new government. The framers were committed to the principles of representative democracy. They also believed that any new government must include an important role for state governments and ensure that the states retained some legitimacy to rule within their borders.
To achieve their goals, the framers created the Congress, the presidency, and the judiciary to share the powers of the national government. They also created a system of division of powers between the national government and the state governments.
The original manuscript of the Constitution is now kept in the National Archives in Washington, D.C. ►

am/d


82 The Living Constitution




3. Describe and Distribute Power
RESEARCHING A CONSTITUTIONAL QUESTION
As you study the Constitution, think about a constitutional question that interests you. Here are some possible questions:
How much, if at all, can the federal government or a state government restrict the sale of firearms?
Under what conditions does the president have the power to order American troops into battle without congressional approval?
Under what conditions may a police officer conduct a search of the inside of an automobile?
The framers had as their third purpose to describe governmental powers and to distribute them among the structures they created. The powers of the legislative branch, which are those of Congress, are listed in Article 1, Section 8, of the Constitution. Many of the executive powers belonging to the president are listed in Article 2, Sections 2 and 3. The courts are given judicial powers in Article 3. The words of Article 4 imply that the states retain authority over many public matters.
Once you have chosen a constitutional question, research that question in articles and books on the Constitution. Also check the indexes of well-known newspapers, such as the New York Times, for articles that are relevant.
4.	Limit Government Powers
The fourth purpose of the framers was to limit the powers of the structures they created. Limits on the Congress's powers are found in Article 1, Section 9. Some of the limits on the powers of state governments are found in Article 1, Section 10. There the framers enumerate functions that are delegated to the national government and so cannot be directed by the states.
5.	Allow for Change
The framers' fifth purpose was to include some means for changing the Constitution. Here they faced a dilemma: they wanted to make certain that the government endured by changing with the times, but they did not want to expose the basic rules of government to so many changes that the system would be unstable. So in Article 5 they created a difficult but not impossible means for amending the Constitution.
How to Read
the Constitution
The Constitution, which appears on pages 84-103, is printed on a beige background, while the explanatory notes next to each article, section, or clause are printed on blue. Each article is divided into sections, and the sections are subdivided into clauses. Headings have been added and the spelling and punctuation modernized for easier reading. Portions of the Constitution no longer in use have been crossed out. The Constitutional Insight questions and answers will help you understand significant issues related to the Constitution.
71 hmhsocialstudies.com
RESEARCH WEB LINKS |
Review Unit 83
ji
i
PREAMBLE
Constitutional Insight Preamble
Why does the Preamble say "We the people of the United States . . . ordain and establish" the new government? The Articles of Confederation was an agreement among the states. But the framers of the Constitution wanted to be sure its legitimacy came from the American people, not from the states, which might decide to withdraw their support at any time. This is a basic principle of the Constitution.
ARTICLE 1
Constitutional Insight Section 1
Why does the first article of the Constitution focus on Congress rather than on the presidency or the courts? The framers were intent on stressing the central role of the legislative branch in the new government because it is the branch that most directly represents the people and is most responsive to them.
CRITICAL THINKING
Do you think Congress is still the branch of the federal government that is most directly responsible to the people? Why or why not?
Constitutional Insight Section 2.1
Why are members of the House of Representatives elected every two years? The House of Representatives was designed to be a truly representative body, with members who reflect the concerns and sentiments of their constituents as closely as possible. The framers achieved this timely representation by establishing two years as a reasonable term for members of the House to serve.
CRITICAL THINKING
Do you think electing members of the House of Representatives every two years is a good idea? Why or why not?
The Constitution
PREAMBLE.
Purpose of the Constitution We the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect Union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.
ARTICLE 1. The Legislature
Section 1. Congress All legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives.
Section 2. The House of Representatives
1. Elections The House of Representatives shall be composed of members chosen every second year by the people of the several states, and the electors in each state shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the state legislature.
2. Qualifications No person shall be a Representative who shall not have attained to the age of twenty-five years, and been seven years a citizen of the United States, and who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that state in which he shall be chosen.
3. Number of Representatives Representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the several states which may be included within this Union, according to their respective numbers, which-shall be determined by add-ing-to the whole number of free persons,
Including those bound to service for a term of years,- and excluding-
Indians net taxed, three fifths.of all other persons: The actual enu-
meration shall be made within three years after the first meeting of the Congress of the United States, and within every subsequent term of ten years, in such manner as they shall by law direct. The number of Representatives shall not exceed one for every thirty thousand, but each state shall have at least one Representative; and until such -enumeration shall be made, the state of New Hampshire shall be-
•entitled to choose three, Massachusetts eight/ Rhode Island and-
■Providence Plantations ene> Connecticut five, New.York six, New-
Requirements for Holding Federal Office
POSITION J MINIMUM AGE | RESIDENCY CITIZENSHIP
Representative	25	state in which elected	7 years
Senator	30	state in which elected	9 years
President Supreme Court	35	14 years in the United States	natural-born
Justice	none	none	none
Jersey four7.Pennsylvania eight, Delaware one;
Maryland six, Virginia ten, North Carolina
hve-j-South Carolina five, and Georgia three.
4. Vacancies When vacancies happen in the representation from any state, the executive authority thereof shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.
5. Officers and Impeachment The House of Representatives shall choose their Speaker and other officers; and shall have the sole power of impeachment.
84 The Living Constitution
1
Section 3. The Senate
1.	Numbers The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two Senators from each state, chosen by the legislature thereof, for six years; and each Senator shall have one vote.
2.	Classifying Terms Immediately after they shall be assembled in consequence of the first election, they shall be divided as equally as may be into three classes. The seats of the Senators of the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of the second year, of the second class at the expiration of the fourth year, and of the third class at the expiration of the sixth year, so that one third may be chosen every second year; and if vacancies happen by resignation; or otherwise, during-the recess of the legislature of any state, the executive thereof
may make temporary appointments until the next meeting-of-the leg
islaturc, which shall then-fill such vacancies.
3.	Qualifications No person shall be a Senator who shall not have attained to the age of thirty years, and been nine years a citizen of the United States, and who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that state for which he shall be chosen.
4.	Role of Vice-President The Vice-President of the United States shall be President of the Senate, but shall have no vote, unless they be equally divided.
5.	Officers The Senate shall choose their other officers, and also a President pro tempore, in the absence of the Vice-President, or when he shall exercise the office of President of the United States.
6.	Impeachment Trials The Senate shall have the sole power to try all impeachments. When sitting for that purpose, they shall be on oath or affirmation. When the President of the United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall preside: and no person shall be convicted without the concurrence of two thirds of the members present.
7.	Punishment for Impeachment Judgment in cases of impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust or profit under the United States; but the party convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject to indictment, trial, judgment and punishment, according to law.
Section 4. Congressional Elections
1.	Regulations The times, places and manner of holding elections for Senators and Representatives shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof; but the Congress may at any time by law make or alter such regulations, except as to the places of choosing Senators.
2.	Sessions The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, stteh meeting shall be on the fir3t Monday in December, unless they
■shall by law appoint a different day?
Constitutional Insight Section 3.1
Why are members of the Senate elected every six years? The framers feared the possibility of instability in the government. So they decided that senators should have six-year terms and be elected by the state legislatures rather than directly by the people. The Seventeenth Amendment, as you will see later, changed this. The framers also staggered the terms of the senators so that only one-third of them are replaced at any one time. This stabilizes the Senate still further.
CRITICAL THINKING
Do you think it is important today for the Senate to have more stability than the House of Representatives? If so, why?
Constitutional Insight Sections 3.6
and 3.7 Must an impeached president step down from office? Not necessarily. An impeachment is a formal accusation of criminal behavior or serious misbehavior. By impeaching the president, the U.S. House of Representatives is officially accusing the nation’s chief executive of one or more wrongdoings that warrant possible removal from office. It is then the responsibility of the Senate to conduct a trial to determine whether the president is guilty or not guilty of the charges—and thus whether or not the president must step down. Conviction requires a two-thirds vote of the Senate.
CRITICAL THINKING
Do you think a president should be put on trial for a crime while he or she is still in office? Explain.
Review Unit
Constitutional Insight Section 5.2
What kinds of rules does Congress make for itself? The Constitution gives each house control over most of its rules of procedure and membership. Rules are important, for they help shape the kinds of laws and policies that pass each body. Senate rules allow a filibuster, whereby a senator holds the floor as long as he or she likes in order to block consideration of a bill he or she dislikes. In recent years, a “cloture" rule has been used to end debate if 60 or more members vote to do so.
In contrast, the House of Representatives has rules to limit debate. A rules committee has the primary task of determining how long a bill on the floor of the House may be discussed and whether any amendments can be offered to the bill. In recent years, the power of the Rules Committee has been limited, but being able to shape the rules remains a powerful tool of members of Congress.
CRITICAL THINKING
Why do you think the chair of the Rules Committee is in a powerful position?
Constitutional Insight Section 7.1
Why must all bills to raise revenue originate in the House? Because its members all stand for election every two years, the House was expected to be more directly responsive to the people. The tradition of restricting the powers of taxation to the people’s representatives dates prior to the English Bill of Rights (1689), which granted to Parliament and withheld from the king the right to raise taxes. When colonists protesting the Stamp Act and the Intolerable Acts protested “no taxation without representation,” they were appealing to a longstanding right codified in the English Bill of Rights.
Constitutional Insight Section 7.2
How often do presidents use the veto, and how often is that action overridden? The use of the veto, which is the refusal to approve a bill, depends on many factors, especially the political conditions of the time. Until 1865, only nine presidents exercised the veto for 36 pieces of legislation, including Andrew Jackson who used it 12 times. Since 1865, every president has used the veto power, some on relatively few occasions, others as frequently as over a hundred times. Usually, Congress is unable to produce the votes (those of two-thirds of the members present in each house) needed to override presidential vetoes.
CRITICAL THINKING
Do you think it should be easier for Congress to override a president’s veto? Why or why not?
Section 5. Rules and Procedures
1.	Quorum Each house shall be the judge of the elections, returns and qualifications of its own members, and a majority of each shall constitute a quorum to do business; but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and may be authorized to compel the attendance of absent members, in such manner, and under such penalties, as each house may provide.
2.	Rules and Conduct Each house may determine the rules of its proceedings, punish its members for disorderly behavior, and, with the concurrence of two thirds, expel a member.
3.	Congressional Records Each house shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and from time to time publish the same, excepting such parts as may in their judgment require secrecy; and the yeas and nays of the members of either house on any question shall, at the desire of one fifth of those present, be entered on the journal.
4.	Adjournment Neither house, during the session of Congress, shall, without the consent of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place than that in which the two houses shall be sitting.
Section 6. Payment and Privileges
1.	Salary The Senators and Representatives shall receive a compensation for their services, to be ascertained by law, and paid out of the treasury of the United States. They shall in all cases, except treason, felony and breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest during their attendance at the session of their respective houses, and in going to and returning from the same; and for any speech or debate in either house, they shall not be questioned in any other place.
2.	Restrictions No Senator or Representative shall, during the time for which he was elected, be appointed to any civil office under the authority of the United States, which shall have been created, or the emoluments whereof shall have been increased, during such time; and no person holding any office under the United States shall be a member of either house during his continuance in office.
Section 7. How a Bill Becomes a Law
1.	Tax Bills All bills for raising revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives; but the Senate may propose or concur with amendments as on other bills.
2.	Lawmaking Process Every bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the Senate shall, before it become a law, be presented to the President of the United States; if he approves he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it with his objections to that house in which it shall have originated, who shall enter the objections at large on their journal, and proceed to reconsider it. If after such reconsideration two thirds of that house shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent, together with the objections, to the other house, by which it shall likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two thirds of that house, it shall become a law. But in all such
86 The Living Constitution
cases the votes of both houses shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names of the persons voting for and against the bill shall be entered on the journal of each house respectively. If any bill shall not be returned by the President within ten days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the same shall be a law, in like manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by their adjournment prevent its return, in which case it shall not be a law.
3. Role of the President Every order, resolution, or vote to which the concurrence of the Senate and House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of adjournment) shall be presented to the President of the United States; and before the same shall take effect, shall be approved by him, or being disapproved by him, shall be repassed by two thirds of the Senate and House of Representatives, according to the rules and limitations prescribed in the case of a bill.
balances reflected in the process of a bill’s becoming a law?
Review Unit 87


Constitutional Insight Section 8 The
powers given to Congress are in Section 8 of Article 1. The first 17 clauses of Section 8 are often called the enumerated powers because they name individually Congress’s specific powers. These powers deal with issues ranging from taxation and the national debt to calling out the armed forces of the various states to governing the nation’s capital district (Washington, D.C.).
The 18th and final clause is different. It gives Congress the power to do what is “necessary and proper” to carry out the enumurated powers. Thus, the enumerated powers of Congress “to lay and collect taxes,” “to borrow money,”
“to regulate commerce,” and “to coin money” imply the power to create a bank in order to execute these powers. Early in the country’s history, this Elastic Clause, as it has been called, was used by Congress to establish the controversial Bank of the United States in 1791 and the Second Bank of the United States in 1816.
CRITICAL THINKING
Why do you think the Elastic Clause is still important today?
MODERN MONEY

Technological advances such as color copiers have led to increased counterfeiting. In response the Bureau of Engraving and Printing (BEP), the federal agency that prints U.S. currency, began adding advanced security features to paper money. The BEP also made a commitment to redesign the nation’s currency every seven to ten years to stay ahead of counterfeiters. The $5, $10, $20, $50, and $100 bills were all redesigned between 2003 and 2010.
iXIXD^
OOGOOOOOT
IQOj
Section 8. Powers Granted to Congress
1.	Taxation The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes,
* duties, imposts and excises, to pay the debts and provide for the com-
mon defense and general welfare of the United States, but all duties, imposts and excises shall be uniform throughout the United States,
2.	Credit To borrow money on the credit of the United States;
3.	Commerce To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several states, and with the Indian tribes;
4.	Naturalization, Bankruptcy To establish a uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform laws on the subject of bankruptcies throughout the United States;
5.	Money To coin money, regulate the value thereof, and of foreign coin, and fix the standard of weights and measures;
6.	Counterfeiting To provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current coin of the United States;
7.	Post Office To establish post offices and post roads;
8.	Patents, Copyrights To promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries;
9.	Federal Courts To constitute tribunals inferior to the Supreme Court;
10.	International Law To define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and offenses against the law of nations;
11.	War To declare war, grant letters of marque and reprisal, and make rules concerning captures on land and water;
12.	Army To raise and support armies, but no appropriation of money to that use shall be for a longer term than two years;
13.	Navy To provide and maintain a navy;
14.	Regulation of Armed Forces To make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces;
15.	Militia To provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the Union, suppress insurrections and repel invasions;
16.	Regulations for Militia To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining the militia, and for governing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the United States, reserving to the states respectively the appointment of the officers, and the authority of training the militia according to the discipline prescribed by Congress;
17.	District of Columbia To exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever, over such district (not exceeding ten miles square) as may, by cession of particular states, and the acceptance of Congress, become the seat of the government of the United States, and to exercise like authority over all places purchased by the consent of the legislature of the state in which the same shall be, for the erection of forts, magazines, arsenals, dockyards, and other needful buildings;—and
18.	Elastic Clause To make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this Constitution in the government of the United States, or in any department or officer thereof.
88 The Living Constitution
J
Section 9. Powers Denied Congress
1.	Slave Trade The migration or importation of such persons as any of the states-now existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited-bythc Congress prior to the year- one thousand eight hundred and eight; but-a taxor duty may be imposed on such importation, not-exceeding ten dollars for each person.
2.	Habeas Corpus The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it.
3.	Illegal Punishment No bill of attainder or ex post facto law shall be passed.
4.	Direct Taxes No capitation, or other direct, tax shall be laid, tmless-in ■proportion to the census-or enumeration herein before directed to
be-takem
5.	Export Taxes No tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any state.
6.	No Favorites No preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce or revenue to the ports of one state over those of another: nor shall vessels bound to, or from, one state be obliged to enter, clear, or pay duties in another.
7.	Public Money No money shall be drawn from the treasury, but in consequence of appropriations made by law; and a regular statement and account of the receipts and expenditures of all public money shall be published from time to time.
8.	Titles of Nobility No title of nobility shall be granted by the United States: and no person holding any office of profit or trust under them shall, without the consent of the Congress, accept of any present, emolument, office, or title, of any kind whatever, from any king, prince, or foreign state.
Section 10. Powers Denied the States
1.	Restrictions No state shall enter into any treaty, alliance, or confederation; grant letters of marque and reprisal; coin money; emit bills of credit; make anything but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts; pass any bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts, or grant any title of nobility.
2.	Import and Export Taxes No state shall, without the consent of the Congress, lay any imposts or duties on imports or exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for executing its inspection laws; and the net produce of all duties and imposts, laid by any state on imports or exports, shall be for the use of the treasury of the United States; and all such laws shall be subject to the revision and control of the Congress.
Constitutional Insight Section 9
Why didn’t the framers include a bill of rights in the original Constitution? Actually, they did. Article 1, Section 9, defines limits on the powers of Congress, just as the first ten amendments (which we call the Bill of Rights) do.
While some of the provisions focus on such issues as slavery and taxation, there are three explicit prohibitions dealing with citizens’ rights:
•	Writ of habeas corpus. Section 9, Clause 2 says that, except in time of rebellion or invasion, Congress cannot suspend people’s right to a writ of habeas corpus. This means that people cannot be held in prison or jail without being formally charged with a crime.
•Bill of attainder. Clause 3 prohibits the passage of any law that convicts or punishes a person directly and without a trial. Any legislative action that would punish someone without recourse to a court of law is called a bill of attainder.
•	Ex post facto law. The same clause prohibits ex post facto laws. Such a law would punish a person for an act that was legal when it was performed.
The fact that these particular rights were protected by the original document issued by the framers reflects both the framers’ experiences during the Revolution and their fear of excessive government power.
Q CRITICAL THINKING
Why are American citizens today so intent on having protections against government violations of their rights?
Review Unit 89
ARTICLE 2
Constitutional Insight Section 1.1
What exactly is “executive power”? \Ne know the president has it, but nowhere is it explicitly defined. It is most often defined as the power to carry out the laws of the land, but of course no one person can handle such a chore alone. A more appropriate definition is found in Section 3 of this article, which empowers the president to “take care that the laws be faithfully executed." In this sense, the president is the chief administrator.
O CRITICAL THINKING
Why is it important to have an executive who is the chief administrator?
3. Peacetime and War Restraints No state shall, without the consent of Congress, lay any duty of tonnage, keep troops or ships of war in time of peace, enter into any agreement or compact with another state, or with a foreign power, or engage in war, unless actually invaded, or in such imminent danger as will not admit of delay.
ARTICLE 2, The Executive
Section 1. The Presidency
1.	Terms of Office The executive power shall be vested in a President of the United States of America. He shall hold his office during the term of four years and, together with the Vice-President, chosen for the same term, be elected as follows:
2.	Electoral College Each state shall appoint, in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct, a number of electors, equal to the whole number of Senators and Representatives to which the state may be entitled in the Congress; but no Senator or Representative, or person holding an office of trust or profit under the United States, shall be appointed an elector.
3.	Former Method of Electing President The electors shall
meet in their respective states, and vote by balfo-t-for two persons/ of
wham one at least shall not be an inhabitant of the-same.state with
themselves. And they shall make a list-.of all the-persons voted for?
-and-of the number of votes for each; which list-t-foey shall sign and-
■eerti-fy, and transmit scaled to the-seat-of the government of the-
United States, directed to the President of the Senate. The President
■ef-the Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate and "House of
Representatives, open all the certificates, and the votes shall then be
counted. The person having the greatest number- of votes shall be the
President, if such number be a majority of the whole-number of clce-
tors-appointed; and if there be more than one who have 3uch major-
ity-end have an equal number of-votes/ then the House of ■Representatives shall immediately choose by ballot one of them for-
President; and if no person have-a majority, then from the five high*
est on the list the said house shall in like manner choose the President.
But in choosing the President; the votes shall be taken by states, the-representation-from each state having one vote; a quorum for this
purpose shall consist of a member or members from two thirds of-
the states, and a majority of aR-the sta-tes shall be necessary to a-
eheice. In every case, after the choice of the President, the person-
having the greatest number-of-votes of the electors shall be the Viee-
President. But if there should remain two -or more who have equal
votes, the Senate shall choose-from them by ballot the Vice President.
4.	Election Day The Congress may determine the time of choosing the electors, and the day on which they shall give their votes; which day shall be the same throughout the United States.
90 The Living Constitution
5.	Qualifications No person except a natural-born citizen, er-a citizen of the United States aMhc time of the adoption of this Constitution,
shall be eligible to the office of President; neither shall any person be eligible to that office who shall not have attained to the age of thirty-five years, and been fourteen years a resident within the United States.
6.	Succession In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve on the Vice-President, and the Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation, or inability, both of the President and Vice-President, declaring what officer shall then act as President, and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be removed, or a President shall be elected.
7.	Salary The President shall, at stated times, receive for his services a compensation, which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the period for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive within that period any other emolument from the United States, or any of them.
8.	Oath of Office Before he enter on the execution of his office, he shall take the following oath or affirmation:—"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the office of President of the United States, and will to the best of my ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States."
Section 2. Powers of the President
1.	Military Powers The President shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of the United States, and of the militia of the several states, when called into the actual service of the United States; he may require the opinion, in writing, of the principal officer in each of the executive departments, upon any subject relating to the duties of their respective offices, and he shall have power to grant reprieves and pardons for offenses against the United States, except in cases of impeachment.
2.	Treaties, Appointments He shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to make treaties, provided two thirds of the Senators present concur; and he shall nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, judges of the Supreme Court, and all other officers of the United States, whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by law; but the Congress may by law vest the appointment of such inferior officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, in the courts of law, or in the heads of departments.
3.	Vacancies The President shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during the recess of the Senate, by granting commissions which shall expire at the end of their next session.
Constitutional Insight Section 1.6
What happens when the vice-president succeeds a dead or incapacitated president? Section 1.6 provides that the vice-president shall assume the powers and duties of the presidential office. But until the Twenty-fifth Amendment was added to the Constitution in 1967, there was no explicit statement in the document that the vice-president is to become president. That procedure owes its origin to John Tyler, the tenth president of the United States, who in 1841 succeeded William Henry Harrison—the first president to die in office. Tyler decided to take the oath of office and assume the title of president of the United States. Congress voted to go along with his decision, and the practice was repeated after Lincoln was assassinated. It would take another century for the written provisions of the Constitution to catch up with the practice.
CRITICAL THINKING
Why is it important to know the order of succession if a president dies in office?
Constitutional Insight Section 2.1
Just how much authority does the president have as ''commander in chief' of the armed forces? The president has the power to give orders to American military forces. There have been several instances in U.S. history when presidents have used that authority in spite of congressional wishes.
President Harry Truman involved the armed forces of the United States in the Korean War from 1950 to 1953 without a congressional declaration of war.
Reacting to criticism of the Vietnam War, Congress in 1973 enacted the War Powers Resolution, making the president more accountable to Congress for any military actions he or she might take. Every president since Richard Nixon has called the resolution unconstitutional. Nevertheless, every president has reported to Congress within 48 hours of sending troops into an international crisis, as is required by the War Powers Resolution.
CRITICAL THINKING
Why is it important that the commander in chief of the armed forces of the United States be a civilian (the president) rather than a military general?
Review Unit
Constitutional Insight Section 3
Is it necessary for the president to deliver a State of the Union address before a joint session of Congress at the start of each legislative year? The Constitution requires only that the president report to Congress on the state of the Union from time to time, and nowhere does it call for an annual address. In 1913, President Woodrow Wilson wanted to influence Congress to take action without delay on some legislation that he thought was important. Wilson revived the tradition—which had been discontinued by Jefferson—of delivering the State of the Union address in person.
O CRITICAL THINKING
How does the president use the State of the Union address today?
Constitutional Insight Section 4
Have high-level public officials ever been impeached? In all of American history, the House has impeached two presidents, and neither had to leave office. In 1868, the Senate found President Andrew Johnson not guilty by one vote after the House impeached him, charging him with violating a Congressional Act. In 1999, senators acquitted President Bill Clinton after the House impeached him with charges of lying under oath and obstructing justice in the attempted cover-up of a White House scandal.
The only other president to come close to impeachment was Richard Nixon. In 1974, the House Judiciary Committee, in what is the first step of the impeachment process, recommended three articles of impeachment against Nixon for his role in the infamous Watergate scandal. Before the full House could vote for or against the articles of impeachment, however, Nixon resigned from office.
CRITICAL THINKING
Why do you think the framers of the Constitution created such an elaborate and seemingly difficult procedure for removing a sitting president?
Section 3. Presidential Duties He shall from time to time give to the Congress information of the state of the Union, and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient; he may, on extraordinary occasions, convene both houses, or either of them, and in case of disagreement between them, with respect to the time of adjournment, he may adjourn them to such time as he shall think proper; he shall receive ambassadors and other public ministers; he shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed, and shall commission all the officers of the United States.
Section 4. Impeachment The President, Vice-President and all civil officers of the United States shall be removed from office on impeachment for, and conviction of, treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors.
(above) Rep. Henry Hyde, chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, swears in Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr during the Committee’s hearings on impeachment charges against President Bill Clinton in 1998; (right) President Andrew Johnson is handed the articles of impeachment before his trial in 1868.
nmiuLco. irie judiciary
J^EDERAL
Courts and Judges The judicial powei ,nflrin	1S ShaU be VCSted in °ne SuPreme Court, and in suck
establish°Th h Congress may from time to time ordain and their offices d ,U	°f the Supreme and inferior courts, shall he
their seTvTces a T8 § behavior' and shall, at stated times, receive fc their continuanceToffice00' 'h""	diminished durin§
The Living Constitution
Section 2. The Courts' Authority
ARTICLE 3
1.	General Authority The judicial power shall extend to all cases, in law and equity, arising under this Constitution, the laws of the United States, and treaties made, or which shall be made, under their authority;—to all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls;—to all cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction;—to controversies to which the United States shall
be a party;—to controversies between two or more states;.between
a state and citizens of another state;—between citizens of different states;—between citizens of the same state claiming lands under grants of different states, and between a state, or the citizens thereof, and foreign states; citizcns-or subjects.
2.	Supreme Court In all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, and those in which a state shall be party, the Supreme Court shall have original jurisdiction. In all the other cases before mentioned, the Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and fact, with such exceptions, and under such regulations, as the Congress shall make.
3.	Trial by Jury The trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be by jury; and such trial shall be held in the state where the said crimes shall have been committed; but when not committed within any state, the trial shall be at such place or places as the Congress may by law have directed.
Constitutional Insight Section 2.1
What is judicial review? Is it the same as judicial power? Actually, they are not the same. Judicial power is the authority to hear cases involving disputes over the law or the behavior of people. Judicial review, in contrast, is a court’s passing judgment on the constitutionality of a law or government action that is being disputed. Interestingly, nowhere does the Constitution mention judicial review. There are places where it is implied (for example, in Section 2 of Article 6), but the only explicit description of the responsibility of the courts is the reference to judicial power in Section 1 of Article 3. The Supreme Court’s power to review laws passed by Congress was explicitly affirmed by the Court itself in Marbury v. Madison. (See page 118.)
CRITICAL THINKING
Why is judicial review, although not mentioned in the Constitution, an important activity of the Supreme Court?
Section 3. Treason
1.	Definition Treason against the United States shall consist only in levying war against them, or in adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort. No person shall be convicted of treason unless on the testimony of two witnesses to the same overt act, or on confession in open court.
2.	Punishment The Congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason, but no attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood, or forfeiture except during the life of the person attainted.
The Supreme Court of the United States as of August 2010. In the front row (left to right) are Associate Justices Clarence Thomas and Antonin Scalia, Chief Justice John Roberts, and Associate Justices Anthony Kennedy and Ruth Bader Ginsburg. In the back row (left to right) are Associate Justices Sonia Sotomayor, Stephen Breyer, Samuel Alito, and Elena Kagan. ▼
ARTICLE 4
Constitutional Insight Section 2.1
Why do college students attending public universities outside their state of residence have to pay higher tuition fees?
The Supreme Court has interpreted the “privileges and immunities” clause to allow higher tuition fees (and fees for hunting permits, etc.) for nonresidents when a state can give a “substantial reason” for the difference. Since state colleges and universities receive some financial support from the states’ taxpayers, the difference is regarded as justified in most states. If a student establishes residency in the state, he or she can pay in-state tuition after one year.
CRITICAL THINKING
Do you think it is fair that a nonresident must pay higher tuition fees at a state college than a resident of the state must pay? Explain.
Constitutional Insight Section 3.1
Should there be a West Virginia? The Constitution states that “no new state shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other state” without the permission of the legislature of the state involved and of the Congress. Vermont, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Maine were created from territory taken from existing states, with the approval of the sitting legislatures.
West Virginia, however, is a different story. During the Civil War, the residents of the
westernmost counties of Virginia were angry with their state’s decision to secede from the Union. They petitioned Congress to have their counties declared a distinct state. Congress agreed, and so the state of West Virginia was created. After the Civil War, the legislature of Virginia gave its formal approval, perhaps because it was in no position to dispute the matter.
CRITICAL THINKING
Suppose a section of Texas should decide to become a new state today. Could it do this? Why or why not?
ARTICLE 4. Relations Among States
Section 1. State Acts and Records Full faith and credit shall be given in each state to the public acts, records, and judicial proceedings of every other state. And the Congress may by general laws prescribe the manner in which such acts, records, and proceedings shall be proved, and the effect thereof.
Section 2. Rights of Citizens
1.	Citizenship The citizens of each state shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states.
2.	Extradition A person charged in any state with treason, felony, or other crime, who shall flee from justice, and be found in another state, shall on demand of the executive authority of the state from which he fled, be delivered up, to be removed to the state having jurisdiction of the crime.
3.	Fugitive Slaves No person held to service or labor in one stater-
under the laws thereof, escaping into another, shall, in consequence
of any law or-regulation therein, be discharged from such service or
labor, but shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such
sendee or labor may be due.
Section 3. New States
1.	Admission New states may be admitted by the Congress into this Union; but no new state shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other state; nor any state be formed by the junction of two or more states, or parts of states, without the consent of the legislatures of the states concerned as well as of the Congress.
2.	Congressional Authority The Congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the United States; and nothing in this Constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the United States, or of any particular state.
Section 4. Guarantees to the States The United States shall guarantee to every state in this Union a republican form of government, and shall protect each of them against invasion; and on application of the legislature, or of the executive (when the legislature cannot be convened), against domestic violence.
ARTICLE 5. Amending the Constitution
The Congress, whenever two thirds of both houses shall deem it necessary, shall propose amendments to this Constitution, or, on the application of the legislatures of two thirds of the several states, shall call a convention for proposing amendments, which, in either case, shall be valid to all intents and purposes, as part of this Constitution, when ratified by the legislatures of three fourths of the several states, or by conventions ir three fourths thereof, as the one or the other mode of ratification may b< proposed by the Congress; provided that no amendment which may bo made prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight shall in
any manner affect the first and fourth cJnmnr in the ninth section of the
first article; and that no state, without its consent, shall be deprived of it: equal suffrage in the Senate.
The Living Constitution
r
ARTICLE 6. Supremacy of the
National Government
Section 1. Valid Debts All debts contracted and engagements entered into, before the adoption of this Constitution, shall be as valid against the United States under this Constitution, as under the Confederation.
Section 2. Supreme Law This Constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be made in pursuance thereof; and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land; and the judges in every state shall be bound thereby, anything in the constitution or laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding.
Section 3. Loyalty to Constitution The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and the members of the several state legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers, both of the United States and of the several states, shall be bound by oath or affirmation to support this Constitution; but no religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the United States. ARTICLE 7. Ratification
The ratification of the conventions of nine states shall be sufficient for the establishment of this Constitution between the states so ratifying the same. Done in convention by the unanimous consent of the states present, the seventeenth day of September in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty-seven and of the independence of the United States of America the twelfth. In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names.
George Washington—President and deputy from Virginia
Delaware: George Read, Gunning Bedford, Jr., John Dickinson, Richard Bassett, Jacob Broom
Maryland: James McHenry, Dan of St. Thomas Jenifer, Daniel Carroll Virginia: John Blair, James Madison, Jr.
North Carolina: William Blount, Richard Dobbs Spaight, Hugh Williamson
South Carolina: John Rutledge, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, Charles Pinckney, Pierce Butler
Georgia: William Few, Abraham Baldwin
New Hampshire: John Langdon, Nicholas Gilman
Massachusetts: Nathaniel Gorham, Rufus King
Connecticut: William Samuel Johnson, Roger Sherman
New York: Alexander Hamilton
New Jersey: William Livingston, David Brearley, William Paterson, Jonathan Dayton
Pennsylvania: Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Mifflin, Robert Morris, George Clymer, Thomas FitzSimons, fared Ingersoll, James Wilson, Gouverneur Morris
ARTICLE 6
Constitutional Insight Section 2 Just how “supreme” is the “law of the land”?
The Constitution and all federal laws and treaties are the highest law of the land. (To be supreme, federal laws must be constitutional.) All state constitutions and laws and all local laws rank below national law and cannot be enforced if they contradict national law. For example, if the United States enters into a treaty protecting migratory Canadian birds, the states must change their laws to fit the provisions of that agreement. That was the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Missouri v. Holland (1920). The state of Missouri argued that the national government could not interfere with its power to regulate hunting within its borders, but the Supreme Court concluded that the treaty was a valid exercise of national power and therefore took priority over state and local laws. The states had to adjust their rules and regulations accordingly.
CRITICAL THINKING
What would happen if the national law were not supreme?
ARTICLE 7
Constitutional insight Why was ratification by only 9 states sufficient to put the Constitution into effect? In taking such a momentous step as replacing one constitution (the Articles of Confederation) with another, the framers might have been expected to require the agreement of all 13 states. But the framers were political realists. They knew that they would have a difficult time winning approval from all 13 states. But they also knew that they had a good chance of getting 9 or 10 of the states “on board” and that once that happened, the rest would follow. Their strategy worked, but just barely. Although they had the approval of 9 states by the end of June 1788, 2 of the most important states— Virginia and New York—had not yet decided to ratify. Without the approval of these influential states, the new government would have had a difficult time surviving. Finally, by the end of July, both had given their blessing to the new constitution, but not without intense debate.
And then there was the last holdout—Rhode Island. Not only had Rhode Island refused to send delegates to the Constitutional Convention in 1787, but it turned down ratification several times before finally giving its approval in 1790 under a cloud of economic and even military threats from neighboring states.
CRITICAL THINKING
Do you think all 50 states would ratify the Constitution today? Why or why not?
Review Unit 95
BILL OF RIGHTS
Constitutional Insight Amendment 1
Do Americans have an absolute right to free speech? The right to free speech is not without limits. In the case of Schenck v. United States (1919), Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote that this right does “not protect a man in falsely shouting fire in a theatre and causing a panic.” Thus, there are some forms of speech that are not protected by the First Amendment, and Congress is allowed to make laws regarding certain types of expression. (See Schenck v. United States on page 396.)
CRITICAL THINKING
Why is there controversy over freedom of speech today?
Constitutional Insight Amendment 4
Can the police search your car without a court-issued search warrant when they stop you for speeding? The answer, according to Supreme Court decisions, depends on whether they have good reasons—called “probable cause”—for doing so. If a state trooper notices bloody clothing on the back seat of a vehicle she stops for a traffic violation, there might be probable cause for her to insist on searching the vehicle. There is probably not sufficient reason for a search if the trooper is merely suspicious of the driver because of the way he is acting. In such cases, the trooper may make a casual request, such as “Do you mind if I look inside your vehicle?” If the answer is no, then according to the Court, the driver has waived his or her constitutional right against unreasonable searches.
CRITICAL THINKING
Why do you think the right against unreasonable searches and seizures is highly important to most people?
Constitutional Insight Amendment 5
Can you be tried twice for the same offense? The prohibition against “double jeopardy” protects you from having the same charge twice brought against you for the same offense, but you can be tried on different charges related to that offense.
CRITICAL THINKING
What do you think could happen if a person could be tried twice for the same offense?
The Bill of Rights
and Amendments 11-27
Amendments 1-10
Proposed by Congress September 25, 1789. Ratified December 15, 1791.
Amendment 1. Religious and Political Freedom (1791)
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.
Amendment 2. Right to Bear Arms (1791) A well-regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.
Amendment 3. Quartering Troops (1791) No soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house without the consent of the owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed by law.
Amendment 4. Search and Seizure (1791) The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
Amendment 5. Rights of Accused Persons (1791) No person shall be held to answer for a capital or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the militia, when in actual service in time of war or public danger; nor shall any person be subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation.
Analyzing
Political
Cartoons
FEDERAL EDIFICE"
This 1788 cartoon celebrated the ratification of the Constitution by New York, the 11th state to ratify it. This left only North Carolina and Rhode Island to complete all 13 pillars of the federal structure.
SKILLBUILDER
Analyzing Political Cartoons 1.	What details in the cartoon convey the unity of the states who have voted for ratification?
2.	How does the cartoonist contrast the states who have voted for ratification with those who have not? What message does this convey?
The Living Constitution
Amendment 6. Right to a Speedy, Public Trial (1791) in
all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the state and district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and to have the assistance of counsel for his defense.
Amendment 7. Trial by Jury in Civil Cases (1791) In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise reexamined in any court of the United States, than according to the rules of the common law.
Amendment 8. Limits of Fines and Punishments (1791)
Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.
Amendment 9. Rights of People (1791) The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.
Amendment 10. Powers of States and People (1791) The
powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the states respectively, or to the people.
the
C £ N T 1 N E L.
Voi IX
s On the er eel ion of the Eleventh PILLAR, of the great F,'- j
'	litnaDOMEi-uit 6tg have	re feluitau •‘oag.DH’i cou»i,r
Rife >'
7&e foundation .
bi SAVED.
The FEDERAL EDIFICE, ELEVEN STARS, in quick lucceflion rife—
ELEVEN COLUMNS
Orike our wond’nng eyes, Soono’er the fhall fwcll the beauteous DOME, COLUMBIA’S boaft—and FREEDOM’S hallow d home.
Here fiiall the ARTS in glorious fplendour Ihme. And AGRICULTURE give her llores divine . COMMERCE refin’d, difpenfe us more than gold,
And this new world, teach WISDOM to the old— RELIGION here lhall fix her blefl. abode.
Array’d ih mikhteft, like its parent GOD .
JUSTICE
And LAW, lhall cndlefs PEACE maintain, And/Jr “ SATURNIAN AGE,” return again. Constitutional Insight Amendment 6
What are the Miranda rights? The term comes from the Supreme Court’s decision in Miranda v. Arizona (1966), in which the justices established basic rules that the police must follow when questioning a suspect. If suspected of a crime, you must be told that you have a right to remain silent and that anything you say “can and will” be used against you. You also need to be informed that you have a right to an attorney and that the attorney may be present during questioning. (See Miranda v. Arizona on page 694.)
CRITICAL THINKING
How do the Miranda rights protect you?
Constitutional Insight Amendment 7
What are the “rules of the common law"? The common law is the body of legal practices and decrees developed in England and English-speaking America from a.d. 1066 through the present. It includes Magna Carta (1215), which acknowledges versions of rights affirmed in the Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Amendments, as well as the English Bill of Rights (1689), which codified rights asserted in the First, Second, Seventh, and Eighth Amendments. The common law also includes the decisions and published opinions of state and federal appeals courts, including the U.S. Supreme Court.
Constitutional Insight Amendment 9
Do you have a right to privacy? Until 1965, no such right had ever been explicitly stated by the courts. That year, in the case of Griswold v. Connecticut, the Court said there is an implied right of American citizens to make certain personal choices without interference from the government; this case concerned the right to use birth control. Years later, in Roe v. Wade (1973), the same logic was used to declare unconstitutional a Texas law restricting a woman’s right to an abortion in the first stages of pregnancy. Since that decision, both the right to privacy and abortion rights have become the focus of major political controversies.
CRITICAL THINKING
How do you define the right to privacy?
Review Unit 97
Amendments 11-27
Amendment 11. Lawsuits Against States (1795) Passed by Congress March 4, 1794. Ratified February 7, 1795.
Note: Article 3, Section 2, of the Constitution was modified by the
Eleventh Amendment.
The Judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by citizens of another state, or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state.
Constitutional Insight Amendment 12
How did the election of 1800 lead to the Twelfth Amendment? The election ended in a tie vote between the Republican running mates. The election was decided in Jefferson’s favor on the House’s 36th ballot. Almost immediately Alexander Hamilton and others designed an amendment that established that the presidential electors would vote for both a presidential and a vice-presidential candidate. This amendment prevents a repeat of the problem experienced in the 1800 election.
CRITICAL THINKING
Why is the Twelfth Amendment important?
ELECTION REFORM
A new wave of electoral reform efforts was triggered by the controversial presidential election of 2000, in which George W. Bush’s narrow victory over Al Gore left many Americans questioning the system in which a candidate can lose the popular vote but win the election.
Eliminating or reworking the electoral college has been historically the most frequently proposed constitutional amendment. Other reform proposals have included improving access to polling places by allowing voting on weekend hours or making Election Day a national holiday. Still other proposals would modernize inaccurate polling and counting machines or replace them with computer stations or online voting.
Amendment 12. Election of Executives (1804) Passed by Congress December 9, 1803. Ratified June 15, 1804.
Note: A portion of Article 2, Section 1, of the Constitution was superseded by the Twelfth Amendment.
The electors shall meet in their respective states and vote by ballot for President and Vice-President, one of whom, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same state with themselves; they shall name in their ballots the person voted for as President, and in distinct ballots the person voted for as Vice-President, and they shall make distinct lists of all persons voted for as President, and of all persons voted for as Vice-President, and of the number of votes for each, which lists they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the government of the United States, directed to the President of the Senate;—the President of the Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate and House of Representatives, open all the certificates and the votes shall then be counted;—the person having the greatest number of votes for President shall be the President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of electors appointed; and if no person have such majority, then from the persons having the highest numbers not exceeding three on the list of those voted for as President, the House of Representatives shall choose immediately, by ballot, the President. But in choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by states, the representation from each state having one vote; a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two thirds of the states, and a majority of all the states shall be necessary to a choice. And if the House of Representatives shall not choose a President whenever the right of choice shall devolve upon them, before the fourth day of March next following-, then the Vice-President shall act as President, as in the case of the death or other constitutional disability of the President. The person having the greatest number of votes as Vice-President shall be the Vice-President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of electors appointed, and if no person have a majority, then from the two highest numbers on the list, the Senate shall choose the Vice-President; a quorum for the purpose shall consist of two thirds of the whole number of Senators, and a majority of the whole number shall be necessary to a choice. But no person constitutionally ineligible to the office of President shall be eligible to that of Vice-President of the United States.
Amendment 13. Slavery Abolished (1865) Passed by Congress January 31, 1865. Ratified December 6, 1865.
Note: A portion of Article 4, Section 2, of the Constitution was superseded by the Thirteenth Amendment.
The Living Constitution
SECTION 1 Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction.
Section 2 Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropri-ate legislation.
Amendment 14. Civil Rights (1868) Passed by Congress June 13, 1866. Ratified July 9, 1868.
Note: Article 1, Section 2, of the Constitution was modified by Section 2 of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Section 1 All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the state wherein they reside. No state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any state deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
Section 2 Representatives shall be apportioned among the several states according to their respective numbers, counting the whole number of persons in each state, excluding Indians not taxed. But when the right to vote at any election for the choice of electors for President and Vice-President of the United States, Representatives in Congress, the executive and judicial officers of a state, or the members of the legislature thereof, is denied to any of the male inhabitants of such state, being twenty-one years of age, and citizens of the United States, or in any way abridged, except for participation in rebellion, or other crime, the basis of representation therein shall be reduced in the proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear to the whole number of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such state.
Section 3 No person shall be a Senator or Representative in Congress, or elector of President and Vice-President, or hold any office, civil or military, under the United States, or under any state, who, having previously taken an oath, as a member of Congress, or as an officer of the United States, or as a member of any state legislature, or as an executive or judicial officer of any state, to support the Constitution of the United States, shall have engaged in insurrection or rebellion against the same, or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof. But Congress may, by a vote of two thirds of each house, remove such disability.
Section 4 The validity of the public debt of the United States, authorized by law, including debts incurred for payment of pensions and bounties for services in suppressing insurrection or rebellion, shall not be questioned. But neither the United States nor any state shall assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or rebellion against the United States, or any claim for the loss or emancipation of any slave; but all such debts, obligations and claims shall be held illegal and void.
Section 5 The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article.
Constitutional Insight Amendment 14, Section 1 Which personal status takes priority-—that of U.S. citizen or that of state citizen? The Fourteenth Amendment firmly notes that Americans are citizens of both the nation and the states but that no state can "abridge the privileges or immunities” of U.S. citizens, deprive them "of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law,” or deny them “equal protection of the laws.”
What does it mean to have ‘'equal protection of the laws"? Equal protection means that the laws are to be applied to all persons in the same way. The legal system may discriminate between persons—treat them differently, or unequally—if there are relevant reasons to do so. For example, a person’s income and number of dependents are relevant for how much income tax the person should pay; a person’s gender is not. The Supreme Court’s 1954 decision in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (see page 708), which declared segregated public schools unconstitutional, was based on an Equal Protection claim; a child’s race is not a relevant reason for the state to assign that child to a particular school.
CRITICAL THINKING
Do you agree or disagree with the Supreme Court’s decision that separate educational facilities are unequal? Explain your position.
The lawyers who successfully challenged segregation in the Brown v. Board of Education case In 1954 included (/eft to right) George E. C. Hayes, Thurgood Marshall, and James M. Nabrit, Jr.
Review Unit
Constitutional Insight Amendment 15
Can you be denied the right to vote? The Fifteenth Amendment prohibits the United States or any state from keeping citizens from voting because of race or color or because they were once slaves. However, a person convicted of a crime can be denied the right to vote, as can someone found to be mentally incompetent.
o CRITICAL THINKING
Why do you think so many people do not exercise the right to vote?
Constitutional Insight Amendment 16
How has the ability of Congress to impose taxes been amended? The Sixteenth Amendment permits a federal income tax and in so doing changes Article 1, Section 9, Clause 4, by stating that Congress has the power to levy an income tax—which is a direct tax—without apportioning such a tax among the states according to their populations.
O CRITICAL THINKING
Do you think Congress should have the power to impose an income tax on the people of the nation? Explain your answer.
Constitutional Insight Amendment 17
How has the way senators are elected been changed? The Seventeenth Amendment changes Article 1, Section 3, Clause 1, by stating that senators shall be elected by the people of each state rather than by the state legislatures.
o CRITICAL THINKING
Why is the direct election of senators by the people of each state important?
Federal agents enforcing the Eighteenth Amendment prepare to smash containers of illegal whiskey.
Amendment 15. Right to Vote (1870) Passed by Congress February 26, 1869. Ratified February 3, 1870.
Section 1 The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any state on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude.
Section 2 The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Amendment 16. Income Tax (1913) Passed by Congress July 12, 1909. Ratified February 3, 1913.
Note: Article 2, Section 9, of the Constitution was modified by the
Sixteenth Amendment.
The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from whatever source derived, without apportionment among the several states, and without regard to any census or enumeration.
Amendment 17. Direct Election of Senators (1913) Passed by Congress May 13, 1912. Ratified April 8, 1913.
Note: Article 2, Section 3, of the Constitution was modified by the
Seventeenth Amendment.
Clause 1 The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two Senators from each state, elected by the people thereof, for six years; and each Senator shall have one vote. The electors in each state shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the state legislatures.
Clause 2 When vacancies happen in the representation of any state in the Senate, the executive authority of such state shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies: Provided, that the legislature of any state may empower the executive thereof to make temporary appointments until the people fill the vacancies by election as the legislature may direct.
Clause 3 This amendment shall not be so construed as to affect the election or term of any Senator chosen before it becomes valid as part of the Constitution.
Amendment 18. Prohibition (1919) Passed by Congress December 18, 1917. Ratified January 16, 1919. Repealed by Amendment 21.
Section 1 After one year from the ratification of this article the manu-
facture, -sale, or transportation of-mtoxicating liquors within, the impor tation thereof into/or the exportation thereof from the United States and all territory subject to the jurisdiction thereof for beverage purposesTs— hereby prohibited.
Section 2 The Congress and the several states 3hall have concurrent
power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Section 3 This article 3hall be inoperative unless it 3hall have been-
ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of the—
several states, as provided in the Constitution, within seven years from—
the date of the submission hcrcof-to the states by the Congress.
10 The Living Constitution
Amendment 19. Woman Suffrage (1920) Passed by Congress June 4, 1919. Ratified August 18, 1920.
Clause 1 The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any state on account of sex.
Clause 2 Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Amendment 20. "Lame Duck" Sessions (1933) Passed by Congress March 2, 1932. Ratified January 23, 1933.
Note: Article 1, Section 4, of the Constitution was modified by Section 2 of this amendment. In addition, a portion of the Twelfth Amendment was superseded by Section 3.
Section 1 The terms of the President and Vice-President shall end at noon on the 20th day of January, and the terms of Senators and Representatives at noon on the 3rd day of January, of the years in which such terms would have ended if this article had not been ratified; and the terms of their successors shall then begin.
Section 2 The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such meeting shall begin at noon on the 3rd day of January, unless they shall by law appoint a different day.
Section 3 If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the term of the President, the President elect shall have died, the Vice-President elect shall become President. If a President shall not have been chosen before the time fixed for the beginning of his term, or if the President elect shall have failed to qualify, then the Vice-President elect shall act as President until a President shall have qualified; and the Congress may by law provide for the case wherein neither a President elect nor a Vice-President elect shall have qualified, declaring who shall then act as President, or the manner in which one who is to act shall be selected, and such person shall act accordingly until a President or Vice-President shall have qualified.
Section 4 The Congress may by law provide for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the House of Representatives may choose a President whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them, and for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the Senate may choose a Vice-President whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them.
Section 5 Sections 1 and 2 shall take effect on the 15th day of October following the ratification of this article.
Section 6 This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three fourths of the several states within seven years from the date of its submission.
Amendment 21. Repeal of Prohibition (1933) Passed by Congress February 20, 1933. Ratified December 5, 1933.
Section 1 The eighteenth article of amendment to the Constitution of the United States is hereby repealed.
Section 2 The transportation or importation into any state, territory, or possession of the United States for delivery or use therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of the laws thereof, is hereby prohibited.
Constitutional Insight Amendment 19
When did women first get the right to vote in the United States? Women had the right to vote in the state of New Jersey between 1776 and 1807. In the late 19th century, some states and territories began to extend full or limited suffrage to women. Then, in 1920, the Nineteenth Amendment prohibited the United States or any state from denying women the right to vote.
O CRITICAL THINKING
How does the right of women to vote affect politics today?
Constitutional Insight Amendment 20
Why is the Twentieth Amendment usually called the Tame Duck” amendment? A lame duck is a person who continues to hold office after his or her replacement has been elected. Such a person is called a lame duck because he or she no longer has any strong political influence. The Twentieth Amendment reduces the time between the election of a new president and vice-president in November and their assumption of the offices, which it sets at January 20 instead of March 4. It also reduces the time new members of Congress must wait to take their seats from 4 months to about 2 months. They are now seated on January 3 following the November election. As a result, the lame duck period is now quite short.
Q CRITICAL THINKING
Why may the framers have specified a longer lame duck period?
Constitutional Insight Amendment 21
What is unique about the Twenty-first Amendment? Besides being the only amendment that explicitly repeals another, it was the first, and is so far the only one, to have been ratified by the state convention method outlined in Article 5. Congress, probably fearing that state legislatures would not deal swiftly with the issue of repeal, chose to have each state call a special convention to consider the amendment. The strategy worked well, for the elected delegates to the conventions represented public opinion on the issue and ratified the amendment without delay.
CRITICAL THINKING
Why is it necessary to pass another amendment to revoke or remove an existing amendment?
Review Unit 101
CONGRESSIONAL TERM LIMITS
In 1995, the Supreme Court struck down all state laws limiting congressional terms, stating that they were unconstitutional. The Court ruled that only a constitutional amendment—such as the Twenty-second, which limits the president to two terms—could impose term limits on members of Congress.
Proposed constitutional amendments for Congressional term limits were defeated in Congress in 1995 and in 1997.
Constitutional Insight Amendment 23
Why were residents of the District of Columbia without a vote in presidential elections? First, the district was merely an idea at the time the Constitution was written. Second, no one expected the district to include many residents. Third, the framers designed the electoral college on a state framework. By 1960, however, the fact that nearly 800,000 Americans living in the nation’s capital could not vote in presidential elections was an embarrassment. The Twenty-third Amendment gives Washington, D.C., residents the right to vote in presidential elections by assigning them electoral votes.
CRITICAL THINKING
Do you think the District of Columbia should be made a separate state?
Constitutional Insight Amendment 24
Why was the poll tax an issue important enough to require an amendment? The poll tax was used in some places to prevent African-American voters—at least the many who were too poor to pay the tax—from participating in elections. As the civil rights movement gained momentum, the abuse of the poll tax became a major issue, but the national government found it difficult to change the situation because the constitutional provisions in Article 1, Section 4, leave the qualifications of voters in the hands of the states. The Twenty-fourth Amendment changed this by prohibiting the United States or any state from including payment of any tax as a requirement for voting. 0 CRITICAL THINKING
What impact do you think the Twenty-fourth ment has had on elections?
Section 3 This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been rati-fled as an amendment to the Constitution by conventions in the several states, as provided in the Constitution, within seven years from the date of the submission hereof to the states by the Congress.
Amendment 22. Limit on Presidential Terms (1951) Passed by Congress March 21, 1947. Ratified February 27, 1951.
Section 1 No person shall be elected to the office of the President more than twice, and no person who has held the office of President, or acted as President, for more than two years of a term to which some other person was elected President shall be elected to the office of the President more than once. But this article shall not apply to any person holding the office of President when this article was proposed by the Congress,
and shall not prevent any person who may be holding the office of ■■
President, or acting as President, during the term1 within which thi3 arti-
cle becomes operative from holding the office of-President or acting a3— President during the remainder of such tcrtTh-
Section 2 This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three fourths of the several states within seven years from the date of its submission to the states by the Congress.
Amendment 23. Voting in District of Columbia (1961) Passed by Congress June 17, 1960. Ratified March 29, 1961.
Section 1 The district constituting the seat of government of the United States shall appoint in such manner as Congress may direct: a number of electors of President and Vice-President equal to the whole number of Senators and Representatives in Congress to which the district would be entitled if it were a state, but in no event more than the least populous state; they shall be in addition to those appointed by the states, but they shall be considered, for the purposes of the election of President and Vice-President, to be electors appointed by a state; and they shall meet in the district and perform such duties as provided by the twelfth article of amendment.
Section 2 The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Amendment 24. abolition of poll taxes (1964) Passed by Congress August 27, 1962. Ratified January 23, 1964.
Section 1 The right of citizens of the United States to vote in any primary or other election for President or Vice-President, for electors for President or Vice-President, or for Senator or Representative in Congress, shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or any state by reason of failure to pay any poll tax or other tax.
Section 2 The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Amendment 25. Presidential Disability, Succession (1967)
Passed by Congress July 6, 1965. Ratified February 10, 1967.
Note: Article 2, Section 1, of the Constitution was affected by the Twenty-fifth Amendment.
he Living Constitution
Section 1. In case of the removal of the President from office or of his death or resignation, the Vice-President shall become President.
Section 2 Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice-President, the President shall nominate a Vice-President who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both houses of Congress.
Section 3 Whenever the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, and until he transmits to them a written declaration to the contrary, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice-President as Acting President.
Section 4 Whenever the Vice-President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive departments or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice-President shall immediately assume the powers and duties of the office as Acting President.
Thereafter, when the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that no inability exists, he shall resume the powers and duties of his office unless the Vice-President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive department [s] or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit within four days to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office. Thereupon Congress shall decide the issue, assembling within forty-eight hours for that purpose if not in session. If the Congress, within twenty-one days after receipt of the latter written declaration, or, if Congress is not in session, within twenty-one days after Congress is required to assemble, determines by two thirds vote of both houses that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice-President shall continue to discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise, the President shall resume the powers and duties of his office.
Amendment 26. 18-year-old Vote (1971) Passed by Congress March 23, 1971. Ratified July 1, 1971.
Note: Amendment 14, Section 2, of the Constitution was modified by
Section 1 of the Twenty-sixth Amendment.
Section 1 The right of citizens of the United States, who are eighteen years of age or older, to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any state on account of age.
Section 2 The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Amendment 27. Congressional Pay (1992) Proposed by Congress September 25, 1789. Ratified May 7, 1992.
No law, varying the compensation for the services of the Senators and Representatives, shall take effect, until an election of Representatives shall have intervened.
Constitutional Insight Amendment 26
Why was the Twenty-sixth Amendment passed? Granting 18-year-olds the right to vote became an issue in the 1960s, during the Vietnam War, when people questioned the justice of requiring 18-year-old men to submit to the military draft but refusing them the right to vote. In 1970, Congress passed a voting rights act giving 18-year-olds the right to vote in elections. When the constitutionality of this act was challenged, the Supreme Court decided that states had to honor the 18-year-old vote for congressional and presidential elections but could retain higher age requirements for state and local elections. To avoid confusion at the polls, the Twenty-sixth Amendment was passed. It guarantees 18-year-olds the right to vote in national and state elections.
O CRITICAL THINKING
Do you think 18-year-olds should have the right to vote? Why or why not?
(above) President Richard M. Nixon signs the Twenty-sixth Amendment to the Constitution, adopted in 1971.
Constitutional Insight Amendment 27
How long did it take to ratify this amendment? Although the Twenty-seventh Amendment was one of the 12 amendments proposed in 1789 as part of the Bill of Rights, it was not ratified until 1992. This amendment, which deals with congressional compensation, allows the members of Congress to increase Congressional pay, but delays the increase until after a new Congress is seated.
CRITICAL THINKING
Do you think members of Congress should be able to vote themselves a pay increase? Explain your answer.
Review Unit 103
TRACING THEMES
Voting Rights
When the American colonists declared their independence from Great Britain in 1776, their struggle to create a representative government was just beginning. One of the key elements of that government is the right to vote. Voting is a civic responsibility; our democratic system relies on its citizens to participate in politics. Voting is an act of patriotism that reinforces the strength of the republic and its democratic ideals. It is a part of our national ethos, or character. While the right to vote is not unique to the United States, Americans take great pride in their democratic history and the efforts that they have made to preserve and protect their voting rights.
However, the right to vote has not always been extended to all groups. As a result, excluded groups used various methods to expand suffrage so that they too could exercise this important right. Such methods have included amendments to the U.S. Constitution, lobbying, nonviolent protests, and litigation. As more Americans have been granted this right, we have moved closer to the constitutional goal of forming a "more perfect union."
AMENDMENTS
In 1870, the Fifteenth Amendment was ratified as part of Reconstruction following the Civil War. It attempted to guarantee African American males the right to vote by stating that the right of U.S. citizens “to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any state on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude.” This extension of suffrage added millions of potential new voters. Unfortunately, the amendment did not protect against denial of suffrage for reasons other than race, so poll taxes, grandfather clauses, and literacy tests were used to prevent African American males from exercising their voting rights. The Twenty-fourth Amendment, ratified in 1964, abolished poll taxes, which extended suffrage yet again. More recently, the Twenty-sixth Amendment, ratified in 1971, granted the right to vote to citizens “eighteen years of age or older.” On the whole, amendments have been an effective means of expanding voting rights.
5W
IB™

LOBBYING
When the delegates to the Seneca Falls Convention gathered in 1848 to begin their campaign for women’s rights, they had no idea that it would take them 72 years of organizing, lobbying, and persuading before they finally won the right to vote. Several organizations took up the banner of women’s suffrage, such as the National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA) and the National Women’s Party (NWP), shown lobbying at left. They used a variety of tactics to achieve their goals. One tactic was lobbying, or exerting pressure on public officials to achieve political goals. For example, the purpose of NAWSA’s Congressional Committee, led by Alice Paul and Lucy Burns, was to convince Congress to pass an amendment granting women the vote. Eventually the lobbying efforts of this and other suffrage groups paid off when the Nineteenth Amendment, ratified in 1920 expanded voting rights to include women.
Chapter 2 Living Constitution
NONVIOLENT PROTESTS
In the 1960s, the African American civil rights movement adopted a strategy of nonviolent protest to seek expansion of voting rights. Although the Fifteenth Amendment guaranteed that voting rights could not be denied due to race, states had implemented other methods to discriminate against African Americans and keep them from the polls. Members of the civil rights movement staged sit-ins, boycotts, marches, and other forms of nonviolent civil action in order to protest discrimination and segregation. In 1965, Martin Luther King Jr. began a campaign of nonviolent protests and marches in Selma, Alabama, to gain voting rights for African Americans. In response to these events, President Johnson asked for the speedy passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. The new law gave the federal government the power to break down longstanding barriers to African American voting rights.
LITIGATION
In many instances, litigation has been used to protect and reclaim voting rights. For example, in the 1915 decision Guinn v. United States the U.S. Supreme Court struck down Oklahoma’s grandfather clause because it violated the rights guaranteed to African Americans in the Fifteenth Amendment. Litigation has also been used to ensure that minority votes carry equal weight. In 1973, for instance, the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund (MALDEF) won a victory in White v. Regester by arguing that reapportionment plans for the Texas legislature disenfranchised African American and Mexican American voters. The Supreme Court upheld a lower court decision requiring certain counties to be redistricted. Through these and other cases, litigation has proven to be an important tool for protecting the expansion of Hi voting rights in the United States.
Review Unit 105
THE LIVING CONSTITUTION ASSESSMENT
MAIN IDEAS
Article 1. The Legislature
1.	Why does the legislative branch of the government represent the people most directly? What is the principal job of this branch?
2.	Why are there more members of the House of Representatives than of the Senate?
3.	Name four powers Congress has.
4.	What powers are denied to Congress? to the states?
Article 2. The Executive
5.	What is the main function of the executive branch?
6.	Who officially elects the president of the United States? Explain.
7.	How can the president lose his or her job before election time?
Article 3. The Judiciary
8.	How are Supreme Court justices appointed?
9.	What kinds of cases go before the Supreme Court? Why is the Court’s decision whether to hear a case important?
Article 4. Relations Among States
10.	To extradite is to send a fugitive back to the state in which he or she is accused of committing a crime. How is this an example of relations among states?
Article 5. Amending the Constitution
11.	How many states must ratify an amendment for it to become part of the Constitution? Why do you think it takes that many?
Article 6. Supremacy of the National Government
12.	How does Article 6 establish the supremacy of the Constitution?
The Amendments
13.	Does the First Amendment allow complete freedom of speech—the right to say anything you want at any time, anywhere? Explain your answer.
14.	What is the newest amendment? What protection does that amendment give to the American people?
THINKING CRITICALLY
TAKING NOTES
The powers of the federal government are separated among the three branches. Create a chart like the one below that shows how the Constitution’s framers used checks and balances to ensure that no one branch of the government could become too much stronger than the others. Executive	Legislative	Judicial
		
MAKING INFERENCES
How does the Constitution reflect the fear of too strong a central government? EVALUATING
The Bill of Rights guarantees a defendant a speedy, public trial. Do you think it is being observed today? Explain. ANALYZING MOTIVES
Why did the framers make it so difficult to amend the Constitution? Do you agree or disagree with their philosophy? Explain. DEVELOPING HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Review the feature on pages 104-105. What methods have people used to expand voting rights? Do you think some methods might be more effective than others? Explain your answer. 
TEXAS TEST PRACTICE
Use the cartoon and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 1.
Use the quotation and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 2.
“ [The president] shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to make treaties, provided two thirds of the Senators present concur; and he shall nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, judges of the Supreme Court, and all other officers of the United States . . . ”
—U.S. Constitution, Art. 2, Sec. 2, part 2
2.	The passage describes checks on the power of—
F the president.
G the Senate.
H the judiciary.
J the states.
3.	Which of the following must ratify Constitutional amendments?
“It’s Awful The Way They’re Trying To Influence Congress. Why Don’t They Serve Cocktails And Make Campaign
Contributions Like We Do?”
In the Constitutional Convention, the framers adopted certain principles to be embodied in the Constitution. Which of the following Constitutional principles does the cartoon support?
A
The federal government’s power should be divided into separate branches. B
The federal government should be stronger than the state governments. C
The federal legislature should be responsive to the will of the people. D
The legislature and the president should check each other’s power. Congress the people the states the president
7\ hmhsocialstudies.com
TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests • Tutorials
"’J'WriteSmart
Imagine that it is 1787, and you are a citizen of one of the original thirteen states. Your vote is necessary to ratify the new Constitution that has been approved by the convention in Philadelphia. You have studied the seven articles and listened to spirited discussions about how you and your state will be affected. Write a journal entry in which you express your views about this document that is so important for the new United States. Make sure you include references to what you have read and heard about the Constitution. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your journal entry.
MULTIMEDIA ACTIVITY
XCWWItY
Review the introduction to the Tracing Themes feature on page 104. Then use the Internet to research why voting is important to the democratic process and to our nation’s continued success. Identify how participation in the democratic process reflects our national ethos, our patriotism, our civic responsibility, and our progress to build a “more perfect union.” Create a multimedia presentation to explain your findings to the class.
7\ hmhsocialstudies.com
Review Unit 107
PROJECTS FOR CITIZENSHIP
Applying the Constitution
The United States Constitution is admired the worid over. But a healthy democracy depends on the continuing participation of its citizens—including you. Here are four projects that will help you learn the rewards and challenges of responsible citizenship.

hmhsocialstudies.com
RESEARCH WEB LINKS
Visit the links for the Constitution
for more information that will help you with these Projects for Citizenship
PROJECT 1
PROJECT 2
Becoming an Educated Voter
ENDORSING A CANDIDATE
Choose a campaign for elective office and learn about the issues and the candidates in the campaign. After doing your research, write an endorsement, or a statement in favor, of one of the candidates.
LEARNING ABOUT THE CANDIDATES
✓	Examine news media and news services. During campaigns, some services and publications offer endorsements that explain why particular candidates are worthy of support.
✓Get information from political parties. They provide information on the candidates, but their perspective is biased toward their own candidates. The major parties have Internet sites, as do many local groups and individual candidates.
✓	Contact interest groups, such as the Sierra Club and the National Association of Manufacturers. They often list candidates' positions on issues and support candidates who share their beliefs.
✓Look at databases and voters' guides published by nonpartisan organizations such as the League of Women Voters and Project Vote Smart.
As you use each source, try to identify any bias. Think about the following questions.
•	What does the author of this source stand to gain from supporting a particular candidate?
•	Is the information in the source complete and accurate?
•	Does the author use loaded or inflammatory language?
PRESENTING YOUR PROJECT
Expressing Political Opinions
WRITING A LETTER TO THE EDITOR
Identify an issue that concerns you. Then write a letter or send an e-mail message about that issue to the editor of a newspaper or magazine.
WRITING A PERSUASIVE LETTER
✓	Find an issue that has been in the news lately and about which you feel strongly.
✓	Read recent articles, editorials, and cartoons in newspapers or magazines. Notice how they have addressed this issue.
✓	Compose a letter that clearly and concisely explains your views about the issue you have chosen. Your letter should also include reasons and facts that support your opinion on the issue. It might also advocate some specific action to be taken to address the issue.
✓identify the person to whom you should send your letter, and note any requirements the newspaper or magazine has for writing letters to the editor.
✓Edit your letter carefully. Be sure to use standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation.
PRESENTING YOUR PROJECT
Present the letter you wrote to the rest of the class. When you do, explain why you chose to write about this issue.
A student expresses her political opinions as she addresses an audience.
After you have written your endorsement, you might send it to a media outlet, such as a newspaper or a television station, or post it on the Internet. Or you might send it to your local or school newspaper.
he Living Constitution
PROJECT 3
PROJECT 4
Understanding How to Lobby
PLANNING A LOBBYING CAMPAIGN
Form a committee with other students to organize a lobbying campaign—a campaign to influence legislation or public policy. Create a plan for the campaign that includes materials to be presented to government officials. In creating your plan, keep the following points in mind.
CREATING A LOBBYING PLAN
^Establish a clear goal of what you want to achieve.
Make sure all members of the group understand and agree with the established goal.
^Identify the appropriate people to lobby—the people who can best help you to achieve your goal. For example, if your group is planning to lobby to have a bill passed, you would lobby the legislators who will vote on the bill. However, if your group wants to lobby for a local improvement—such as cleaning up an abandoned factory site—you should lobby the local officials who make those decisions.
•^Gather statistics and other information that support your case. Explore a variety of resources, including the library, the Internet, and news services. Conduct interviews with appropriate state or local officials. Use the information you gather to develop a brief written report that can be given to the officials you intend to lobby.
^Organize public opinion in favor of your case. Gather signatures on petitions or conduct a letter-writing campaign to encourage people who support your goal to contact government officials. You can also create fliers calling attention to your cause.
^Present your case to government officials firmly but politely. Practice your presentation several times before you actually appear before them.
PRESENTING YOUR PROJECT
Share your lobbying plan with the rest of the class in the form of a written proposal that includes materials, such as petition forms, that you will use in your lobbying effort. If you implement your lobbying plan, describe to the class what response you received from the officials you lobbied.
Volunteering in your Community
MAKING AN ORAL REPORT
Identify a local community organization that you might want to help. Find out what kinds of volunteer activities the organization has, such as answering phones in the office, serving food to the homeless, or cleaning vacant lots. Then volunteer to participate in one of those activities. Prepare an oral report to present to the rest of the class about your experiences as a volunteer. Keep the following points in mind as you choose which organization to help.
A group of young volunteers in the Summer of Service project discusses plans with carpenters.
SUGGESTIONS FOR VOLUNTEERING
•^Decide what kinds of public service projects might interest you. You might talk to your parents, a teacher, friends, a local church, or a local political organization to learn what kinds of volunteer services are needed in your community.
✓	Call local community organizations to find out what kinds of volunteer opportunities they offer and decide whether you would like to volunteer for those projects.
✓	Decide what cause you want to support and identify an organization that addresses that cause.
✓	Decide what type of work you want to do and work with that organization.
PRESENTING YOUR PROJECT
Deliver an oral report to your class about your experiences as a volunteer. Explain why you chose the specific volunteer activity that you did. Describe the activity you performed. Then explain what effect your volunteering had as well as whether you felt the experience was a good one.
Review Unit 109
On September 17, Constitution Day, Americans celebrate the signing of the United States Constitution in 1787. In Texas, social studies classrooms also observe Celebrate Freedom Week. This important celebration focuses on the meaning and significance of the two foundational documents in United States history—the Declaration of Independence and the U.S. Constitution.
The Declaration of Independence
One of the most eloquent and influential documents ever written, the Declaration of Independence gave the reasons the American colonies were willing to fight for independence. Thomas Jefferson, the main author of the document, began by explaining the purpose of government. Part of this first section, known as the Preamble, must be recited by Texas students during Celebrate Freedom Week. It is perhaps the most famous statement from the document:
l/l/e hold these Truths to be self-evident, that all Men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness. That to secure these Rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just Powers from the Consent of the Governed.
—Declaration of Independence
* In CONGRESS, July 4, t77t>.
imowtouT^ecfardten ,»*, States
t*/t M ■avtMsst/ Qttftuwn/, &
"	//,rzrT
These powerful words established the idea that governments exist to serve their citizens, and that people have basic natural rights that government cannot take away. Throughout our history, these words have inspired Americans to fight for and expand the definitions of freedom, equality, and basic rights. For example, women's rights advocates echoed the language of the Declaration of Independence in 1848 when they demanded the right to vote by declaring that "all men and women are created equal." Abolitionists and civil rights leaders also looked to the Declaration of Independence in their struggles to end slavery and ensure that African Americans were guaranteed equal rights. Even beyond America, the Declaration of Independence has inspired independence and prodemocracy movements around the world. It continues to inspire us today.
Independence Day
Each 4th of July, Americans celebrate the adoption of the Declaration of Independence with parades, fireworks, picnics, fairs, and ceremonies honoring our freedoms and government.
KEY FACTS
DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE
Date
•	Adopted July 4,1776 by the Continental Congress
Key Author
•	Thomas Jefferson
Intent
•	To announce formally that the 13 American colonies considered themselves independent states no longer part of the British Empire
•	To explain and justify the reasons for independence
Meaning and importance
•	Established in writing the principle that all people have certain fundamental rights that no government can take away
•	Explained that the purpose of government is to serve citizens
•	Influenced the U.S. Constitution and Bill of Rights
•	Has inspired people throughout history in the struggle for equality, justice, and basic human rights
©Philip Gould/ CORBIS; ©Renzo luo/Shutterstock
4 I

The U.S. Constitution
Building on the Declaration of Independence, the U.S. Constitution established the system of government that is still in effect today. Another truly groundbreaking document, the Constitution established the rule of law and made clear that no one, including the highest government official, is above it. The document's opening words, the Preamble, elegantly state its purpose:
We the People of the United States, in Order to form a more perfect Union, establish Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.
—United States Constitution
The three opening words, We the People, which were written so much larger than
the others, announced dramatically that in the United States the people are the	|
source of all government power and authority.	I
To protect people's rights and to balance power, the Constitution set up a system	f
that divides power among federal and state governments. Federal power is	I
supreme, and certain powers are shared or reserved for the states. A system	«
of checks and balances further divides power among three equal branches of	|
government—legislative, executive, and judicial.	1
i
The Constitution also includes a process by which it can be amended, or	|
changed. It is sometimes referred to as "a living document" for this reason;	®
it can be added to and improved by the people to reflect changes in society.
Since it was adopted in 1787, the Constitution has been amended 27 times. These
amendments have abolished slavery, guaranteed women and minorities the right
to vote and to receive equal treatment under the law, changed voting and	,
election procedures, and made other improvements to our government.
CF3
One of the most important parts of the Constitution is the Bill of Rights—the first 10 amendments. The Bill of Rights helps protect the rights described in the Declaration of Independence. For example, the Bill of Rights protects such basic rights as freedom of speech, press, and religion as well as due process rights such as the right to a fair trial. The Bill of Rights was an important early addition to the Constitution because it stated in writing some of the specific individual rights and protections guaranteed for all Americans.
KEY FACTS
BILL OF RIGHTS
THE CONSTITUTION
Date
•	Adopted September 17,1787 by the Constitutional Convention
Key Author
•	James Madison
Intent
•	To establish a new national government of the United States
•	To replace the Articles of Confederation
•	To safeguard the freedoms of all Americans, present and future
Meaning and Importance
•	Established the supreme law of the land for the United States that is still in effect today
•	Identifies the people as the ultimate source of government power
•	Sets up a system of power sharing among the federal and state government
•	Divides power into three equal branches of government
•	Includes an amendment process
•	Includes the Bill of Rights and other amendments that have protected and expanded individual rights and freedoms
1st Amendment	Protects freedom of religion, speech, press, assembly, petition
2nd Amendment	Protects the right to keep and bear arms
3rd Amendment	Provides restrictions on quartering soldiers in citizens7 homes
4th Amendment	Bans unreasonable searches or seizures
5th Amendment	Protects citizens against self-incrimination and being tried twice for the same crime; prohibits government from depriving citizens of life, liberty, or property without due process of law
6th Amendment	Protects citizens' right to a swift and fair trial
7th Amendment	Guarantees right to trial by jury
8th Amendment	Protects citizens against cruel and unusual punishment
9th Amendment	States that citizens have rights beyond those specifically written in the Constitution
10th Amendment	States that powers not given to the government are reserved to the states, or to the people
©Renzo fuo/Shutterstock
Research Activity
As part of Celebrate Freedom Week, conduct research on the two most
influential documents in U.S. history. First, read the Declaration of Independence
and explore how it influenced subsequent American history and has inspired
people for generations. In your own words, explain how the Declaration o
Independence is still relevant in our lives today. Then, review a copy o t e ,
U.S.
Constitution to explore how it has been amended throughout our nation s history. Give an example of how the Constitution or Bill of Rights protects your
rights, and the rights of others.
Celebrate Freedom Week 109 CF4
Essential Question
myNotebook
How did the Jeffersonian Era, the Age of Jackson, and manifest destiny contribute to the growth of the nation during the first half of the 19th century?
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
12B, 21C, 22A,22B, 29B
SECTION 1: The Jeffersonian Era
Main Idea During the presidencies of Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and James Monroe, the country grew in both size and prestige.
SECTION 2: The Age of Jackson
Main idea During a time of growing sectionalism, Andrew Jackson's election in 1828 ushered in a new era of popular democracy.
SECTION 3: Early British Colonies Main Idea Through settlement and war, the United States greatly expanded its boundaries during the mid-1800s.
SECTION 4: The Colonies Come of Age Main Idea Inventions and economic developments in the early 19th century helped transform American society.
SECTION 5: Reforming American Society Main Idea Throughout the mid-19th century, men and women embarked on a widespread effort to solve problems in American society.
:	Treaty of
: Ghent is signed, end-: ing the War of 1812.
:	j Congress
: passes the : Missouri : Compromise.
(The port of New Orleans, Louisiana, was a major center for the cotton trade.
USA
WORLD
[1803! The United States purchases the Louisiana Territory from France.
1800
!18021 Toussaint L’Ouverture defeats French forces sent to recapture Saint Domingue (Haiti).
1810
: H?ip] Mexican War : [18151 Napoleon : of Independence	: is defeated at
• begins.	: Waterloo.
: [l821] Mexico • wins its independ-: ence from Spain.
James	John
Monroe Quincy Adams
Presidents
Thomas
Jefferson
Thomas
Jefferson
James
Madison
James
Madison
