274 Chapter 8
: Goo]	;	rX90x] Theodore 5	[1904 j Theodor-.
: William	5	Roosevelt	•	Roosevelt	is
: McKinley is	•	becomes	•	elected
• reelected.	:	president.	:	president.
•M99J Austrian psychoanalyst : Sigmund Freud publishes • The Interpretation of Dreams.
: j 1916 [ Woodrow • Wilson is : reelected.
1905
: 1908 Henry Ford : introduces the Model T.
: >1.908] William H. Taft elected president.
• 119121 Woodrow Wilson : is elected president.
:1914; World War I : begins in Europe.
1915
Life at the Turn of the 20th Century 275
Science and Urban Life
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
Advances in science and technology helped solve urban problems, including overcrowding.
American cities continue to depend on the results of scientific and technological research.
Louis Sullivan Daniel Burnham Frederick Law Olmsted
Orville and Wilbur Wright
George Eastman
hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on important changes in city design, communications, and transportation.
MW

The Brooklyn Bridge, connecting Brooklyn to the island of Manhattan in New York City, opened in 1883. It took 14 years to build. Each day, laborers descended to work in a caisson, or watertight chamber, that took them deep beneath the East River. E. F. Farrington, a mechanic who worked on the bridge, described the working conditions.
A
Personal Voice e. f. farrington 66 Inside the caisson everything wore an unreal, weird appearance. There was a confused sensation in the head . . . What with the flaming lights, the deep shadows, the confusing noise of hammers, drills, and chains, the half-naked forms flitting about. . . one might, if of a poetic temperament, get a realizing sense of Dante’s Inferno. ” —quoted in The Great Bridge
In 1883, New Yorkers celebrated the opening of the world’s longest suspension bridge, the 1,595-foot-long Brooklyn Bridge.
Four years later, trains ran across the bridge 24 hours a day and carried more than 30 million travelers each year.
Technology and City Life
Engineering innovations, such as the Brooklyn Bridge, laid the groundwork for modern American life. Cities in every industrial area of the country expanded both outward and upward. In 1870, only 25 American cities had populations of 50,000 or more; by 1890, 58 cities could make that claim. By the turn of the 20th century, due to the increasing number of industrial jobs, four out of ten Americans made their homes in cities.
In response to these changes, technological advances began to meet the nation's needs for communication, transportation, and space. One remedy for more urban space was to build toward the sky.
276 Chapter 8
j MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
How did new technologies make the building of skyscrapers practical?
Summarizing
How did electric transit impact urban life?
Vocabulary promenade: a
public place for walking
SKYSCRAPERS
Architects were able to design taller buildings because of two factors: the invention of elevators and the development of internal steel skeletons to bear the weight of buildings. In 1890-1891, architect Louis Sullivan designed the ten-story Wainwright Building in St. Louis. He called the new breed of skyscraper a proud and soaring thing/' The tall building's appearance was graceful because its steel framework supported both floors and walls. The skyscraper became America's greatest contribution to architecture, "a new thing under the sun," according to the architect Frank Lloyd Wright, who studied under Sullivan. Skyscrapers solved the practical problem of how to make the best use of limited and expensive space. The unusual form of another skyscraper, the Flatiron Building, seemed perfect for its location at one of New York's busiest intersections. Daniel Burnham designed this slender 285-foot tower in 1902. The Flatiron Building and other new buildings served as symbols of a rich and optimistic society.
ELECTRIC TRANSIT
As skyscrapers expanded upward, changes in transportation allowed cities to spread outward. Before the Civil War, horses had drawn the earliest streetcars over iron rails embedded in city streets. In some cities during the 1870s and 1880s, underground moving cables powered streetcar lines. Electricity, however, transformed urban transportation. In 1888 Richmond, Virginia, became the first American city to electrify its urban transit. Other cities followed. By the turn of the twentieth century, intricate networks of electric streetcars—also called trolley cars—ran from outlying neighborhoods to downtown offices and department stores.
New railroad lines also fed the growth of suburbs, allowing residents to commute to downtown jobs. New York's northern suburbs alone supplied 100,000 commuters each day to the central business district.
A few large cities moved their streetcars far above street level, creating elevated or "el" trains. Other cities, like New York, built subways by moving their rail lines underground. These streetcars, elevated trains, and subways enabled cities to annex suburban developments that mushroomed along the advancing transportation routes. s#
ENGINEERING AND URBAN PLANNING
Steel-cable suspension bridges, like the Brooklyn Bridge, also brought cities' sections closer together. Sometimes these bridges provided recreational opportunities. In his design for the Brooklyn Bridge, for example, John Augustus Roebling provided an elevated promenade whose "principal use will be to allow people of leisure, and old and young invalids, to promenade over the bridge on fine days." This need for open spaces in the midst of crowded commercial cities inspired the emerging science of urban planning. City planners sought to restore a measure of serenity to the environment by designing recreational areas. Landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted spearheaded the movement for planned urban parks.
In 1857 Olmsted, along with English-born architect Calvert Vaux, helped draw up a plan for "Greensward," which was selected to become Central Park, in New York City. Olmsted envisioned the park as a rustic haven in the center of the busy city.
The finished park featured boating and
The Flatiron Building, shown here under construction, stands at the intersection of Fifth Avenue and 23rd Street in New York City.
hn
jiii
jin


.Vr'nonij |


tennis facilities, a zoo, and bicycle paths. Olmsted hoped that the park's beauty would soothe the city's inhabitants and let them enjoy a "natural setting.
A
Personal Voice Frederick law olmsted “The main object and justification [of the park] is simply to produce a certain influence in the minds of people and through this to make life In the city healthier and happier. The character of this influence ... is to be produced by means of scenes, through observation of which the mind may be more or less lifted out of moods and habits. ”
—quoted in Frederick Law Olmsted's New York
In the 1870s, Olmsted planned landscaping for Washington, D.C., and St. Louis. He also drew the initial designs for "the Emerald Necklace," Boston's parks system. Boston's Back Bay area, originally a 450-acre swamp, was drained and developed by urban planners into an area of elegant streets and cultural attractions, including Olmsted's parks.
CITY PLANNING
By contrast, Chicago, with its explosive growth from 30,000 people in 1850 to 300,000 in 1870, represented a nightmare of unregulated expansion. Fortunately for the city, a local architect, Daniel Burnham, was intrigued History Through
Architecture

THE CHICAGO PLAN
This map from Daniel Burnham’s original plan of Chicago looks deceptively like an ordinary map today. But at the time, it was almost revolutionary in its vision, and it inspired city planners all over the country.
Qchicago’s Lakefront First, Burnham designed the “White City” to host the 1893 World’s Columbian Exposition. His greatest legacy to Chicago may have been his idea for a lakefront park system, complete with beaches, playing fields, and playgrounds.
'I 1! \	.
x' K \ • IZ
■	iir——'Jk^
■V—
i i 'w i i l._
11
F! rL'iS;' :A -1	/
""71”
{^Neighborhood Parks Though not all cities could claim a lakefront vista for recreation, most cities sprinkled neighborhood parks where their residents needed them. Urban planners provided for local parks—such as Lincoln Park in Chicago—so that “the sweet breath of plant life” would be available to everyone.
BB0E0S5F^
II J
i \r 
vi
X
$
QHarbors For Cities On the Great Lakes, the shipping business depended on accessible harbors. Burnham saw the advantage of harbors for recreation and commercial purposes, but he advocated moving the harbors away from the central business districts to free space for public use.
□The Civic Center Burnham redesigned the street pattern to create a group of long streets that would converge on a grand plaza, a practice reflected in other American cities. The convergence of major thoroughfares at a city's center helped create a unified city from a host of neighborhoods.
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Visual Sources 1.	Why did Chicago’s location make it a good choice for urban planning?
2.	How was Chicago’s importance as a shipping center maintained?
Unity was the goal of the architect of Chicago’s city center.
178 Chapter 8
J MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
Q
List three major changes in cities near the turn of the century. What effect did each have? Vocabulary internal combustion engine: an engine in which fuel is burned within the engine rather than in an external furnace
by the prospect of remaking the city. His motto was "Make no little plans. They have no magic to stir men's blood." He oversaw the transformation of a swampy area near Lake Michigan into a glistening White City for Chicago's 1893 World's Columbian Exposition. Majestic exhibition halls, statues, the first Ferris wheel, and a lagoon greeted more than 21 million visitors who came to the city.
Many urban planners saw in Burnham's White City glorious visions of future cities. Burnham, however, left Chicago an even more important legacy: an overall plan for the city, crowned by elegant parks strung along Lake Michigan. As a result, Chicago's lakefront today features curving banks of grass and sandy beaches instead of a jumbled mass of piers and warehouses.
New Technologies
New developments in communication brought the nation closer together. In addition to a railroad network that now spanned the nation, advances in printing, aviation, and photography helped to speed the transfer of information.
A REVOLUTION IN PRINTING
By 1890, the literacy rate in the United States had risen to nearly 90 percent. Publishers turned out ever-increasing numbers of books, magazines, and newspapers to meet the growing demand of the reading public. A series of technological advances in printing aided their efforts. American mills began to produce huge quantities of cheap paper from wood pulp. The new paper proved durable enough to withstand high-speed presses. The electrically powered web-perfecting press, for example, printed on both sides of a continuous paper roll, rather than on just one side. It then cut, folded, and counted the pages as they came down the line. Faster production and lower costs made newspapers and magazines more affordable. People could now buy newspapers for a penny a copy.
AIRPLANES
In the early 20th century, brothers Orville and Wilbur Wright, bicycle manufacturers from Dayton, Ohio, experimented with new engines powerful enough to keep "heavier-than-air" craft aloft. First the Wright brothers built a glider. Then they commissioned a four-cylinder internal combustion engine, chose a propeller, and designed a biplane with a 40'4" wingspan. Their first successful flight—on December 17, 1903, at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina—covered 120 feet and lasted 12 seconds. Orville later described the take-off. ORLD
STAOj? THE GARDEN CITY
Urban planning in the United States had European counterparts. In Tomorrow: A Peaceful Path to Social Reform (1898), for example, the British city planner Ebenezer Howard wrote of a planned residential community called a garden city.
Howard wanted to combine the benefits of urban life with easy access to nature. His city plan was based on concentric circles— with a town at the center and a wide circle of rural land on the perimeter. The town center included a garden, concert hall, museum, theater, library, and hospital.
The circle around the town center included a park, a shopping center, a conservatory, a residential area, and industry. Six wide avenues radiated out from the town center. In 1903, Letchworth, England served as the model for Howard’s garden city.
A
Personal Voice orville wright “After running the motor a few minutes to heat it up, I released the wire that held the machine to the track, and the machine started forward into the wind. Wilbur ran at the side of the machine ... to balance it. . . . Unlike the start on the 14th, made In a calm, the machine, facing a 27-mile wind, started very slowly. . . . One of the life-saving men snapped the camera for us, taking a picture just as the machine had reached the end of the track and had risen to a height of about two feet.”
—quoted in Smithsonian Frontiers of Flight
Orville (right) and Wilbur Wright at home in Dayton, Ohio, in 1909.
▼_________________
Life at the Turn of the 20th Century 279
Technology >
Early Airplane Engines and Their Weights
AVIATION PIONEERS
In 1892, Orville and Wilbur Wright opened a bicycle shop in Dayton, Ohio. They used the profits to fund experiments in aeronautics, the construction of aircraft. In 1903, the Wright brothers took a gasoline-powered airplane that they had designed to a sandy hill outside Kitty Hawk, North Carolina.
The airplane was powered by a 4-cylinder 12-horse-power piston engine, ► designed and constructed by the bicycle shop’s mechanic, Charles Taylor.
The piston—a solid cylinder fit snugly into a hollow cylinder that moves back and forth under pressure—was standard until jet-propelled aircraft came into service in the 1940s.
The engine is the heaviest component in airplane construction. The design of lighter engines was the most important development in early aviation history.
Date	Name of Engine	Approximate Weight
		per Unit of Horsepower
1880s	Otto	440 lbs (200 kg)
1903	Wright	13 lbs (6 kg)
1910	Gnome	3.3 lbs (1.5 kg)
V-12
Liberty 2 lbs (1 kg) 1944	Wright Cyclone	1.1 lbs (0.5 kg)
Source: The History of Invention, Trevor I. Williams
<4 On December 17, Orville Wright made the first successful flight of a powered aircraft in history. The public paid little attention. But within two years, the brothers were making 30-minute flights. By 1908, the pioneer aviators had signed a contract for production of the Wright airplane with the U.S. Army.
280 Chapter 8
8
Within two years, the Wright brothers had increased their flights to 24 miles. By 1920, convinced of the great potential of flight, the U.S. government had established the first transcontinental airmail service.
PHOTOGRAPHY EXPLOSION
Before the 1880s, photography was a professional activity. Because of the time required to take a picture and the weight of the equipment, a photographer could not shoot a moving object. In addition, photographers had to develop their shots immediately. New techniques eliminated the need to develop pictures right away. George Eastman developed a series of more convenient alternatives to the heavy glass plates previously used. Now, instead of carrying their darkrooms around with them, photographers could use flexible film, coated with gelatin emulsions, and could send their film to a studio for processing. When professional photographers were slow to begin using the new film, Eastman decided to aim his product at the masses.
In 1888, Eastman introduced his Kodak camera. The purchase price of $25 included a 100-picture roll of film. After taking the pictures, the photographer would send the camera back to Eastman's Rochester, New York, factory. For $10, the pictures were developed and returned with the camera reloaded. Easily held and operated, the Kodak prompted millions of Americans to become amateur photographers. The camera also helped to create the field of photojournalism. Reporters could now photograph events as they occurred. When the Wright brothers first flew their simple airplane at Kitty Hawk, an amateur photographer captured the first successful flight on film.
GEORGE EASTMAN 1854-1932
In 1877, when George Eastman took up photography as a hobby, he had to lug more than 100 pounds of equipment for one day's outing. To lighten his load, he replaced heavy glass plates with film that could be rolled onto a spool.
In 1888, Eastman sold his first roll-film camera. Eastman called his new camera (shown at left) the Kodak, because the made-up name was short and memorable. It was popularized by the slogan “You Press the Button, We Do the Rest.”
i
i
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. •Louis Sullivan	•Frederick Law Olmsted	‘George Eastman
•Daniel Burnham	•Orville and Wilbur Wright

MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Using a three-column chart, such as the one below, list three important changes in city design, communication, and transportation.
City Design	Communication	Transportation
1.	1.	1.
2.	2.	2.
3.	3.	3.
Which change had the greatest impact on urban life? Why?
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	HYPOTHESIZING
If you had been an urban planner at the turn of the century, what new ideas would you have included in your plan for the ideal city?
Think About:
•	Olmsted’s plans for Central Park
•	Burnham’s ideas for Chicago
•	the concept of the garden city
4.	EVALUATING
Which scientific or technological development described in this section had the greatest impact on American culture? Use details from the text to justify your choice.
5.	SUMMARIZING
How did bridge building contribute to the growth of cities?
Life at the Turn of the 20th Century 281
TEKS 3C.5B,
Expanding Public Education
MAIN IDEA
Reforms in public education led to a rise in national literacy and the promotion of public education.
WHY ITT MATTERS NOW
The public education system is the foundation of the democratic ideals of American society.
Terms & Names
• Booker T.
Washington
•Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute
One American’s Story
MAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on developments in education at the turn of the 20th century.
William Torrey Harris was an educational reformer who saw the public schools as a great instrument "to lift all classes of people into . . . civilized life." As U.S. commissioner of education from 1889 to 1906, Harris promoted the ideas of great educators like Horace Mann and John Dewey—particularly the belief that schools exist for the children and not the teachers. Schools, according to Harris, should properly prepare students for full participation in community life.
A
Personal Voice william torrey Harris “ Every [educational] method must... be looked at from two points of view: first, its capacity to secure the development of rationality or of the true adjustment of the individual to the social whole; and, second, its capacity to strengthen the individuality of the pupil and avoid the danger of obliterating the personality of the child by securing blind obedience in place of Intelligent cooperation, and by mechanical memorizing in place of rational Insight. ” —quoted in Public Schools and Moral Education
E. B.
Du Bois • Niagara Movement Many other middle-class reformers agreed with Harris and viewed the public Compulsory schools as training grounds for employment and citizenship. People believed that attendance laws, economic development depended on scientific and technological knowledge. As though slow to be a result, they viewed education as a key to greater security and social status, enforced, helped Others saw the public schools as the best opportunity to assimilate the millions ,m class,ooms * of immigrants entering American society. Most people also believed that public the turn education was necessary for a stable and prosperous democratic nation.	cen
Expanding Public Education
Although most states had established public schools by the Civil War, many school-age children still received no formal schooling. The majority of students who went to school left within four years, and few went to high school
82 Chapter 8
!i
MAIN IDEA
Drawing
Conclusions
Why did
American children begin attending school at a younger age?
SCHOOLS FOR CHILDREN
Between 1865 and 1895, states passed laws requiring 12 to 16 weeks annually of school attendance by students between the ages of 8 and 14. The curriculum emphasized reading, writing, and arithmetic. However, the emphasis on rote memorization and the uneven quality of teachers drew criticism. Strict rules and physical punishment made many students miserable. One 13-year-old boy explained to a Chicago school inspector why he hid in a warehouse basement instead of going to school.
A
Personal Voice “They hits ye If yer don’t learn, and they hits ye if ye whisper, and they hits ye if ye have string in yer pocket, and they hits ye if yer seat squeaks, and they hits ye if ye don’t stan’ up in time, and they hits ye if yer late, and they hits ye if ye fer-get the page. ”
—anonymous schoolboy quoted in The One Best System
In spite of such problems, children began attending school at a younger age. Kindergartens, which had been created outside the public school system to offer childcare for employed mothers, became increasingly popular. The number of kindergartens surged from 200 in 1880 to 3,000 in 1900, and, under the guidance of William Torrey Harris, public school systems began to add kindergartens to their programs.
Although the pattern in public education in this era was one of growth, opportunities differed sharply for white and black students. In 1880, about 62 percent of white children attended elementary school, compared to about 34 percent of African-American children. Not until the 1940s would public school education become available to the majority of black children living in the South.
THE GROWTH OF HIGH SCHOOLS
In the new industrial age, the economy demanded advanced technical and managerial skills. Moreover, business leaders like Andrew Carnegie pointed out that keeping workers loyal to capitalism required society to "provide ladders upon which the aspiring can rise." By early 1900, more than half a million students attended high school. The curriculum expanded to include courses in science, civics, and social studies. And new vocational courses prepared male graduates for industrial jobs in drafting, carpentry, and mechanics, and female graduates for office work.
Expanding Education/lncreasing Literacy
Year
Students Enrolled
Literacy in English (% of Population age 10 and over)
1871
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
7.6 million
9.9 million
12.7 million
15.5 million
17.8 million
21.6 million
80%
83%
87%
89%
92%
94%
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs
1.	By how much did the illiteracy rate drop from 1871 to 1920?
2.	Does the number of immigrants during this period make the reduction more or less impressive? Why?
f =1,000,000 students
cni trees1 Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1921, HteS satetfcs of toe IHM States.
i
Life at the Turn of the 20th Century 283
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
African Americans were mostly excluded from public secondary education. In 1890, fewer than 1 percent of black teenagers attend ed high school. More than two-thirds of these students went to private schools, which received no government financial support. By 1910, about 3 percent of African Americans between the ages of 15 and 19 attended high school, but a majority of these students still attended private schools. EDUCATION FOR IMMIGRANTS
Unlike African Americans, immigrants were encouraged to go to school. Of the nearly 10 million European immigrants settled in the United States between 1860 and 1890, many were Jewish people fleeing poverty and systematic oppression in eastern Europe. Most immigrants sent their children to America's free public schools, where they quickly became "Americanized.” Years after she became a citizen, the Russian Jewish immigrant Mary Antin recalled the large numbers of non-English-speaking immigrant children. By the end of the school year, they could recite "patriotic verses in honor of George Washington and Abraham Lincoln . . . with plenty of enthusiasm.” Some people resented the suppression of their native languages in favor of English. Catholics were especially concerned because many public school systems had mandatory readings from the (Protestant) King James Version of the Bible. Catholic communities often set up parochial schools to give their children a Catholic education.
Thousands of adult immigrants attended night school to learn English and to qualify for American citizenship. Employers often offered daytime programs to Americanize their workers. At his Model T plant in Highland Park, Michigan, Henry Ford established a "Sociology Department,” because "men of many nations must be taught American ways, the English language, and the right way to live.” Ford's ideas were not universally accepted. Labor activists often protested that Ford's educational goals were aimed at weakening the trade union movement by teaching workers not to confront management.
Vocabulary parochial school:
a school supported by a church parish
TECHNOLOGY AND SCHOOLS
In 1922,Thomas Edison predicted that motion pictures would eventually replace textbooks.
More recently, it has been predicted that computers will replace traditional classrooms and texts. Computers are used for video course sharing, in which students in many locations participate in the same class. Teachers are using electronic interactive whiteboards to help them lead and record presentations and discussions. Students are also using computers to access and share scientific data and to communicate with peers around the world.
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
Jjj What
institutions
encouraged
European
immigrants to
become
assimilated?
Expanding Higher Education
Although the number of students attending high school had increased by the turn of the century, only a minority of Americans had high school diplomas. At the same time, an even smaller minority—only 2.3 percent—of America's young people attended colleges and universities.
CHANGES IN UNIVERSITIES
Between 1880 and 1920, college enrollments more than Quadrupled. And colleges instituted major changes in curricula and admission policies. Industrial development changed the nation's educational needs. The research university emerged—offering courses in modern languages the physical sciences, and the new disciplines of psychology and sociology' Professional schools in law and medicine were established. Private colleges and uni versities required entrance exams, but some state universities began to admit students by using the high school diploma as the entrance requirement.
HIGHER EDUCATION FOR AFRICAN AMERICANS
After the Civil War thou sands of freed African Americans pursued higher education, despite their exclusion from white institutions. With the help of the Freedmen's Bureau and other groups blacks founded Howard, Atlanta, and Fisk Universities, all of which opened 284 Chapter 8
MAIN IDEA
Synthesizing
Cj Describe the state of higher education for African Americans at the turn of the century.

between 1865 and 1868. Private donors could not, however, financially support or educate a sufficient number of black college graduates to meet the needs of the segregated communities. By 1900, out of about 9 million African Americans, only 3,880 were in attendance at colleges or professional schools.
The prominent African American educator, Booker T. Washington, believed that racism would end once blacks acquired useful labor skills and
proved their economic value to society. Washington, who was born enslaved, graduated from Virginia's Hampton Institute. By 1881, he headed the Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute, now called Tuskegee University, in Alabama. Tuskegee aimed to equip African Americans with teaching diplomas and useful skills in agricultural, domestic, or mechanical work."No race," Washington said, "can prosper till it learns that there is as much dignity in tilling a field as in writing a poem."
By contrast, W. E. B. Du Bois, the first African American to receive a doctorate from Harvard (in 1895), strongly disagreed with Washington's gradual approach. In 1905, Du Bois founded the Niagara Movement, which insisted that blacks should seek a liberal arts education so that the African-American community would have well-educated leaders.
Du Bois proposed that a group of educated blacks, the most "talented tenth" of the community, attempt to achieve immediate inclusion into mainstream American life. "We are Americans, not only by birth and by citizenship," Du Bois argued, "but by our political ideals.. .. And the greatest of those ideals is that ALL MEN ARE CREATED EQUAL."
By the turn of the 20th century, millions of people received the education they needed to cope with a rapidly changing world. At the same time, however, racial discrimination remained a thorn in the flesh of American society.
-I
▲
Medical students and their professors work in the operating theater of the Moorland-Spingarn Research Center at Howard University.
B
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
T.
Washington E. B. Du Bois •Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute	’Niagara Movement
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one below, list at least three developments in education at the turn of the 20th century and their major results.
Development	Result
1.	
2.	
3.	
Which educational development do you think was most important? Explain your choice.
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	HYPOTHESIZING
How might the economy and culture of the United States have been different without the expansion of public schools? Think About:
•	the goals of public schools and whether those goals have been met
•	why people supported expanding public education
•	the impact of public schools on the development of private schools
4.	COMPARING
How were the actions taken by Booker T. Washington and W. E. B. Du Bois to expand economic opportunities for racial minorities similar and different? What impact did their actions have on American society?
ANALYZING ISSUES
How did expansion of the educational system affect American children?
Life at the Turn of the 20th Century 285
TEKS 3£, 5B, 6A, 21A
Segregation and Discrimination
MAIN IDEA
WHY IIT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
African Americans led the fight against voting restrictions and Jim Crow laws.
Today, African Americans have the legacy of a century-long battle for civil rights.
•	Ida B. Wells
•	poll tax
•	grandfather clause
•	segregation
•	Jim Crow laws
•	Plessy v. Ferguson
•	debt peonage
^^^^^0neAmerican'sSt6r)rj^^^S
! hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on important events in race relations at the turn of the 20th century.
Born into slavery shortly before emancipation, Ida B. Wells moved to Memphis in the early 1880s to work as a teacher. She later became an editor of a local paper. Racial justice was a persistent theme in Wells's reporting. The events of March 9, 1892 turned that theme into a crusade. Three African-American businessmen, friends of Wells, were lynched— illegally executed without trial. Wells saw lynching for what it was.
A
Personal Voice ida b. wells “Thomas Moss, Calvin McDowell, and Lee Stewart had been lynched in Memphis . . . [where] no lynching had taken place before. . . . This is what opened my eyes to what lynching really was. An excuse to get rid of Negroes who were acquiring wealth and property and thus keep the race terrorized.”
—quoted in Crusade for Justice
Ida B. Wells moved north to continue her fight against lynching by writing, lecturing, and organizing for civil rights.
African Americans were not the only group to experience violence and racial discrimination. Native Americans, Mexican residents, and Chinese immigrants also encountered bitter forms of oppression, particularly in the American West.
African Americans Fight Legal Discrimination
As African Americans exercised their newly won political and social rights during Reconstruction, they faced hostile and often violent opposition from whites. African Americans eventually fell victim to laws restricting their civil rights but never stopped fighting for equality. For at least ten years after the end of Reconstruction in 1877, African Americans in the South continued to vote and occasionally to hold political office. By the turn of the 20th century, however, Southern states had adopted a broad system of legal policies of racial discrimination and devised methods to weaken African-American political power.
286 Chapter 8
VOTING RESTRICTIONS
All Southern states imposed new voting restrictions and denied legal equality to African Americans. Some states, for example, limited the vote to people who could read, and required registration officials to administer a literacy test to test reading. Blacks trying to vote were often asked more difficult questions than whites, or given a test in a foreign language. Officials could pass or fail applicants as they wished.
Another requirement was the poll tax, an annual tax that had to be paid before qualifying to vote. Black as well as white sharecroppers
were often too poor to pay the poll tax. To reinstate white voters who may have failed the literacy test or could not pay the poll tax, several Southern states added the grandfather clause to their constitutions. The clause stated that even if a man failed the literacy test or could not afford the poll tax, he was still entitled to vote if he, his father, or his grandfather had been eligible to vote before January 1, 1867. The date is important because before that time, freed slaves did not have the right to vote. The grandfather clause therefore did not allow them to vote.
This theater in Leland, Mississippi, was segregated under the Jim Crow laws.
Vocabulary minstrel: one
of a troupe of entertainers in blackface presenting a comic variety show
P MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
How did the Plessy v. Ferguson ruling affect the civil rights of African Americans?
JIM CROW LAWS
During the 1870s and 1880s, the Supreme Court failed to overturn the poll tax or the grandfather clause, even though the laws undermined all federal protections for African Americans' civil rights. At the same time that blacks lost voting rights, Southern states passed racial segregation laws to separate white and black people in public and private facilities. These laws came to be known as Jim Crow laws after a popular old minstrel song that ended in the words "Jump, Jim Crow." Racial segregation was put into effect in schools, hospitals, parks, and transportation systems throughout the South. PLESSY v. FERGUSON Eventually a legal case reached the U.S. Supreme Court to test the constitutionality of segregation. In 1896, in Plessy v. Ferguson, the Supreme Court ruled that the separation of races in public accommodations was legal and did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment. The decision established the doctrine of "separate but equal," which allowed states to maintain segregated facilities for blacks and whites as long as they provided equal service. The decision permitted legalized racial segregation for almost 60 years. (See Plessy v. Ferguson, page 290.) A;
Turn-of-the-Century Race Relations
African Americans faced not only formal discrimination but also informal rules and customs, called racial etiquette, that regulated relationships between whites and blacks. Usually, these customs belittled and humiliated African Americans, enforcing their second-class status. For example, blacks and whites never shook hands, since shaking hands would have implied equality. Blacks also had to yield the sidewalk to white pedestrians, and black men always had to remove their hats for whites.
Life at the Turn of the 20th Century 287
; I
Some moderate reformers, like Booker T. Washington, earned support from whites. Washington suggested that whites and blacks work together for social progress.
A
Personal Voice booker t. Washington “To those of the white race ... I would repeat what I say to my own race. . . . Cast down your bucket among these people who have, without strikes and labour wars, tilled your fields, cleared your forests, builded your railroads and cities, and brought forth treasures from the bowels of the earth. ... In all things that are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as the hand In all things essential to mutual progress.9 9
—Atlanta Exposition address, 1895
Washington hoped that improving the economic skills of African Americans would pave the way for long-term gains. People like Ida B. Wells and W. E. B. Du Bois, however, thought that the problems of inequality were too urgent to postpone.
VIOLENCE
African Americans and others who did not follow the racial etiquette could face severe punishment or death. All too often, blacks who were accused of violating the etiquette were lynched. Between 1882 and 1892, more than 1,400 African-American men and women were shot, burned, or hanged without trial in the South. Lynching peaked in the 1880s and 1890s but continued well into the 20th century. DISCRIMINATION IN THE NORTH
Most African Americans lived in the segregated South, but by 1900, a number of blacks had moved to Northern cities. Many blacks migrated to Northern cities in search of better-paying jobs and social equality. But after their arrival, African Americans found that there was racial discrimination in the North as well. African Americans found themselves forced into segregated neighborhoods. They also faced discrimination in the workplace. Labor unions often discouraged black membership, and employers hired African-American labor only as a last resort and fired blacks before white employees. Sometimes the competition between African Americans and working-class whites became violent, as in the New York City race riot of 1900. Violence erupted after a young black man, believing that his wife was being mistreated by a white policeman, killed the policeman. Word of the killing spread, and whites retaliated by attacking blacks. Northern blacks, however, were not alone in facing discrimination. Non-whites in the West also faced oppression. &
Discrimination in the West
HISTORICAL
SPOTLIGHT
WASHINGTON VS. DU BOIS
Booker T. Washington argued for a gradual approach to racial equality—suggesting that "it is at the bottom of life we must begin, and not at the top.”
Ten years later, W. E. B. Du Bois denounced this view of gradual equality. Du Bois demanded full social and economic equality for African Americans, declaring that “persistent manly agitation is the way to liberty.”
In 1909 the Niagara Movement, founded by Du Bois in 1905, became the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), with Du Bois as the editor of its journal, The Crisis. He wrote, “We refuse to surrender. . . leadership ... to cowards and trucklers. We are men; we will be treated as men.” The NAACP continues the fight for racial equality today.
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
£) What were Booker T. Washington’s views about establishing racial equality?
MAIN IDEA
Contrasting
& How did conditions for African Americans in the North differ from their circumstances in the South?
Western communities were home to people of many backgrounds working anc living side by side. Native Americans still lived in the Western territories claimec by the United States. Asian immigrants went to America's Pacific Coast in search of wealth and work. Mexicans continued to inhabit the American Southwest African Americans were also present, especially in former slave-holding areas such as Texas. Still, racial tensions often made life difficult.
MEXICAN WORKERS
In the late 1800s, the tail,cads hired more Mexicans that members of any other ethnic group to construct rail lines in the Southwest 188 Chapter 8
Mexican track workers for the Southern Pacific railroad posed for this group photo taken sometime between 1910 and 1915.
Vocabulary peon: a worker bound in servitude to a landlord creditor
Mexicans were accustomed to the region's hot, dry climate. But the work was grueling, and the railroads made them work for less money than other ethnic groups.
Mexicans were also vital to the development of mining and agriculture in the Southwest. When the 1902 National Reclamation Act gave government assistance for irrigation projects, many southwest desert areas bloomed. Mexican workers became the major labor force in the agricultural industries of the region.
Some Mexicans, however, as well as African Americans in the Southwest, were forced into debt peonage, a system that bound laborers into slavery in order to work off a debt to the employer. Not until 1911 did the Supreme Court declare involuntary peonage a violation of the Thirteenth Amendment.
EXCLUDING THE CHINESE
By 1880, more than 100,000 Chinese immigrants lived in the United States. White people's fear of job competition with the Chinese immigrants often pushed the Chinese into segregated schools and neighborhoods. Strong opposition to Chinese immigration developed, and not only in the West. (See Chinese Exclusion Act, page 259.) Racial discrimination posed terrible legal and economic problems for nonwhites throughout the United States at the turn of the century. More people, however, whites in particular, had leisure time for new recreational activities, as well as money to spend on a growing arrray of consumer products.
ASSESSMENT
i S:
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
B.
Wells • grandfather clause *Jim Crow laws *debt peonage • poll tax	• segregation	• Plessy v. Ferguson
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Review the section, and find five key events to place on a time line as shown.
1890 Event Event 1900
Event Event Event
Which of these events do you think was most important? Why?
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING CAUSES AND EFFECTS
Why were race relations a significant social issue in the late 19th century? How did they affect the lives of African Americans?
4.	COMPARING
What did some African-American leaders do to fight discrimination?
5.	CONTRASTING
How did the challenges and opportunities for Mexicans in the United States differ from those for African Americans? Think About:
•	the types of work available to each group
•	the effects of government policies on each group
•	the effect of the legal system on each group
i
I
Life at the Turn of the 20th Century 289
PLESSY v. FERGUSON (1896)
ORIGINS OF THE CASE
In 1892, Homer Plessy took a seat in the "Whites Only" car of a train and refused to move. He was arrested, tried, and convicted in the District Court of New Orleans for breaking Louisiana's segregation law. Plessy appealed, claiming that he had been denied equal protection under the law. The Supreme Court handed down its decision on May 18, 1896. THE RULING
The Court ruled that separate-but-equal facilities for blacks and whites did not violate the Constitution. LEGAL REASONING
Plessy claimed that segregation violated his right to equal protection under the law.
Moreover he claimed that, being "of mixed descent," he was entitled to "every recog-
nition, right, privilege and immunity secured to the citizens of the United States of
the white race."
Justice Henry B. Brown, writing for the majority, ruled:
“The object of the [Fourteenth] amendment was . . . undoubtedly to enforce the absolute equality of the two races before the law, but... it could not have been intended to abolish distinctions based upon color, or to enforce social, as distinguished from political equality, or a commingling of the two races upon terms unsatisfactory to either. Laws permitting, and even requiring, their separation In places where they are liable to be brought Into contact do not necessarily Imply the Inferiority of either race to the other.99
In truth, segregation laws did perpetrate an unequal and inferior status for African Americans. Justice John Marshall Harlan understood this fact and dissented from the majority opinion. He wrote, "In
Justice John Marshall Harlan
respect of civil rights, all citizens are equal before the law." He condemned the majority for letting "the seeds of race hate . . . be planted under the sanction of law." He also warned that "The thin disguise of 'equal' accommodations . . . will not mislead any one, nor atone for the wrong this day done."
LEGAL SOURCES
LEGISLATION
U.S. CONSTITUTION,
FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT
(1868) “No state shall . . . deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.”
LOUISIANA ACTS 1890, NO.
Ill "... that all railway companies carrying passengers in their coaches in this State, shall provide equal but separate accommodations for the white, and colored races.”
RELATED CASES
CIVIL RIGHTS CASES
(1883) The Court ruled that the Fourteenth Amendment could not be used to prevent private citizens from discriminating against others on the basis of race.
WILLIAMS v. MISSISSIPPI (1898)
The Court upheld a state literacy requirement for voting that, in effect, kept African Americans from the polls.
CUMMING v. BOARD OF EDUCATION
OF RICHMOND COUNTY
(1899) The Court ruled that the federal government cannot
prevent segregation in local school facilities because
education is a local, not federal, issue.
Chapter 8
i
i
[white]
[colored
▲ One result of Jim Crow laws was separate drinking fountains for whites and African Americans.
WHY IT MATTERED
In the decades following the Civil War [1861-1865], Southern state legislatures passed laws that aimed to limit civil rights for African Americans. The Black Codes of the 1860s, and later Jim Crow laws, were intended to deprive African Americans of their newly won political and social rights granted during Reconstruction.
Plessy was one of several Supreme Court cases brought by African Americans to protect their rights against segregation. In these cases, the Court regularly ignored the Fourteenth Amendment and upheld state laws that denied blacks their rights. Plessy was the most important of these cases because the Court used it to establish the separate-but-equal doctrine.
As a result, city and state governments across the South—and in some other states—maintained their segregation laws for more than half of the 20th century. These laws limited African Americans' access to most public facilities, including restaurants, schools, and hospitals. Without exception, the facilities reserved for whites were superior to those reserved for nonwhites. Signs reading "Colored Only" and "Whites Only" served as constant reminders that facilities in segregated societies were separate but not equal.
HISTORICAL IMPACT
It took many decades to abolish legal segregation. During the first half of the 20th century, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) led the legal fight to overturn Plessy. Although they won a few cases over the years, it was not until 1954 in Brown v. Board of Education that the Court overturned any part of Plessy. In that case, the Supreme Court said that separate-but-equal was unconstitutional in public education, but it did not completely overturn the separate-but-equal doctrine.
In later years, the Court did overturn the separate-but-equal doctrine, and it used the Brown decision to do so. For example, in 1955, Rosa Parks was convicted for violating a Montgomery, Alabama, law for segregated seating on buses. A federal court overturned the conviction, finding such segregation unconstitutional. The case was appealed to the Supreme Court, which upheld without comment the lower court's decision. In doing so in this and similar cases, the Court signaled that the reasoning behind Plessy no longer applied.
▲ As secretary of the Montgomery chapter of the NAACP, Rosa Parks had protested segregation through everyday acts long before Sepember 1955.
THINKING CRITICALLY
CONNECT TO TODAY
1. Analyzing Primary Sources Read the part of the Fourteenth Amendment reprinted in this feature. Write a paragraph explaining what you think “equal protection of the laws” means. Use evidence to support your ideas.
wwrui
CONNECT TO HISTORY
2. Visit the links for Historic Decisions of the Supreme Court to research and read Justice Harlan’s entire dissent in Plessy v. Ferguson. Based on his position, what view might Harlan have taken toward laws that denied African Americans the right to vote? Write a paragraph or two expressing what Harlan would say about those laws.
hmhsocialstudies.com
INTERNET ACTIVITY
Life at the Tum of the 20th Century 291
The Dawn of Mass Culture
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
As Americans had more time for leisure activities, a modern mass culture emerged.
Today, the United States has a worldwide impact on mass culture.
OneAmerican'sStory
! hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the development of mass culture.
•Joseph Pulitzer
•	William Randolph Hearst
•	Ashcan school
•	Mark Twain
•	rural free delivery (RFD)
▲
The sprawling amusement center at Coney Island became a model for urban amusement parks,
Along the Brooklyn seashore, on a narrow sandbar just nine miles from busy Manhattan, rose the most famous urban amusement center, Coney Island. In 1886, its main developer,
George Tilyou, bragged, "If Paris is France, then Coney Island ... is the world." Indeed, tens of thousands of visitors mobbed Coney Island after work each evening and on Sundays and holidays. When Luna Park, a spectacular amusement park on Coney Island, opened in May 1903, a reporter described the scene.
A
Personal Voice bruce blen “ [Inside the park was] an enchanted, storybook land of trellises, columns, domes, minarets, lagoons, and lofty aerial flights. And everywhere was life—a pageant of happy people; and everywhere was color—a wide harmony of orange and white and gold. ... It was a world removed—shut away from the sordid clatter and turmoil of the streets. ” —quoted in Amusing the Million
Coney Island offered Americans a few hours of escape from the hard work week. A schoolteacher who walked fully
dressed into the ocean explained her unusual behavior by saying, "It has been a hard year at school, and when I saw the big crowd here, everyone with the brakes off, the spirit of the place got the better of me." The end of the 19th century saw the rise of a "mass culture" in the United States.
American Leisure
Middle-class Americans from all over the country shared experiences as new leisure activities, nationwide advertising campaigns, and the rise of a consumer culture began to level regional differences. As the 19th century drew to a close, many Americans fought off city congestion and dull industrial work by enjoying amusement parks, bicycling, new forms of theater, and spectator sports.
292 Chapter 8
AMUSEMENT PARKS
To meet the recreational needs of city dwellers, Chicago, New York City, and other cities began setting aside precious green space for outdoor enjoyment. Many cities built small playgrounds and playing fields throughout their neighborhoods for their citizens' enjoyment. Some amusement parks were constructed on the outskirts of cities. Often built by trolley-car companies that sought more passengers, these parks boasted picnic grounds and a variety of rides.
The roller coaster drew daredevil customers to Coney Island in 1884, and the first Ferris wheel drew enthusiastic crowds to the World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893. Clearly, many Americans were ready for new and innovative forms of entertainment—and a whole panorama of recreational activities soon became available.
Eight hours for work, eight hours for rest, eight hours for what we will"
THE CARPENTERS’ UNION, WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS
MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
$ How did the mass production of bicycles change women’s lives?
BICYCLING AND TENNIS
With their huge front wheels and solid rubber tires, the first American bicycles challenged their riders. Because a bump might toss the cyclist over the handlebars, bicycling began as a male-only sport. However, the 1885 manufacture of the first commercially successful "safety bicycle," with its smaller wheels and air-filled tires, made the activity more popular. And the Victor safety bicycle, with a dropped frame and no crossbar, held special appeal to women. Abandoning their tight corsets, women bicyclists donned shirtwaists (tailored blouses) and "split" skirts in order to cycle more comfortably. This attire soon became popular for daily wear. The bicycle also freed women from the scrutiny of the ever-present chaperone. The suffragist Susan B. Anthony declared, "I think [bicycling] has done more to emancipate women than anything else in the world. ... It gives women a feeling of freedom and self-reliance." Fifty thousand men and women had taken to cycles by 1888. Two years later 312 American firms turned out 10 million bikes in one year. 41
Americans took up the sport of tennis as enthusiastically as they had taken up cycling. The modern version of this sport originated in North Wales in 1873. A year later, the United States saw its first tennis match. The socialite Florence Harriman recalled that in the 1880s her father returned from England with one of New York's first tennis sets. At first, neighbors thought the elder Harriman had installed the nets to catch birds.
Hungry or thirsty after tennis or cycling? Turn-of-the-century enthusiasts turned to new snacks with recognizable brand names. They could munch on a Hershey chocolate bar, first sold in 1900, and wash down the chocolate with a Coca-Cola®. An Atlanta pharmacist originally formulated the drink as a cure for headaches in 1886. The ingredients included extracts from Peruvian coca leaves as well as African cola nuts.
Bicycling and other new sports became fads in the late 1800s.
The Negro Leagues were first formed in 1920.
SPECTATOR SPORTS
Americans not only participated in new sports, but became avid fans of spectator sports, especially boxing and baseball. Though these two sports had begun as popular informal activities, by the turn of the 20th century they had become profitable businesses. Fans who couldn't attend an important boxing match jammed barbershops and hotel lobbies to listen to telegraphed transmissions of the contest's highlights. BASEBALL
New rules transformed baseball into a professional sport. In 1845, Alexander J. Cartwright, an amateur player, organized a club in New York City and set down regulations that used aspects of an English sport called rounders. Five years later, 50 baseball clubs had sprung up in the United States, and New York alone boasted 12 clubs in the mid-1860s. In 1869, a professional team named the Cincinnati Red Stockings toured the country. Other clubs soon took to the road, which led to the formation of the National League in 1876 and the American League in 1900. In the first World Series, held in 1903, the Boston Pilgrims beat the Pittsburgh Pirates. African-American baseball players, who were excluded from both leagues because of racial discrimination, formed their own clubs and two leagues—the Negro National League and the Negro American League.
The novelist Mark Twain called baseball "the very symbol . . . and visible expression of the drive and push and rush and struggle of the raging, tearing, booming nineteenth century." By the 1890s, baseball had a published game schedule, official rules, and a standard-sized diamond.
The Spread of Mass Culture
As increasing numbers of Americans attended school and learned to read, the cultural vistas of ordinary Americans expanded. Art galleries, libraries, books, and museums brought new cultural opportunities to more people. Other advances fostered mass entertainment. New media technology led to the release of hundreds of motion pictures. Mass-production printing techniques gave birth to thousands of books, magazines, and newspapers.
MASS CIRCULATION NEWSPAPERS
Looking for ways to captivate readers' attention, American newspapers began using sensational headlines. For example, to introduce its story about the horrors of the Johnstown, Pennsylvania flood of 1889, in which more than 2,000 people died, one newspaper used the headline "THE VALLEY OF DEATH." Joseph Pulitzer, a Hungarian immigrant who had bought the New York World in 1883, pioneered popular innovations, such as a large Sunday edition,
MAIN IDEA
Drawing
Conclusions
Why do you think sports were so popular among Americans at the turn of the century?
294 Chapter 8
i
MAIN IDEA
Drawing
Conclusions
How did the World and the Journal attract readers?
comics, sports coverage, and women's news. Pulitzer's paper emphasized "sin, sex, and sensation" in an attempt to surpass his main competitor, the wealthy William Randolph Hearst, who had purchased the New York Morning Journal in 1895. Hearst, who already owned the San Francisco Examiner, sought to outdo Pulitzer by filling the Journal with exaggerated tales of personal scandals, cruelty, hypnotism, and even an imaginary conquest of Mars.
The escalation of their circulation war drove both papers to even more sensational news coverage. By 1898, the circulation of each paper had reached more than one million copies a day.
PROMOTING FINE ARTS
By 1900, at least one art gallery graced every large city. Some American artists, including Philadelphian Thomas Eakins, began to embrace realism, an artistic school that attempted to portray life as it is really lived. Eakins had studied anatomy with medical students and used painstaking geometric perspective in his work.
By the 1880s, Eakins was also using photography to make realistic studies of people and animals.
In the early 20th century, the Ashcan school of American art, led by Eakins's student Robert Henri, painted urban life and working people with gritty realism and no frills. Both Eakins and the Ashcan school, however, soon were challenged by the European development known as abstract art, a direction that most people found difficult to understand.
In many cities, inhabitants could walk from a new art gallery to a new public library, sometimes called "the poor man's university." By 1900, free circulating libraries in America numbered in the thousands.
History Through
THE CHAMPION SINGLE SCULLS (MAX SCHMITT IN A SINGLE SCULL)
(1871) This painting by Thomas Eakins is an example of the realist movement—an artistic school that aimed at portraying people and environments as they really are.
What realistic details do you see portrayed in this painting?
Life at the Turn of the 20th Century 295
POPULAR FICTION
As literacy rates rose, scholars debated the role of literature in society. Some felt that literature s ou up 1 America's literary tastes, which tended toward crime tales and Western adventures. Most people preferred to read light fiction. Such books sold for a mere ten cents, hence their name, "dime novels." Dime novels typically told glorified adventure tales of the West and featured heroes like Edward Wheeler's Deadwood Dick. Wheeler published his first Deadwood Dick novel in 1877 and in less than a decade produced over 30 more.
Some readers wanted a more realistic portrayal of American life. Successful writers of the era included Sarah Orne Jewett, Theodore Dreiser, Stephen Crane, Jack London, and Willa Cather. Most portrayed characters less polished than the upper-class men and women of Henry James's and Edith Wharton's novels. Samuel Langhorne Clemens, the novelist and humorist better known as Mark Twain, inspired a host of other young authors when
he declared his independence of "literature and all that bosh." Yet, some of his books have become classics of American literature. The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, for example, remains famed for its rendering of life along the Mississippi River.
Although art galleries and libraries attempted to raise cultural standards, many Americans had scant interest in high culture—and others did not have access to it. African Americans, for example, were excluded from visiting many museums and other white-controlled cultural institutions.
Highly popular dime novels often featured
adventure stories.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
What factors contributed to the popularity of dime novels?
New Ways to Sell Goods
Along with enjoying new leisure activities, Americans also changed the way they shopped. Americans at the turn of the 20th century witnessed the beginnings of the shopping center, the development of department and chain stores, and the birth of modern advertising.
URBAN SHOPPING
Growing city populations made promising targets for enterprising merchants. The nation's earliest form of a shopping center opened in Cleveland, Ohio, in 1890. The glass-topped arcade contained four levels of jewelry, leather goods, and stationery shops. The arcade also provided band music on Sundays so that Cleveland residents could spend their Sunday afternoons strolling through the elegant environment and gazing at the window displays. Retail shopping districts formed where public transportation could easily bring shoppers from outlying areas. To anchor these retail shopping districts, ambitious merchants started something quite new, the modern department store.
THE DEPARTMENT STORE
Marshall Field of Chicago first brought the department store concept to America. While working as a store clerk, Field found that paying close attention to women customers could increase sales considerably. In 1865, Field opened his own store, featuring several floors of specialized departments. Field's motto was "Give the lady what she wants.” Field also pioneered the bargain basement, selling bargain goods that were "less expensive but reliable." i nt chain store Department stores prided themselves on offering a variet of personal services. New chain stores-retail stores offering the same merchar dise under the same ownership-sold goods for less by buying in quantity an limiting personal service. In the 1870s, F. W. Woolworth found that if he offere an item at a very low price, "the consumer would purchase it on the spur of th
Vocabulary consumer- a
person who purchases goods or services for direct use or ownership
596 Chapter 8
r
moment" because "it was only a nickel." By 1911, the Woolworth chain boasted 596 stores and sold more than a million dollars in goods a week.
ADVERTISING
An explosion in advertising also heralded modern consumerism. Expenditures for advertising were under $10 million a year in 1865 but increased tenfold, to $95 million, by 1900. Patent medicines grabbed the largest number of advertising lines, followed by soaps and baking powders. In addition to newspapers and magazines, advertisers used ingenious methods to push products. Passengers riding the train between New York and Philadelphia in the 1870s might see signs for Dr. Drake's Plantation Bitters on barns, houses, billboards, and even rocks. CATALOGS AND RFD
Montgomery Ward and Sears Roebuck brought retail merchandise to small towns. Ward's catalog, launched in 1872, grew from a single sheet the first year to a booklet with ordering instructions in ten languages. Richard Sears started his company in 1886. Early Sears catalogs stated that the company received "hundreds of orders every day from young and old who never [before] sent away for goods." By 1910, about 10 million Americans shopped by mail. The United States Post Office boosted mail-order businesses. In 1896 the Post Office introduced a rural free delivery (RFD) system that brought packages directly to every home. The turn of the 20th century saw prosperity that caused big changes in Americans' daily lives. At the same time, the nation's growing industrial sector faced problems that called for reform.
i
CATALOG SHOPPING
Catalogs were a novelty when Sears and Montgomery Ward arrived on the scene. However, by the mid-1990s, more than 13 billion catalogs filled the mailboxes of Americans.
Today, the world of mail-order business is changing. After over 100 years of operation, Montgomery Ward filed for bankruptcy on December 28, 2000.
Online shopping is challenging mail-order commerce today.
Online retail sales grew from $500 million in 1998 to nearly $89 billion in 2007. What do online shoppers order? Computer equipment, computer software, and electronic appliances make up about 25 percent of online spending.
1.	TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. •Joseph Pulitzer	-Ashcan school	‘rural free delivery (RFD)
•William Randolph Hearst ‘Mark Twain
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Re-create the spider diagram below. Add examples to each category.
Why is mass culture often described as a democratic phenomenon?
CRITICAL THINKING
3. SUMMARIZING
How did American methods of selling goods change at the turn of the 20th century?
Think About:
•	how city people did their shopping
•	how rural residents bought goods
•	how merchants advertised their products
ANALYZING VISUAL SOURCES
This cartoon shows the masters of the “new journalism.” According to the cartoonist, where were Pulitzer and Hearst leading American journalism?
Life at the Turn of the 20th Century 297
DAILY LIFE
(1877-1917) Going to the Show
As Americans moved from rural areas to cities, they looked for new ways to spend their weekend and evening leisure time. Live theatrical performances brought pleasure to cities and small towns alike. Stars, popular performers who could attract large audiences, compensated for the less-talented supporting actors. Audiences could choose from a wide range of music, drama, circus, and the latest in entertainment—moving pictures.
VAUDEVILLE THEATER
Performances that included song, dance, juggling, slapstick comedy, and sometimes chorus lines of female performers were characteristic of vaudeville. Promoters sought large audiences with varied backgrounds. Writing in Scribner's Magazine in October 1899, actor Edwin Milton Royle hailed vaudeville theater as “an American invention” that offered something to attract nearly everyone.
Until the 1890s, African-American performers filled roles mainly in minstrel shows that featured exaggerated imitations of African-American music and dance and reinforced racist stereotypes of blacks. By the turn of the century, however, minstrel shows had largely been replaced by more sophisticated musicals, and many black performers entertained in vaudeville.
M1
1 4 ’
'c
Bill “Bojangles” Robinson was a popular tap dancer.
THE CIRCUS
The biggest spectacle of all was often the annual visit of the Barnum & Bailey Circus, which its founders, P T. Barnum and Anthony Bailey, touted as “The Greatest Show on Earth.” Established in 1871, the circus arrived by railroad and staged a parade through town to advertise the show.
1 Chapter J
A shorter workweek allowed many Americans more time for leisure activities, and they certainly took advantage of it.
• In 1890, an average of 60,000 fans attended professional baseball games daily.
A LOOK AT THE FACTS
•	In 1893, a crowd of 50,000 attended the Princeton-Yale football game.
A
Trip to Chinatown, one of the popular new musical comedies, ran for an amazing 650 performances in the 1890s. •	In 1900, 3 million phonograph records of Broadway-produced musical comedies were sold.
•	The love of the popular musicals contributed to the sale of $42 million worth of musical instruments in 1900.
THE SILVER SCREEN
The first films, one-reel, ten-minute sequences, consisted mostly of vaudeville skits or faked newsreels. In 1903, the first modern film—an eight-minute silent feature called The Great Train Robbery— debuted in five-cent theaters called nickelodeons. By showing a film as often as 16 times a day, entrepreneurs could generate greater profits than by a costly stage production. By 1907, an estimated 3,000 nickelodeons dotted the country.
ragtime music
A blend of African-American spirituals and European musical forms, ragtime originated in the 1880s in the saloons of the South. African-American pianist and composer Scott Joplin’s ragtime compositions made him famous in the first decade of the 1900s. Ragtime led later to jazz, rhythm and blues, and rock ‘n’ roll. These forms of popular American culture spread worldwide, creating new dances and fashions that „ emulated the image of “loud, loose, American rebel.’
• By 1900, almost 500 men’s social clubs existed. Nine hundred college fraternity and sorority chapters had over 150,000 members.
20th Centu\
CHAPTER
ASSESSMENT
TERMS & NAMES
For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its connection to late 19th-century American life.
1.	Louis Sullivan
2.	Orville and Wilbur Wright
3.	Booker T. Washington
W. E. B.
Du Bois 5.	Niagara Movement
6.	Ida B. Wells
7.	Jim Crow laws
8.	Plessyv. Ferguson
9.	debt peonage 10. rural free delivery
MAIN IDEAS
Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
Science and Urban Life (pages 276-281)
1.	How did new technology promote urban growth around the turn of the century?
2.	In what ways did methods of communication improve in the late 19th and early 20th centuries?
Expanding Public Education
(pages 282-285)
3.	How did late 19th century public schools change?
4.	Why did some immigrants oppose sending their children to public schools?
Segregation and Discrimination
(pages 286-289)
5.	Analyze the effects of the P/essy v. Ferguson Supreme Court decision.
6.	How did Mexicans help make the Southwest prosperous in the late 19th century?
Dawn of Mass Culture (pages 292-297)
7.	What leisure activities flourished at the turn of the 20th century?
8.	What innovations in retail methods changed the way Americans shopped during this time period?
CRITICAL THINKING
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a table similar to the one shown, listing at least six important trends at the turn of the century, along with a major impact of each. Trend	Impact
1.	
2.	
3.	
4.	
5.	
6.	
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
How had changes in technology affected urban life by the turn of the 20th century? INTERPRETING GRAPHS
Look at the graph of Expanding Education/lncreasing Literacy on page 283, Which year reported the greatest gain in the literacy rate? What do you think were the implications on society of a more literate population? 300 Chapter 8

TEXAS TEST PRACTICE
Use the quotation below and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 1.
“We boast of the freedom enjoyed by our people above all other peoples. But It Is difficult to reconcile that boast with a state of the law which, practically, puts the brand of servitude and degradation upon a large class of our fellow-citizens, our equals before the law. ”
—Justice John Marshall Harlan in the dissenting opinion in Plessyv. Ferguson
1.	Justice Harlan used this reasoning for what purpose?
A to celebrate American democracy B to justify segregation
C to denounce the “separate-but-equal” argument D to demonstrate that equality before the law is
not practical
2.	Which of the following was not an outcome of expanding public education in the early 20th century?
F the establishment of public high schools and colleges
G the growth of equal education for all H a rise in the literacy rate J the founding of kindergartens
3.	The turn of the 20th century brought shorter work hours and more leisure time to many urban Americans. Which of the following bar graphs correctly reflects these factors?
B
Public Parks
1902 1908 1919
Public Parks
Public Parks
1902 1908 1919
Public Parks
1902 1908 1919
71 hmhsocialstudies.com
TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests • Tutorials
INTERACT WITH HISTORY
'"VWriteSmart Recall the issues that you recorded in myNotebook as you read the chapter. Now that you know more about the role of technology in people’s lives, would you change any of your responses? Discuss your ideas with a small group. Then make a cause-and-effect chart about one technological innovation of the era and its lasting impact on society. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write a paragraph summarizing your group’s discussion.
MULTIMEDIA ACTIVITY
XCBJTVRY
Visit the links for Chapter Assessment to find out more about the World’s Columbian Exposition held in Chicago in 1893. In a small group, make a list of the “famous firsts,” such as the first elevated railway, introduced at the exposition. Illustrate your list, adding pictures and informative captions, on a colorful poster for display in the classroom.
7i hmhsocialstudies.com
"VWriteSmart
Imagine you are a newspaper editor in 1896.
Write an editorial explaining what you think of the Supreme Court ruling in Plessyv. Ferguson. Be sure to address the “separate but equal” argument. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your editorial.
Life at the Turn of the 20th Century
End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Evaluating Sources
DEFINING THE SKILL
Historians must constantly evaluate sources to determine their credibility. When you evaluate sources, you examine them critically to assess their validity based on language, corroboration with other sources, and information about the author. Credible sources help historians produce an accurate and reliable historical account. Historians use several criteria for evaluating sources, including the author; the context of where, when, and why a source was created; the level of bias; and the distance of the author from the event.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: EVALUATE A SOURCE
The following is an excerpt of a speech by Booker T. Washington. The speech shows the emotion, point of view, and bias of the author. Examine the language, facts, and author when evaluating the source. Address by© BookerT. Washington, Principal,Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute,Tuskegee, Alabama
© This speech was given in front of a primarily white audience during a time when ! racial relations in the South were strained and social and economic opportunities i for African Americans were limited.
I "One third of the population of the South is of the Negro race. No enterprise seeking the material, civil or moral welfare of this section can disregard this element of our population and reach the highest success....
To those of my race who depend on bettering their condition in a foreign land, or who underestimate the importance of cultivating friendly relations
! with the southern white man who is their next door neighbor, I would say cast down your bucket where you are, cast it down in making friends in every manly way of the people of all races whom we are surrounded... .©No race can prosper till it learns that there is as much dignity in tilling a field as in writing a poem. It is at the bottom of life we must begin and not at the top. Nor should we permit our grievances to overshadow our opportunities.
To those of the white race who look to the incoming of those of foreign birth and strange tongue and habits for the prosperity of the South, were I permitted, I would repeat what I say to my own race.'Cast down your bucket where you are.'Cast it down among the 8,000,000 Negroes whose habits you know, whose loyalty and love you have tested in days when to have proved treacherous meant the ruin of your firesides.... Casting down your bucket among my people, helping and encouraging them as you are doing on these grounds, and to education of head, hand, and heart, you will find that they will buy your
S surplus land, make blossom the waste places in your fields, and run your ! factories. While doing this you can be sure in the future, as you have been in i the past, that you and your families will be surrounded by the most patient,
faithful, law-abiding and unresentful people that the world has seen.. .©In I all things that are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as
the hand in all things essential to mutual progress.
©—Address at the Opening of the Atlanta Exposition, September 18,1895
© Identify and learn the background of the author of the source. Quotations almost always include the name of the speaker or writer. This title also gives context information.
© Consider when, in relation to the event, the source was created. Sources tend to be more reliable if the author was close in time and place to a given event Is the source a primary source written by someone who witnessed or was involved in a historical event or a secondary source produced by someone who was not actually there? Why was this speech created and where was it given?
© Look at the language the author uses. What does this tell you about the author’s point of view or frame of reference? What bias does it show?
© Consider If the information can be corroborated and determine the usefulness of the source. Identify facts that can be confirmed or disproved by another source. Alternate sources can confirm where and when this speech was given, but the content is largely based on Washington’s opinions.
301
STRATEGY. MAKE A CHART
Summarize the information from the source in a chart. Source	Address at the Opening of the Atlanta Exposition, September 18,1895
Author	looker T. Washington, Principal, Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama
Historical Context	Prejudice and legal discrimination were rampant in the South. Washington looked for solutions to problems with racial relations that both sides might support.
Language	•	urged African Americans to value agricultural and industrial work •	asked whites to provide such opportunities to African Americans •	believed African Americans should accept segregation for the moment
Corroboration of Facts	The date, location, and speech itself can be confirmed by other sources. The content of the speech is filled with unconfirmed opinions and ideas, not facts.
Usefulness of Source	It is a valuable source to provide insight into Washington and his views on race relations but should be combined with other sources for a complete picture of race relations during the period.
APPLYING THE SKILL
Turn to Chapter 8, pages 290-291 and read the "Historic Decisions of the Supreme Court" feature. Reread the quote by Justice Henry B. Brown and evaluate it to determine if it is a credible source. Follow the steps above and make a chart to organize your information.
1.	Identify and learn the background of the author of the source.
Who was Henry B. Brown? What do you know about the author?
2.	Consider when, In relation to the event, the source was created.
What is the historical context for this source? What other national events may have influenced the justices on the Supreme Court? When, where, and why was the source created?
3.	Look at the language the author uses.
What do words and phrases such as undoubtedly and it could not have been intended tell you about the author’s point of view or frame of reference? What bias does it show?
4.	Consider If the Information can be corroborated and determine the usefulness
of the source.	,	,	. ...
What source could confirm or disprove the facts or ideas about this Supreme Court case? How useful is this source? Does it have any limitations? If so, what?
301 SK2


UNIT
' ' ';K • - (*\
’■ »jF'‘ <
7<

