’4 Chapter 11

The Western Front 1914-1916


the first time.
Verdun, Feb.-July 1916
French hold the line in longest battle of the war.
Somme, 1st battle, July-Nov. 1916
Disastrous British offensive.
Unable to save Belgium, the Allies retreated to the Marne River in France, where they halted the German advance in September 1914. After struggling to outflank each other's armies, both sides dug in for a long siege. By the spring of 1915, two parallel systems of deep, rat-infested trenches crossed France from the Belgian coast to the Swiss Alps. German soldiers occupied one set of trenches, Allied soldiers the other. There were three main kinds of trenches—front line, support, and reserve. Soldiers spent a period of time in each kind of trench. Dugouts, or underground rooms, were used as officers' quarters and command posts. Between the trench complexes lay "no man's land"—a barren expanse of mud pockmarked with shell craters and filled with barbed wire. Periodically, the soldiers charged enemy lines, only to be mowed down by machine gun fire.
The scale of slaughter was horrific. During the First Battle of the Somme— which began on July 1, 1916, and lasted until mid-November—the British suffered 60,000 casualties the first day alone. Final casualties totaled about 1.2 million, yet only about seven miles of ground changed hands. This bloody trench warfare, in which armies fought for mere yards of ground, continued for over three years. It led to a stalemate wherein neither side could gain an advantage.
f..MAtN IDEA*
Drawing
Conclusions
sgj Why do you think soldiers were rotated in the trenches?
IA». HISTORY
VIDEO
J
Vocabulary emigrate: to leave one’s country or region to settle in another; to move
main idea
Analyzing
Motives
© Why did the United States begin to favor Britain and France?
Americans Question Neutrality
In 1914, most Americans saw no reason to join a struggle 3,000 miles away. The war did not threaten American lives or property. This does not mean, however, that individual Americans were indifferent to who would win the war. Public opinion was strong—but divided.
DIVIDED LOYALTIES
Socialists criticized the war as a capitalist and imperialist struggle between Germany and England to control markets and colonies in China, Africa, and the Middle East. Pacifists, such as lawyer and politician William Jennings Bryan, believed that war was evil and that the United States should set an example of peace to the world. Many Americans simply did not want their sons to experience the horrors of warfare, as a hit song of 1915 conveyed.
“I didn't raise my boy to be a soldier,
I brought him up to be my pride and joy.
Who dares to place a musket on his shoulder,
To shoot some other mother's darling boy?”
Millions of naturalized U.S. citizens followed the war closely because they still had ties to the nations from which they had emigrated. For example, many Americans of German descent sympathized with Germany. Americans of Irish descent remembered the centuries of British oppression in Ireland and saw the war as a chance for Ireland to gain its independence.
On the other hand, many Americans felt close to Britain because of a common ancestry and language as well as similar democratic institutions and legal systems. Germany's aggressive sweep through Belgium increased American sympathy for the Allies. The Germans attacked civilians, destroying villages, cathedrals,
libraries, and even hospitals. Some atrocity stories—spread by British propaganda— later proved to be false, but enough proved true that one American magazine referred to Germany as "the bully of Europe."
More important, America's economic ties with the Allies were far stronger than its ties with the Central Powers. Before the war, American trade with Britain and France was more than double its trade with Germany. During the first two years of the war, America's transatlantic trade became even more lopsided, as the Allies flooded American manufacturers with orders for all sorts of war supplies, including dynamite, cannon powder, submarines, copper wire and tubing, and armored cars. The United States shipped millions of dollars of war supplies to the Allies, but requests kept coming. By 1915, the United States was experiencing a labor shortage. $
Y.CONO.M/f BACKGROUND
TRADE ALLIANCES
Maintaining neutrality proved difficult for American businesses. Trade with Germany became increasingly risky. Shipments were often stopped by the British blockade. In addition, President Wilson and others spoke out against German atrocities and warned of the threat that the German Empire posed to democracy.
From 1912 to 1917, U.S. trade relationships with European countries shifted dramatically. From 1914 on, trade with the Allies quadrupled, while trade with Germany fell to near zero.
Also, by 1917, American banks had loaned $2.3 billion to the Allies, but only $27 million to the Central Powers. Many U.S. leaders, including Treasury Secretary William McAdoo, felt that American prosperity depended upon an Allied victory.
U.S.
Exports to Europe, 1912-1917 I
France Great Britain
■ All Other European Countries
Germany
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs 1.	By how much did total U.S. exports to Europe rise or fall between 1914 and 1917?
2.	What trends does the graph show before the start of the war, and during the war?
The First World War 377
i !t
This image of a U-boat crew machine-gunning helpless survivors of the Lusitania was clearly meant as propaganda.
In fact, U-boats seldom lingered after an attack.
The War Hits Home
Although the majority of Americans favored victory for the Allies rather than the Central Powers, they did not want to join the Allies' fight. By 1917, however, America had mobilized for war against the Central Powers for two reasons: to ensure Allied repayment of debts to the United States and to prevent the Germans from threatening U.S. shipping.
THE BRITISH BLOCKADE
As fighting on land continued, Britain began to make more use of its naval strength. It blockaded the German coast to prevent weapons and other military supplies from getting through. However, the British expanded the definition of contraband to include food. They also extended the blockade to neutral ports and mined the entire North Sea. The results were twofold. First, American ships carrying goods for Germany refused to challenge the blockade and seldom reached their destination. Second, Germany found it increasingly difficult to import foodstuffs and fertilizers for crops. By 1917, famine stalked the country. An estimated 750,000 Germans starved to death as a result of the British blockade.
Americans had been angry at Britain's blockade, which threatened freedom of the seas and prevented American goods from reaching German ports. However, Germany's response to the blockade soon outraged American public opinion.
GERMAN U-BOAT RESPONSE
Germany responded to the British blockade with a counterblockade by U-boats (from Unterseeboot, the German word for a submarine). Any British or Allied ship found in the waters around Britain would be sunk—and it would not always be possible to warn crews and passengers of an attack. One of the worst disasters occurred on May 7, 1915, when a U-boat sank the British liner Lusitania (loo'si-ta'ne-a) off the southern coast of Ireland Of the 1,198 persons lost, 128 were Americans. The Germans defended their action on the grounds that the liner carried ammunition. Despite Germany's explanation Americans became outraged with Germany because of the loss of life American public opinion turned against Germany and the Central Powers.
EUROPE via LIVER?®1
LUSITANIA
Fastest and Largest Steamer , now in Atlantic Service Sai I SATURDAY, MAYt.WM Transylvania, Fri., May J J' Orduna, - • Tuesday 1,1 J Tuscania, •» - Fri., May.i, J "• LUSITANIA, Sat., May: ,! Transylvania. Fri-,_J_une A Gibraltar-Genoa-Naples-j5;^ S.S. Carpathia. Tliur., May 1V5®
Through booklnc*

THE
WORLDjOUfS klnc» <» J"'!!’"'1' urnji"	w *
«i«t*
NOTICE!
TRAVELLERS intendinptj
embark on lb? ' ft are reminded Hun a J war exist?, mid her allies am and her allies: that t * war includes He rout to the BriliRh W in accordance with form I ,lcc given by the Impe« f
man Government,
the flag of Great any of her allies, ahE destruction in tll0% ftihf that travellers war-tone on *b PJ0 f() -• Britain or her ttlbca ilieir own risk. IMPERIAL GERMAN El
tosHivtcrox, n. c.
Arab-"
Chapter 11
A newspaper ad for the Lusitania included a warning fromthe German Embassy-
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
How did the German U-boat campaign affect U.S. public opinion?
Despite this provocation, President Wilson ruled out a military response in favor of a sharp protest to Germany. Three months later, in August 1915, a U-boat sank another British liner, the Arabic, drowning two Americans. Again the United States protested, and this time Germany agreed not to sink any more passenger ships. But in March 1916 Germany broke its promise and torpedoed an unarmed French passenger steamer, the Sussex. The Sussex sank, and about 80 passengers, including Americans, were killed or injured. Once again the United States warned that it would break off diplomatic relations unless Germany changed its tactics. Again Germany agreed, but there was a condition: if the United States could not persuade Britain to lift its blockade against food and fertilizers, Germany would consider renewing unrestricted submarine warfare,
THE 1916 ELECTION In November 1916 came the U.S. presidential election. The Democrats renominated Wilson, and the Republicans nominated Supreme Court Justice Charles Evans Hughes. Wilson campaigned on the slogan "He Kept Us Out of War." Hughes pledged to uphold America's right to freedom of the seas but also promised not to be too severe on Germany.
The election returns shifted from hour to hour. In fact, Hughes went to bed believing he had been elected. When a reporter tried to reach him with the news of Wilson's victory, an aide said, "The president can't be disturbed." "Well," replied the reporter, "when he wakes up, tell him he's no longer president."
The United States Declares War
Wilson campaign button
After the election, Wilson tried to mediate between the warring alliances. The attempt failed. In a speech before the Senate in January 1917, the president called for "a peace without victory. ... a peace between equals," in which neither side would impose harsh terms on the other. Wilson hoped that all nations would join in a "league for peace" that would work to extend democracy, maintain freedom of the seas, and reduce armaments.
GERMAN PROVOCATION
The Germans ignored Wilson's calls for peace. Germany's leaders hoped to defeat Britain by resuming unrestricted submarine warfare. On January 31 the kaiser announced that U-boats would sink all ships in British waters—hostile or neutral—on sight. Wilson was stunned. The German decision meant that the United States would have to go to war. However, the president held back, saying that he would wait for "actual overt acts" before declaring war. main idea I
Making
Inferences
$ Why did the Zimmermann note alarm the U.S. government?
The overt acts came. First was the Zimmermann note, a telegram from the German foreign minister to the German ambassador in Mexico that was intercepted by British agents. The telegram proposed an alliance between Mexico and Germany and promised that if war with the United States broke out, Germany would support Mexico in recovering "lost territory in Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona." Next came the sinking of four unarmed American merchant ships, with a loss of 36 lives.
Finally, events in Russia removed the last significant obstacle to direct U.S. involvement in the war. In March, the oppressive Russian monarchy was
Alliances During WWI		
Allies		Central Powers
Australia	India	Austria-Hungary
Belgium	Italy	Bulgaria
British Colonies	Japan	Germany
Canada &	Montenegro	Ottoman Empire
Newfoundland	New Zealand	
France	Portugal	
French North	Romania	
Africa & French	Russia	
Colonies	Serbia	
Great Britain	South Africa	
Greece	United States	
Although not all of the countries listed above sent troops into the war, they all joined the war on the Allied side at		
various times.		
The First World War 379
aajORLDSTAgp
REVOLUTION IN RUSSIA
At first, the Russians surprised the Germans by mobilizing rapidly. Russian troops advanced quickly into German territory but were turned back at the Battle of Tannenberg in August 1914.
Throughout 1915, the Russians endured defeats and continued to retreat. By the end of 1915 they had suffered about 2.5 million casualties. The war also caused massive bread shortages in Russia.
Revolutionaries ousted the czar in March 1917 and established a provisional government. In November, the Bolsheviks, led by Lenin and Trotsky, overthrew the provisional government. They set up a Communist state and sought peace with the Central Powers.
replaced with a representative government. Now supporters of American entry into the war could claim that this was a war of democracies against brutal monarchies.
AMERICA ACTS A
light drizzle fell on Washington on April 2, 1917, as senators, representatives, ambassadors, members of the Supreme Court, and other guests crowded into the Capitol building to hear President Wilson deliver his war resolution. A
Personal Voice woodrow wilson “Property can be paid for; the lives of peaceful and Innocent people cannot be. The present German submarine warfare against commerce is a warfare against mankind. ... We are glad ... to fight... for the ultimate peace of the world and for the liberation of its peoples. . . . The world must be made safe for democracy. ... We have no selfish ends to serve. We desire no conquest, no dominion. We seek no indemnities. ... It is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful people into war. . . . But the right Is more precious than peace. ”
—quoted in American Voices
Congress passed the resolution a few days later. With the hope of neutrality finally shattered, U.S. troops would follow the stream of American money and munitions that had been heading to the Allies throughout the war. But Wilson's plea to make the world "safe for democracy" wasn't just political posturing. Indeed, Wilson and many Americans truly believed that the United States had to join the war to pave the way for a future order of peace and freedom. A resolved but anxious nation held its breath as the United States prepared for war.
-W
ASSESSMENT
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance, •nationalism	•Central Powers	»no man’s land
•militarism	•Archduke Franz Ferdinand • trench warfare
•Allies
•Lusitania •Zimmermann note
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one shown, list the causes for the outbreak of World War I.
Causes of WWI
Which was the most significant cause? Explain your answer.
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	SYNTHESIZING
Describe some ways in which World War I threatened the lives of civilians on both sides of the Atlantic.
4.	SUMMARIZING
Why were America’s ties with the Allies stronger than its ties with the Central Powers?
ANALYZING IMPACT
How did trench warfare result in a stalemate on the Western Front?
ANALYZING ISSUES
Why do you think Germany escalated its U-boat attacks in 1917? Think About:
•	Germany’s military buildup
•	the effects of the British blockade
•	Germany’s reason for using submarine warfare

Chapter 11
American Power Tips the Balance
MAIN IDEA
The United States mobilized a large army and navy to help the Allies achieve victory.
]£
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
During World War I, the United States military evolved into the powerful fighting force that it remains today.
•Eddie Rickenbacker •Selective Service Act
•convoy system •American Expeditionary Force
•General John J. Pershing •Alvin York •conscientious objector •armistice

One; American's Story;
hmhsocialstudies.com ]
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on American responses to the war.
Eddie Rickenbacker, famous fighter pilot of World War I, was well known as a racecar driver before the war. He went to France as a driver but transferred to the aviation division. He learned to fly on his own time and eventually joined the U.S. Army Air Service. Rickenbacker repeatedly fought the dreaded Flying Circus—a German air squadron led by the "Red Baron," Manfred von Richthofen.
i
A
Personal Voice eddie rickenbacker “1 put In six or seven hours of flying time each day. ... My narrowest escape came at a time when I was fretting over the lack of action. . . . Guns began barking behind me, and sizzling tracers zipped by my head. ... At least two planes were on my tail. . . . They would expect me to dive. Instead I twisted upward in a corkscrew path called a ‘chandelle.’ I guessed right. As I went up, my two attackers came down, near enough for me to see their faces. I also saw the red noses on those Fokkers [German planes]. I was up against the Flying Circus again.”
—Rickenbacker: An Autobiography
World War I flying ace Eddie Rickenbacker
After engaging in 134 air battles and downing 26 enemy aircraft, Rickenbacker won fame as the Allied pilot with the most victories—"American ace of aces."
America Mobilizes
The United States was not prepared for war. Only 200,000 men were in service when war was declared, and few officers had combat experience. Drastic measures were needed to build an army large and modem enough to make an impact in Europe.
The First World War 381
FOR U.S.ARNY
NEAREST RECRUITING STATION
Drafted men line up for service at Camp Travis in San Antonio, Texas, around 1917.
Vocabulary
separated or isolated from others

James Montgomery Flagg’s portrayal of Uncle Sam became the most famous recruiting poster in American history.
RAISING AN ARMY
To meet the government's need for more fighting power, Congress passed the Selective Service Act in May 1917. The act required men to register with the government in order to be randomly selected for military service. By the end of 1918, 24 million men had registered under the act. Of this number, almost 3 million were called up. About 2 million troops reached Europe before the truce was signed, and three-fourths of them saw actual combat. Most of the inductees had not attended high school, and about one in five was foreign-born. About 400,000 African Americans served in the armed forces. More than half of them served in France. African American soldiers served in segregated units and were excluded from the navy and marines. Most African Americans were assigned to noncombat duties, although there were exceptions. The all-black 369th Infantry Regiment saw more continuous duty on the front lines than any other American regiment. Two soldiers of the 369th, Henry Johnson and Needham Roberts, were the first Americans to receive France's highest military honor, the Croix de Guerre—the "cross of war."
The eight-month training period took place partly in the United States and partly in Europe. During this time the men put in 17-hour days on target practice, bayonet drill, kitchen duty, and cleaning up the grounds. Since real weapons were in short supply, soldiers often drilled with fake weapons—rocks instead of hand grenades, or wooden poles instead of rifles.
Although women were not allowed to enlist, the army reluctantly accepted women in the Army Corps of Nurses, but denied them army rank, pay, and benefits. Meanwhile, some 13,000 women accepted noncombat positions in the navy and marines, where they served as nurses, secretaries, and telephone operators, with full military rank.
MASS PRODUCTION
In addition to the vast army that had to be created and trained, the United States had to find a way to transport men, food, and equipment over thousands of miles of ocean. It was an immense task, made more difficult by German submarine activity, which by early 1917 had sunk twice as much ship tonnage as the Allies had built. In order to expand its fleet, the U.S. govern-ment took four crucial steps. Summarizing
& How did the United States raise an army for the war?
►2 Chapter 11
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
How did the United States expand its navy so quickly?
First, the government exempted many shipyard workers from the draft and gave others a "deferred" classification, delaying their participation in the draft. Second, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce joined in a public relations campaign to emphasize the importance of shipyard work. They distributed service flags to families of shipyard workers, just like the flags given to families of soldiers and sailors. They also urged automobile owners to give shipyard employees rides to and from work, since streetcars were so crowded. Third, shipyards used prefabrication techniques. Instead of building an entire ship in the yard, standardized parts were built elsewhere and then assembled at the yard. This method reduced construction time substantially. As a result, on just one day—July 4, 1918—the United States launched 95 ships. Fourth, the government took over commercial and private ships and converted them for transatlantic war use.
America Turns the Tide
German U-boat attacks on merchant ships in the Atlantic were a serious threat to the Allied war effort. American Vice Admiral William S. Sims convinced the British to try the convoy system, in which a heavy guard of destroyers escorted merchant ships back and forth across the Atlantic in groups. By fall of 1917, shipping losses had been cut
in half.
The U.S. Navy also helped lay a 230-mile barrier of mines across the North Sea from Scotland to Norway. The barrier was designed to bottle up the U-boats that sailed from German ports and keep them out of the Atlantic Ocean.
By early 1918 the Germans found it increasingly difficult to replace their losses and to staff their fleet with trained submariners. Of the almost 2 million Americans who sailed to Europe during the war, only 637 were lost to U-boat attacks.
World War I Convoy System

merchant ships
	
defensive boundary	
r - ’’i »	<
enemy
submarine
FIGHTING IN EUROPE
After two and a half years of fighting, the Allied forces were exhausted and demoralized. One of the main contributions that American troops made to the Allied war effort, apart from their numbers, was their freshness and enthusiasm. They were determined to hit the Germans hard. Twenty-two-year-old Joseph Douglas Lawrence, a U.S. Army lieutenant, remarked on the importance of American enthusiasm when he described his first impression of the trenches. A
Personal Voice Joseph douglas Lawrence “ I have never seen or heard of such an elaborate, complete line of defense as the British had built at this point. There was a trench with dugouts every three hundred yards from the front line In Ypres back four miles to and including Dirty Bucket. Everything was fronted with barbed wire and other entanglements. Artillery was concealed everywhere. Railroad tracks, narrow and standard gauge, reached from the trenches back into the zone of supply. Nothing had been neglected to hold this line, save only one important thing, enthusiasm among the
troops, and that was the purpose of our presence. ”
__Fighting Soldier: The AEF in 1918
Lieutenant Joseph D. Lawrence
The First World War 383

Fighting “Over There”
The American Expeditionary Force (AEF), led by General John J. Pershing, included men from widely separated parts of the country. American infantrymen were nicknamed doughboys, possibly because of the white belts they wore, which they cleaned with pipe clay, or "dough/' Most doughboys had never ventured far from the farms or small towns where they lived, and the sophisticated sights and sounds of Paris made a vivid impression. However, doughboys were also shocked by the unexpected horrors of the battlefield and astonished by modern warfare.
NEW WEAPONS
With fighting bogged down in the trenches, both the Allied and Central Powers began looking for weapons and tactics to gain an advantage. Although some of these weapons were new, others, like the machine gun, had been so refined that they changed the nature of warfare. The two most innovative weapons were the tank and the airplane. Together, they heralded mechanized warfare, or warfare that relies on machines powered by gasoline and diesel engines. Tanks ran on caterpillar treads and were built of steel so that bullets bounced off. The British first used tanks during the 1916 Battle of the Somme, but not very effectively. By 1917, the British had learned how to drive large numbers of tanks through barbed wire defenses, clearing a path for the infantry.
The early airplanes were so flimsy that at first both sides limited their use to scouting. After a while, the two sides used tanks to fire at enemy planes that were gathering information. Early dogfights, or individual air combats, like the one described by Eddie Rickenbacker, resembled duels. Pilots sat in their open cockpits and shot at each other with pistols. Because it was hard to fly a plane and shoot a pistol at the same time, planes began carrying mounted machine guns. But the planes' propeller blades kept getting in the way of the bullets. Then the Germans introduced an interrupter gear that permitted the stream of bullets to avoid the whirring blades.
^V.v player
GENERAL JOHN J. PERSHING 1860-1948
When General Pershing, the commander of the American Expeditionary Force (AEF), arrived in France, he found that the Allies intended to use American troops simply as reinforcements.
Pershing, however, urged that the AEF operate as an independent fighting force, under American command.
Pershing believed in aggressive combat and felt that three years of trench warfare had made the Allies too defensive. Under Pershing, American forces helped to stop the German advance, ca|> turing important enemy positions. After the war, Pershing was made General of the Armies of the United States—the highest rank given to an officer.
MAIN IDEA
Forming
Generalizations
How did World War I change the nature of warfare?
Background
When the U.S. entered the war, its air power was weak. Then, in July 1917, Congress appropriated a hefty $675 million to build an air force.
Technology)-
TECHNOLOGY AT WAR
Both sides in World War I used new technology to attack more soldiers from greater distances than ever before. Aircraft and long-range guns were even used to fire on civilian targets—libraries, cathedrals, and city districts. The biggest guns could shell a city from 75 miles.
Machine Guns
Firepower increased to 600 rounds per minute.
Airships and Airplanes
One of the most famous WWI planes, the British Sopwith Camel, had a front-mountecj machine gun for “dogfights.” Planes were also loaded with bombs, as were the floating gas-filled "airships” called zeppelms-
Meanwhile, airplanes were built to travel faster and carry heavy bomb loads. By 1918 the British had built up a strategic bomber force of 22,000 planes with which to attack German weapons factories and army bases.
Observation balloons were used extensively by both sides. Balloons were so important strategically that they were often protected by aircraft flying close by, and they became prime targets for Rickenbacker and other ace pilots.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
What were the physical and psychological effects of this new kind of warfare?
The War Introduces New Hazards
None of the new technologies provided the hoped-for advantage. Instead, the stalemate continued, and led to horrific injuries and hazards. The fighting men were surrounded by filth, lice, rats, and polluted water that caused dysentery. They inhaled poison gas and smelled the stench of decaying bodies. They suffered from lack of sleep. Constant bombardments and other experiences often led to battle fatigue and "shell shock," a term coined during World War I to describe a complete emotional collapse from which many never recovered.
Physical problems included a disease called trench foot, caused by standing in cold wet trenches for long periods of time without changing into dry socks or boots. First the toes would turn red or blue, then they would become numb, and finally they would start to rot. The only solution was to amputate the toes, and in some cases the entire foot. A painful infection of the gums and throat, called trench mouth, was also common among the soldiers.
Red Cross ambulances, often staffed by American volunteers, carried the wounded from the battlefield to the hospital. An American nurse named Florence Bullard recounted her experience in a hospital near the front in 1918.
A
Personal Voice Florence bullard “The Army is only twelve miles away from us and only the wounded that are too severely injured to live to be carried a little farther are brought here. . . . Side by side I have Americans, English, Scotch, Irish, and French, and apart in the corners are Boche [Germans]. They have to watch each other die side by side. I am sent for everywhere—in the . . . operating-room, the dressing-room, and back again to the rows of men. . . . The cannon goes day and night and the shells are breaking over and around us. ... I have had to write many sad letters to American mothers. I wonder If it will ever end. w
—quoted in Over There: The Story of America’s First Great Overseas Crusade In fact, the end was near, as German forces mounted a final offensive.
The First World War 385
Chateau-Thierry, June 1918
U.S. troops help stop the German advance on Paris.
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1. Location Did the Germans achieve their goal of capturing Paris in their March 1918 offensive? Why or why not?
Place What geographical feature of northern France made it particularly well suited to trench warfare?
Allied Victories, 1917-1918
5® Chapter 11
Ypres, 3rd battle, July-Nov. 1917
Allied victory costs over half a million casualties.	J
(Cantigny, May 1918 U.S. troops
fill gaps between French and British lines during German offensive.

American Troops Go on the Offensive
When Russia pulled out of the war in 1917, the Germans shifted their armies from the eastern front to the western front in France. By May they were within 50 miles of Paris. The AEF arrived just in time to help stop the German advance at Cantigny in France. Several weeks later, U.S. troops played a major role in throwing back German attacks at Chateau-Thierry and Belleau Wood. In July and August, they helped win the Second Battle of the Marne. The tide had turned against the Central Powers. In September, U.S. soldiers began to mount offensives against the Germans at Saint-Mihiel and in the Meuse-Argonne area. For more than a month, the Allies pushed northward. In the Battle of the Argonne Forest, the Americans suffered some 120,000 casualties. By November, however, they occupied the hills around Sedan, France. £)
AMERICAN WAR HERO
During the fighting in the Meuse-Argonne area, Alvin York became famous as a war hero. York sought exemption as a conscientious objector, a person who opposes warfare on moral grounds, pointing out that the Bible says, "Thou shalt not kill." York eventually decided that it was morally acceptable to fight if the cause was just. On October 8,1918, armed only with a rifle and a revolver, York killed 25 Germans and—with six other doughboys—captured 132 prisoners. General Pershing called him the outstanding soldier of the AEF. For his heroic acts, York was promoted to sergeant and awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor.
THE COLLAPSE OF GERMANY
On November 3, 1918, Austria-Hungary surrendered to the Allies. That same day, German sailors mutinied against government authority. The mutiny spread quickly Everywhere in Germany, groups of soldiers and workers organized revolutionary councils. On November 9, socialist leaders in the capital, Berlin, established a German republic. The kaiser gave up the throne. Drawing
Conclusions
$ How did American forces help the Allies win the war?
I
Although there were no Allied soldiers on German territory and no truly decisive battle had been fought, the Germans were too exhausted to continue fighting. So at the eleventh hour, on the eleventh day, in the eleventh month of 1918, Germany agreed to a cease-fire and signed the armistice, or truce, that ended the war.
THE FINAL TOLL
World War I was the bloodiest war in history up to that time. Deaths numbered about 22 million, more than half of them civilians. In addition, 20 million people were wounded, and 10 million more became refugees. The direct economic costs of the war may have been about $338 billion. The United States lost 48,000 men in battle, with another 62,000 dying of disease. More than 200,000 Americans were wounded. For the Allies, news of the armistice brought great relief. Private John Barkley described the reaction to the news.
A
Personal Voice john l. barkley “ About 9 o’clock in the evening we heard wild commotion in the little town.
The French people, old and young, were running through the streets. Old men and women we’d seen sitting around their houses too feeble to move, were out in the streets yelling, 'Vive la France! Vive la France! Vive I’America!’. .. .
Down the street came a soldier. He was telling everybody the armistice had been signed. I said, 'What’s an armistice?’ It sounded like some kind of machine to me. The other boys around there didn’t know what it meant either.
When the official word came through that it meant peace, we couldn’t believe it. Finally Jesse said, 'Well kid, I guess it really does mean the war is over.’
I said, 'I just can’t believe it’s true.’
But it was. ”
—No Hard Feelings
i
Across the Atlantic, Americans also rejoiced at the news. Many now expected life to return to normal. However, people found their lives at home changed almost as much as the lives of those who had fought in Europe.

1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•Eddie Rickenbacker •Selective Service Act
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Fill in a web like the one below to show how Americans responded to the war.
Why was the entire population affected by America’s entry into World War I?
•convoy system •American Expeditionary Force
•General John J. Pershing •Alvin York
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING IMPACT
How did specific needs result in technological innovations in the military during World War I? How did these innovations impact fighting and the stalemate on the Western Front?
4.	analyzing events
What were the significant battles of World War I? How did the AEF contribute to Allied victories?
ANALYZING VISUAL SOURCES
This World War I poster shows the role of non-combatants overseas. What is the message in this propaganda poster?
conscientious objector armistice
Back, our 3K55K girls over thenV^
United War Work Campaign ▼
The First World War 387
TEKS4F,13A,19B,21A
The War at Home
MAIN ODEA
WHY IIT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Naumras
World War I spurred social, political, and economic change in the United States.
Such changes increased government powers and expanded economic opportunities.
War Industries Board Bernard M. Baruch propaganda
•George Creel • Espionage and Sedition Acts •Great Migration
?| hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on how World War I changed American life.
r One American's Story j
The suffragist Harriot Stanton Blatch visited a munitions plant in New Jersey during World War I and proudly described women at work.
A
Personal Voice Harriot stanton blatch “The day I visited the place, In one of the largest shops women had only Just been put on the work, but it was expected that In less than a month they would be found handling all of the twelve hundred machines under that one roof alone. The skill of the women staggers one. After a week or two they master the operations on the 'turret/ gauging and routing machines. The best worker on the 'facing’ machine is a woman. She is a piece worker, as many of the women are. . . . This woman earned, the day I saw her, five dollars and forty cents. She tossed about the fuse parts, and played with that machine, as I would with a baby. ” —quoted in We, the American Women
Before World War I, women had been excluded from many jobs. However, the wartime need for labor brought over a million more women into the work force. For women, as for the rest of society, World War I brought about far-reaching changes.
Congress Gives Power to Wilson
Harriot Stanton Blatch followed in the footsteps of her famous mother, Elizabeth Cady Stanton.
Winning the war was not a job for American soldiers alone. As Secretary of War Newton Baker said, "War is no longer Samson with his shield and spear and sword, and David with his sling. It is the conflict of smokestacks now the combat of the driving wheel and the engine." Because World War I was such an immense conflict, the entire economy had to be refocused on the war effort The shift from producing consumer goods to producing war supplies was too complicated and important a job for private industry to handle on its own so business and government collaborated in the effort. In the process, the power of government was greatly expanded. Congress gave President Wilson direct control over much of the economy, including the power to fix prices and to regulate—even to nationalize—certain war-related industries.
188 Chapter 11
Background
In 1913 Henry Ford speeded up factory production with a constantly moving assembly line. Wartime production spread this technique throughout the country.
MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
Why would labor disputes affect the war effort?
WAR INDUSTRIES BOARD
The main regulatory body was the War Industries Board (WIB). It was established in 1917 and reorganized in 1918 under the leadership of Bernard M. Baruch (bo-rook'), a prosperous businessman. The board encouraged companies to use mass-production techniques to increase efficiency. It also urged them to eliminate waste by standardizing products—for instance, by making only 5 colors of typewriter ribbons instead of 150. The WIB set production quotas and allocated raw materials. Under the WIB, industrial production in the United States increased by about 20 percent. However, the WIB applied price controls only at the wholesale level. As a result, retail prices soared, and in 1918 they were almost double what they had been before the war. Corporate profits soared as well, especially in such industries as chemicals, meatpacking, oil, and steel.
The WIB was not the only federal agency to regulate the economy during the war. The Railroad Administration controlled the railroads, and the Fuel Administration monitored coal supplies and rationed gasoline and heating oil. In addition, many people adopted "gasless Sundays" and "lightless nights" to conserve fuel. In March 1918, the Fuel Administration introduced another conservation measure: daylight-saving time, which had first been proposed by Benjamin Franklin in the 1770s as a way to take advantage of the longer days of summer.
WAR ECONOMY
Wages in most industries rose during the war years. Hourly wages for blue-collar workers—those in the metal trades, shipbuilding, and meatpacking, for example—rose by about 20 percent. A household's income, however, was largely undercut by rising food prices and housing costs. By contrast, stockholders in large corporations saw enormous profits. One industrial manufacturer, the DuPont Company, saw its stock multiply in value 1,600 percent between 1914 and 1918. By that time the company was earning a $68-mil-lion yearly profit. As a result of the uneven pay between labor and management, increasing work hours, child labor, and dangerously "sped-up" conditions, unions boomed. Union membership climbed from about 2.5 million in 1916 to more than 4 million in 1919. More than 6,000 strikes broke out during the war months.
To deal with disputes between management and labor, President Wilson established the National War Labor Board in 1918. Workers who refused to obey board decisions could lose their draft
exemptions. "Work or fight," the board told them. However, the board also worked to improve factory conditions. It pushed for an eight-hour workday, promoted safety inspections, and enforced the child labor ban. &
FOOD ADMINISTRATION
To help produce and conserve food, Wilson set up the Food Administration under Herbert Hoover.
Instead of rationing food, he called on people to follow the "gospel of the clean plate." He declared one day a week "meatless," another "sweetless," two days "wheatless," and two other days "porkless." Restaurants removed sugar bowls from the table and served bread only after the first course.
The War Economy, 1914-1920
Average Annual Income
Consumer Price Index*
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States
1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 1920
*A measure of changes in the prices of goods and services commonly bought by consumers
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs 1.	How did the rise in average annual income compare with the rise in prices from 1914 to 1920?
2.	How might the combined change in wages and prices affect a working family?
The First World War 389
A wartime poster encourages Americans to conserve resources.
Homeowners planted "victory gardens" in their yards. Schoolchildren spent their after-school hours growing tomatoes and cucumbers in public parks. As a result of these and similar efforts, American food shipments to the Allies tripled. Hoover also set a high government price on wheat and other staples. Farmers responded by putting an additional 40 million acres into production. In the process, they increased their income by almost 30 percent.
Selling the War
Once the government had extended its control over the economy, it was faced with two major tasks: raising money and convincing the public to support the war.
WAR FINANCING
The United States spent about $35.5 billion on the war effort. The government raised about one-third of this amount through taxes, including a progressive income tax (which taxed high incomes at a higher rate than low incomes), a war-profits tax, and higher excise taxes on tobacco, liquor, and luxury goods. It raised the rest through public borrowing by selling "Liberty Loan" and "Victory Loan” bonds. The government sold bonds through tens of thousands of volunteers. Movie stars spoke at rallies in factories, in schools, and on street corners. As Treasury Secretary William G. McAdoo put it, only "a friend of Germany" would refuse to buy war bonds. Jg>
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC INFORMATION
To popularize the war, the government set up the nation's first propaganda agency, the Committee on Public Information (CPI). Propaganda is a kind of biased communication designed to influence people's thoughts and actions. The head of the CPI was a former muckraking journalist named George Creel. Creel persuaded the nation's artists and advertising agencies to create thousands of paintings, posters, cartoons, and sculptures promoting the war. He recruited some 75,000 men to serve as "Four-Minute Men," who spoke about everything relating to the war: the draft, rationing, bond drives, victory gardens and topics such as "Why We Are Fighting" and "The Meaning of America."
Nor did Creel neglect the written word. He ordered a printing of almost 25 million copies of "How the War Came to America"-which included Wilson's war message-in English and other languages. He distributed some 75 million pamphlets, booklets, and leaflets, many with the enthusiastic help of the Boy
Summarizing
jgj How did the government raise money for the war effort?
Chapter 11

Scouts. Creel s propaganda campaign was highly effective. However, while the campaign promoted patriotism, it also inflamed hatred and violations of the civil liberties of certain ethnic groups and opponents of the war.
Attacks on Civil Liberties Increase
Early in 1917, President Wilson expressed his fears about the consequences of war hysteria.
A
Personal Voice woodrow wilson “ Once lead this people into war and they’ll forget there ever was such a thing as tolerance. To fight you must be brutal and ruthless, and the spirit of ruthless brutality will enter into the very fiber of our national life, infecting Congress, the courts, the policeman on the beat, the man in the street. Conformity would be the only virtue, and every man who refused to conform would have to pay the penalty. ”
—quoted in Cobb of "The World"
The president's prediction came true. As soon as war was declared, conformity indeed became the order of the day. Attacks on civil liberties, both unofficial and official, erupted.
MAIN IDEA
Developing
Historical
Perspective
§) What effect did the war have on the lives of recent immigrants?
ANTI-IMMIGRANT HYSTERIA
The main targets of these attacks were Americans who had emigrated from other nations, especially those from Germany and Austria-Hungary. The most bitter attacks were directed against the nearly 2 million Americans who had been born in Germany, but other foreign-born persons and Americans of German descent suffered as well. Many Americans with German names lost their jobs. Orchestras refused to play the music of Mozart, Bach, Beethoven, and Brahms. Some towns with German names changed them. Schools stopped teaching the German language, and librarians removed books by German authors from the shelves. People even resorted to violence against German Americans, flogging them or smearing them
Analyzing
| Political Cartoons )
THE ENEMY WITHIN
After the United States entered the war, government propaganda helped inflame prejudice against recent immigrants. In the suspicious atmosphere of the time, conspiracy theories flourished, and foreign spies were believed to be everywhere. This cartoon reveals the hysteria that gripped the country in 1917.
SKILLBUILDER
Analyzing Political Cartoons 1.	What is happening in this cartoon?
2.	What does the cartoonist suggest will happen to “enemy aliens”?
The First World War 391
Vocabulary
sedition: rebellion
against one's
government;
treason
with tar and feathers. A mob in Collinsville, Illinois, wrapped a German flag around a German-born miner named Robert Prager and lynched him. A jury cleared the mob's leader.
Finally, in a burst of anti-German fervor, Americans changed the name of German measles to "liberty measles." Hamburger—named after the German city of Hamburg—became "Salisbury steak" or "liberty sandwich," depending on whether you were buying it in a store or eating it in a restaurant. Sauerkraut was renamed "liberty cabbage," and dachshunds turned into "liberty pups.
ESPIONAGE AND SEDITION ACTS
In June 1917 Congress passed the Espionage Act, and in May 1918 it passed the Sedition Act. Under the Espionage and Sedition Acts a person could be fined up to $10,000 and sentenced to 20 years in jail for interfering with the war effort or for saying anything disloyal, profane, or abusive about the government or the war effort. Like the Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798, these laws clearly violated the spirit of the First Amendment. Their passage led to over 2,000 prosecutions for loosely defined antiwar activities; of these, over half resulted in convictions. Newspapers and magazines that opposed the war or criticized any of the Allies lost their mailing privileges. The House of Representatives refused to seat Victor Berger, a socialist congressman from Wisconsin, because of his antiwar views. Columbia University fired a distinguished psychologist because he opposed the war. A colleague who supported the war thereupon resigned in protest, saying, "If we have to suppress everything we don't like to hear, this country is resting
a pretty wobbly basis."
The Espionage and Sedition Acts targeted socialists and labor leaders.
Eugene V. Debs was handed a ten-year prison sentence for speaking out against the war and the draft. The anarchist Emma Goldman received a two-year prison sentence and a $10,000 fine for organizing the No Conscription League. When she left jail, the authorities deported her to Russia. "Big Bill" Haywood and other leaders of the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) were accused of sabotaging the war effort because they urged workers to strike for better conditions and higher pay. Haywood was sentenced to a long prison term. (He later skipped bail and fled to Russia.) Under such federal pressure, the IWW faded away,
j MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
Jgj What impact did the Espionage and Sedition Acts have on free speech?
This Industrial The War Encourages Social Change
Workers of the
World (IWW)	Wars often unleash powerful social forces. The period of World War I was no
sticker encourages exception; important changes transformed the lives of African Americans workers to join and women.
the union.
AFRICAN AMERICANS AND THE WAR
Black public opinion about the war was divided. On one side were people like W. E. B. Du Bois, who believed that blacks should support the war effort. il
4
A
Personal Voice w. e. b. du bois “That which the German power represents today spells death to the aspirations of Negroes and all darker races for equality, freedom and democracy. ... Let us, while this war lasts, forget our special grievances and close our ranks shoulder to shoulder with our own white fellow citizens and the allied nations that are fighting for democracy.”
—“Close Ranks”
Chapter 11
Du Bois believed that African-American support for the war would strengthen calls for racial justice. In contrast, William Monroe Trotter, founder of the Boston Guardian, believed that victims of racism should not support a racist government. Trotter condemned Du Bois's accommodationist approach and favored protest instead. Nevertheless, despite grievances over continued racial inequality in the United States, most African Americans backed the war.
MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
E/
How did the war open opportunities for African Americans? THE GREAT MIGRATION
In concrete terms, the greatest effect of the First World War on African Americans' lives was that it accelerated the Great Migration, the large-scale movement of hundreds of thousands of Southern blacks to cities in the North. This great population shift had already begun before the war in the late 19th century, when African Americans trickled northward to escape the Jim Crow South—but after the turn of the century, the trickle became a tidal wave. Several factors contributed to the tremendous increase in black migration. First, many African Americans sought to escape racial discrimination in the South, which made it hard to make a living and often threatened their lives. Also, a boll weevil infestation, aided by floods and droughts, had
ruined much of the South's cotton fields. In the North, there were more job opportunities. For example, Henry Ford opened his automobile assembly line to black workers in 1914. The outbreak of World War I and the drop in European immigration increased job opportunities for African Americans in steel mills, munitions plants, and stockyards. Northern manufacturers sent recruiting agents to distribute free railroad passes through the South. In addition, the publisher of the black-owned newspaper Chicago Defender bombarded Southern blacks with articles contrasting Dixieland lynchings with the prosperity of African Americans in the North.
History Through
THE MIGRATION OF THE NEGRO, PANEL NO. 1
(1940-41) This painting by Jacob Lawrence shows three of the most common destinations for African Americans leaving the South. Why do you
think the artist has not shown any individual facial features?
The First World War 393
However, racial prejudice against African Americans also existed in the North. The press of new migrants to Northern cities caused overcrowding and intensified racial tensions.
Nevertheless, between 1910 and 1930, hundreds of thousands of African Americans migrated to such cities as Chicago, New York, and Philadelphia. Author Richard Wright described the great exodus.
A
Personal Voice richard wright 46 We are bitter no more; we are leaving! We are leaving our homes, pulling up stakes to move on. We look up at the high southern sky and remember all the sunshine and all the rain and we feel a sense of loss, but we are leaving.
We look out at the wide green fields which our eyes saw when we first came into the world and we feel full of regret, but we are leaving. We scan the kind black faces we have looked upon since we first saw the light of day, and, though pain is in our hearts, we are leaving. We take one last furtive look over our shoulders to the Big House— high upon a hill beyond the railroad tracks—where the Lord of the Land lives, and we feel glad, for we are leaving. ”
—quoted in 12 Million Black Voices
WOMEN IN THE WAR
While African Americans began new lives, women moved into jobs that had been held exclusively by men. They became railroad workers, cooks, dockworkers, and bricklayers. They mined coal and took part in shipbuilding. At the same time, women continued to fill more traditional jobs as nurses, clerks, and teachers. Many women worked as volunteers, serving at Red Cross facilities and encouraging the sale of bonds and the planting of victory gardens. Other women, such as Jane Addams, were active in the peace movement. Addams helped found the Women's Peace Party in 1915 and remained a pacifist even after the United States entered the war. President Wilson acknowledged, "The services of women during the supreme crisis have been of the most signal usefulness and distinction; it is high time that part of our debt should be acknowledged." While acknowledgment of that debt did not include equal pay for equal work, it did help bolster public support for woman suffrage. In 1919, Congress finally passed the Nineteenth Amendment, granting women the right to vote. In 1920 the amendment was ratified by the states.
HISTORICAL
SPOTLIGHT
RACE RIOTS
Racial prejudice against African Americans in the North sometimes took violent forms. In July 1917, a race riot exploded in East St. Louis, Illinois. White workers, furious over the hiring of African Americans as strikebreakers at a munitions plant, rampaged through the streets. Forty blacks and nine whites died.
Another riot erupted in July 1919 in Chicago when a 17-year-old African American swam from the water off a “black beach” to the water off a “white beach.” There, white bathers threw rocks at him until he drowned.
African Americans retaliated, and several riots broke out in the city. Order was restored after several days of violence that involved about 10,000 people.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
What effect did the war have on women’s lives?
Women worked in a variety of jobs during the war. Here, women assemble an aircraft wing.

THE FLU EPIDEMIC
In the fall of 1918, the United States suffered a home- front crisis when an international flu epidemic affected about one-quarter of the
U.S. population. The effect of the epidemic on the economy was devastating.
Mines shut down, telephone service was cut in half, and factories and offices
staggered working hours to avoid contagion. Cities ran short of coffins, and the New York City corpses of poor people lay unburied for as long as a week. The mysterious illness street cleaners seemed to strike people who were otherwise in the best of health, and death wore masks to could come in a matter of days. Doctors did not know what to do, other than to avoid catchinS recommend cleanliness and quarantine. One epidemic survivor recalled that "so inf,uenza-many people died from the flu they just rang the bells; they didn't dare take ▼
j MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
6| How did wartime conditions help spread the flu?
[corpses] into the church."
In the army, where living conditions allowed contagious illnesses to spread rapidly, more than a quarter of the soldiers caught the disease. In some AEF units, one-third of the troops died. Germans fell victim in even larger numbers than the Allies. Possibly spread around the world by soldiers, the epidemic killed about 500,000 Americans before it disappeared in 1919. Historians believe that the influenza virus killed as many as 30 million people worldwide. G/
World War I brought death and disease to millions but, like the flu epidemic, the war also came to a sudden end. After four years of slaughter and destruction, the time had come to forge a peace settlement. Americans hoped that this "war to end all wars" would do just that. Leaders of the victorious nations gathered at Versailles outside Paris to work out the terms of peace, and President Wilson traveled to Europe to ensure it.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
• War Industries Board	• propaganda	• Espionage and	• Great Migration
M.
Baruch • George Creel Sedition Acts MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one shown, list some of the changes that the war brought about for each group.
Changes Brought About by the War	
African Americans	
Women	
Immigrants	
Explain how each group benefited from or was disadvantaged by these changes.
CRITICAL THINKING
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
How did the war affect government power? Think About:
•	how private business worked with government
•	how much control the president gained over the economy
•	the Espionage and Sedition Acts
MAKING INFERENCES
Why do you think the flu spread so quickly among the troops?
ANALYZING CAUSES AND EFFECTS
In what ways did the Great Migration change demographic patterns within the United States? What were the effects of this change?
ANALYZING ISSUES
Explain the constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during World War I.
The First World War 395

supreme COVA^
i
SCHENCK v. UNITED STATES (1919)
ORIGINS OF THE CASE
Charles Schenck, an official of the U.S. Socialist Party, distributed leaflets that called the draft a "deed against humanity” and compared conscription to slavery, urging conscripts to "assert your rights." Schenck was convicted of sedition and sentenced to prison, but he argued that the conviction, punishment, and even the law itself violated his right to free speech. The Supreme Court agreed to hear his appeal. THE RULING A
unanimous court upheld Schenck’s conviction, stating that under wartime conditions, the words In the leaflets were not protected by the right to free speech. LEGAL REASONING
The Supreme Court's opinion in the Schenck case, written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., has become famous as a guide for how the First Amendment defines the right of free speech. Holmes wrote:
LEGAL SOURCES
LEGISLATION
66 The question in every case is whether the words used are used in such circumstances and are of such a nature as to create a clear and present danger that they will bring about the substantive evils that Congress has a right to prevent. ”
Justice Holmes noted that "in ordinary times" the First Amendment might have protected Schenck, but "[w]hen a nation is at war many things that might be said in time of peace . . . will not be endured."
The analogy that Holmes used to explain why Schenck could be punished for his words has become probably the best-known observation ever made about free speech:
“ Protection of free speech would not protect a man in falsely shouting Tire!’ in a theatre and causing a panic. ”
Writing for the Court, Holmes implied that during wartime, Schenck's leaflet was just that dangerous.
Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., Supreme Court Justice 1902-1932 >
Chapter 11
U.S. CONSTITUTION, FIRST AMENDMENT
(1791) “Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press.”
THE SEDITION ACT
(1918) "(W)hoever. . . shall willfully utter, print, write or publish any disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or abusive language about the form of government,. . . Constitution, . . . military or naval forces,. .. flag,. ■ ■ or the uniform of the Army or Navy of the United States . . . shall be punished by a fine of not more than $10,000 or imprisonment for not more than twenty years, or both."
RELATED CASES
DEBS v. UNITED STATES (MARCH, 1919)
The conviction against Eugene Debs for speaking against the war and the draft is upheld.
FROHWERK v. UNITED STATES (MARCH, 1919)
The publisher of a newspaper that had criticized the war is sentenced with a fine and ten years in prison.
ABRAMS v. UNITED STATES (NOV., 1919)
Leaflets criticizing the U.S. expeditionary force in Russia are found to be unprotected by the First Amendment. Holmes writes a dissenting opinion
calling for the “free trade of ideas.’’
WHY IT MATTERED
During the course of World War I, the federal government brought approximately 2,000 prosecutions for violations of the Espionage Act of 1917 or the Sedition Act of 1918, the same laws under which it convicted Schenck, Debs, and Frohwerk.
By the fall of 1919, however, Holmes had changed his mind. The case of Abrams v. United States concerned leaflets that criticized President Wilson's "capitalistic" government for sending troops to put down the Russian Revolution. Justice Holmes, joined by Justice Louis Brandeis, dissented from the majority of the Court, which upheld the conviction. In his dissent, Holmes emphasized the importance of a free exchange of ideas so that truth will win out in the intellectual marketplace. His reasoning won him acclaim as a protector of free speech.
The belief that truth will eventually win out in the marketplace of ideas has become important legal justification for promoting freedom of speech.
HISTORICAL IMPACT
Disagreements about what kinds of speech are "free" under the First Amendment continue. During the 1950s, when people were jailed for supporting Communism, and during the Vietnam War, when war protestors supported draft resistance, these issues again reached the Supreme Court.
The Court has also been asked to decide if young people in schools have the same First Amendment rights as adults. In Tinker v. Des Moines School District (1969), the Court ordered a school to readmit students who had been suspended for wearing black arm bands in protest of the war in Vietnam.
This so-called symbolic speech, such as wearing an armband or burning a draft card or a flag to express an opinion, has sparked heated debate. In Texas v. Johnson (1989), the Court, by a narrow five to four vote, invalidated a law under which a man who burned an American flag to protest Reagan administration policies had been convicted. The decision so outraged some people that members of Congress considered amending the Constitution to prohibit any "physical desecration" of the flag. The amendment did not pass. Our freedoms of expression continue to depend upon the words in the first article of the Bill of Rights,
written more than 200 years ago.
Eugene Debs was arrested for antiwar speeches like the one he gave at this 1916 presidential campaign stop.
In 1965 Mary Beth Tinker and her brother, John, were suspended from school for wearing armbands that symbolically criticized the Vietnam War.
CONNECT TO HISTORY
1. Analyzing Primary Sources Read Justice Holmes’s dissent in Abrams v. United States. Compare it with the opinion he wrote in Schenck v. United States. Explain the major difference or similarity in the two opinions.
CONNECT TO TODAY
2. Visit the links for Historic Decisions of the Supreme Court to research articles about free speech issues. Select several of these issues—such as whether hate groups have a right to march—to discuss with other students in your class. Choose one issue and, as a group, write down as many arguments as you can on both sides of the issue. Then present a debate to the class.
hmhsocialstudies.com
INTERNET ACTIVITY
The First World War 397
I
Wilson Fights for Peace
MAIN IDEA
European leaders opposed most of Wilson’s peace plan, and the U.S. Senate failed to ratify the peace treaty.
f WHY ITT MATTERS NOW
Many of the nationalist issues left unresolved after World War I continue to trouble the world today.
Terms & Names
• Fourteen Points	• Treaty of
•	League of Nations
•Georges
Clemenceau
•	David Lloyd George
Versailles
•	reparations •war-guilt clause
•	Henry Cabot Lodge
hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the Treaty of Versailles.
On<e American
▲
Colonel Edward M. House was a friend and advisor to President Woodrow Wilson.
In January 1918, at the magnificent Palace of Versailles outside Paris, President Wilson tried to persuade the Allies to construct a just and lasting peace and to establish a League of Nations. Colonel E. M. House, a native of Texas and a member of the American delegation to Versailles, later wrote about the conference.
A
Personal Voice colonel e. m. house “How splendid it would have been had we blazed a new and better trail!...
It may be that Wilson might have had the power and influence if he had remained in Washington and kept clear of the Conference. When he stepped from his lofty pedestal and wrangled with representatives of other states, upon equal terms, he became as common clay. ... To those who are saying that the Treaty is bad and should never have been made and that it will Involve Europe in infinite difficulties in its enforcement, I feel like admitting it. But I would also say in reply that empires cannot be shattered and new states raised upon their ruins without disturbance. ”
—quoted in Hooray for Peace, Hurrah for War
House saw what happened when Wilson's idealism ran up against practical politics. The Allied victors, vengeful toward Germany after four years of warfare, rejected most of Wilson's peace program.
Wilson Presents His Plan
Rejection was probably the last thing Wilson expected when he arrived in Europe. Everywhere he went, people gave him a hero's welcome. Italians displayed his picture in their windows; Parisians strewed the street with flowers. Representatives of one group after another, including Armenians, Jews, Ukrainians, and Poles, appealed to him for help in setting up independent nations for themselves.
398 Chapter 11
Vocabulary free trade: the
buying and selling of goods without tariffs, or fees
MAIN IDEA
Developing
Historical
Perspective
kj Why did the Allies reject Wilson’s plan?
FOURTEEN POINTS
Even before the war was over, Wilson presented his plan for world peace. On January 18, 1918, he delivered his now famous Fourteen Points speech before Congress. The points were divided into three groups. The first five points were issues that Wilson believed had to be addressed to prevent another war: 1.	There should be no secret treaties among nations.
2.	Freedom of the seas should be maintained for all.
3.	Tariffs and other economic barriers among nations should be lowered or abolished in order to foster free trade.
4.	Arms should be reduced "to the lowest point consistent with domestic safety, thus lessening the possibility of military responses" during diplomatic crises.
5.	Colonial policies should consider the interests of the colonial peoples as well as the interests of the imperialist powers.
The next eight points dealt with boundary changes.
Wilson based these provisions on the principle of self-determination "along historically established lines of nationality." In other words, groups that claimed distinct ethnic identities were to form their own nation-states or decide for themselves to what nations they would belong.
The fourteenth point called for the creation of an international organization to address diplomatic crises like those that had sparked the war. This League of Nations would provide a forum for nations to discuss and settle their grievances without having to resort to war.
THE ALLIES REJECT WILSON’S PLAN
Wilson's naivete about the political aspects of securing a peace treaty showed itself in his failure to grasp the anger felt by the Allied leaders. The French premier, Georges Clemenceau (klemz an-so"), had lived through two German invasions of France and was determined to prevent future invasions. David Lloyd George, the British prime minister, had just won reelection on the slogan "Make Germany Pay." The Italian prime minister, Vittorio Orlando, wanted control of Austrian-held territory.
Contrary to custom, the peace conference did not include the defeated Central Powers. Nor did it include Russia, which was now under the control of a Communist government, or the smaller Allied nations. Instead, the "Big Four Wilson, Clemenceau, Lloyd George, and Orlando—worked out the treaty's details among themselves. Wilson conceded on most of his Fourteen Points in return for the establishment of the League of Nations.
PLAYER
WOODROW WILSON 1856-1924
At the end of the war, President Wilson wanted the United States to become more involved in international affairs. He believed the nation had a moral obligation to help maintain peace in the world. Wilson’s sense of moral purpose had a lasting influence on American foreign policy.
t to right) David Lloyd George, Georges Clemenceau, ► I Woodrow Wilson in Paris in 1919-
The First World War 399
1

Europe and the Middle East, 1915
i Europe and the Middle East, 1923
[	] Allied Powers
j Central Powers
|	1 Neutral countries
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
■HTS~ 500011165	1. Region What had happened to
0 250 500 kilometers	German territory in the east by 1923?
2. Location Which new nation absorbed — .... . -j Serbia and Montenegro by 1923?
0	250	500 miles
0	250 500 kilometers
| New nations
Allied-occupied zones| | IO French Mandate British Mandate
Debating the Treaty of Versailles
On June 28, 1919, the Big Four and the leaders of the defeated nations gathered in the Hall of Mirrors of the Palace of Versailles to sign the peace treaty. After four years of devastating warfare, everyone hoped that the treaty would create stability for a rebuilt Europe. Instead, anger held sway.
PROVISIONS OF THE TREATY
The Treaty of Versailles (var-sf) established nine new nations—including Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia—and shifted the boundaries of other nations. It carved five areas out of the Ottoman Empire and gave them to France and Great Britain as mandates, or temporary colonies. Those two Allies were to administer their respective mandates until the areas were ready for self-rule and then independence. The treaty barred Germany from maintaining an army. It also required Germany to return the region of Alsace-Lorraine to France and to pay reparations, or war damages, amounting to $33 billion to the Allies.
I
hkl,
HISTORY
VIDEO
The Treaty of Versailles
hmhsocialstudies.com!
THE TREATY’S WEAKNESSES
This treatment of Germany weakened the abil- ity of the Treaty of Versailles to provide a lasting peace in Europe. Several basic
flaws in the treaty sowed the seeds of postwar international problems that even-
tually would lead to the Second World War.
First, the treaty humiliated Germany. It contained a war-guilt clause
forcing Germany to admit sole responsibility for starting World War I. Although	___,
German militarism had played a major role in igniting the war, other European [ MAIN^^J nations had been guilty of provoking diplomatic crises before the war. «> arizing Furthermore, there was no way Germany could pay the huge financial Sunnn reparations. Germany was stripped of its colonial possessions in the Pacific, which	Versailles
might have helped it pay its reparations bill.	affect Germany?
11
400 Chapter 11
In addition, for three years the Russians had fought on the side of the Allies, suffering higher casualties than any other nation. However, because Russia was excluded from the peace conference, it lost more territory than Germany did. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (or Soviet Union), as Russia was officially called after 1922, became determined to regain its former territory.
Finally, the treaty ignored claims of colonized people for self-determination, as in the case of Southeast Asia, where the Vietnamese people were beginning to demand the same political rights enjoyed by people in Western nations.
OPPOSITION TO THE TREATY
When Wilson returned to the United States, he faced strong opposition to the treaty. Some people, including Herbert Hoover, believed it was too harsh. Hoover noted, "The economic consequences alone will pull down all Europe and thus injure the United States." Others considered the treaty a sell-out to imperialism because it simply exchanged one set of colonial rulers for another. Some ethnic groups objected to the treaty because the new national boundaries it established did not satisfy their particular demands for self-determination. For example, before the war many Poles had been under German rule. Now many Germans were under Polish rule. DEBATE OVER THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS
The main domestic opposition, however, centered on the issue of the League of Nations. A few opponents believed that the League threatened the U.S. foreign policy of isolationism. Conservative senators, headed by Henry Cabot Lodge, were suspicious of the provision for joint economic and military action against aggression, even though it was voluntary. They wanted the constitutional right of Congress to declare war included in the treaty. POINT
COUNTERPOINT
“The League of Nations was the world’s best hope for lasting peace.”
President Wilson campaigned for the League of Nations as “necessary to meet the differing and unexpected contingencies” that could threaten world peace. Wilson believed that the League would create a forum where nations could talk through their disagreements. He also hoped it would provide collective security, in which nations would “respect and preserve as against external aggression the territorial integrity and existing political independence of all members of the League,” and thereby prevent devastating warfare.
Critics complained that membership in the League would limit American independence in international affairs. However, Wilson argued that League membership included “a moral, not a legal, obligation” that would leave Congress free to decide its own course of action. Wilson tried to
assure Congress as well as the general public that the League was “not a straitjacket, but a vehicle of life.” It was also “a definite guaranty . . . against the things that have just come near bringing the whole structure of civilization into ruin.”
TfumN® eRmcAUY  ..................-...........
CONNECT TO HISTORY
Summarizing Both supporters and opponents of the League hoped to preserve peace. How did each group propose to secure peace for the United States? CONNECT TO TODAY
Identifying Problems What are some contemporary arguments against United States participation in international organizations such as the United Nations or the World Court? “The League of Nations posed a threat to U.S. self-determination.”
Senator William Borah was one of the foremost critics of the Treaty of Versailles because he objected to U.S. membership in the League of Nations. Borah feared that membership in the League “would draw America away from her isolation and into the internal affairs and concerns of Europe” and involve the United States in foreign wars. “Once having surrendered and become a part of the European concerns,” Borah wondered, “where, my friends, are you going to stop?”
Many opponents also feared that the League would nullify the Monroe Doctrine by limiting “the right of our people to govern themselves free from all restraint, legal or moral, of foreign powers.”
Although Wilson argued that the League of Nations would have no such power of restraint, Borah was
unconvinced. He responded to Wilson’s argument by asking, “What will your League amount to if it does not contain powers that no one dreams of giving it?”
The First World War 401
I
History Through
Film
ECHOES OF THE GREAT WAR
In the 1920s and 1930s, a number of Hollywood horror films were influenced by memories of the Great War. The Hunchback of Notre Dame and The Phantom of the Opera featured men who, like many veterans, were forced to live with shameful disfigurements.
Other films recalled the war’s bleak landscapes. For example, parts of the movie Frankenstein were filmed on the same sets as All Quiet on the Western Front, the famous war film. James Whale, who directed Frankenstein, was a veteran of the war. Like many of his generation, he remained profoundly disturbed by the horrors the war had unleashed.
Lon Chaney in ► The Phantom of the Opera (1925)
Chaney in The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1923)
(top) All Quiet on the Western Front (1930) (bottom) Frankenstein (1931)
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Visual Sources 1.	Why might the theme of human disfigurement be especially powerful to the generation that lived through World War I?
2.	How do horror films of your time reflect specific fears and anxieties of the current generation?
WILSON REFUSES TO COMPROMISE
Wilson unwisely ignored the Republican majority in the Senate when he chose the members of the American delegation. If he had been more willing to accept a compromise on the League, it would have been more likely that the Senate would have approved the treaty. Wilson, however, was exhausted from his efforts at Versailles. Despite ill health, Wilson set out in September 1919 on an 8,000-mile tour. He delivered 34 speeches in about 3 weeks, explaining why the United States should join the League of Nations. On October 2, Wilson suffered a stroke (a ruptured blood vessel to the brain) and lay partially paralyzed for more than two months, unable to even meet with his cabinet. His once-powerful voice was no more than a thick whisper.
When the treaty came up for a vote in the Senate in November 1919, Senator Lodge introduced a number of amendments, the most important of which qualified the terms under which the United States would enter the League of Nations. It was feared that U.S. membership in the League would force the United States to form its foreign policy in accord with the League. Although the Senate rejected the amendments, it also failed to ratify the treaty.
Wilson refused to compromise. "I will not play for position," he proclaimed. "This is not a time for tactics. It is a time to stand square. I can stand defeat; I cannot stand retreat from conscientious duty." The treaty again came up for a vote in March 1920. The Senate again rejected the Lodge amendments—and again failed to muster enough votes for ratification.
The United States finally signed a separate treaty with Germany in 1921, after Wilson was no longer president. The United States never joined the League of Nations, but it maintained an unofficial observer at League meetings.
MAIN IDEA
•2 Chapter 11
Making Inferences
Why were some people afraid of the treaty’s influence over American foreign policy?
J
The Legacy of the War
i
Vocabulary
fascist:
characteristic of or relating to fascism, a system of totalitarian government
When World War I ended, many Americans looked forward to a return of what Warren G. Harding called "normalcy." However, both the United States and the rest of the world had been utterly transformed by the war. At home, World War I had strengthened both the U.S. military and the power of government. It had also accelerated social change, especially for African Americans and women. In addition, the propaganda campaign had provoked powerful fears and antagonisms that were left unchanneled when the war finally came to an end.
In Europe the destruction and massive loss of life severely damaged social and political systems. In many countries the war created political instability and violence that persisted for decades. During the war years, the first Communist state was established in Russia, while after the war, militant fascist organizations seized control in Italy, Spain, and Germany.
World War I had devastated European economies, allowing the United States to emerge as the world's leading economic power. However, the United States still faced economic challenges at home. Increased demand for consumer goods led to inflation and many Americans struggled to afford ordinary items. Farmers who had increased production to meet wartime needs faced setbacks when demand dropped. Still, most Americans looked forward to the new decade as a time of prosperity.
Appalled by the scale of destruction, Americans began to call World War I "the war to end all wars," in the hope that humanity would never again be willing to fight such a war. However, the Treaty of Versailles had settled nothing, and unresolved issues in Europe would eventually drag America in to an even bigger war.
i
i
Domestic Consequences of World War I
•	accelerated America’s emergence as the world’s greatest industrial power
•	contributed to the movement of African Americans to Northern cities
•	intensified anti-immigrant and anti-radical sentiments among mainstream Americans
• brought over one million women into the work force
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. •Fourteen Points	•Georges Clemenceau	’Treaty of Versailles
•League of Nations	•David Lloyd George	• reparations
war-guilt clause Henry Cabot Lodge
i
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Re-create the spider diagram shown below. Fill in the web with information about the provisions and weaknesses of the Treaty of Versailles and opposition to it.
Do you think Congress should have rejected the treaty?
CRITICAL THINKING
DEVELOPING HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Why didn’t the Treaty of Versailles lay the foundations for a lasting peace?
ANALYZING ISSUES
Why did so many Americans oppose the Treaty of Versailles?
5.	SUMMARIZING
Describe how characteristics and issues of World War I were reflected in film.
6.	HYPOTHESIZING
Predict Germany’s reaction to the Treaty of Versailles. Give reasons for your predictions.
Think About:
•	what Germans thought of the war-guilt clause
•	German reaction to reparations
•	how Germans felt about the loss of territory
ANALYZING EFFECTS
How did the international military conflict of World War I affect the U.S. economy?
The First World War 403
TRACING THEMES
America in World Affairs
The United States has not always been as involved in world affairs as it is today. Throughout its history, the nation's foreign policy has swung back and forth between a commitment to involvement with the world and the desire for isolation. "Steer clear of permanent alliances," George Washington cautioned Americans in his Farewell Address of 1796. Washington's warning to the young nation became a theme of government policy for the next hundred years, as domestic issues dominated Americans' attention.
In the late 1800s, however, Americans began to look outward to the larger world. The country had reached the limits of its continental expansion and stretched from ocean to ocean. As its economic power grew stronger, the United States became more involved in the affairs of its neighbors in the Western Hemisphere.
THE UNITED STATES AND LATIN AMERICA
Throughout the 19th century, the United States expanded its influence in the Western Hemisphere. The Monroe Doctrine was intended to diminish European interference. After the Civil War, American trade with Latin America, including the Spanish colony of Cuba, grew. In fact, the United States traded more heavily with Cuba than Spain did.
When the Cubans rebelled against Spain, Americans sympathized with the rebels. After the battleship U.S.S. Maine sank in the Cuban harbor of Havana, Americans blamed the Spanish, and Congress declared war. After defeating the Spanish, the United States extended its influence in territories such as Puerto Rico, Panama, and Mexico. A new expansionist era had begun.
The Only Way We Can Save Her

’ nKjBTRjAWWiKw U R BATTI.K^HIP —.------ r«fv	--------
c; ■)
c


*’ STaY out’ / STAY OUT for. >, MY SAKE, AS WELL AS YOUR OWN •
s



INVOLVEMENT AND ISOLATIONISM
Before World War I, the United States had generally limited its military involvement to the Western Hemisphere. As the war in Europe progressed, this position became impossible to maintain, as German U-boats increasingly threatened American lives. In spite of fierce opposition from isolationists, the United States joined World War I in 1917. U.S. involvement in the conflict greatly strengthened its armed forces and revealed the nation’s military potential.
After the war, the United States returned to a policy of isolationism. A decade later, as European dictators began menacing other European countries, American public opinion was sharply divided. Many argued that the best way to preserve American democracy was to stay out of war in IQ??6' 11 t00k Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii,in
1 to force the United States into World War II.
14 Chapter 11

U.S. forces in Vietnam in 1968
This statue of Lenin, the leader of the 1917 Russian Revolution, was toppled by Latvian citizens in 1991.

s n
THE COLD WAR
After World War II, tensions between the United States and Communist countries like the Soviet Union and China developed into a nonmilitary conflict known as the Cold War. During the Cold War, which lasted for nearly 50 years, the United States and the Soviet Union competed to extend their political and economic influence. In some parts of the world, such as Korea and Vietnam, the Cold War led to prolonged military warfare.
The great costs of these conflicts—both in money and in lives— led to renewed calls for isolationism. Nevertheless, the U.S. remained actively involved in the Cold War throughout the 1980s.
LIFE
INVOLVEMENT IN EUROPE
When the fascist threat to democracy became too great to ignore, the United States joined the Allies in fighting the Axis Powers during World War II. The United States and the Soviet Union emerged from the war as the two strongest military powers in the world.
It was now impossible for the nation to return to isolationism.
The United States took an active role in
rebuilding Europe through programs like the Marshall Plan and was instrumental in establishing the Unite Nations. The United States also stayed involved with Europe militarily during the Cold War as a member o the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).



The First World War 405
CHAPTER
LONG-TERM CAUSES
■^ASSESSMENT
r
TERMS & NAMES
For each term or name below, write a sentence connection to World War I.
nationalism trench warfare Zimmermann note Selective Service Act General John J. Pershing
6.	armistice
7.	Espionage and Sedition Acts
8.	Great Migration
9.	Fourteen Points 10. Treaty of Versailles
Nationalist tensions in Europe Competition for colonies Arms races and militarism Formation of defense alliances
IMMEDIATE CAUSES
Assassination of Franz Ferdinand Austria-Hungary’s retaliation against Serbia
Declarations of war between rival alliances
Germany’s invasion of Belgium
World War
IMMEDIATE EFFECTS
Destruction and immense loss of life
Revolution in Russia
Social change in United States
Allied victory over Central Powers
Treaty of Versailles
Formation of mandates (temporary
colonies)
League of Nations
MAIN IDEAS
Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
World War I Begins (pages 372-380)
1.	What were the main reasons for U.S. involvement in thewar?
2.	Where did Germany begin its war offensive, and what happened there?
American Power Tips the Balance (pages 381 387)
3.	How did the United States mobilize a strong military during World War I?
4.	What new weapons made fighting in World War I deadlier than fighting in previous wars?
The War at Home (pages 388-395)
5.	How did the U.S. government sell the war to the nation?
6.	What events during the war undermined civil liberties?
Wilson Fights for Peace (pages 398-403)
7.	What were the major effects of the Treaty of Versailles?
8.	Analyze the major issues raised by Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points.
CRITICAL THINKING
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one shown, provide causes for the listed effects of World War I. LONG-TERM EFFECTS
Causes			Effects
		
		U.S. enters World War 1
	jp-	
		Germany collapses
		
		U.S. economy becomes more productive
		
Breakup of empires
U.S. policy of isolationism United States' emergence as global economic giant
Rise of militant extremist parties in Europe
Eruption of World War II
DEVELOPING HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
How might U.S. involvement in World War I have affected the debate over American isolationism? INTERPRETING MAPS
Look at the maps of Europe befor and after World War I (page 400). Identify the changes in national boundaries and explain why they occurred. EXPLAINING TURNING POINTS
What is the significance of the years 1914-1918 as a turning point in American history? Explain. TEXAS TEST PRACTICE
Use the graph and your knowledge of United States history to answer question 2.
Use the map and your knowledge of United States history to answer question 1.
Which country was an ally of the United States during World War I?
A country A
B country B
C country C
D country D
Military Casualties
Austria-Hungary
Russia
France
Germany
Italy
Great Britain Bulgaria United States
20	40	60	80	100
Casualties (percent of soldiers)
2. The countries with the greatest percentage of military casualties were all —
F
G
H
J
El
members of the Allied Powers, members of the Central Powers, located far from the battlefront. bordering one of the war’s two fronts.
71 hmhsocialstudies.com
TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests • Tutorials
INTERACT WITH HISTORY
"VWriteSmart COLLABORATIVE
LEARNtl Think about the issues you recorded in myNotebook as you read the chapter. Write a speech arguing for or against American involvement in World War I.
Use information from the chapter to support your argument. Give your speech to the class. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your speech.
"'VWriteSmart
Imagine you are a diplomat participating in the peace talks at the end of World War I. Decide whether you support or oppose the provisions of the Treaty of Versailles. Then write an essay convincing the other participants to adopt your point of view. If you support the treaty, explain why. If you oppose it, offer an alternate version. Use persuasive language and clear examples. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your essay.
XCEHTURY
Organize into small groups and review
the story of Eddie Rickenbacker, the famous World War I fighter pilot. Rickenbacker’s bravery and aviation skills made him a hero. Consider the definition of the term heroic. What qualities make people heroes? Using stories and images from magazines and newspapers, make a poster that defines the term and identifies current heroes. Explain why each individual on the poster represents the word heroic. Display the poster in your classroom.

The First World War 407
End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Making Predictions
DEFINING THE SKILL
Making predictions entails identifying situations that leaders or groups face or have faced in the past, and then suggesting what course of action they might take as well as what might happen as a result of that action. Making predictions about the effects of past events helps you to understand how events in the past shape the future. Making predictions about the effects of proposed actions, such as proposed legislation, helps you to evaluate the possible courses of action.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: MAKE A PREDICTION
When reading history, to identify a decision to be made by historical figures, look for words such as decide, decision, and chose. Notice how one political decision often leads to another. Notice both positive and negative consequences of decisions. The following passage discusses the central weaknesses of the Treaty of Versailles, which ended World War I. The chart on the next page lists decisions made by those who framed the treaty, along with alternative decisions and predictions of possible outcomes. I
Weaknesses of the Treaty of Versailles I © First, the treaty humiliated Germany. The war-guilt clause, which forced Germany to accept I blame for the war and pay financial reparations, caused Germans of all political viewpoints to detest ; the treaty.
Q
Second, Russia, which had fought with the Allies, was excluded from the peace conference. ; Russia had suffered almost the same number of casualties as Germany-—the two countries had by far ; the highest casualty rates of the war. Russia lost more territory than Germany did. The Union of Soviet i Socialist Republics, as Russia was called after 1922, grew determined to regain its lost territory.
i ©Third, the treaty ignored the claims of colonized people for self-determination. For example, the : Allies dismissed the claims of the Vietnamese, who wanted freedom from French colonial rule.
© Identify the decisions. Think about what factors make the decision difficult and may have caused people to dislike the decision. In this case, Germans disliked the decision of the framers of the Treaty of Versailles to include the war-guilt clause because the clause forced their country to pay financial reparations.
Q
Decide what other decisions may have been made. Consider alternative choices that leaders or groups may have made in a historical situation. For example, what leaders might have decided not to exclude Russia from the peace conference? © Predict the outcomes of the alternative decisions. Consider the effect a different decision might have on historical events. Remember that there can be more than one consequence to a decision. For example, what might have happened if the Vietnamese were given independence from French colonial rule?
07 SKI
STRATEGY: MAKE A CHART
Record decisions made as well as alternative decisions and possible outcomes. By arranging the information in a chart, you will be better able to analyze each decision and its alternatives and make predictions based on that analysis. In this case, predictions based on alternative decisions suggest that the Treaty of Versailles may have been better able to avoid a world war and decrease tensions worldwide if those drafting the treaty had made different decisions. Decision:
The Treaty included a war-guilt clause.
Alternative decision:
The treaty has no war-guilt clause.
Possible outcome:
Germany rebuilds. World War II does not occur.
Decision:
Kussia was excluded from the peace conference.
Alternative decision:
Kussia was included in the peace negotiations.
Possible outcome:
Tension between the Soviet Union and the West decreases.
Decision:
The treaty ignored the claims of colonized peoples.
Alternative decision:
The treaty respected the claims of colonized peoples.
Possible outcome:
Tensions are reduced worldwide: Vietnam War is averted.
APPLYING THE SKILL
Turn to Chapter 11, Section 1, pages 379-380 and read the passage "The United States Declares War." Make a chart like the one above in which you identify the decision to enter the war, alternative decisions or actions that might have allowed the United States to avoid entering the war, and their possible outcomes. Consider how the effects of each decision might change depending on what action was taken or not taken.
1.	Identify the decisions.
What events occurred that led the United States to declare war?
2.	Decide what other decisions might have been made.
What else could the Germans have done when President Wilson called for peace? What else might have happened if Mexico and Germany did not discuss an alliance? What might have happened if there had been no change in Russian leadership?
3.	Predict the outcomes of the alternate decisions.
Consider your answers to the previous question. Think about the possible outcomes if the alternative decisions that you listed had occurred instead. Write your predicted outcomes in your chart.
407 SK2
! .i


J

When U.S. troops arrived in Europe in 1917 to fight in World War I, the war had been dragging on for nearly three years. The American soldiers suddenly found themselves in the midst of chaos. Each day, they faced the threats of machine gun fire, poison gas, and aerial attacks. Still, the arrival of American reinforcements had sparked a new zeal among the Allies, who believed the new forces could finally turn the tide in their favor. The letters
soldiers wrote to their families back home reveal the many emotions they felt on the battlefield: confusion about their surroundings, fear for their own safety, concern for friends and loved ones, and hope that the war would soon be over.
Explore World War I online through the eyes of the soldiers who fought in it. You can find a wealth of information, video clips, primary sources, activities, and more at
MCI MULTIMEDIA CONNECTIONS
“I have been ok everyfront in France. You cant imagine how torn uy this country really Is. Every where there acre wire entan^lencents and trenches and layouts. Even out frthe war 'zone there are entanyiewcents and layouts to yrotedt the civiliansfrom air raids’’
— Corp. Albert Smith, U.S. soldier
W
Over There Watch the video to learn about the experiences of American soldiers on the way to Europe and upon their arrival.
Letter from France
Read the document to learn about one soldier's observations of wartime life.
*
t P


., -.4 1
•»
tl
J*

r>
War on the Western Front
Watch the video to hear one soldier's vivid account of battle and its aftermath.
		
	'■V	
		
♦ xz	■A x ' tt	
		o HISTORY.
OH
Surrender! Watch the video to experience soldiers' reactions to the news that the war was finally over.
LETTERS FROM WORLD WAR I 407 IVIC2


The 1920s and the Great
