858 Chapter 26
A K
%

1998
: 1997 Scottish
'■ scientist - clones “Dolly” : the sheep.
i1998]		: [2001] On September 11,
President	'<3	
Clinton is		: terrorists attack New York’s
impeached.		: World Trade Center and the • Pentagon with hijacked jets.
120081 Barack Obama is elected 44th president.
: j1998J Northern Ireland, : the Irish Republic, and : the United Kingdom sign : peace agreements.
2000
12000 j George W.
Bush is elected 43rd president.
Present
•[20011 Serbian president : Slobodan Milosevic is • brought before the UN :war crimes tribunal.
U.S. forces invade Iraq.
The United States in Today's Worl
TEKS 2D, 10E, 11 A, 11D, 11E, 17E, 19C, 20B, 24B
The 1990s and the New Millennium
MAIN IDEA
n
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
The nation became divided as the Democrats gained control of the White House in the 1990s, and the Republicans came to power at the beginning of the new millennium.
Democrats and Republicans need to find a way to work together and unite a divided nation.
William Jefferson
Clinton
H.
Ross Perot Hillary Rodham
Clinton
NAFTA
•Newt Gingrich •Contract with America •Al Gore •George W. Bush • Barack Obama
One American's
^ptaSgnote?
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on major actions taken by President Clinton during his two terms in office.
On January 20, 1993, William Jefferson Clinton was inaugurated as the 42nd president of the United States. Clinton entered the presidency at a time when America was at a turning point. A severe economic recession had made many Americans uneasy about the future. They looked to Clinton to lead a
government that would be more responsive to the people.
Bill Clinton delivers his inaugural address.
A
Personal Voice william jefferson clinton “We must do what America does best*, offer more opportunity to all and demand more responsibility from all. It is time to break the bad habit of expecting something for nothing from our Government or from each other. Let us ail take more responsibility not only for ourselves and our families but for our communities and our country. To renew America, we must revitalize our democracy. ”
—First Inaugural Address, January 20, 1993
Clinton's speech recalled the one given by another president as he took office. In 1961, John F. Kennedy called on each American to "ask not what your country can do for you—ask what you can do for your country." Clinton had admired Kennedy since he was a teenager, and he drew inspiration from this historic message in his own inaugural address in an effort to galvanize the nation to confront the challenges it faced.
Clinton Wins the Presidency
Governor William Jefferson Clinton of Arkansas became the fhTmlmberof the baby-boom generation to win the presidency. He captured the White House at the age of 46, by vowing to strengthen the nation's weak economy and to lead the Democratic Party in a more moderate direction.
880 Chapter 26
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
A)
What factors accounted for Bush’s decline in popularity? THE ELECTION OF 1992
After the U.S. victory in the Persian Gulf War in 1991, Republican president George Bush s popularity had climbed to an 89 percent approval rating. Shortly after the war ended, however, the nation found itself in the grips of a recession. In early 1992, Bush's approval rating nose-dived to 40 percent. In his run for reelection, President Bush could not convince the public that he had a clear strategy for ending the recession and creating jobs. Throughout the presidential race, Bill Clinton campaigned as the candidate who would lead the nation out of its economic crisis. So did a third-party candidate—Texas billion-aire H. Ross Perot. Perot targeted the soaring federal budget deficit as the nation's number one problem. A budget deficit occurs when the federal government borrows money to meet all its spending commitments. "It's time," Perot declared in his usual blunt style, "to take out the trash and clean up the barn."
Election Day results, however, demonstrated that Clinton's center-of-the-road strategy had the widest appeal. Though Clinton won, he captured only 43 percent of the popular vote. Bush received 38 percent, while Perot managed an impressive 19 percent.
A “NEW” DEMOCRAT
Bill Clinton won the presidency in part by promising to move away from traditional Democratic policies. He also emphasized the need to move people off welfare and called for growth in private business as a means to economic progress. In office, Clinton worked to move the Democratic Party toward the political center by embracing both liberal and conservative programs. According to an ally, Clinton hoped "to modernize liberalism so it could sell again." By doing so, he sought to create a "new" and more inclusive Democratic Party.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
Si What factors led to the defeat of Clinton’s health care plan?
WILLIAM JEFFERSON CLINTON, 1946-
Born in Hope, Arkansas, at the beginning of the baby boom, Bill Clinton had wanted to be president most of his life. As a college student in the 1960s, he had opposed the Vietnam War and pulled strings to avoid being drafted.
After studying in England as a Rhodes scholar and graduating from Yale Law School, Clinton returned to Arkansas. He taught at the University of Arkansas School of Law and dived into politics, becoming governor in 1979 at the age of 32.
Moderate Reform
and Economic Boom
President Clinton demonstrated his willingness to pursue both liberal and conservative policies on health care, the budget deficit, crime, and welfare.
HEALTH CARE REFORM
Clinton had pledged to create a plan to guarantee affordable health care for all Americans, especially for the millions of Americans who lacked medical insurance. Once in office, Clinton appointed First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton, a skilled lawyer and child-welfare advocate, to head the team creating the plan. The president presented the health care reform bill to Congress in September 1993. Congress debated the plan for a year. Intense lobbying and Republican attacks on the plan for promoting "big government” sealed its doom. In the end, Congress never even voted on the bill. «S>
▲
Hillary Rodham Clinton explains the hearth care reform plan to a Senate subcommittee.
The United States in Today's World,
Injured victims after the April 1995 bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
▼
BALANCED BUDGET AND AN ECONOMIC BOOM
President Clinton was more successful in his efforts to reduce the federal budget deficit. Clinton and the Republican-controlled Congress agreed in 1997 on legislation to balance the federal budget by the year 2002. The bill cut spending by billions of dollars, lowered taxes to win Republican support, and included programs aimed at helping children and improving health care. A year later, Clinton announced that—for the first time in nearly 30 years— the federal budget had a surplus. That is, the government took in more than it spent. Surpluses were used, in part, to pay down the nation's debt, which had soared to around $5.5 trillion.
Perhaps the most effective tool in generating a surplus was the booming economy. About the time Clinton took office, the economy rebounded. Unemployment fell and the stock market soared to new heights. As a result, the government's tax revenues rose, and fewer people received public aid. These factors helped slash the federal debt.
REFORMING WELFARE
Clinton and the congressional Republicans cooperated to reform the welfare system. In 1996, a bill was proposed to place limits on how long people could receive benefits. It also put an end to a 61-year federal guarantee of welfare, and instead gave states "block grants"—set amounts of federal money they could spend on welfare or for other social concerns. Although liberal Democrats feared the effects of eliminating the federal safety net for the poor, the president backed the bill. Over the next few years, states moved millions of people from welfare to jobs. Because of the strong economy, the transition was more successful than some had been predicting.
Crime and Terrorism
The improved economy—along with enlargement of police forces—combined to lower crime rates in the 1990s. However, fears were raised among Americans by acts of violence and terrorism around the country.
A shocking crime occurred April 1999 when two students at Columbine High School, in Colorado, killed 12 students and a teacher and wounded 23 others, and then shot themselves. Americans were appalled at copycat crimes that began to occur. Some called for tougher gun control, while others argued that exposure to violent imagery should be curtailed. Violence had pervaded television news throughout the decade.
In 1993, terrorists had exploded bombs in the World Trade Center in New York City. This was closely followed by a 1995 blast that destroyed a nine-story federal office building in Oklahoma City, killing 168 children, women, and men. Timothy McVeigh, an American veteran of the Gulf War, was found guilty in the Oklahoma bombing. He was executed in 2001, the first use of the federal death penalty in 38 years. Although American embassies and military targets abroad were subject to sporadic and deadly terrorist attacks during the decade, the U.S. was in no way prepared for a devastating attack that took place on its own soil on the morning of September 11, 2001. m
main idea
Summarizing
What acts of
terrorism targeted
Americans in the
decade preceding
2001?
862 Chapter 26
Vocabulary globalization: to
make worldwide in scope or application
In a coordinated effort, two hijacked commercial jets struck the twin towers of the World Trade Center in New York City, one crashing just minutes after the other. The jets exploded on impact and subsequently leveled the tallest buildings of New York's skyline, the symbolic center of American finance. About an hour later, a third plane tore into the Pentagon building, the U.S. military headquarters outside Washington,
D.C.
Air travel ceased almost immediately; across the nation planes in the air were ordered to land. During the evacuation of the White House and the New York financial district, a fourth hijacked plane crashed near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
About 3,000 people were killed in the attacks. These included all the passengers on all four planes, workers and visitors in the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, and hundreds of rescue workers. (See Section 1, "The War on Terrorism," in Chapter 27 on page 894.)
New Foreign Policy Challenges
Conflicts and confused alliances grew in the wake of the Cold War. The question of U.S. intervention overseas, and the globalization of the economy presented the United States with a host of new challenges.
RELATIONS WITH FORMER COLD WAR FOES
Maintaining strong relations with Russia and China became major goals for the Clinton administration. Throughout the 1990s, the U.S. and Russia cooperated on economic and arms-control issues. Still, Russia criticized U.S. intervention in Yugoslavia, where a bloody civil war raged. Meanwhile, U.S. officials protested Russian attacks on rebels in the Russian region of Chechnya. U.S. relations with China were strained as well. Clinton had stressed that he would lean on China to grant its citizens more democratic rights. As president, however, he put greater emphasis on increasing trade with China. Despite concerns that Chinese spies had stolen U.S. defense secrets, Clinton supported a bill—passed in 2000—granting China permanent trade rights.
TROOPS ABROAD
With the Cold War over, the United States turned more of its attention to regional conflicts. President Clinton proved willing to use troops to end conflicts overseas. In 1991, military leaders in Haiti forced the elected president from office. Thousands of refugees fled the military leaders' harsh rule. In 1994, President Clinton dispatched American troops to Haiti, and the military rulers were forced to step down. Other interventions occurred in the Balkans. In 1991, Yugoslavia broke apart into five nations. In Bosnia, one of the new states, some Serb militias under Slobodan Milosevic began "ethnic cleansing," killing or expelling from their homes people of certain ethnic groups. In 1995, the United States helped negotiate a peace agreement in Bosnia. Clinton sent U.S. troops to join NATO troops to help ensure the deal. About three years later, Serb forces attacked ethnic Albanians in the Serb province of Kosovo. The U.S. and its NATO allies launched air strikes against Serbian targets in 1999, forcing the Serbs to back down. American troops followed up by participating in an international peace-keeping force.
The United States in Today's World 81
MAIN IDEA
jfjjF f In both Bosnia and Kosovo, the administration promised
&	early withdrawal. However, the U.S. troops stayed longer
than had been intended, drawing criticism of Clinton's
policies.
TRADE AND THE GLOBAL ECONOMY
Seeing flourishing trade as essential to U.S. prosperity and to world economic and political stability, President Clinton championed the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), This legislation would bring Mexico into the free-trade zone that the United States and Canada already had formed. The political battle over NAFTA demonstrated the dynamic relationship between the U.S. free enterprise system and its international trade policies. Opponents believed NAFTA would cost American jobs. They argued that because Mexican factories paid lower wages, they could make and sell goods at a lower cost. Without tariffs to make Mexican goods more expensive than American goods, many feared American factories would go out of business. Clinton and the other supporters of NAFTA believed the agreement
would increase trade, which would help the U.S. economy. Clinton fought for and won passage of NAFTA in 1993, when the treaty was ratified by all three countries' legislatures. Once the treaty took effect on January 1, 1994, trade with Mexico increased.
Critics of free trade have remained vocal. In late 1999, protestors gathered in Seattle at a meeting of the World Trade Organization (WTO), an organization that promotes free trade and economic development. Demonstrations at Summit of the Americas meetings in Quebec City, Canada, in 2001, Miami in 2003, and Mar del Plata, Argentina, in 2005 ended violently. Such protests helped to halt plans to launch the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA)—an enlarged version of NAFTA covering the 34 countries in the Western Hemisphere.
Partisan Politics and Impeachment
Analyzing
Causes
Why did the United States send troops to Yugoslavia and Kosovo?
While Clinton and Congress worked together on deficit reduction and NAFTA, relations in Washington became increasingly partisan. In the midst of political wrangling, a scandal rocked the White House, and Bill Clinton became the second president in U.S. history to be impeached.
REPUBLICANS TAKE CONTROL OF CONGRESS
In 1994, after the failure of President Clinton's health care plan, recurring questions regarding his leadership began to surface. The new president had failed to deliver on several campaign promises. This discontent helped contribute to a major Republican victory in the 1994 midterm elections. Many Republican candidates, led by Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, campaigned with a document they called the Contract with America—ten items Republicans promised to enact if they won control of Congress. They included congressional term limits, a balanced-budget amendment, tax cuts, tougher crime laws, and welfare reform. Many of the ideas that comprised the Contract with America originated with the Heritage Foundation. Founded in 1973, the Heritage Foundation was one of the key organizations in the conservative resurgence of the 1980s and 1990s. Its mission is to develop and advocate conservative public policy within the United States. In the November 1994 election, the Republicans gained 54 seats in the House
and 8 in the Senate, handing the Democrats a humiliating defeat. Republicans
took control of both houses of Congress for the first time since 1954. Newt
Gingrich was chosen as the new Speaker of the House.
Vocabulary partisan: devoted to or biased in support of a party, group, or cause
Summarizing
What were
some of the
provisions of the
Contract of
America?
864 Chapter 26
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
$ What factors contributed most to Clinton’s reelection?
President Clinton and the Republican-controlled Congress clashed. Clinton opposed Republican budgets that slowed spending on entitlements such as Social Security and Medicaid. Clinton and Congress refused to compromise, and no budget was passed. As a result, the federal government shut down for almost a week in November 1995, and again for several weeks in the next two months.
THE 1996 REELECTION The budget standoff helped Clinton, as did the strong economy and passage of the welfare reform law of 1996, which suggested an improved working relationship with Congress. As a result, voters reelected Clinton in November 1996. With 49 percent of the popular vote, he outpolled the Republican nominee, U.S. Senator Bob Dole, and the Reform Party candidate, H. Ross Perot. Still, the Republicans maintained control of the House and Senate. President Clinton and Republican leaders pledged to work more cooperatively, jg)
!
I
CLINTON IMPEACHED
President Clinton was accused of improperly using money from a land deal with the Whitewater Development Company to fund his 1984 gubernatorial reelection campaign. In addition, Clinton allegedly had lied under oath about having an improper relationship with a young White House intern. In 1998, Clinton admitted to the relationship but denied lying about it under oath or attempting to obstruct the investigation. In December 1998, the House of Representatives approved two articles of impeachment, charging the president with perjury and obstruction of justice. Clinton became only the second president—and the first in 130 years—to face a trial in the Senate. At the trial a month later, the Senate fell short of the 67 votes—a two-thirds majority—required to convict him. Clinton remained in office and apologized for his actions. The impeachment proceedings divided the nation. While some believed that Clinton had violated the voters' trust and should be removed from office, others argued the trial was politically motivated.
These Americans protested the impeachment. Many Democrats claimed that prosecuting President Clinton was “pure partisanship”
▼
The Race for the White House
In the 2000 presidential race, the Democrats chose Vice President Al Gore to succeed Bill Clinton. The Republicans nominated George W. Bush, governor of Texas and the son of the former president. Ralph Nader, a long-time consumer advocate, ran as a third-party candidate for the Green Party, which championed environmental causes and promoted an overall liberal agenda. On the eve of the election, polls showed that the race would be tight.
ELECTION NIGHT CONFUSION
As election night unfolded, Al Gore appeared to take the lead. The television networks projected that he would win Florida, Pennsylvania, and Michigan—states rich in electoral votes that would ultimately decide the winner of the race. Then, in a stunning turn of events, the TV networks recanted their original projection about Gore's victory in Florida and proclaimed the state "too close to call." As midnight passed, it became clear that whoever won Florida would gain the 270 electoral votes needed to win the election. About 2 A m the networks predicted Bush the winner of Florida—and thus the presidency. However as the final votes in Florida rolled in, Bush's lead shrank considerably and the state again became too close to call. By the next day, Al Gore had won the popular vote by more than 500,000 votes out of 105 million cast across the nation.
The United States in Today's World
Some Democrats blamed Nader's third-party candidacy for the election out-
come. Some people argue that he split the liberal vote, earning votes that would
have otherwise gone to Gore. This result narrowed the margin between Gore and
Bush. However, Nader supporters argue that he represented an important alterna-
tive for voters.
DISPUTE RAGES IN FLORIDA
In the weeks following the election, lawyers and spokespersons went to Florida to try to secure victory. George Bush's razor-thin victory in Florida triggered an automatic recount, which gave Bush a win by just over ►
More than a month after the votes were cast, Al Gore concedes the 2000 presidential election.
500 votes—but the battle for the presidency did not end there. The Gore campaign requested manual recounts in four mostly Democratic counties. Bush representatives opposed the manual recounts. James A. Baker III, former secretary of state and leader of the Bush team in Florida, argued that such recounts would raise the possibility of political mischief.
THE BATTLE MOVES TO THE COURTS
As the manual recounting began on November 12, the Republicans sued to stop the recounts; a month-long court fight followed. The battle ultimately reached the Supreme Court. On December 12, the court voted 5 to 4 to stop the recounts, thus awarding the Florida electoral votes and the presidency to
Bush. The justices argued that manual recounts lacked
uniform standards and, therefore, violated equal protection for voters. e
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Issues
How did the election of 2000 highlight both the weaknesses and the strengths of America’s election process?
KtV l’LAV/;y;
The Bush Administration
After the protests and legal actions subsided, George W. Bush was inaugurated as the 43rd president of the United States on January 20, 2001. Bush inherited several challenges, including a weakening national economy and an energy problem in California.
During his first months as president, Bush began to advance his political agenda. He declared plans to reform the federal role in education and to privatize Social Security. Bush also proposed a $1.35 trillion tax cut, which became law in June 2001.
ANTITERRORIST MEASURES
The political landscape changed dramatically after the September 11 terrorist attacks. The Bush administration, now with the overwhelming support of Congress and the American people, shifted its energy and attention to combating terrorism. In October 2001, Bush signed an antiterrorism bill into law. The law allowed the government to detain foreigners suspected of terrorism for seven days without charging them with a crime. By the following month, Bush had created the Department of Homeland Security, a government body set up to coordinate national efforts to combat terrorism. In addition, the federal government increased its involvement in aviation security.
The Bush Administration also began waging a war against terrorism. In October 2001, coalition forces led by
GEORGE W. BUSH, 1946-
George W. Bush was born into a family steeped in politics. His father, George H. W. Bush, was the 41st president of the United States (1989-1993). However, George W. Bush did not immediately follow in his father’s political footsteps. In 1975, he started an oil company in Midland, Texas. For a time, he also was part owner of the Texas Rangers baseball team.
Eventually, Bush was elected governor of Texas in 1994. Six years later, he became the 43rd president of the United States. He won reelection in 2004.
i
866 Chapter 26
MAIN IDEA
Evaluating
Leadership
$ How do you think the American people responded to Bush’s antiterrorist measures?
the United States began bombing Afghanistan. The Afghan government was harboring Osama bin Laden and his al-Qaeda terrorist network believed responsible for the September 11 attacks. In 2002, the coalition successfully broke up the al-Qaeda network in Afghanistan. Osama bin Laden, however, remained at large. Nonetheless, the Bush administration gained widespread public approval for the decisive steps taken.
Bush also scored a major success when direct elections were held for the first time in Afghanistan in October 2004.
The Afghan people elected interim president Hamid Karzai as their first democratically elected president. Although Afghanistan still faced many problems, the elections were considered a positive move toward resolving them.
WAR AGAINST IRAQ
In 2003, Bush expanded the war on terrorism to Iraq. Following the Persian Gulf War, Iraq had agreed to UN demands to stop the production of biological, chemical, and nuclear weapons. However, throughout the 1990s, the leader of Iraq, Saddam Hussein, cooperated only partly with UN arms inspectors and eventually barred them from entering his country. After the September 11 attacks, Bush alleged that Hussein was supporting terrorists and might supply them with weapons of mass destruction (WMD). Bush called for renewed arms inspections in Iraq. The inspectors determined that Iraq had not resumed its WMD programs; but Hussein had again not cooperated fully with the inspection process. The United States and Great Britain then ended diplomacy with Iraq and invaded in March 2003. Within a month, Iraq's forces were defeated. U.S. forces then began an intensive search for WMD in Iraq. No traces of WMD were found. U.S. forces captured the former dictator in December 2003, and Hussein was later tried and executed by the Iraqi government.
▲
Hamid Karzai is victorious in Afghanistan's first direct presidential election.
DOMESTIC AGENDA
Meanwhile, on the home front, President Bush concentrated on education and the economy. He signed into law an education reform plan entitled No Child Left Behind. This plan called for more accountability by states for students' success, mandatory achievement testing, and more school options available for parents. The economy posed a greater challenge, as corporate scandals, such as those related to the companies Enron and WorldCom, rocked the nation. The scandals had a negative impact on the U.S. economy. Congress responded by passing the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. This act established a regulatory board to oversee the accounting industry and its involvement with corporations.
In 2003, Congress passed and Bush signed into law a $350 billion tax cut, which Bush claimed would help the sagging economy and create jobs. Democrats in Congress opposed the tax cut, saying it would mostly benefit the rich. The Democrats were overruled, however, because the Republican Party had regained control of the Senate in the 2002 midterm elections.
BUSH REELECTED IN 2004
Although the Bush administration received much Initial support for the war on terrorism, many Americans came to question the decision to invade Iraq. They were dismayed by the failure to find WMD there. In 2004, President Bush was reelected, despite deep divisions among the American people. During Bush's second term, discontent about the war grew. At the same time, controversies arose over warrantless spying on American citizens and allegations that the administration allowed torture of terrorist suspects. The Bush administration was also criticized over its response to Hurricane Katrina. In the 2006 mid-term elections, Democrats regained control of both the House and the Senate.
The United States in Today's World 8)
The Obama Administration

HISTORY
VIDEO
Election 2008
- f N - ’

The continuing war in Iraq and a deteriorating economy contributed to President Bush's unpopularity. The collapse of the financial markets in the fall of 2008 did little to improve the situation. More than two-thirds of Americans disapproved of his handling of the presidency. As a result, in the 2008 presidential election, Americans voted for a change in direction by electing Democrat Barack Obama,
U.S. senator from Illinois. In defeating Republican Senator John McCain of Arizona, Obama made history as the first African American to be elected president of the United States.
On taking office, Obama pushed through an economic stimulus package to combat the recession brought on by the crash of the financial markets. In
addition, he fulfilled a campaign promise by passing a sweeping health care reform bill. However, aspects of health care reform drew criticism from some people. In addition, many Americans expressed their unhappiness with continued high levels of unemployment. This discontent allowed Republicans to gain a majority of seats in the U.S. House of Representatives during the 2010 midterm elections.
In foreign policy, Obama drew up plans to end combat operations in Iraq and in Afghanistan. He also continued to combat terrorism. In 2011, the United States struck a blow against al-Qaeda, when special forces tracked down and killed Osama bin Laden in Pakistan.
h
Barack Obama, his wife, Michelle, and daughters, Sasha and Malia, celebrate his victory at Grant Park in Chicago on November 4,2008.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•William Jefferson Clinton •H. Ross Perot •Hillary Rodham Clinton
•North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA)
•Newt Gingrich
•Contract with America •Al Gore
W.
Bush • Barack Obama
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a time line of President Clinton’s major actions during his two terms. Use a form such as the one below.
Explain whether each action was a success or a failure for Clinton.
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	EVALUATING
Evaluate the impact of the relationships among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches on the presidential election of 2000.
ANALYZING EFFECTS
How did a third party impact the presidential election of 2000?
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
How does NAFTA represent the dynamic relationship between the U.S. free enterprise system and international trade policies?
ANALYZING EVENTS
Describe U.S. involvement in world affairs during this period. Think About:
•	the crisis in the Balkans
•	the 9/11 attacks
•	the global war on terror
7.	SUMMARIZING
How did organizations such as the Heritage Foundation and the Contract with America contribute to the conservative resurgence of the 1990s?
868 Chapter 26
The New Global Economy
MAIN IDEA
j WHY IT MATTERS NOW j Terms & Names Because of technological	New types of business have	•service sector	• General
advances and new trade	meant new work environments	•downsize	Agreement on
laws, the U.S. economy	and new challenges for American	•Bill Gates	Tariffs and Trade
underwent a boom during	workers.	•dotcom	(GATT)
the late 20th century.			•multinational
			corporation
OneAmericah's Story
hmhsocialstudies.com
|R IHMiMulxU It J 
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the major changes in the U.S. economy during the 1990s and early 2000s.
▲
Workers at the John Roberts clothing factory
As Bill Clinton took office in 1993, some regions of the nation, particularly the Northeast, were still in an economic recession. Near Kennebunkport, Maine, the John Roberts clothing factory faced bankruptcy. With help from their union, the factory workers were able to turn their factory into an employee-owned company.
Ethel Beaudoin, who worked for the company for more than 30
years, was relieved that the plant would not be closing.
A
Personal Voice ethel beaudoin “ It’s a nice feeling to be part of the process ... of deciding what this company buys for machinery and to know the customers more intimately. They’re our customers, and it’s a nicer feeling when the customers know that the coat that we put out is made by owners/’
—quoted in Divided We Fall
Beaudoin's experience offered one example of the economic possibilities in America. A new global economy—brought about by new technologies, increased international competition, and the end of the Cold War—changed the nation's economic prospects.
The Shifting Economy
Americans heard a great deal of good news about the economy. Millions of new jobs were created between 1993 and 1999. By the fall of 2000, the unemployment rate had fallen to the lowest it had been since 1970.
The United States in Today's Worh
y,C.ONOM/e
BACKGROUND
GREENSPAN AND THE FED
Alan Greenspan was chairman of the Federal Reserve System (the Fed) from 1987, when he was appointed by President Ronald Reagan, until he retired in 2006. The Fed has been described as the economic pacemaker of the United States because it helps determine how much money there will be in the American economy.
Before being elected president in 2000, George W. Bush made it a point to meet with Alan Greenspan before meeting with any other government officials in Washington.
But there was alarming news as well. Wage inequality between upper- and lower-income Americans—the income gap—widened. Median household income began to drop. Although economists disagreed about the reasons for the economy's instability most everyone agreed it was undergoing significant changes.
MORE SERVICE, LESS SECURITY
Chief among the far-reaching changes in the workplace of the 1990s was the explosive growth of jobs in the service sector, the part of the economy that provides services to consumers. By 2008, nearly 80 percent of American workers were teachers, medical professionals, lawyers, engineers, store clerks, waitstaff, and other service workers. Low-paying jobs, such as sales and fast-food, grew fastest. These positions, often part-time or temporary, offered limited benefits. Many corporations, rather than invest in salaries and benefits for full-time staff, hired temporary workers, or temps, and began to downsize—trim payrolls to streamline operations and increase profits. These private sector decisions to downsize were meant to create economic opportunities for some citizens. By increasing profits, they benefited the shareholders who owned corporate stock. However, they also had unintended consequences for the economy as a whole. Manpower, Inc., a temporary services agency, became the largest U.S. employer, earning $2 billion in 1993 when 640,000 Americans cashed its paychecks. In 2008, about one-fifth of the nation's labor force worked in temporary or part-time positions.
Of those cut in downsizing, younger workers suffered higher rates of unemployment. In 2008, about 14 percent of workers aged 16 to 24 were unemployed—more than double the national rate. And many young Americans are living at home longer and are less financially secure than American youth in the past.
FARMS AND FACTORIES
The nation's shift to a service economy came at the expense of America's traditional workplaces. Manufacturing, which surpassed farming mid-century as the largest job sector, experienced a sharp decline in the 1980s and 1990s. In 1992, for example, 140,000 steelworkers did the same work that 240,000 had accomplished ten years earlier. The decline in industrial jobs contributed to a drop in union membership. In 1945, 35 percent of American workers belonged to unions; by 2008, only 12 percent were union members. In the 1990s and early 2000s, unions had trouble organizing. High-tech and professional workers felt no need for unions, while low-wage service employees feared losing their jobs in a strike. Some workers saw their incomes decline. The increased use of computer-driven robots to make manufactured goods eliminated many jobs, but it also spurred a vibrant high-tech economy. Those with advanced training and specialized technical skills or a sense of entrepreneurial risk-taking saw their salaries rise and their economic security expand.
HIGH-TECH INDUSTRIES
In the late 1990s, entrepreneurs turned innovative ideas about computer technology into huge personal fortunes, hoping to follow in the footsteps of Bill Gates, the decade's most celebrated entrepreneur. Gates founded the software company Microsoft. By 2008, it had made him the second wealthiest individual in the world, with assets estimated at about $53 billion. A rapid outcropping of new businesses accompanied the explosive growth of
the Internet late in the decade. The NASDAQ (National Association of Securities
Dealers Automated Quotation System), a technology-dominated stock index on
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
How did
the change from an industrial economy to a service economy affect Americans' economic security?
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
How did
downsizing affect people?
870 Chapter 26
Persons Employed in Three Economic Sectors*
Year	Farming	Manufacturing	Service Producing
1900	11,050	7,252	6,832
1950	6,001	18,475	20,721
2012	994	16,994	112,654
*numbers in thousands Sources: Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970; Statistical Abstracts of the United States, 1953, 1954; Bureau of Labor Statistics (online)			
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Charts 1- What sector of the U.S. economy has seen the greatest decline in workers over the past century? 2. In terms of employee participation, by roughly how many times did the service sector grow between 1950 and 2012? Wall Street, rose dramatically as enthusiasm grew for high-tech businesses. These businesses were known as dotcoms, a nickname derived from their identities, or addresses, on the World Wide Web, which often ended in ".com." The dotcoms expanded rapidly and attracted young talent and at times excessive investment funding for such untested fledgling companies.
Thousands of smaller businesses were quick to anticipate the changes that the Internet would bring. Suddenly companies could work directly with consumers or with other companies. Many predicted that the price of doing business would fall markedly and that overall worldwide productivity would jump dramatically.
The boom of new business was termed "The New Economy."
However, the positive economic outlook fueled by "The New Economy" was short lived. In 2000, only 38 percent of online retailing made a profit. As a result, many dotcoms went out of business. This decline had many causes. Entrepreneurs often provided inadequate advertising for their e-companies. Also, many dotcoms had hard-to-use Web sites that confused customers. The unsuccessful dotcoms caused many investors to stop putting money in Internet businesses.
In 2002, the U.S. economy was also hard hit by corporate scandals, when Enron was charged with using illegal accounting practices and WorldCom filed what was then the largest bankruptcy claim in U.S. history. Investors began to lose faith in corporations. In addition, the continued threat of international terrorism had a negative effect on the economy. All of these factors caused the NASDAQ to decline. After the NYSE and NASDAQ rose again to record highs in 2007, they both were rocked by the global financial crisis of 2008 and 2009.
Change and the Global Economy
In 1900 U.S. trade with the rest of the world was worth about $2.2 billion (roughly 12 percent of the economy). Over a century later, U.S. trade with other countries exceeded $4 trillion (about 30 percent of the economy). As American companies competed for international and domestic markets, American workers felt the sting of competing with workers in other countries.
INTERNATIONAL TRADE
The expansion of U.S. trade abroad was an important goal of President Clinton's foreign policy. In 1994, in response to increasing international economic competition among trading blocs, the United States joined many other nations in adopting a new version of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The new treaty lowered trade barriers, such as tariffs, and established the World Trade Organization (WTO) to resolve trade disputes. The United States in Today's Worl

’US'
World Trading Blocs, 2010
NEW"
ZEALAND
Andean Community (CAN)
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Central American Common Market (CACM)
Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM) Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
Council of Arab Economic Unity (CAEU)
European Free Trade Association (EFTA)
European Union (EU)
Group of Eight (G8)
Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa (CEMAC)
North American Free Trade Agreement (NARA)
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR)
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Location What is the only G-8 country located outside Europe and North America?
2.	Location To which world trade organizations does the United States belong?
E3
a
INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION
With the increase of global trade, many U.S. businesses transformed into multinational corporations, or large corporations with branches in several countries. Multinational corporations are beneficial in that they provide new jobs, goods, and services around the world and spread technological advances. However, by building factories in countries with lax governmental regulation, some multinational corporations may be able to employ harmful environmental and labor policies, leading to pollution and unsafe working conditions. Also, international trade agreements caused some American workers to worry about massive job flight to countries that produced the same goods as the United States but at a lower cost. In the 1990s, U.S. multinational corporations frequently moved their operations to less economically advanced countries, such as Mexico, where wages were lower. After the passage of NAFTA, more than 100,000 low-wage jobs were lost in U.S. manufacturing industries such as apparel, auto parts, and electronics. Also, competition with foreign companies helped U.S. companies to maintain low wages and decrease benefits, jgj
INTERNATIONAL SLOWDOWN
Around the turn of the 21st century, the global economy began to slow down. Between 1997 and 2002, the gross domestic product in Japan declined by 6 percent. In 2001, the economies of more than a dozen countries were in recession, and many other countries reported lower growth Background
“Job flight" had occurred in the 1970s, when cheap but quality auto imports from Japan and Germany forced many U.S. workers out of high-paying jobs.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
Q)
What were some of the
effects of NAFTA
ond ft ATT?
872 Chapter 26
rates than they had the previous year.
The flow of foreign direct investment (FDI) to developing countries declined dramatically. As a result, the economies of these countries were particularly hard hit. For example, the overall growth of Africa's economies slowed to 2.7 percent in 2002.
The U.S. economy also suffered. As it happened, both the U.S. and world economies began to reverse the downward trend by 2004. However, in late 2007 a global financial crisis began, brought on by the collapse of several major banking firms. Financially secure banks cut back on lending. As a result, businesses found it difficult to get the credit they needed to invest in new
inventory or pay their employees, much less hire new ones. The U.S. unemployment rate jumped and the stock market dipped, earning the period the nickname the "Great Recession."
In response to the economic downturn, the government passed legislation intended to spur recovery through investment in the public and private sectors. The Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) committed $475 billion to stabilize the U.S. banking and automobile industries. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) distributed over $8 billion in funds to individuals in the form of tax credits and through programs such as Medicaid, food stamps, and unemployment benefits. ARRA also impacted the private sector through grants and loans for government contracts awarded to American businesses. Several economic studies agree that the government's stimulus efforts added jobs, increased GDP, and reduced unemployment. The recession officially ended in June 2009, though some worry that the economy remains on uncertain footing.
•service sector •downsize
• Bill Gates •dotcom

▲
A
Lehman Brothers worker is surrounded by photographers on the day that the investment bank declared bankruptcy. 1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
• General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)
•multinational
corporation
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a cluster diagram like the one below, record the major changes that occurred in the U.S. economy during the 1990s.
Which change has affected you the most? Explain.
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING CAUSES
A variety of factors affect the U.S. economy. Identify and discuss the role of each with a partner.
Think About:
•	individuals, including entrepreneurs
•	multinational corporations
•	government policies and legislation in the private and public sectors
•	international events
ANALYZING ISSUES
How do you explain some Americans’ fears over the international trade agreements?
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
How was downsizing a private sector action meant to create economic opportunities for citizens? What were its unintended consequences?
The United States in Today's World

I
lilljj
KELO v. CITY OF NEW LONDON (2005)
ORIGINS OF THE CASE
In 1998, a private company proposed building a research facility on a large piece of unused land in New London, Connecticut. Hoping the new facility would revive the surrounding area's economy, the city planned to use its power of eminent domain to give nearby land to a private developer. The developer intended to tear down the private homes that were occupying the land in order to build a hotel, restaurants, shops, offices, and private high-rise apartments. The city believed these projects qualified as public use, but local homeowners including Susette Kelo disagreed and took the matter to the courts. THE RULING
The Supreme Court ruled that the planned development of the land qualified as a public use because It was intended to improve the city’s poor economy. LEGAL REASONING
The Fifth Amendment’s Takings Clause gives the government the right of eminent domain, the power to take private property for public use. The question in Kelo v. City of New London was whether the economic benefits of a private development constitute public use under the Fifth Amendment.
Justice John Paul Stevens, writing for the 5-4 majority, ruled:
LEGAL SOURCES
“For more than a century, our public use jurisprudence has wisely eschewed [avoided] rigid formulas and intrusive scrutiny in favor of affording legislatures broad latitude in determining what public needs justify the use of the takings power.”
According to the Court, the Fifth Amendment did not require a literal definition of public use; the “broader and more natural interpretation of public use as ‘public purpose’” was sufficient.
In her dissenting opinion, Justice Sandra Day O’Connor argued that the decision blurred the distinction between private and public use of property.
“Under the banner of economic development, all private property is now vulnerable to being taken and transferred to another private owner, so long as it might be upgraded—i.e., given to an owner who will use it in a way that the legislature deems more beneficial to the public—in the process.”
U.S. CONSTITUTION
U.S. CONSTITUTION, FIFTH AMENDMENT
(1791) “[N]or shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation.”
U.S. CONSTITUTION, FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT
(1868) “[N]or shall any state deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law. . .
RELATED CASES
BERMAN v. PARKER (1954)
The Court interpreted the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment, determining that private property can be taken for a “public purpose" with just compensation.
HAWAII HOUSING AUTHORITY
v. MIDKIFF (1984) The Court held that the power of eminent domain allowed a state to take property from an oligopoly for distribution to a wider population of private residents.
874 Chapter 26
WHY IT MATTERED
The Fifth Amendment protects an individual’s right to own private property. This protection is one of the principles upon which our economic system is based. However, the same amendment also gives government the right to take private property for public use, with just compensation. This right allows government officials to force property owners to sell their land to the government at what is determined to be a fair price. In many instances, the government’s use of eminent domain is beneficial for communities and the individuals and industries that live and operate there. For example, for years the right has been used to create public roads or railroad tracks that improve transportation and make trade more efficient, benefiting the community as a whole.
By expanding the definition of public use to include ventures by private developers, Kelo has also expanded the circumstances under which local governments can seize private property. This decision has the potential to broaden the impact of governmental actions on individuals,
industries, and communities with
respect to Fifth Amendment proper-
ty rights. Some observers worried
that the Kelo decision would allow
governments to take actions that
would benefit some at the
expense of the others.
HISTORICAL IMPACT
The Kelo decision has served as something of a cautionary tale. Many Americans worried that the ruling gave local government too much power to abuse its right of eminent domain. In response,
43 state legislatures and 8 state supreme courts have taken measures to restrict the use of eminent domain and strengthen property rights protections. In June 2013, the House Judiciary Committee approved the Private Property Rights Protection Act, which would prohibit governments that receive federal funds from using eminent domain to transfer private property from one owner to another for economic development. The legislation is a direct response to the Kelo ruling. In New London, the company whose research facility prompted the development has announced plans to leave the area, and the condemned and bulldozed neighborhood where Susette Kelo once lived remains vacant.
Susette Kelo stands outside her New London home.


1
Llii
THINKING CRITICALLY
CONNECT TO HISTORY
1. Developing Historical Perspective Do research to find another example of a government exercising its right of eminent domain. Explain how the governments actions in that instance affected individuals, industries, and the community.
CONNECT TO TODAY
2. Do you think the government’s right of eminent domain always serves the public good? What impact does such an action have on Fifth Amendment property rights? Explain your opinion, as well as any circumstances under which your perspective might change.
hmhsocialstudies.com
The United States in Today's World
I
I
I


TEKS IOC, 27A,27C,28A,28B,28C
Technology and Modern Life
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Advances in technology have increased not only the pace but also the comfort of many Americans’ daily lives.
Providing access to the new technology and regulating its use are two current challenges facing 21st-century America.
rOne American's Storyj
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on technological changes discussed in this section.
For years, Rudy Garcia-Tolson was confined to a wheelchair. After undergoing a double amputation he was fitted with carbon fiber prostheses—artificial replacements for missing body parts. These lightweight, strong, and durable new legs now make many things possible for Rudy.
A
Personal Voice rudy garcia-tolson 661 told them to cut my legs off. I saw pictures of people running with prosthetic legs. I didn’t want to stay in a wheelchair. ... My legs won’t stop me. Nothing stops me.... I like to show kids that there’s no limitations— kids or challenged people or adults, there’s no limitations to what a person can do. . . . My motto Is, If you have a brave heart, that's a powerful weapon. ”
—quoted in Press-Enterprise, January 1, 2000
Advances in medical technology have permitted Rudy to live a more fully active life. He competes in races and won a gold medal in swimming at the 2004 paralympics. Throughout the 20th century and into the 21st, technological developments helped Americans become more active in
:	Terms & Names	
• information	•Telecommuni-
superhighway	cations Act of
• Internet	1996
•telecommute	•genetic
	engineering
The Communications Revolution
In his 2011 State of the Union address, President Obama explained, "Our" free
enterprise system is what drives innovation." Private businesses are motivated by
profit to develop better products than their competitors. At times, the government
supports innovation by providing funding. These combined efforts have allowed
Americans to benefit from new, life-changing technologies.
876 Chapter 26
Analyzing
Political Cartoons j-
“VACATION, 2000”
By the end of the 20th century, millions of Americans owned any number of personal communication devices. People were able to speak to or correspond with each other instantaneously almost anytime, almost anywhere. The cartoon suggests that Americans are dependent on their communication devices, and that the once relaxing and peaceful family vacation has given way to the hustle and bustle of constant access.
SKILLBUILDER
Analyzing Political Cartoons
1.	What modern-day communication devices are being used in this cartoon?
2.	In what ways do the characters in this cartoon seem trapped by modern-day communications technology?
ENTERING THE INFORMATION AGE
In the 1980s, the computer industry transformed the world. Instead of giant mainframes and minicomputers, desktop workstations now ruled business. Home computers became widely available. The information superhighway—a network of communication devices linking people and institutions across the nation and the world—promised to advance the revolution further. In 1994, Vice President Al Gore began to oversee the government's participation in developing this superhighway. Even though private industries would build the superhighway, the government would keep access democratic, ensure affordable service for everyone, protect privacy and property rights, and develop incentives for investors. Vocabulary
Interface:
the point of communication between a computer and any other entity, such as a printer or human operator
The 1990s enjoyed explosive growth of the Internet, an international network linking computers and allowing almost instant transmittal of text, images, and sound to users around the world. Use of the network was further popularized by the World Wide Web, which provided a simple visual interface for words and pictures to be seen by an unlimited audience. Through an electronic connection, such as a TV cable or phone line, users could access an array of media, from streaming video to research archives, from online shopping catalogs to customized news broadcasts. As businesses, schools, and organizations began to use the Web as a primary form of communication, new forms of social interaction emerged. Users developed online communities, such as MySpace and Facebook, to "meet" and communicate with one another. By 2009, nearly 228 million Americans used the Internet regularly to send email, to network, to share music and photos, or to browse through pages on the Web.
BUSINESS AND MARKETPLACE APPLICATIONS
The late-20th-century advances in computers and communications have had an impact on American society and business comparable to the industrial developments of the late 1800s. The desire to capitalize on these innovations for profit drove several companies to enter the marketplace with technology products developed for personal use. As a result, consumers now clamor for the most current technology in cell phones, laptop computers and tablets, and other personal electronic devices. The United States in Today's World
These innovations have affected the workplace as well. Because of cell phones, fax machines, the Internet, wireless connectivity, and overnight shipping, people can more readily telecommute, or work from a location of their choice instead of going to an office every day Computer-based management techniques have also allowed many businesses to streamline. For instance, some manufacturers have implemented just-in-time (JIT) systems, in which they bring in only as many raw materials as are needed to produce the goods their customers demand. Such efficiencies allow them to use their resources elsewhere.
LEGISLATING TECHNOLOGY
In the 1980s, the government was slow to recognize the implications of the new communications technology. In 1994, however, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) began to auction the valuable rights to airwaves and collected over $9 billion. Then, with the rapid growth in the communications industry, the federal government took several steps to ensure that consumers received the best service. Congress passed the Telecommunications Act of 1996, removing barriers that had previously prevented one type of communications company from starting up or buying another related one. While it increased competition in the industry, the law also paved the way for major media mergers. When Capital Cities/ABC Inc. joined the Walt Disney Company, industry watchdogs noted that this reflected the trend toward concentrating media influence in the hands of a few powerful conglomerates. The passage of the Telecommunications Act won applause from the communications industry but only mixed reviews from the public. Consumer activists worried that the law would fail to ensure equal access to new technologies for rural residents and poor people. Civil rights advocates contended that the Communications Decency Act (part of the Telecommunications Act) restricted free speech because it barred the transmission of "indecent" materials to minors via the Internet. Since the early 2000s, the issue of network neutrality has created considerable controversy. Supporters of network neutrality want regulations established that would prevent service providers or the government from restricting access to, or content delivered on, the Internet.
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
Explain the revolutionary nature of communicating via the Internet.
Scientific Advances Enrich Lives
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
How might the Telecommunications Act affect consumers?
At NASA Langley Research Center in Virginia, an aerospace engineer wearing stereo glasses sees a 3-D view of a space station simulation, as shown in the background.
The exciting growth in the telecommunications industry in the 1990s and early 2000s was matched by developments that revolutionized robotics, space exploration, and medicine. The world witnessed marvels that for many echoed science fiction.
SIMULATION, ROBOTICS, AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
Visual imaging and artificial intelligence (a computer's ability to perform activities that require intelligence) were combined to provide applications in industry, medicine, and education. For example, virtual reality began with the flight simulators used to train military and commercial pilots. Today, with a headset that holds tiny video screens and earphones, and with a data glove that translates hand movements to a computer screen, a user can navigate a "virtual landscape." Doctors have used virtual reality to take a computerized tour of a patient's throat and lungs to check for medical problems. Surgeons have performed longdistance surgery through telepresence systems— gloves, computers, and robotic elements specially 878 Chapter 26
wired so that a doctor can operate on a patient hundreds of miles away. Architects and engineers have used virtual reality to create models of their designs. Modeling also affected the nightly newscast. Using supercomputers and improved satellite data, meteorologists could offer extended weather forecasts that reached the accuracy of one-day forecasts of 1980. The use of such technologies has increased worker productivity.
As technology became more sophisticated, computers increased in capability. IBM s Deep Blue defeated chess champion Garry Kasparov in 1997. Computational linguists steadily improved natural language understanding in computers, thus fine tuning the accuracy of voice recognition systems.
Robots grew more humanlike as engineers equipped them with high-capacity chips simulating brain function. By the early 2000s, robots had the ability to walk on two legs, interact with people, learn taught behaviors, and express artificial feelings with facial gestures.
Background
The International Space Station was established by joining and expanding upon the Russian station, Mir, and the American Spacelab.
SPACE EXPLORATION
In the 1990s, astronomy expanded our view of the universe. In 1997, NASA's Pathfinder and its rover Sojourner transmitted live pictures of the surface of Mars to millions of Internet users. Shuttle missions, meanwhile, concentrated on scientific research and assembly, transport, and repair of orbiting objects, paving the way to possible human missions to Mars and other space travel in the coming century. NASA concentrated on working with other nations to build the International Space Station (ISS). The ISS promised to offer scientists a zero-gravity laboratory for research in medicine, space mechanics and architecture, and long-term living in space. Ellen Ochoa, part of the first shuttle crew to dock to the ISS, hoped to inspire young students:
A
Personal Voice ellen ochoa Tm not trying to make everyone an astronaut, but I want students to think about a career and the preparation they’ll need... tell students that the opportunities I had were a result of having a
good educational background. Education is what allows you to stand out.”
Dr. Ellen Ochoa
-quoted in Stanford University School of Engineering Annual Report, 1997-98.
A shuttle crew in 1993 aboard the Endeavor repaired the Hubble Space Telescope, which returns dazzling intergalactic views. In late 1995, astronomers using observatories discovered the first planet outside our own solar system. Since then dozens more have been detected. On July 21, 2011, the Atlantis crew completed the final mission of NASA's 30-year shuttle program. However, U.S. space exploration goes on and continues to benefit Americans' quality of life in many ways. In addition to the discoveries we can make about the universe, the innovation required to develop vehicles and other systems for space travel has yielded many products of use on Earth, from sunglasses and smoke detectors to the magnetic resonance imagery (MRI) machines used for medical scans. Also, space exploration is inspiring to society as a whole, convincing Americans that no challenge is too big to overcome.
BIOTECHNOLOGY
The most profound insight into the book of life came from the field of biotechnology. The Human Genome Project, an international effort to map the genes of the human body, and Celera, a private company in molecular biology, simultaneously announced in 2000 that they had sequenced nearly all of the human genome only a decade after the research began. Cooperation via the Internet and access to computerized databases by multiple research groups vastly accelerated the scientists' ability to identify and order over three billion chemical "letters" of The United States in Today's World 87
Researchers work at the Beijing Genomics Institute at Shenzhen in southern China.
the genetic code of DNA. Molecular biologists hoped that this genetic map would offer the key to treating many inherited diseases and diagnosing congenital disabilities, and that drug makers could one day design pharmaceuticals for each patient's particular profile.
DNA had been in the spotlight before the breakthrough announcement. In well-publicized legal proceedings, prosecutors relied on DNA evidence to help prove the guilt of defendants who may have left behind a single hair at a crime scene. Others, wrongly imprisoned, were released when genetic analysis proved their innocence.
But different opinions arose over some of the new
"biotechnology." Some speculated that technological progress outpaced social evolution and society’s ability to grapple with the consequences. In 1997, Scottish researchers cloned Dolly the sheep from one cell of an adult sheep. Shortly thereafter, two Rhesus monkeys were cloned in Oregon, and many wondered whether human cloning was next. Firms sought to patent genes used for medical and research applications, using the principle of invention and property. Advances such as these, as well as gene therapy, artificial human chromosomes, and testing embryos for genetic defects all sparked heated debates among scientists, ethicists, religious leaders, and politicians.
The use of genetic engineering—the artificial changing of the molecular biology of organisms' cells to alter an organism—also aroused public concern. However, the Federal Department of Agriculture (FDA) holds that genetically engineered foods are safe and that they require no extra labeling. Scientists in the late 1990s modified corn and rice to provide resistance to pests and increase nutritional value. In 1996, the European Union limited the importation of such products in response to consumer pressure, allowing only those clearly labeled as having been genetically modified.
MEDICAL PROGRESS
People suffering from some diseases benefited from advances in medicine in the 1990s and early 2000s. Cancer survival rates improved drastically as clinicians explored the use of gene therapy, genetically engineered antibodies, and immune system modulation. Improvements in tracking the spread of HIV—the virus that causes AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome)—through the body made researchers better prepared to find a cure. AIDS patients were treated with combination therapies, and public health officials advocated abstinence and "safer sex" practices to control the spread of HIV. Improved technology for making medical diagnoses offered new hope as well. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), for example, was used to produce cross-sectional images of any part of the body. Advances that will make the MRI procedure ten times faster will also make MRI more widely available and cheaper to use. Medical researchers look ahead to using fleets of tiny "nanosensors ” one-thousandth the width of a human hair to find tumors and to deploying "nano-bots" to repair tissues and even genes.
Background
In 2007, about 14,100 Americans died from AIDS, roughly one-third the 1992 number.
care.
880 Chapter 26
ENVIRONMENTAL MEASURES
Energy consumption in the United States has been increasing gradually since the 1970s. Despite efforts to cut petroleum consumption since the energy crisis, the transportation sector remains almost completely dependent on petroleum. In 2009, Americans consumed 8.8 million barrels of petroleum in the form of gasoline per day. Use of coal, natural gas, and other energy sources has also increased since the 1970s, as Americans have adopted more technologies requiring electricity to operate in their homes and workplaces. While the total energy consumption is going up, however, energy use per household has been on the decline. Increased energy efficiency of appliances, heating, and air conditioning has offset increases in home size and use of household electronics. As more products requiring energy to function become a part of Americans' daily lives, they continue to find ways to use energy more efficiently. With the spreading use of technology came greater concern about the impact of human activities on the natural environment. Scientists have continued examining ways to reduce American dependence on pollution-producing fossil fuels. Fossil fuels such as oil provided 84 percent of the energy in the United States in 2009 but also contributed to poor air quality, acid rain, and global warming. Many individuals have tried to help by reducing consumption of raw materials. The recycling of glass bottles and jars, plastic bottles, newspapers, cardboard, and aluminum cans and other materials is now commonplace. In 2007, recycling saved the energy equivalent of nearly 11 billion gallons of gasoline.
IMPROVED STANDARD OF LIVING
American scientific discoveries and technological innovations have had a positive affect on the standard of living. Improvements in communication and transportation have made it possible for the United States to participate in the global economy. New technological advances led to new industries, which created jobs for more Americans. Innovations have improved productivity, which enables prices of goods and services to decline and wages to increase. As a result, Americans are able to take advantage of consumer technologies such as personal computers and mobile devices that make their lives easier. Finally, new medical technologies improve health and increase life expectancy. However, the pace of innovation has slowed since the 1970s. The federal government and private industries will have to work together to reinvigorate American innovation so that the nation can continue to reap the benefits. 13
\ ASSESSMENT
B
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
• Information superhighway •Internet
•telecommute
•Telecommunications Act of 1996
•genetic engineering
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
On a chart like the one shown, list four of the technological changes described in this section and explain how each change has affected your life.
Technological Change	Effect on Me
1.	
2.	
3.	
4.	
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING EFFECTS
Explain the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations on U.S. economic development. How do they improve the standard of living?
ANALYZING ISSUES
How does the free enterprise system drive innovation and its application in the marketplace?
5.	SUMMARIZING
How has the application of technological innovations in the workplace improved productivity?
Think About:
•	computers
•	robotics
•	just-in-time systems
ANALYZING EFFECTS
Explain how space technology and exploration improves the quality
The United States in Today's World
Hurricane Katrina Proposition 187
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on demographic changes in the United States.
One American's Story

Every ten years the United States conducts a census, or head count of its population. The results of the census determine, among other things, how billions of federal dollars are spent for housing, health care, and education over the coming decade. The Census Bureau estimates that the 1990 census undercounted Latinos by more than five percent. This undercount resulted in a loss of millions of dollars of aid to municipalities with large Latino populations, as well as denying Latinos political representation in all levels of government.
During the census conducted in 2000, Antonia Hernandez, President and General Counsel of the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund (MALDEF), spearheaded the national jHagase Contar! Make Yourself Count! campaign. MALDEF workers canvassed neighborhoods urging residents to complete the census. They stressed that all information was fidential and discussed the high stakes of being counted.
con-
Antonia
Hernandez,
MALDEF’s
president
1985-2003
A
Personal Voice antonia hernandez “ The census not only measures our growth and marks our place in the community, but it is the first and indispensable step toward fair political representation, equal distribution of resources, and enforcement of our civil rights.” —Public statement for iHagase Contar! campaign, 2000
Data from the 2000 census revealed that the Hispanic population had grown by close to 58 percent since 1990, reaching 35.3 million. In the next seven years, it grew by nearly 30 percent to 45.5 million.
Urban Challenges
One of the most significant socio-cultural changes in American history has been
the movement of Americans from the cities to the suburbs. The years after World
War II through the 1980s saw a widespread pattern of urban flight, the process
in which Americans left the cities and moved to the suburbs. At mid-century the
population of cities exceeded that of suburbs. By 1970, the ratio became even
882 Chapter 26
By the early 2000s, after decades of decline, some major cities across the country had increased their populations while others slowed or halted declines. The transformation of the United States into a nation of suburbs had intensified the problems of the cities.
j MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
$ List the factors that influenced middle-class residents to leave cities for suburbs.
CAUSES OF URBAN CHANGE
Several factors contributed to the movement of Americans out of the cities. Because of the continued movement of job-seeking Americans into urban areas in the 1950s and 1960s, many urban American neighborhoods became overcrowded. Overcrowding in turn contributed to such urban problems as increasing crime rates and decaying housing. During the 1970s and early 1980s, city dwellers who could afford to do so moved to the suburbs for more space, privacy, and security. Often, families left the cities because suburbs offered newer, less crowded schools. As many middle-class Americans left cities for the suburbs, the economic base of many urban neighborhoods declined, and suburbs grew wealthy. Following the well-educated labor force, more industries relocated to suburban areas in the 1990s. The economic base that provided tax money and supported city services in large cities such as New York, Detroit, and Philadelphia continued to shrink as people and jobs moved outward.
In addition, many downtown districts fell into disrepair as suburban shoppers abandoned city stores for suburban shopping malls. According to the 1990 census, the 31 most impoverished communities in the United States were in cities.
By the mid-1990s, however, as the property values in the nation's inner cities declined, many people returned to live there. In a process known as gentrification, they purchased and rehabilitated deteriorating urban property, oftentimes displacing lower income people. Old industrial sites and neighborhoods in locations convenient to downtown became popular, especially among young, single adults who preferred the excitement of city life and the uniqueness of urban neighborhoods to the often more uniform environment of the suburbs.
Architecture
History Through
REBUILDING THE RIVERFRONTS
As part of the effort to revitalize cities, a number of architects, landscape architects, and urban planners have focused on enhancing what for many urban centers had become a neglected eyesore—their waterfronts. In Pittsburgh, landscape architects turned a dreary strip of concrete and parking lot into Allegheny Riverfront Park, an inviting stretch of natural walkways and recreation areas.
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Visual Sources
1.	Why might landscape architects consider improving riverfronts to be a key part of revitalizing cities?
2.	In what other ways could architects and urban designers make city living more attractive?
The United States in Today's World
SUBURBAN LIVING
While many suburbanites continued to commute to city jobs during the 1990s and early 2000s, increasing numbers of workers began to telecommute, or use new communications technology, such as computers, modems, and fax machines, to work from their homes. Another notable trend was the movement of minority populations to the suburbs. Nationwide, by the early 2000s, more Latinos, Asians, and African Americans lived in the suburbs than lived in the core cities. Suburban growth led to intense competition between suburbs and cities, and among the suburbs themselves, for business and industry. Since low-rise suburban homes yielded low tax revenues, tax-hungry suburbs offered tax incentives for companies to locate within their borders. These incentives resulted in lower tax revenues for local governments—meaning that less funds were available for schools, libraries, and police departments. Consequently, taxes were often increased to fund these community services as well as to build the additional roads and other infrastructure necessary to support the new businesses.
The shift of populations from cities to suburbs was not the only significant change in American life in the 1990s and early 2000s. The American public was also growing older, and its aging raised complex issues for policymakers.
HURRICANE KATRINA
Urban areas can also face challenges due to extreme weather. In 2005, New Orleans experienced widespread flooding as a result of a combination of physical and human geographic factors. In August, Hurricane Katrina—a massive storm with sustained winds of 125 mph—made landfall along the coast of the Gulf of Mexico and devastated parts of Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana. Much of the city of New Orleans lies below sea level, using levees to hold back surrounding waters. The city was flooded when these levees failed in the aftermath of the hurricane. Investigations have revealed that design flaws in the levees caused them to burst under the weight of Hurricane Katrina's storm surge. The human suffering due to the storm and subsequent flooding was immense. The Aging of America
Vocabulary
infrastructure:
the basic facilities, services, and installations needed for the functioning of a community or society
The Graying of America, 1990-2030
Year	Number of Americans 65 and older*	Percent of U.S. population
1990	31,081	12.4
2000	34,837	12.7
2010	40,268	13.0
2020	54,804**	16.1**
2030	72,092**	19.3**
* numbers in thousands		
** projected totals		
Source: U.S. Census Bureau		
The U.S. Census Bureau documents that in 2008 Americans were older than ever before, with a median age of 36.8—four years older than in 1990. Increased longevity and the aging of the baby boom generation were the primary reasons for the rising median age.
Behind the rising median age lie several broad trends. The country's birthrate has slowed slightly, and the number of seniors has increased as Americans live longer because of advances in medical care and living healthier lifestyles. The number of people over 85 has increased at a faster rate than any other segment of the population, to 5.7 million in the year 2008.
The graying of America has placed new demands on the country's programs that provide care for the elderly. These programs accounted for only 6 percent of the national budget in 1955. By 2010, these programs consumed about one-third of the national budget.
The major programs that provide care for elderly and disabled people are Medicare and Social Security. Medicare, which pays medical expenses for senior citizens, began in 1965, when most Americans had lower life expectancies. By 2010, the costs of this program exceeded $465 billion.
884 Chapter 26
MAIN IDEA
Predicting
Effects
What are the factors that will force an eventual restructuring of Social Security?
Social Security, which pays benefits to retired Americans, was designed to rely on continued funding from a vast number of younger workers who would contribute taxes to support a small number of retired workers. That system worked well when younger workers far outnumbered retirees and when most workers didn't live long after retirement.
In 1996, it took Social Security contributions from three workers to support every retiree. By 2030, however, with an increase in the number of elderly persons and an expected decline in the birthrate, there will be only two workers' contributions available to support each senior citizen. Few issues loomed as large in the recent presidential elections as what to do about Social Security. If the government does not restructure the system, Social Security will eventually pay out more money than it will take in. Some people suggest that the system be reformed by raising deductions for workers, taxing the benefits paid to wealthier Americans, and raising the age at which retirees can collect benefits.
The Shifting Population
In addition to becoming increasingly suburban and elderly, the population of the United States has also been transformed by immigration. Between 1970 and 2010, the country's population swelled from 204 million to more than 309 million. Immigration accounted for much of that growth. As the nation's newest residents yearned for U.S. citizenship, however, other Americans debated the effects of immigration on American life.
A CHANGING IMMIGRANT POPULATION
The most recent immigrants to the United States differ from immigrants of earlier years. The large numbers of immigrants who entered the country before and just after 1900 came from Europe. Change in U.S. Foreign-Born Population, 2000-2011
Percentage Increase in Foreign-Born Population
■ 75.1% or greater « 50.1 to 75.0%
□ 25.1 to 50.0%
EZ3 25.0% or less
Foreign-born population increased nationally by 29.8%.
N.H.
Mass.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
Movement Use the map to create a chart showing the percentage increase in foreign-born population for each state. Then use the map and your chart to pose and answer a question about geographic distributions and patterns.
The United States in Today's World 8l
Lowe Shee Miu, of Oakland, California, stands in front of a monument commemorating Chinese immigrants at Angel Island—the Ellis Island of the West.
In contrast, more than 30 percent of immigrants since the 1960s have come from Asia and about 50 percent from the Western Hemisphere, primarily Mexico.
In Mexico, for example, during three months in 1994-1995, the Mexican peso was devalued by 73 percent. The devaluation made the Mexican economy decline. As a result, almost a million Mexicans lost their jobs. Many of the unemployed headed north in search of jobs in the United States.
This search for a better opportunity continued throughout the 1990s as thousands of legal and illegal immigrants arrived each day—the vast majority from Mexico. To help those persons seeking more opportunity in America, a temporary guest worker program for those immigrants residing illegally in the United States was proposed several times in the early 2000s. By 2010, however, this guest worker program had not been enacted into law.
Census Bureau data indicated that patterns of immigration are changing the country's ethnic and racial makeup. By 2001, for example, California had
become a "majority-minority" state, with Asian Americans, Latinos, African Americans, and Native Americans making up more than half its population. By 2009, three other states—Hawaii, New Mexico, and Texas—had also become majority-minority states. Arizona, Georgia, Maryland, Mississippi, and New York were close, with minority populations of 40 percent.
DEBATES OVER IMMIGRATION POLICY
The presence of such a large number of immigrants has also added to the continuing debate over U.S. immigration policies. Many Americans believe that their country can't absorb more immigrants. By the early 1990s, an estimated 3.2 million illegal immigrants from Mexico, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Haiti had made their way to the United States. Many illegal immigrants also arrived from Canada, Poland, China, and Ireland. They took jobs many Americans turned down, as farm workers and domestic servants—often receiving the minimum wage or less and no benefits. By 2009, an estimated 10.8 million illegal immigrants resided in the United States. Hostility toward illegal immigration has increased in states such as California and Arizona, two states with high percentages of immigrants. In 1994, California passed Proposition 187, which cut all education and nonemergency health benefits to illegal immigrants. By March 1998, Proposition 187 was ruled unconstitutional. In 2010, Arizona passed a law that enhanced state and local police authority to enforce federal immigration laws. These efforts to control immigration inspired political participation among Hispanic voters, who saw themselves as targets.
As more immigrants make their way to the U.S. and the nation’s ethnic composition changes, debates about immigration will continue. Those who favor tighter restrictions argue that immigrants take desired jobs. Others, however, point to America's historical diversity and the new ideas and energy immigrantsbring.
Background
The U.S. Census has asked a race question on every census since the first survey in 1790. Since 1890, the categories and definitions have changed with nearly every census.
| ^ain ipea |
Comparing
How are
current arguments
against
immigration
similar to those
used in the past?
886 Chapter 26
NATIVE AMERICANS CONTINUE LEGAL BATTLES
As the nation debated its immigrant policies, the ancestors of America's original inhabitants continued to struggle. The end of the 20th century found most members of this minority enduring extremely difficult lives. In 2007, about 25 percent of Native Americans lived below the poverty line, more than two times the poverty rate for white Americans. Furthermore, Native Americans endured suicide rates and alcoholism rates that were considerably higher than that of the general population. In the face of such hardships, Native Americans strived to improve their lives. Throughout the 1990s, dozens of tribes attained greater economic independence by establishing thriving gaming resorts. Although controversial for promoting gambling, reservation gaming—$27 billion a year industry by 2008—provided Native Americans with much-needed money for jobs, education, social services, and infrastructure. Over the past decades, Native Americans have used the courts to attain greater recognition of their tribal ancestry and land rights. In 1999, for example, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the Chippewa Indians of Minnesota retained fishing and hunting rights on some 13 million acres of land that were guaranteed to them in an 1837 treaty. Across the nation, a number of other tribes have had similar land rights affirmed.
America in a New Millennium
As the 21st century begins, Americans face both new problems and old ones. Environmental concerns have become a global issue and have moved to center stage. Furthermore, poverty remains a problem for many Americans in the late 20th century, as does the increasing threat that terrorist acts pose to Americans at home and abroad.
It is clear that the new century America faces will bring changes, but those changes need not deepen divisions among Americans. With effort and cooperation, the change could foster growth and tolerance. The 20th century brought new ways of both destroying and enriching lives. What will the 21st bring? Much will depend on you—the dreamers, the decision makers, and the voters of the future.
1. TERMS & NAMES •urban flight
For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•gentrification	• Hurricane Katrina
Proposition 187
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Demography is the study of statistics about human populations. Use a table like the one below to summarize the demographic changes occurring in the United States.
Demographic Changes	
Urban distribution	
Age	
Ethnic and racial makeup	
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	HYPOTHESIZING
As urban problems become more common in the suburbs, how might the residents of suburbs respond? Base your answer on existing behavior patterns. Think About:
•	the spread of suburbs farther and farther from the city
•	the new ability to telecommute
•	the tax problems that suburbs face
COMPARING AND CONTRASTING
How was the immigration that occurred in the 1990s and early 2000s similar to and different from earlier waves of immigration?
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
How do disagreements over immigration policy reflect the benefits and challenges of a diverse population?
ANALYZING ISSUES
How did physical and human geographic factors impact the levee failure in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina?
The United States in Today's World
TRACING THEMES
Immigration and Migration
Immigrants to the United States have been part of a worldwide movement pushing people away from traditional means of support and pulling them toward better opportunities. Most immigrants have left their homelands because of economic problems, though some have fled oppressive governments or political turmoil.
War has often been the deciding factor for people to immigrate to the United States or to migrate within the country. Others have migrated to escape poverty, religious persecution, and racial violence. But the chief lure in coming to the United States or migrating within its borders continues to be the opportunity to earn a living.

MIGRATING TO THE WEST
Throughout the 19th century, Americans continued their movement westward to the Pacific Ocean. Victory in the War with Mexico in 1848 greatly increased the amount of land under American control, and thousands of Americans moved out West to take advantage of it.
Two important consequences emerged from this movement. First, following the discovery of gold in California, hundreds of thousands of people from around the world rushed in to strike it rich. Within a year, there were enough residents in California to qualify it for statehood. Second, Americans disagreed over whether the new lands should be open to slavery. That disagreement fueled the fires that led to the Civil War.






! -

ADAPTING TO AMERICAN WAYS
With hope and apprehension, millions of foreign immigrants poured into America’s pulsing cities during the early 20th century. Bringing with them values, habits, and attire from the Old World, they faced a multitude of new experiences, expectations, and products in the New World.
Many native-born Americans feared that the new immigrants posed a threat to American culture. Instead of the immigrants being allowed to negotiate their existence by combining the old with the new, they were pressured to forget their old cultures, languages, and customs for more “American” ways.
MIGRATING FOR JOBS
Throughout the 20th century, African Americans migrated across the United States. In the Great Migration of the early 20th century, they left their homes in the rural South. Of the millions of African Americans who left, most moved to cities, usually in the North.
The Second Migration, sparked by World War II, allowed African Americans to take industrial jobs— many formerly held by whites—to support the war effort. This migration had lasting consequences for the civil rights movement. Many African Americans who remained in the South moved to cities, where they developed organizations that helped them fight segregation.

•!
IN SEARCH OF A NEW LIFE
In 1964, 603 Vietnamese lived in the United States. A decade later, as the Vietnam War ended, hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese refugees fled their homeland for other nations, including the United States. Vietnamese immigration to America continued, and by 1998 there were nearly 1 million Vietnamese-born persons living in the United States.
The men and women who made this long and arduous journey from Vietnam are part of the changing face of U.S. immigration. Beginning in the 1970s, Asians and Latin Americans replaced Europeans as the two largest immigrant groups in the United States. Between 1970 and 1990, about 1.5 million Europeans journeyed to America’s shores. During that same period, roughly 5.6 million Latin Americans and 3.5 million Asians arrived. This trend has continued. In 2008, the largest immigrant groups in the United States hailed from Mexico, the Philippines, India, and China and Hong Kong respectively. These most recent arrivals to the United States have come for largely the same reasons—greater freedom and economic opportunity and the chance to begin a new life.

Wit
The United States in Today's World
CHAPTER
ASSESSMENT
TERMS & NAMES
For each term or name below, write a sentence explaining its significance.
1.	William Jefferson Clinton
2.	NAFTA
3.	Contract with America
4.	George W. Bush
5.	service sector
MAIN IDEAS
6.
8.
9.
10.
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) Telecommunications Act of 1996
genetic engineering urban flight Proposition 187
The Changing Face of America
(pages 882-887)
7.	How has urban flight changed both cities and suburbs?
8.	What challenges do experts think the United States will face in the future?
CRITICAL THINKING
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a time line of important events from the 2000 election, using a form like the one below. Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
The 1990s and The New Millennium
(pages 860-868)
1.	How did Clinton’s impeachment trial affect U.S. citizens’ trust in government and its leaders?
2.	What factors led George W. Bush to victory in 2000?
The New Global Economy (pages 869-873)
3.	Summarize which parts of the economy grew during the 1990s and which declined.
4.	Why was the World Trade Organization founded?
Technology and Modern Life (pages 876-881)
5.	What resources did the Internet make available?
6.	What were the positive and negative influences that technology had on American lives in the 1990s?
event
event
I
event
event
Which event do you think was the turning point? Explain.
DEVELOPING HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Reread the Historic Decisions of the Supreme Court feature on pages 874-875. How does the principle of eminent domain demonstrate the effects of government actions on individuals, industries, and communities? How does it affect Fifth Amendment property rights? EXPLAINING TURNING POINTS
What is the significance of the years 2001 and 2008 as turning points in American history? Explain. VISUAL SUMMARY THE UNITED STATES IN TODAY'S WORLD
\
\

TECHNOLOGY
Technological revolution1 □
ECONOMICS
U.S. records its longest economic expansion. Service industries grow; manufacturing declines; telecommuting increases. Trade relations become globalized.
890
Clinton is impeached. U.S. becomes involved in conflicts in the Balkans and the Middle East. Election 2000 is settled by the Supreme Court; George W. Bush wins.
TEXAS TEST PRACTICE
Use the graphs below and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer questions 1 and 2.
)------------------------------
1.	Which U.S. population was too small to appear on the 2000 graph but is represented on the 2010 graph?
A
Latinos B
Native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders C whites D blacks
2.	What conclusion can be drawn from the 2010 census data, compared with the data from 2000?
F
There were more immigrants in the Midwest. G
The population of ethnic minorities increased. H
The 2000 census reflects a broader range of categories.
J
Immigration has slowed in the 2000s. 3.	Which country was not a member of the G8 in 2000?
A
China B Japan C Italy D
United States ^Whmhsocialstudies.com
I TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests • Tutorials

INTERACT WITH HISTORY
^WriteSmart Recall the issues that you recorded in myNotebook as you read the chapter. As a “think tank”director who researches and analyzes future issues, you are asked to write a concise summary of the five most important issues facing Americans in the 21st century. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your summary. Then present it to the class.
&
ON WRITING
"’J'WriteSmart
Based on what you have read in this chapter, write a paragraph discussing the historical significance of the 2008 presidential election. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your paragraph.
COLLABORATIVE LEAR|
VCEHTURY
Working in a small group, use the Internet and library resources to find data about energy use in the United States since the 1960s. Consider the following:
•	How has energy use changed over the past several decades? What factors account for these changes?
•	How have changes in energy use impacted the American way of life?
Present your findings in a poster.
The United States in Today's Worh
End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Creating Thematic Maps
DEFINING THE SKILL
Maps are scale representations, usually of land surfaces. (See Chapter 5 End-of-Chapter Skill Activity.) A thematic map is a special-purpose map that focuses on a particular topic. The location of football stadiums, a country's natural resources, election results, and major battles in a war are all topics you might see illustrated on a thematic map.
Creating a thematic map involves clarifying information and representing geographical data visually. Creating a map is similar to taking notes, except that you draw much of the information. When you draw, it is easiest to use an existing map as a guide. You can include data on climate and population and on patterns or distributions of human activity.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: CREATE A MAP
The following chart shows the numbers of immigrants who planned to settle in the southwestern states of the United States in 1995. The map below depicts the data given in the chart. 0 Determine what map you should use as a guide. Find a map of the Southwest that you can recreate.
0 Decide how best to show the data. These data can be grouped in three broad categories of numbers: more than 100,000; 10,000 to 100,000; and less than 10,000.
0 Select a title that identifies the geographical area and the map’s purpose. Include a date or time span.
0 If appropriate, draw and label the lines of latitude and longitude. Use the guide map’s scale and a ruler to help you correctly space the lines of latitude and longitude.
© Draw the subject of your map, following your guide map carefully. Color or mark the map to show its purpose. Use each color or symbol to represent similar information.
© Include a key or legend explaining colors, symbols, or shading. The map’s legend allows readers to interpret what the colors or symbols that you’ve used on your map mean. Also, reproduce the scale and compass rose from the map you used as a guide. These tools help readers to interpret your map within in a larger context.
APPLYING THE SKILL
Turn to Chapter 26, p. 889, in "Immigration and Migration" and read the section "1970-Present." Create a sketch map showing different continents from which people immigrated to the United States during this time period. Use a modern world map with continents outlined as a guide. You can add arrows from each continent pointing to the United States. Include a legend to indicate different figures from the immigration data.
1.	Determine what map you should use as a guide.
Find a map of the world that you can recreate.
2.	Decide how best to show the data.
What categories of numbers can you use to show immigration data on the map?
3.	Select a title that identifies the geographical area and the map’s purpose.
What date or time span can you include on your map? What title helps indicate its purpose?
4.	If appropriate, draw and label the lines of latitude and longitude.
Use the guide map’s scale and a ruler to help you correctly space the lines of latitude and longitude if it feels appropriate to add them to your map.
5.	Draw the subject of your map, following your guide map carefully.
Color or mark the map to show its purpose. What colors and symbols will you use for each continent or for different groups of data?
6.	Include a key or legend explaining colors, symbols, or shading.
Create a legend that indicates what the colors or symbols that you've chosen represent. Also, reproduce the scale and compass rose from the map you used as a guide.
891
Essential Question
myNotebook
What important issues does the United States face in the 21 st century?
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
9A, 9B, 10E, 11B, 11C, 11F, 13B, 14A, 14B, 19B, 19E,22CZ 25C,25D, 26A,26C,31B SECTION 1: The War on Terrorism SECTION 2: Global Involvement
SECTION 3: Civil Rights in the 21st Century
SECTION 4: Immigration
SECTION 5: Social Issues and Government Responses
SECTION 6: Conservation and the Environment
SECTION 7: Globalization and Cultural Diffusion

I
Lv
L
ci- . J. I


wyNotebook
iy-
WITH HISTORY
You are an American citizen preparing to vote in an upcoming election. As a voter, it is your responsibility to be informed about the myriad issues confronting society and government today. You must educate yourself about all sides of these issues to ensure that you make the right choice at the voting booth. As you read the chapter and explore the issues below, use the annotation tools in your eBook to record your thoughts.
Explore the Issues
•	How do these issues affect you?
•	How can political decisions positively or negatively affect these issues?
•	How would you like your elected officials to approach these issues?
i *	Jr -

Issues for the^21st Century 8
TEKS19B
The War on Terrorism
How can the United States combat terrorism?
On the morning of September 11, 2001, two airliners crashed into the twin towers of the World Trade Center in New York City and a third smashed into a section of the Pentagon, across the river from Washington, D.C. A fourth airliner crashed in a field in the Pennsylvania countryside. Nineteen Arab terrorists had hijacked the four planes and used them as missiles in an attempt to destroy predetermined targets. The first three planes hit their intended targets. In the fourth plane, passengers fought the hijackers and the plane went down short of its target.
Explosions and raging fire severely weakened the twin towers. Within two hours after the attacks, both skyscrapers had crumbled to the ground. One wing of the Pentagon was extensively damaged. About 3,000 people were killed in the attacks—the most destructive acts of terrorism in modern history.
Historical Perspective
Terrorism is the use of violence against people or property to extort changes in societies or governments. Throughout history, individuals and groups have used terror tactics to achieve political or social goals. In recent decades, however, terrorist groups have carried out more and increasingly destructive attacks. Terrorist activities impact people of all ages around the world. The U.S. National Counterterrorism Center recorded over 14,000 terrorist incidents worldwide in 2006 alone.
Modern international terrorism gained world attention during the 1972 Summer Olympic Games in Munich, Germany. Members of a Palestinian group killed two Israeli athletes and took nine others hostage, later killing them. Palestinian terrorists also used airplane hijackings and suicide bombers.
Since then, terrorist activities have occurred across the globe. The Irish Republican Army (IRA) used terrorist tactics for decades to oppose British control of Northern Ireland. The IRA officially renounced violence in 2005. In South America, a group known as the Shining Path terrorized the residents of Peru throughout the late 20th century. The group sought to overthrow the government and establish a Communist state. In 2004, Islamic radicals killed and injured nearly 2,000 people with a series of bombs exploded on the Madrid subways.
Groups belonging to the al-Qaeda terrorist organization operate in many countries. Officials have linked several major attacks against U.S. facilities in Africa to al-Qaeda, including bombings at the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania. Jemaah Islamiah, an Islamic revolutionary group linked to al-Qaeda, has organized numerous attacks throughout Southeast Asia.
In 2011, a car bomb exploded outside the government quarter in Oslo,
Norway. Two hours later, Anders Behring Breivik took over an island with a sum-
mer camp in Buskerud and killed 69 individuals. In April of 2013, two bombs
exploded near the finish line at the Boston Marathon, in Boston, Massachusetts,
killing three and injuring 264.
