Chapter 7


WRv1^]l'W^ .
ttfc...	.i,;,
Ik ,‘ii <vi’ • TV7 v---- '•*■ *" *■
j - B	H " 4 t
HISTORY
Ellis Island: Arrival
7i hmhsocialstudies.com
VIDEO
HESTER ST
*

myNotebook !
INTERACT
£>'
y
The year is 1880. New York City's swelling population has created a housing crisis. Immigrant families crowd into apartments that lack light, ventilation, and sanitary facilities. Children have nowhere to play except in the streets and are often kept out of school to work and help support their families. You are a reformer who wishes to help immigrants improve their lives. As you read the chapter and explore the issues below, use the annotation tools in your eBook to record your thoughts.
Explore the Issues
•	How can immigrants gain access to the services they need?
•	What skills do newcomers need?
•	How might immigrants respond to help from an outsider?
. W.
r' Kir. ley
o|f pied
1898 Hawaii is annexed by the United States.
:[l900]
: McKinley : is reelected.
i1903 s The Wright Brothers achieve the first successful airplane flight.
419101 The : appearance of : Hailey’s comet • causes wide-: spread panic.
[19121 Woodrow Wilson is elected president.
1900
1910
	: 1905 Workers revolt in	: 11908] Oil is	: [19121 Qing	1
: 1901 The	: gt Petersburg, Russia.	: discovered	• dynasty in China
: Commonwealth of		: in Persia.	: is overthrown.
- Australia is founded.			
19141 Panama Canal opens.
Immigrants and Urbanization 253
TEKS3C, 3D
The New Immigrants
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
Immigration from Europe, Asia, the Caribbean, and Mexico reached a new high in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
This wave of immigration helped make the United States the diverse society it is today.
One American's
' hmhsocialstudies.com
»TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes about immigration to the United States.
In 1871, 14-year-old Fong See came from China to "Gold Mountain"—the United States. Fong See stayed, worked at menial jobs, and saved enough money to buy a business. Despite widespread restrictions against the Chinese, he became a very successful importer and was able to sponsor many other Chinese who wanted to enter the United States. Fong See had achieved the American dream. However, as his great-granddaughter Lisa See recalls, he was not satisfied.
A
Personal Voice lisa see “He had been trying to achieve success ever since he had first set foot on the Gold Mountain. His dream was very ‘American.’ He wanted to make money, have influence, be respected, have a wife and children who loved him. In 1919, when he traveled to China, he could look at his life and say he had achieved his dream. But once in China, he suddenly saw his life in a different context. In America, was he really rich? Could he live where he wanted? ... Did Americans care what he thought? . . . The answers played in his head—no, no, no. ” •	Ellis Island •Angel Island
•	melting pot
•	nativism
•Chinese
Exclusion Act
•Gentlemen’s
Agreement
—On Gold Mountain
Despite Fong See's success, he could not, upon his death in 1957, be buried next to his Caucasian wife because California cemeteries were still segregated.
Through the “Golden Door”
Driven by a sense of optimism, millions of immigrants entered the United States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Some, known as “birds of passage " intended to immigrate temporarily to earn money to take back home Many others believed that they would find a better life in America, free of the challenges they faced back home such as famine, land shortages, or persecution
Chapter 7
Background
From 1815 to 1848, a wave of revolutions— mostly sparked by a desire for constitutional governments— shook Europe. In 1830, for example, the Polish people rose up against their Russian rulers.
EUROPEANS
Between 1870 and 1920, approximately 20 million Europeans arrived in the United States. Before 1890, most immigrants came from countries in western and northern Europe. Beginning in the 1890s, however, increasing numbers came from southern and eastern Europe. In 1907 alone, about a million people arrived from Italy, Austria-Hungary, and Russia. Why did so many leave their homelands? Many of these new immigrants left to escape religious persecution. Whole villages of Jews were driven out of Russia by pogroms, organized attacks often encouraged by local authorities. Other Europeans left because of rising population. Between 1800 and 1900, the population in Europe doubled to nearly 400 million, resulting in a scarcity of land for farming. Farmers competed with laborers for too few industrial jobs. In the United States, jobs were supposedly plentiful. In addition, a spirit of reform and revolt had spread across Europe in the 19th century. Influenced by political movements at home, many young European men and women sought independent lives in America.
CHINESE AND JAPANESE
While waves of Europeans arrived on the shores of the East Coast, Chinese immigrants came to the West Coast in smaller numbers. Between 1851 and 1883, about 300,000 Chinese arrived. Many came to seek their fortunes after the discovery of gold in 1848 sparked the California gold rush. Chinese immigrants helped build the nation's railroads, including the first transcontinental line. When the railroads were completed, they turned to farming, mining, and domestic service. Some, like Fong See, started businesses. However, Chinese immigration was sharply limited by a congressional act in 1882. In 1884, the Japanese government allowed Hawaiian planters to recruit Japanese workers, and a Japanese emigration boom began. The United States' annexation of Hawaii in 1898 resulted in increased Japanese immigration to the West Coast. Immigration continued to increase as word of comparatively high American wages spread. The wave peaked in 1907, when 30,000 left Japan for the United States. By 1920, more than 200,000 Japanese lived on the West Coast.
»I
HISTORY
U.S.
Immigration Patterns, as of 1900 VIDEO
Italians in America: Old World, New Land
’/’T hmhsociaistudies.com
Russia 4%
Poland 3.5% Mexico China Japan _l
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Movement Where did the greatest number of Italian immigrants settle?
2.	Movement From which country did the smallest percentage of immigrants come?
Settlement figures in thousands .
New York
in
3
Massachusetts
Wisconsin
CM
1.5% total

Immigrants and Urbanization 255
n
THE WEST INDIES AND MEXICO
Between 1880 and 1920, about 260,000 immigrants arrived in the eastern and southeastern United States from t e est Indies. They came from Jamaica, Cuba, Puerto Rico, and other islands. Many West Indians left their homelands because jobs were scarce and the industrial boom in the United States seemed to promise work for everyone. Mexicans, too, immigrated to the United States to find work, as well as to flee political turmoil. The 1902 National Reclamation Act, which encouraged the irrigation of arid land, created new farmland in Western states and drew Mexican farm workers northward. After 1910, political and social upheavals in Mexico prompted even more immigration. About 700,000 people 7 percent of the population of Mexico at the time—came to the U.S. over the next 20 years. &
Life in the New Land
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
What reasons did people from other parts of the world have for immigrating to the United States?
No matter what part of the globe immigrants came from, they faced many adjust-ments to an alien—and often unfriendly—culture.
A DIFFICULT JOURNEY
By the 1870s, almost all immigrants traveled by steamship. The trip across the Atlantic Ocean from Europe took approximately one week, while the Pacific crossing from Asia took nearly three weeks. Many immigrants traveled in steerage, the cheapest accommodations in a ship's cargo holds. Rarely allowed on deck, immigrants were crowded together in the gloom, unable to exercise or catch a breath of fresh air. They often had to sleep in louse-infested bunks and share toilets with many other passengers. Under these conditions, disease spread quickly, and some immigrants died before they reached their destination. For those who survived, the first glimpse of America could be breathtaking.
A
Personal Voice rosa cavalleri European governments used passports to control the number of professionals and young men of military age who left the country. ▼
“America!. . .We were so near It seemed too much to believe. Everyone stood silent—like in prayer.. . . Then we were entering the harbor. The land came so near we could almost reach out and touch It. . . . Everyone was holding their breath. Me too.... Some boats had bands playing on their decks and all of them were tooting their horns to us and leaving white trails in the water behind them. ”
—quoted in Rosa: The Life of an Italian Immigrant
ELLIS ISLAND
After initial moments of excitement, the immigrants faced the anxiety of not knowing whether they would be admitted to the United States. They had to pass inspection at immigration stations, such as the one at Castle Garden in New York, which was later moved to Ellis Island in New York Harbor. About 20 percent of the immigrants at Ellis Island were detained for a day or more before being inspected. However, only about 2 percent of those were denied entry. The processing of immigrants on Ellis Island was an ordeal that might take five hours or more. First, they had to pass a physical examination by a doctor. Anyone with a serious health problem or a contagious disease, such as tuberculosis, was promptly sent home. Those who passed the medical exam then reported to a government inspector. The inspector checked documents and questioned immigrants to
-	-	. 57
^ ‘• Rinnovasioni, modlCcaelonl o Udimaricnl
Vocabulary tuberculosis: a
bacterial infection characterized by fever and coughing, that spreads easily
Many immigrants, like these arriving at Ellis Island, were subjected to tests such as the one below. To prove their mental competence, they had to identify the four faces looking left in 14 seconds. Can you do it?
Fig, 4.—Moon Section of “V, C." lest. The subject should be able to point out the four moons that are looking to the left in fourteen seconds, if lie is directed to begin at the upper right band corner anil proceed systematically along each line, left to right.
Vocabulary felony: any one of the most serious crimes under the law, including murder, rape, and burglary
determine whether they met the legal requirements for entering the United States. The requirements included proving they had never been convicted of a felony, demonstrating that they were able to work, and showing that they had some money (at least $25 after 1909). One Irish immigrant, Mary Mullins Gordon, describes the overwhelming surroundings that newcomers encountered at Ellis Island.
Fig. 5.—The Key Section of the “V. C.” test. The time element has not been worked out for	this section, but it	is hardly	the	less
laluable. '*A” is shown the	subject and he is	asked to	find	the
nearest like it in Fig. i, “Un is shown and he is asked to find it in Fig. 3, “C" is shown and	he is asked to find	it .in JFTg.	4>,“n”
is shown and he is asked to	find it in Fig. a, an ‘
and he is asked to find it in Fig. 4.
i shown



r
main idea
Identifying Problems
ft What difficulties did Immigrants face in gaining admission to the United States?
A
Personal Voice mary mullins Gordon “When I saw Ellis Island, it’s a great big place, ... We all had to gather your bags, and the place was crowded with people and talking, and crying, . . . And we passed through some of the halls there, big open spaces there, and there was bars, and there was people behind these bars, and they were talking different languages, and I was scared to death. I thought I was in jail.57
—Ellis Island Oral History Project
From 1892 to 1924, Ellis Island was the chief immigration station in the United States. An estimated 17 million immigrants passed through its noisy, bustling facilities.
ANGEL ISLAND
While European immigrants arriving on the East Coast passed through Ellis Island, Asians—primarily Chinese—arriving on the West Coast gained admission at Angel Island in San Francisco Bay. Between 1910 and 1940, about 50,000 Chinese immigrants entered the United States through Angel Island. Processing at Angel Island stood in contrast to the procedure at Ellis Island. Immigrants endured harsh questioning and a long detention in filthy, ramshackle buildings while they waited to find out whether they would be admitted or rejected. g> COOPERATION FOR SURVIVAL
Once admitted to the country, immigrants faced the challenges of finding a place to live, getting a job, and getting along in daily life while trying to understand an unfamiliar language and culture. Many immigrants sought out people who shared their cultural values, practiced their religion, Immigrants and Urbanization
HISTORY
VIDEO
Angel Island: Ellis Island of the West
7! hmhsocialstudies.com
257
and spoke their native language. The ethnic communities were e ra s or immigrants. People pooled their money to build churches or synagogues. ey formed social clubs and aid societies. They founded orphanages and homes or the elderly and established cemeteries. They even published newspapers in their own languages.
Committed to their own cultures but also trying hard to grow into their new identities, many immigrants came to think of themselves as "hyphenated Americans. As hard as they tried to fit in, these new Polish- and Italian- and Chinese-Americans felt increasing friction as they rubbed shoulders with people born and raised in the United States. Native-born people often disliked the immigrants' unfamiliar customs and languages, and viewed them as a threat to the American way of life.
Immigration Restrictions
Vocabulary synagogue: place of meeting for worship and religious instruction in the Jewish faith
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
How did
immigrants deal with challenges they faced?
Many native-born Americans thought of their country as a melting pot, a mixture of people of different cultures and races who blended together by abandoning their native languages and customs. Many new immigrants, however, did not wish to give up their cultural identities. As immigration increased, strong antiimmigrant feelings emerged.
THE RISE OF NATIVISM
One response to the growth in immigration was nativism, or overt favoritism toward native-born Americans. Nativism gave rise to anti-immigrant groups and led to a demand for immigration restrictions. Many nativists believed that Anglo-Saxons—the Germanic ancestors of the English—were superior to other ethnic groups. These nativists did not object to immigrants from the "right" countries. Prescott F. Hall, a founder in 1894 of the Immigration Restriction League, identified desirable immigrants as "British, German, and Scandinavian stock, historically free, energetic, progressive." Nativists thought that problems were caused by immigrants from the "wrong" countries— "Slav, Latin, and Asiatic races, historically down-trodden . . . and stagnant."
Nativists sometimes objected more to immigrants' religious beliefs than to their ethnic backgrounds. Many native-born Americans were Protestants and thought that Roman Catholic and Jewish immigrants would undermine the democratic institutions established by the country's Protestant founders. The American Protective Association, a nativist group founded in 1887, launched vicious anti-Catholic attacks, and many colleges, businesses, and social clubs refused to admit Jews.
In 1897, Congress—influenced by the Immigration Restriction League—passed a bill requiring a literacy test for immigrants. Those who could not read 40 words in English or their native language would be refused entry. Although President Cleveland vetoed the bill, it was a powerful statement of public sentiment. In 1917, a similar bill would be passed into law in spite of President Woodrow Wilson's veto.
ANTI-ASIAN SENTIMENT
Nativism also found a foothold in the labor movement, particularly in the West, where native-born workers feared that jobs would go to Chinese Vocabulary
progressive:
favoring advancement toward better conditions or new ideas
immigrants, who would accept lower wages. The
depression of 1873 intensified anti-Chinese senti-
ment in California. Work was scarce, and labor
groups exerted political pressure on the govern-
ment to restrict Asian immigration. The founder of
the Workingmen's Party, Denis Kearney, headed the
anti-Chinese movement in California. He made
hundreds of speeches throughout the state, each
ending with the message, "The Chinese must go!"
In 1882, Congress slammed the door on Chinese immigration for ten years by passing the Chinese Exclusion Act. This act banned entry to all Chinese except students, teachers, merchants, tourists, and government officials. In 1892,
Congress extended the law for another ten years. In 1902, Chinese immigration was restricted indefinitely; the law was not repealed until 1943.
THE GENTLEMEN S AGREEMENT
The fears that had led to anti-Chinese agitation were extended to
Japanese and other Asian people in the early 1900s.
In 1906, the local board of education in San
Francisco segregated Japanese children by putting
them in separate schools. When Japan raised an
angry protest at this treatment of its emigrants,
President Theodore Roosevelt worked out a deal. Under the Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907-1908, Japan's government agreed to limit emigration of unskilled workers to the United States in exchange for the repeal of the San Francisco segregation order.
Although doorways for immigrants had been all but closed to Asians on the West Coast, cities in the East and the Midwest teemed with European immigrants—and with urban opportunities and challenges.

Fear and resentment of Chinese immigrants sometimes resulted in mob attacks, like the one shown here.
ASSESSMENT
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. •Ellis Island	•melting pot	•Chinese Exclusion Act
•Angel Island	•nativism
•Gentlemen’s Agreement
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a diagram such as the one below. List two or more causes of each effect.
Causes 			> Effects
1.	Immigrants
2.	leave their
3.	home countries.
1.	Immigrants face
2.	hardships in the
3.	United States.
1.	Some nativists
2.	want to restrict
3.	immigration.
CRITICAL THINKING
IDENTIFYING PROBLEMS
Which group of immigrants do you think faced the greatest challenges in the United States? Why?
ANALYZING EFFECTS
What were the effects of the massive influx of immigrants to the U.S. in the late 1800s?
5.	SUMMARIZING
Describe how many immigrants felt about seeking new lives in the United States.
6.	EVALUATING
What arguments can you make against nativism and anti-immigrant feeling? Think About:
•	the personal qualities of immigrants
•	the reasons for anti-immigrant feeling
•	the contributions of immigrants to the United States
Immigrants and Urbanization 259
TRACING THEMES
Diversity and the National Identity
Before the first Europeans arrived, a variety of cultural groups coastal fishing societies, desert farmers, plains and woodland hunters—inhabited North America. With the arrival of Europeans and Africans, the cultural mix grew more complex. Although this diversity has often produced tension, it has also been beneficial. As different groups learned from one another about agriculture, technology, and social customs, American culture became a rich blend of cultures from around the world.
SPANISH NORTH AMERICA
Spanish missionaries in the Southwest tried to impose their culture upon Native Americans. However, many Native Americans retained aspects of their original cultures even as they took on Spanish ways. For example, today many Pueblo Indians of New Mexico perform ancient ceremonies, such as the Corn Dance, in addition to celebrating the feast days of Catholic saints. Later, the first cowboys—descendants of the Spanish—would introduce to white Americans cattle-ranching techniques developed in Mexico.
THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE
The signers of the Declaration of Independence were descendants of immigrants. The founders’ ancestors had come to North America in search of economic opportunity and freedom of religious expression. When the Second Continental Congress declared a “United States” in 1776, they acknowledged that the country would contain diverse regions and interests. Thus the founders placed on the presidential seal the motto “E Pluribus Unum”— “out of many, one.”
THE EMANCIPATION PROCLAMATION
At the midpoint of the Civil War, President Abraham Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation, freeing all slaves in areas of the Union that were in rebellion. Although the Proclamation could not be enforced immediately, it was a strong statement of opposition to slavery, and it paved the way for African Americans’ citizenship.
ISO
Chapter 7 THE STATUE OF LIBERTY
Jewish poet Emma Lazarus wrote the famous lines inscribed at the foot of the Statue of Liberty, “Give me your tired, your poor,/Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,. . .” The statue’s dedication took place during the most extensive wave of immigration the United States has ever known.
Many native-born Americans felt that the newcomers should fully immerse themselves in their new culture. However, most immigrants combined American language and customs with their traditional ways. As immigrants celebrated Independence Day and Thanksgiving, they introduced into American culture new celebrations, such as Chinese New Year and Cinco de Mayo.
21ST-CENTURY DIVERSITY
In 1998, three countries (Mexico, China, and India) contributed a third of the total number of immigrants to the United States. The rest of 1998’s immigrants came from countries as diverse as Vietnam, Sudan, and Bosnia.
American athletes at the 2000 Olympic Games in Sydney, Australia, reflected the increasing diversity of the U.S., pointing toward a future in which there may no longer be a majority racial or ethnic group.
Immigrants and Urbanization 261
The Challenges of Urbanization
MAIN IDEA |
f The rapid growth of cities forced people to contend with problems of housing, transportation, water, and sanitation.
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Consequently, residents of U.S. cities today enjoy vastly improved living conditions.
One American's Story;
hmhsocialstudies.com J
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes about urbanization and its problems.
Terms & Names
• urbanization	* settlement house
•Americanization	’Jane Addams
movement	‘Social Gospel
•tenement
•mass transit
In 1870, at age 21, Jacob Riis left his native Denmark for the United States. Riis found work as a police reporter, a job that took him into some of New York City's worst slums, where he was shocked at the conditions in the overcrowded, airless, filthy tenements. Riis used his talents to expose the hardships of New York City's poor.
A
Personal Voice Jacob riis “ Be a little careful, please! The hall is dark and you might stumble over the children pitching pennies back there. Not that It would hurt them; kicks and cuffs are their daily diet. They have little else. . . . Close [stuffy]? Yes! What would you have? All the fresh air that ever enters these stairs comes from the hall-door that is forever slamming. . . . Here is a door. Listen! That short hacking cough, that tiny, helpless wail—what do they mean?
... The child is dying with measles. With half a chance it might have lived; but It had none. That dark bedroom killed it.”
—How the Other Half Lives
Making a living in the late 19th and early 20th centuries was not easy. Natural and economic disasters had hit farmers hard in Europe and in the United States, and the promise of industrial jobs drew millions of people to American cities. The urban population exploded from 10 million to 54 million between 1870 and 1920. This growth revitalized the cities but also created serious problems that, as Riis observed, had a powerful impact on the new urban poor.
As many as 12 people slept in rooms such as this one in New York City, photographed by Jacob Riis around 1889.
Urban Opportunities
The technological boom in the 19 th century contributed to the growingfndus" trial strength of the United States. The result was rapid urbanization, or growth of cities, mostly in the regions of the Northeast and Midwest.
Chapter 7
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Motives
$ Why did native-born Americans start the Americanization movement?
IMMIGRANTS SETTLE IN CITIES
Most of the immigrants who streamed into the United States in the late 19th century became city dwellers because cities were the cheapest and most convenient places to live. Cities also offered unskilled laborers steady jobs in mills and factories. By 1890, there were twice as many Irish residents in New York City as in Dublin, Ireland. By 1910, immigrant families made up more than half the total population of 18 major American cities.
The Americanization movement was designed to assimilate people of wide-ranging cultures into the dominant culture. This social campaign was sponsored by the government and by concerned citizens. Schools and voluntary associations provided programs to teach immigrants skills needed for citizenship, such as English literacy and American history and government. Subjects such as cooking and social etiquette were included in the curriculum to help the newcomers learn the ways of native-born Americans. £
Despite these efforts, many immigrants did not wish to abandon their traditions. Ethnic communities provided the social support of other immigrants from the same country. This enabled them to speak their own language and practice their customs and religion. However, these neighborhoods soon became overcrowded, a problem that was intensified by the arrival of new transplants from America's rural areas.
MIGRATION FROM COUNTRY TO CITY
Rapid improvements in farming technology during the second half of the 19th century were good news for some farmers but bad news for others. Inventions such as the McCormick reaper and the steel plow made farming more efficient but meant that fewer laborers were needed to work the land. As more and more farms merged, many rural people moved to cities to find whatever work they could. Many of the Southern farmers who lost their livelihoods were African Americans. Between 1890 and 1910, about 200,000 African Americans moved north and west to cities such as Chicago and Detroit, in an effort to escape racial violence, economic hardship, and political oppression. Many found conditions only somewhat better than those they had left behind. Segregation and discrimination were often the reality in Northern cities. Job competition between blacks and white immigrants caused further racial tension.
Immigrants and Urbanization 263

I
I
I
Urban Problems
As the urban population skyrocketed, city governments faced the problems of how to provide residents with needed services and safe living conditions. HOUSING When the industrial age began, working-class families in cities had two housing options. They could either buy a house on the outskirts of town, where they would face transportation problems, or rent cramped rooms in a boardinghouse in the central city. As the urban population increased, however, new types of housing were designed. For example, row houses single-family dwellings that shared side walls with other similar houses packed many singlefamily residences onto a single block.
After working-class families left the central city, immigrants often took over their old housing, sometimes with two or three families occupying a one-family residence. As Jacob Riis pointed out, these multifamily urban dwellings, called tenements, were overcrowded and unsanitary.
In 1879, to improve such slum conditions, New York City passed a law that set minimum standards for plumbing and ventilation in apartments. Landlords began building tenements with air shafts that provided an outside window for each room. Since garbage was picked up infrequently, people sometimes dumped it into the air shafts, where it attracted vermin. To keep out the stench, residents nailed windows shut. Though established with good intent, these new tenements soon became even worse places to live than the converted single-family residences. &
Sanitation problems in big cities were overwhelming. It was not unusual to see a dead horse in the street.
TRANSPORTATION
Innovations in mass transit, transportation systems designed to move large numbers of people along fixed routes, enabled workers to go to and from jobs more easily. Street cars were introduced in San Francisco in 1873 and electric subways in Boston in 1897. By the early 20th century, mass-transit networks in many urban areas linked city neighborhoods to one another and to outlying communities. Cities struggled to repair old transit systems and to build new ones to meet the demand of expanding populations. WATER
Cities also faced the problem of supplying safe drinking water. As the urban population grew in the 1840s and 1850s, cities such as New York and Cleveland built public waterworks to handle the increasing demand. As late as the 1860s, however, the residents of many cities had grossly inadequate piped water— or none at all. Even in large cities like New York, homes seldom had indoor plumbing, and residents had to collect water in pails from faucets on the street and heat it for bathing. The necessity of improving water quality to control diseases such as cholera and typhoid fever was obvious. To make city water safer, filtration was introduced in the 1870s and chlorination in 1908. However, in the early 20th century, many city dwellers still had no access to safe water. SANITATION
As the cities grew, so did the challenge of keeping them clean. Horse manure piled up on the streets, sewage flowed through open gutters, and factories spewed foul smoke into the air. Without dependable trash collection, people dumped their garbage on the streets. Although private contractors called scavengers were hired to sweep the streets, collect garbage, and clean outhouses, they MAIN IDEA
j Identifying
Problems
$ What housing problems did urban working-class families face?
Vocabulary chlorination: a
method of purifying water by mixing it with the chemical chlorine
264 Chapter 7
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
$ How did conditions in cities affect people’s health?
often did not do the jobs properly. By 1900, many cities had developed sewer lines and created sanitation departments. However, the task of providing hygienic living conditions was an ongoing challenge for urban leaders.
CRIME
As the populations of cities increased, pickpockets and thieves flourished. Although New York City organized the first full-time, salaried police force in 1844, it and most other city law enforcement units were too small to have much impact on crime. FIRE
The limited water supply in many cities contributed to another menace: the spread of fires. Major fires occurred in almost every large American city during the 1870s and 1880s. In addition to lacking water with which to combat blazes, most cities were packed with wooden dwellings, which were like kindling waiting to be ignited. The use of candles and kerosene heaters also posed a fire hazard. In San Francisco, deadly fires often broke out during earthquakes. Jack London described the fires that raged after the San Francisco earthquake of 1906. A
Personal Voice jack London “On Wednesday morning at a quarter past five came the earthquake. A minute later the flames were leaping upward. In a dozen different quarters south of Market Street, in the working-class ghetto, and in the factories, fires started. There was no opposing the flames. . . . And the great water-mains had burst. All the shrewd contrivances and safeguards of man had been thrown out of gear by thirty seconds’ twitching of the earth-crust.”
—"The Story of an Eye-witness”
At first, most city firefighters were volunteers and not always available when they were needed. Cincinnati, Ohio, tackled this problem when it established the nation's first paid fire department in 1853. By 1900, most cities had full-time professional fire departments. The introduction of a practical automatic fire sprinkler in 1874 and the replacement of wood as a building material with brick, stone, or concrete also made cities safer.
FIRE:
Enemy of the City The Great Chicago Fire October 8-10,1871
The fire burned for over 24 hours.
An estimated 300 people died.
• 100,000 were left M	homeless.
More than 3 square miles of the city center was destroyed.
Property loss was estimated at $200 million.
17,500 buildings were destroyed.
The San Francisco Earthquake April 18,1906
The quake lasted 28 seconds; fires burned for 4 days.
An estimated 1,000 people died.
Over 200,000 wer< left homeless.
Fire swept through 5 square miles of the city.
•	Property loss was estimated at $500 million.
•	28,000 buildings were destroyed.
Immigrants and Urbanization 265
i
Reformers Mobilize	.
As problems in cities mounted, concerned Americans worked to find solutions. Social welfare reformers targeted their efforts at relieving urban poverty.
THE SETTLEMENT HOUSE
In the late 1800s, with poverty a desperate problem, some American reformers turned to Great Britain for inspiration. In 1884, London reformers had founded Toynbee Hall, the first of the settlement houses. These were community centers in slum neighborhoods that provided assistance to local residents, especially immigrants. In addition to providing aid, settlement houses taught immigrants many useful skills. They provided social activities, such as clubs and sports. They also sent visiting nurses into the homes of the sick. Most settlement house workers were middle-class, college educated women who lived among the people they served. The movement gave women new opportunities to lead, organize, and improve life for others. Settlement houses soon began appearing in U.S. cities. One of the first was Hull House in Chicago, founded by Jane Addams and Ellen Gates Starr in 1889. Addams became one of the most influential members of the settlement house movement. Hull House was located in the middle of an urban neighborhood peopled by Italian, Irish, German, Greek, Bohemian, and Russian and Polish Jewish immigrants. Through English classes and job-training programs offered at Hull House, Addams worked to provide economic opportunities for the ethnic and religious minorities who inhabited the neighborhood. Settlement houses also sought political solutions by lobbying state and local government to resolve social and economic problems. By 1910, about 400 settlement houses were operating in cities across the country. The settlement houses helped cultivate social responsibility toward the urban poor.
Many workers in the movement held strong religious views. They believed in the Social Gospel, the idea that religious faith should be expressed through good works. They believed that churches had a moral duty to help solve society's problems and preached salvation through service to the poor. Their views contrasted with Social Darwinists, who saw existence as a competitive struggle and argued that people were poor because of their own deficiencies. They criticized the Social Gospel movement because they did not believe their reforms could help.
( 2 1 ASSESSMENT
•Social Gospel
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance, •urbanization	•tenement	•settlement house
•Americanization movement	*mass transit	-Jane Addams
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Re-create the spider map below. List problems on the vertical lines. Fill in details about attempts to solve each problem__________
Solutions to \
Urban Problems J
Which solution do you think was most effective? Why?
266 Chapter 7
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	SUMMARIZING
Explain how settlement house workers expanded economic opportunities for ethnic and religious minorities.
ANALYZING ISSUES
Why would urban problems inspire followers of the Social Gospel to work toward reform?
ANALYZING EFFECTS
What effects did the migration from rural areas to the cities in the late 19th century have on urban society?
Think About:
•	why people moved to cities
•	the problems caused by rapid urban growth
•	the differences in the experiences of whites and blacks
TEKS 3A
MAIN IDEA
Politics in the Gilded Age
Local and national political corruption in the 19th century led to calls for reform.
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Political reforms paved the way for a more honest and efficient government in the 20th century and beyond.
Terms & Names
X hmhsoci’alstudies.com
IHKIIMU
NUTc5 Use the graphic organizer online to take notes about political corruption in the Gilded Age.
One American’s Story
•political machine	•James A. Garfield		
•graft	• Chester A. Arthur		
• Boss Tweed	• Pendleton Civil		
• patronage	Service Act		
•civil service	•Grover Cleveland	!	r
• Rutherford B.	• Benjamin	1 i	'T
Hayes	Harrison		
Mark Twain described the excesses of the late 19th century in a satirical novel, The Gilded Age, a collaboration with the writer Charles Dudley Warner. The title of the book has since come to represent the period from the 1870s to the 1890s. Twain mocks the greed and self-indulgence of his characters, including Philip Sterling.
A
Personal Voice MARK TWAIN
and CHARLES DUDLEY WARNER “ There are many young men like him [Philip Sterling] In American society, of his age, opportunities, education and abilities, who have really been educated for nothing and have let themselves drift, in the hope that they will find somehow, and by some sudden turn of good luck, the golden road to fortune. ... He saw people, all around him, poor yesterday, rich to-day, who had come into sudden opulence by some means which they could not have classified among any of the regular occupations of life.99
—The Gilded Age
Twain's characters find that getting rich quick is more difficult than they had thought it would be. Investments turn out to be worthless; politicians' bribes eat up their savings. The glittering exterior of the age turns out to hide a corrupt political core and a growing gap between the few rich and the many poor.
▲
A luxurious apartment building rises behind a New York City shantytown in 1889.
The Emergence of Political Machines
the”late 19th century, cities experienced rapid growth under inefficient government. In a climate influenced by dog-eat-dog Social Darwinism, cities were receptive to a new power structure, the political machine, and a new politician, the city boss.
Immigrants and Urbanization 267
THE POLITICAL MACHINE
An organized group that controlled the activities of a political party in a city, the political machine also offered services to voters and businesses in exchange for political or financial support, n t e eca es after the Civil War, political machines gained control of local government in Baltimore, New York, San Francisco, and other major cities. The machine was organized like a pyramid. At the pyramid's base were local precinct workers and captains, who tried to gain voters' support on a city block or in a neighborhood and who reported to a ward boss. At election time, the ward boss worked to secure the vote in all the precincts in the ward, or electoral district. Ward bosses helped the poor and gained their votes by doing favors or providing services. As Martin Lomasney, elected ward boss of Boston's West End in 1885, explained, "There's got to be in every ward somebody that any bloke can come to . . . and get help. Help, you understand; none of your law and your justice, but help." At the top of the pyramid was the city boss, who controlled the activities of the political party throughout the city. Precinct captains, ward bosses, and the city boss worked together to elect their candidates and guarantee the success of the machine. £
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
In what way did the structure of the political machine resemble a pyramid?
THE ROLE OF THE POLITICAL BOSS
Whether or not the boss officially served as mayor, he controlled access to municipal jobs and business licenses, and influenced the courts and other municipal agencies. Bosses like Roscoe Conkling in New York used their power to build parks, sewer systems, and waterworks, and gave money to schools, hospitals, and orphanages. Bosses could also provide government support for new businesses, a service for which they were often paid extremely well. It was not only money that motivated city bosses. By solving urban problems, bosses could reinforce voters' loyalty, win additional political support, and extend their influence.
IMMIGRANTS AND THE MACHINE
Many precinct captains and political bosses were first-generation or second-generation immigrants. Few were educated beyond grammar school. They entered politics early and worked their way up from the bottom. They could speak to immigrants in their own language and understood the challenges that newcomers faced. More important, the bosses were able to provide solutions. The machines helped immigrants with naturalization (attaining full citizenship), hous- ing, and jobs—the newcomers' most pressing needs. In return, the immigrants provided what the political bosses needed—votes. $
"Big Jim" Pendergast, an Irish-American saloonkeeper, worked his way up from precinct captain to Democratic city boss in Kansas City by aiding Italian
African-American, and Irish voters in his ward. By 1900, he controlled Missouri state politics as well.
A
Personal Voice james pendergast “ I’ve been called a boss. All there Is to it is having friends, doing things for neo-
SoInX™ ,’at" " d° **	'	Y°“ «„■, people ,„7„
l„ ™ St y0U_’°U ™ke *hem V°" *”	1 c°e-’e<l anybody
in my life. Wherever you see a man bulldozing anybody he don’t last long.”
quoted in The Pendergast Machine
▲
A corrupt 19th-century boss robs the city treasury by easily cutting government red tape, or bureaucracy.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Motives
Why did immigrants support political machines?
!68 Chapter 7
Municipal Graft and Scandal
While the well-oiled political machines provided city dwellers with services, many political bosses fell victim to corruption as their influence grew.
ELECTION FRAUD AND GRAFT
When the loyalty of voters was not enough to carry an election, some political machines turned to fraud. Using fake names, party faithfuls cast as many votes as were needed to win. Once a political machine got its candidates into office, it could take advantage of numerous opportunities for graft, the illegal use of political influence for personal gain. For example, by helping a person find work on a construction project for the city, a political machine could ask the worker to bill the city for more than the actual cost of materials and labor. The worker then "kicked back" a portion of the earnings to the machine. Taking these kickbacks, or illegal payments for their services, enriched the political machines—and individual politicians.
Political machines also granted favors to businesses in return for cash and accepted bribes to allow illegal activities, such as gambling, to flourish. Politicians were able to get away with shady dealings because the police rarely interfered. Until about 1890, police forces were hired and fired by political bosses.
Vocabulary extortion: illegal use of one’s official position to obtain property or funds
THE TWEED RING SCANDAL
William M. Tweed, known as Boss Tweed, became head of Tammany Hall, New York City's powerful Democratic political machine, in 1868. Between 1869 and 1871, Boss Tweed led the Tweed Ring, a group of corrupt politicians, in defrauding the city. One scheme, the construction of the New York County Courthouse, involved extravagant graft. The project cost taxpayers $13 million, while the actual construction cost was $3 million. The difference went into the pockets of Tweed and his followers.
Thomas Nast, a political cartoonist, helped arouse public outrage against Tammany Hall's graft, and the Tweed Ring was finally broken in
1871. Tweed was indicted on 120 counts of fraud and extortion and sentenced to 12 years in jail. His sentence was reduced to one year, but after leaving jail, Tweed was quickly arrested on another charge. While serving a second sentence, Tweed escaped. He was captured in Spain when officials identified him from a Thomas Nast cartoon. By then, political corruption had become a national issue.
▲
Boss Tweed, head of Tammany Hall.
Analyzing
Political Cartoons}
TAMMANY TIGER LOOSE”
Political cartoonist Thomas Nast ridiculed Boss Tweed and his machine in the pages of Harper's Weekly. Nast’s work threatened Tweed, who reportedly said, "I don’t care so much what the papers write about me—my constituents can’t read; but . . . they can see pictures!”
SKILLBUILDER
Analyzing Political Cartoons 1.	Under the Tammany tiger’s victim is a torn paper that reads “LAW.” What is its significance?
2.	Boss Tweed and his cronies, portrayed as noblemen, watch from the stands on the left. The cartoon’s caption reads “What are you going to do about it?” What effect do you think Nast wanted to have on his audience?
Immigrants and Urbanization 269

RUTHERFORD B. HAYES(1877-1881) "
Nobody ever left the presidency with less regret. . . than I do. ” JAMES A. GARFIELD
(1881) “Assassination can be no more guarded against than death by lightning. ”
i
CHESTER A. ARTHUR
(1881-1885) “ There doesn't seem to be anything else for an ex-president to do
but. . . raise big pumpkins. ”
!70 Chapter 7
Civil Service Replaces Patronage ^
The desire for power and money that made local politics corrupt in the industrial age also infected national politics.
PATRONAGE SPURS REFORM
Since the beginning of the 19th century, presidents had complained about the problem of patronage, or the giving of government jobs to people who had helped a candidate get elected. In Andrew Jackson's administration, this policy was known as the spoils system. People from cabinet members to workers who scrubbed the steps of the Capitol owed their jobs to political connections. As might be expected, some government employees were not qualified for the positions they filled. Moreover, political appointees, whether qualified or not, sometimes used their positions for personal gain. Reformers began to press for the elimination of patronage and the adoption of a merit system of hiring. Jobs in civil service—government administration—should go to the most qualified persons, reformers believed. It should not matter what political views they held or who recommended them. $
REFORM UNDER HAYES, GARFIELD, AND ARTHUR
Civil service reform made gradual progress under Presidents Hayes, Garfield, and Arthur. Republican president Rutherford B. Hayes, elected in 1876, could not convince Congress to support reform, so he used other means. Hayes named independents to his cabinet. He also set up a commission to investigate the nation's customhouses, which were notorious centers of patronage. On the basis of the commission's report, Hayes fired two of the top officials of New York City's customhouse, where jobs were controlled by the Republican Party. These firings enraged the Republican New York senator and political boss Roscoe Conkling and his supporters, the Stalwarts. When Hayes decided not to run for reelection in 1880, a free-for-all broke out at the Republican convention, between the Stalwarts—who opposed changes in the spoils system—and reformers. Since neither Stalwarts nor reformers could win a majority of delegates, the convention settled on an independent presidential candidate, Ohio congressman James A. Garfield. To balance out Garfield's ties to reformers, the Republicans nominated for vice-president Chester A. Arthur, one of Conkling's supporters. Despite Arthur's inclusion on the ticket, Garfield angered the Stalwarts by giving reformers most of his patronage jobs once he was elected.
On July 2, 1881, as President Garfield walked through the Washington, D.C., train station, he was shot two times by a mentally unbalanced lawyer named Charles Guiteau, whom Garfield had turned down for a job. The would-be assassin announced, "I did it and I will go to jail for it. 1 am a Stalwart and Arthur is now president." Garfield finally died from his wounds on September 19. Despite his ties to the Stalwarts, Chester Arthur turned reformer when he became president. His first message to Congress urged legislators to pass a civil service law.
The resulting Pendleton Civil Service Act of 1883 authorized a bipartisan civil service commission to make
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
How did patronage contribute to government incompetence and fraud?
appointments to federal jobs through a merit system based on candidates' performance on an examination. By 1901, more than 40 percent of all federal jobs had been classified as civil service positions, but the Pendleton Act had mixed consequences. On the one hand, public administration became more honest and efficient. On the other hand, because officials could no longer pressure employees for campaign contributions, politicians turned to other sources for donations.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
What were the positive and the negative effects of the Pendleton Civil Service Act?
Business Buys Influence
With employees no longer a source of campaign contributions, politicians turned to wealthy business owners. Therefore, the alliance between government and big business became stronger than ever.
HARRISON, CLEVELAND, AND HIGH TARIFFS
Big business hoped the government would preserve, or even raise, the tariffs that protected domestic industries from foreign competition. The Democratic Party, however, opposed high tariffs because they increased prices. In 1884, the Democratic Party won a presidential election for the first time in 28 years with candidate Grover Cleveland. As president, Cleveland tried to lower tariff rates, but Congress refused to support him. In 1888, Cleveland ran for reelection on a low-tariff platform against the former Indiana senator Benjamin Harrison, the grandson of President William Henry Harrison. Harrison's campaign was financed by large contributions from companies that wanted tariffs even higher than they were. Although Cleveland won about 100,000 more popular votes than Harrison, Harrison took a majority of the electoral votes and the presidency. He signed the McKinley Tariff Act of 1890, which raised tariffs on manufactured goods to their highest level yet.
In 1892, Cleveland was elected again—the only president to serve two non-consecutive terms. He supported a bill for lowering the McKinley Tariff but refused to sign it because it also provided for a federal income tax. The Wilson-Gorman Tariff became law in 1894 without the president's signature. In 1897, William McKinley was inaugurated president and raised tariffs once again.
The attempt to reduce the tariff had failed, but the spirit of reform was not dead. New developments in areas ranging from technology to mass culture would help redefine American society as the United States moved into the 20th century.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•	political machine	• patronage	• James A. Garfield	• Grover Cleveland
,graft	•civil service	• Chester A. Arthur	• Benjamin Harrison
•	Boss Tweed	• Rutherford B.	Hayes	• Pendleton Civil Service Act
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one shown, list examples of corruption in 19th-century politics.
CRITICAL THINKING
EVALUATING LEADERSHIP
Reread the quotation from James Pendergast on page 268. Explain whether you agree or disagree that machine politicians did not coerce people.
ANALYZING CAUSES
Why do you think tariff reform failed? Support your response with evidence from the chapter.
5.	HYPOTHESIZING
How do you think politics in the United States would have been different if the Pendleton Civil Service Act had not been passed? THINK ABOUT:
•	the act’s impact on federal workers
•	the act’s impact on political fundraising
•	Republican Party conflicts
Immigrants and Urbanization 271
i 7')
I ASSESSMENT
Increased
Immigration
Increased Machine Politics
Result
Reaction
2.
EVALUATING
In the 1860s, Horace Greeley—editor of the New York Tribune—remarked, “We cannot all live in the cities, yet nearly all seem determined to do so.” Why do you think this was true at the end of the 19th century? Do you think it is still true? Why or why not? COMPARING
How were politicians like Boss Tweed similar to industrial magnates like Carnegie and Rockefeller? IMMIGRATION AND MIGRATION
Poverty and persecution cause millions of people to leave Europe, China, Japan, the Caribbean, and Mexico for the United States.
♦
♦
POLITICS
Ellis Island	6.
Gentlemen’s Agreement	7.
Americanization movement 8. Jane Addams	9.
political machine	10.
URBANIZATION
For each term or name below, write a sentence explaining its connection to immigration and urbanization.
graft
Boss Tweed patronage
Rutherford B. Hayes Pendleton Civil Service Act
Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
The New Immigrants (pages 254-259)
What trends or events in other countries prompted people to move to the United States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries?
What difficulties did many of these new immigrants face?
The Challenges of Urbanization
(pages 262-266)
Why did cities in the United States grow rapidly in the decades following the Civil War?
What problems did this rapid growth pose for cities? What solutions to urban problems did the settlement-house movement propose?
VISUAL SUMMARY IMMIGRANTS AND URBANIZATION
The influx of immigrants and migrants causes a population boom in cities.
City services, such as housing, transportation, water, and sanitation, are stretched to the limit.
Reformers try to fix urban problems through education, training, charity, and political action.
Immigrants are forced to adapt to a new language and culture. Changes in agriculture cause people to migrate from the rural U.S. to the cities in search of work.
Many immigrants and migrants face discrimination in their efforts to find jobs and housing.
Politics in the Gilded Age (pages 267-271)
6.	Why did machine politics become common in big * cities in the late 19th century?
7.	What government problems arose as a result of patronage?
8.	Summarize the views of Grover Cleveland and Benjamin Harrison on tariffs.
CRITICAL THINKING
USING YOUR NOTES
In a diagram like the one below, show one result of and one reaction against (a) the increase in immigration and (b) the increase in machine politics. Political machines develop to take advantage of the needs of immigrants and the urban poor. City politicians use fraud and graft to maintain political power. Corruption in national politics results in the call for civil service jobs to be awarded on the basis of merit.
Big business’s growing influence on politics defeats tariff reform that would aid wage-earners.
272 Chapter 7
.Jp*

TEXAS TEST PRACTICE
Use the quotation and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 1.
“The Chinese . . . ask for fair treatment. . . . Since the first restriction law was passed the United States has received as immigrants more than two million Austro-Hungarians, two million Italians and a million and a half Russians and Finns. Each of these totals is from five to seven times the whole amount of Chinese immigration of all classes during thirty years of free Immigration. ... The question is not now of the admission of laborers, but whether other Chinese who are entitled to come under both law and treaty shall receive the same courtesies as people of other nations, and shall be relieved from many harassing regulations. They must no longer be detained, photographed and examined as if they were suspected of crime. ”
—Ng Poon Chew, from The Treatment of the Exempt Classes of Chinese in the United States
1. The information in the passage supports which one of the following points of view?
A
European immigration should be restricted. B
Chinese laborers should be allowed to immigrate.
C
All immigrants are treated like criminals. D
Chinese immigrants and European immigrants should be treated the same.
Use the cartoon and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 2.
2. The cartoon suggests that Boss Tweed (the large figure at left) —
F was solely responsible for stealing the people’s money.
G did not steal the people’s money.
H had help from his associates in stealing the
people’s money.
J was loyal to his associates.

7! hmhsocialstudies.com
TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests • Tutorials
INTERACT WITH HISTORY
"VWriteSmart Think about the issues you recorded in myNotebook as you read the chapter. With what you have learned about the challenges faced by immigrants in the 19th century, consider the following question: What were the best solutions attempted by government and reformers in the 1800s? Create a pamphlet promoting the reform, improvement, or government solution you chose. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write the text for your pamphlet.
COLLABORATIVE LEARNI
■■■■■■■■maNaaaaM
\CEIJTURY
Organize into small groups and discuss
the immigrant experiences that you learned about in this chapter. Consider why people chose to immigrate; why they felt optimistic that they would find a better life in the United States; and the opportunities, challenges, and attitudes that they faced once they arrived. Then, within your group, break into two teams and debate the Americanization movement to assimilate immigrants into American culture.
"v WriteSmart
Imagine you are a senator and the Senate is about to vote on the Chinese Exclusion Act.
Prepare a persuasive speech arguing against the new law. For the first part of your speech, explain why this law is unjust and unfair to the Chinese.
For the second part, address the concerns of those in favor of the act and provide an alternate solu-tion for the issues prompting the Chinese Exclusion Act. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your speech.
Immigrants and Urbanization 273
End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Developing Historical Inquiry
DEFINING THE SKILL
Historical inquiry entails asking questions about events and trends what caused them, what made them important, and so forth. These questions might ask how or why something happened, why someone acted in a certain way, or how different conditions might have changed an event. To decide if a historical question is reasonable, ask yourself (1) whether the answer is important or not, and (2) if enough information exists to answer it. The ability to formulate historical questions is an important step in doing research. As you examine multiple sources of evidence—firsthand accounts, documents, letters, and other records of the past—ask questions about the information each source conveys and why that information is significant. Use these questions to form a central question to research.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: FORMULATE HISTORICAL QUESTIONS
The diagram below shows questions a student might ask to learn more about the Tweed Ring Scandal. After asking questions, identify the central question to research and examine different sources to find answers. Q
The Tweed Ring Scandal Who were ito leaders?
t-he scandal?
What conditions ^allowed the scandal
to occur?
What did the leaders do?
What happened during the Tweed Ring Scandal?
What happened as a result of the Tweed Ring?
'Where and when did , the scandal occur? ,
Why did political machines start?
0 Central research question: What happened during the Tweed Ring Scandal?
0 Determine the topic that you would like to know more about. Consider different people, places, and events from U.S. history. Choose one idea that you would like to learn more about.
0 Decide what questions to ask and write them down. Writing questions will help guide your research and keep
°c“sed T g°T 6gin by asking about the basic facts of the event: wh<> was involved? What did they do? Where and when did the event occur? Expand your questions to include causes and effects.	*
0 Review each of your questions. Make sure your questions are specific, straightforward, and directly related to your op,c. Rewrite any questions that are vague, too broad, or biased. In this example, the student ewr her question about what caused the event so that it was more specific.	6
0 Formulate a central research question about the event to explore further. Examine all the questions and choose one or write a new one that gets at the central idea you want to research.	b and
273 SKI
uLih
STRATEGY: MAKE A CHART
Once you have decided upon a topic, decide the best way to find out more information. Use a chart to organize your research. Research Question: What happened during the Tweed Ring Scandal?		
Question	Fact	Source
Who were the leaders of the Tweed King?	•	William Marcy Tweed was “Soss” Tweed •	Other leaders: Kichard Connolly, A. Oakey Hall, and Keter Sweeny	“’Boss Tweed’: The Fellowship of the King” by Fete Hamill, New York Times, 3/27/2OOS
What did the leaders do?	•	Remanded bribes and used extortion or threats •	Stole millions of dollars •	Controlled elections	Lowermanhattan.info, News Stories Archive 3/5/2004
When and where did the scandal occur?	New York City, around 1663-1571	Inside the Apple: A Streetwise History of New York City by Michelle Nevius
What was the result of the scandal?	•	Corrupt politicians defrauded the city •	One construction project cost taxpayers $13 million, but actual costs were $3 million; Tweed and his followers pocketed the rest	“Municipal Graft and Scandal,” The Americans: United States History Since 1377, page 269
How was the scandal resolved?	•	Thomas Nast published cartoons in Harper's Weekly •	Keform lawyer Samuel J. Tilden led efforts to convict Tweed of larceny and forgery	Britannica Online Encyclopedia
applying the skill
Turn to Chapter 7, Section 2, page 266 and read the section "Reformers Mobilize." Follow the strategies to formulate historical questions about the Settlement House movement. Write a one-page essay on the topic.
1.	Determine the topic that you would like to know more about. Which aspect of the movement would you like to explore?
2.	Decide what questions to ask and write them down. What questions will allow you to learn more about the topic.
3.	Review each of your questions. Are your questions clear and concise?
4.	Formulate a central question about the event to explore further. Use your question to do research for the essay.
273 SK2
ilBiiiiSi



For most European immigrants, Ellis Island was the first stop. Between 1892 and 1954, the immigration station processed over 12 million immigrants. These immigrants went through an inspection before they were allowed to enter the United States. Those with serious health problems were sent home, as were those who did not meet various legal requirements. Others were sent home because they exceeded
immigration quotas. However, if immigrants could clear these hurdles, they were free to enter the United States and begin their new lives.
Co online to explore some of the personal stories and recollections of immigrants who made the journey to America and passed through Ellis Island. You can find a wealth of information, video clips, primary sources, activities, and more at
1	Doctors examined immigrants as they headed upstairs to the Great Hall.
2	Lines were long, but the inspection often lasted only a few minutes.
3	Immigrants who passed the inspection could exchange money, send mail or telegrams, or buy train tickets.
4	Immigrants then met relatives or loved ones.
5	Immigrants who had to stay overnight were assigned to dormitories.

J J
t ' ( ft -'	y*
•r
I. ,
CLICK THROUGH
INTER ACTIVITIES
The Golden Door
Watch the video to see how and why immigrants traveled to the United States.
Examination
Watch the video to see the physical examination that immigrants experienced at Ellis Island.
Quotas
Watch the video to see how immigration quotas affected immigrants trying to come to the United States.
Essential Question
mylMotebook
What were the significant trends in areas such as technology, education, race relations, and mass culture at the turn of the 20th century?
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
3C,5B,6A,21A, 26A.29E
SECTION 1: Science and Urban Life
Main Idea Advances in science and technology helped solve urban problems, including overcrowding.
SECTION 2: Expanding Public Education
Main Idea Reforms in public education led to a rise in national literacy and the promotion of public education.
SECTION 3: Segregation and Discrimination
Main Idea African Americans led the fight against voting restrictions and Jim Crow laws
SECTION 4: The Dawn of Mass Culture Main Idea As Americans had more time for leisure activities, a modern mass culture emerged.
World’s Columbian Exposition ^commemorating the 400th anniversary] of Columbus sailing to the Americas,,

:l4883| Construction •of the Brooklyn : Bridge Is completed.
118921 Ida B. Wells crusades against lynching.
: [1888] Electric : trolleys are first : introduced.
USAl
world!
1880
1885
1890
118781 Bicycle touring club Is founded In Europe.
: 1^8841 Fifteen-nation • conference on the division : of Africa convenes in Berlin.
118891 Barnum & Bailey Circus opens in London.
: i1896i Supreme Court 5 establishes "separate : but-equal” doctrine m : Plessyv. Ferguson, .j
