CHAPTER 9
The Progressive Era 1890-1920
CHAPTER 10 America Claims an Empire
1890-1920
CHAPTER 11
The First World War
1914-1920
feiN.
I'h



^<1
Mfh


UNIT PROJECT
In this unit, you will read about important changes in the nation and the world that helped the United States to assume a major global role. Use your knowledge of historical eras, the unit’s content, and the major characteristics of history to identify the eras in this unit. Then create a webpage that describes the defining characteristics of each era.
The Statue of Liberty by Francis Hopkinson Smith


■>;//

A-TSu.
'.£■ v'.a-







''


ws





■
~s 1. y


a?

<7
B
SECTION 1: The Origins of Progressivism
Main Idea Political, economic, and social change in late 19th century America led to broad progressive reforms.
SECTION 2: Women in Public Life
Main Idea As a result of social and economic change, many women entered public life as workers and reformers.
SECTION 3: Teddy Roosevelt's Square Deal
Main Idea As president, Theodore Roosevelt worked to give citizens a Square Deal through progressive reforms.
SECTION 4: Progressivism Under Taft
Main Idea Taft's ambivalent approach to progressive reform led to a split in the Republican Party and the loss of the presidency to the Democrats.
SECTION 5: Wilson's New Freedom
strong reform agenda as a progressive leader.
A 1916 suffrage parade.
USA
WORLD
[18961
William McKinley is elected president.
: William McKinley *. is reelected.
119001
[1901 ] McKinley is assassinated; Theodore Roosevelt becomes president.
1904J Theodore Roosevelt is elected
president.......
1900
[1889] Eiffel Tower	• 1 d Ofto 1	:	i	
opens for visitors.	. [ 1898 { Marie	5 1899 Boer War
	* Curie discovers	• in South Africa
	: radium.	: begins.
1901	u t
Commonwealth of
Australia is created.
304 Chapter 9
ss
William H. Taft is elected president.
E. B.
Du Bois helps found the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). myNotefocwk
INTERACT
WITH HISTORY
Woodrow Wilson is reelected.
11919] Eighteenth
Amendment outlaws alcoholic beverages.
It is the dawn of the 20th century, and the reform movement is growing. Moral reformers are trying to ban alcoholic beverages. Political reformers work toward fair government and business practices. Women fight for equal wages and the right to vote. Throughout society, social and economic issues take center stage. As you read the chapter and explore the issues below, use the annotation tools in your eBook to record your thoughts.
Explore the Issues
•	What types of actions might pressure big business to change?
•	How can individuals bring about change in their government?
•	How might reformers recruit others?
1910
1920
119201 Nineteenth Amendment grants women the right to vote.
: 1910 j Mexican	: j 19121 China’s	:
: revolution	: Qin dynasty
: begins.	: topples.
|1914] World War I begins in Europe.
1919 j Mohandas Gandhi becomes leader of the independence movement in India.
The Progressive Era 305

The Origins of Progressivism
MAIN IDEA
WHY U MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
Political, economic, and social change in late 19th century America led to broad progressive reforms.
Progressive reforms in areas such as labor and voting rights reinforced democratic principles that continue to exist today.
*	progressive movement
*	Aorence Kelley »prohibition
*	muckraker •scientific
management
•Robert M.
La Follette
• Initiative »referendum •recall •Seventeenth Amendment

hmhsocialstudies.com
»TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes about progressive reform organizations.
One American's Story;
Camella Teoli was just 12 years old when she began working in a Lawrence, Massachusetts, textile mill to help support her family. Soon after she started, a machine used for twisting cotton into thread tore off part of her scalp. The young Italian immigrant spent seven months in the hospital and was scarred for life.
Three years later, when 20,000 Lawrence mill workers went on strike for higher wages, Camella was selected to testify before a congressional committee investigating labor conditions such as workplace safety and underage workers. When asked why she had gone on strike, Camella answered simply, "Because I didn't get enough to eat at home." She explained how she had gone to work before reaching the legal age of 14.
A
Mill workers on strike in 1912 in Lawrence, Massachusetts
A
Personal Voice camella teoli “I used to go to school, and then a man came up to my house and asked my father why I didn’t go to work, so my father says I don’t know whether she is 13 or 14 years old. So, the man say You give me $4 and I will make the papers come from the old country [Italy] saying [that] you are 14. So, my father gave him the $4, and in one month came the papers that I was 14. I went to work, and about two weeks [later] got hurt in my head. ”
—at congressional hearings, March 1912
After nine weeks of striking, the mill workers won the sympathy of the nation as well as five to ten percent pay raises. Stories like Camella's set off a national investigation of labor conditions, and reformers across the country organized to address the problems of industrialization.
Four Goals of Progressivism
At the dawn of the new century, middle-class reformers addressed many of the problems that had contributed to the social upheavals of the 1890s. Journalists and writers exposed the unsafe conditions often faced by factory workers, including
306 Chapter 9
Vocabulary
temperance:
refraining from
alcohol
consumption
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Motives
4^ Why did the prohibition movement appeal to so many women?
women and children. Intellectuals questioned the dominant role of large corporations in American society. Political reformers struggled to make government more responsive to the people. Together, these reform efforts formed the progressive movement, which aimed to restore economic opportunities and correct injustices in American life.
Even though reformers never completely agreed on the problems or the solutions, each of their progressive efforts shared at least one of the following goals:
•	protecting social welfare
•	promoting moral improvement
•	creating economic reform
•	fostering efficiency
PROTECTING SOCIAL WELFARE
Many social welfare reformers worked to soften some of the harsh conditions of industrialization. The Social Gospel and settlement house movements of the late 1800s, which aimed to help the poor through community centers, churches, and social services, continued during the Progressive Era and inspired even more reform activities. The Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA), for example, opened libraries, sponsored classes, and built swimming pools and handball courts. The Salvation Army fed poor people in soup kitchens, cared for children in nurseries, and sent "slum brigades" to instruct poor immigrants in middle-class values of hard work and temperance.
In addition, many women were inspired by the settlement houses to take action. Florence Kelley became an advocate for improving the lives of women and children. She was appointed chief inspector of factories for Illinois after she had helped to win passage of the Illinois Factory Act in 1893. The act, which prohibited child labor and limited women's working hours, soon became a model for other states.
PROMOTING MORAL IMPROVEMENT
Other reformers felt that morality, not the workplace, held the key to improving the lives of poor people. These reformers wanted immigrants and poor city dwellers to uplift themselves by improving their personal behavior. Prohibition, the banning of alcoholic beverages, was one such program. Prohibitionist groups feared that alcohol was undermining American morals. Founded in Cleveland in 1874, the Woman's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) spearheaded the crusade for prohibition. Members advanced their cause by entering saloons, singing, praying, and urging saloonkeepers to stop selling alcohol. As momentum grew, the Union was transformed by Frances Willard from a small midwestern religious group in 1879 to a national organization. Boasting 245,000 members by 1911, the WCTU became the largest women's group in the nation's history.
WCTU members followed Willard's "do everything slogan and began opening kindergartens for immigrants, visiting inmates in prisons and asylums, and working for
FLORENCE KELLEY 1859-1932
The daughter of an antislavery Republican congressman from Pennsylvania, Florence Kelley became a social reformer whose sympathies lay with the powerless, especially working women and children. During a long career, Kelley pushed the government to solve America’s social problems.
In 1899, Kelley became general secretary of the National Consumers’ League, where she lobbied to improve factory conditions. “Why,” Kelley pointedly asked while campaigning for a federal child-labor law, “are seals, bears, reindeer, fish, wild game in the national parks, buffalo, [and] migratory birds all found suitable for federal protection, but not children?”
In the 1890s, Carry Nation worked for prohibition by walking into saloons, scolding the customers, and using her hatchet to destroy bottles of liquor.
307
HISTORICAL
SPOTLIGHT
ANTI-SALOON LEAGUE
Quietly founded by progressive women in 1895, the Anti-Saloon League called itself “the Church in action against the saloon.” Whereas early temperance efforts had asked individuals to change their ways, the Anti-Saloon League worked to pass laws to force people to change and to punish those who drank.
The Anti-Saloon League endorsed politicians who opposed “Demon Rum,” no matter which party they belonged to or where they stood on other issues. It also organized statewide referendums to ban alcohol. Between 1900 and 1917, voters in nearly half of the states—mostly in the South and the West—prohibited the sale, production, and use of alcohol. Individual towns, city wards, and rural areas also voted themselves “dry.”
suffrage. The WCTU reform activities, like those of the settlement-house movement, provided women with expanded public roles, which they used to justify giving women voting rights.
Sometimes efforts at prohibition led to trouble with immigrant groups. Such was the case with the Anti-Saloon League, founded in 1895. As members sought to close saloons to cure society's problems, tension arose between them and many immigrants, whose customs often included the consumption of alcohol. Additionally, saloons filled a number of roles within the immigrant community such as cashing paychecks and serving meals.
CREATING ECONOMIC REFORM
As moral reformers sought to change individual behavior, a severe economic panic in 1893 prompted some Americans to question the capitalist economic system. As a result, some Americans, especially workers, embraced socialism. Labor leader Eugene V. Debs, who helped organize the American Socialist Party in 1901, commented on the uneven balance among big business, government, and ordinary people under the free-market system of capitalism. A
Personal Voice eugene v. debs “ Competition was natural enough at one time, but do you think you are competing today? Many of you think you are competing. Against whom? Against [oil magnate John D.] Rockefeller? About as I would if I had a wheelbarrow and competed with the Santa Fe [railroad] from here to Kansas City. ” —Debs: His Life, Writings and Speeches
Though most progressives distanced themselves from socialism, they saw the truth of many of Debs's criticisms. Big business often received favorable treatment from government officials and politicians and could use its economic power to limit competition.
Journalists who wrote about the corrupt side of business and public life in mass circulation magazines during the early 20th century became known as muckrakers (milk rak r). (The term refers to John Bunyan's "Pilgrim's Progress," in which a character is so busy using a rake to clean up the muck of this world that he does not raise his eyes to heaven.) In her "History of the Standard Oil Company," a monthly serial in McClure's Magazine, the writer Ida M. Tarbell described the company's cutthroat methods of eliminating competition. "Mr. Rockefeller has systematically played with loaded dice," Tarbell charged, "and it is doubtful if there has been a time since 1872 when he has run a race with a competitor and started fair." £)
FOSTERING EFFICIENCY
Many progressive leaders put their faith in experts and scientific principles to make society and the workplace more efficient. In defending an Oregon law that limited women factory and laundry workers to a ten-hour day, lawyer Louis D. Brandeis paid little attention to legal argument. Instead, he focused on data produced by social scientists documenting the high costs of long working hours for both the individual and society. This type of argument—the "Brandeis brief”—would become a model for later reform litigation Within industry, Frederick Winslow Taylor began using time and motion studies to improve efficiency by breaking manufacturing tasks into simpler parts "Taylorism" became a management fad, as industry reformers applied these scientific management studies to see just how quickly each task could be performed
|8 Chapter 9
MAIN IDEA
j Evaluating
Ey What contribution did muckrakers make to the reform movement?
MAIN IDEA
Contrasting
^Contrast the goals of scientific management with other progressive reforms.
However, not all workers could work at the same rate, and although the introduction of the assembly lines did speed up production, the system required people to work like machines. This caused a high worker turnover, often due to injuries suffered by fatigued workers. To keep automobile workers happy and to prevent strikes, Henry Ford reduced the workday to eight hours and paid workers five dollars a day. This incentive attracted thousands of workers, but they exhausted themselves. As one homemaker complained in a letter to Henry Ford in 1914, "That $5 is a blessing—a bigger one than you know but oh they earn it."
Such efforts at improving efficiency, an important part of progressivism, targeted not only industry, but government as well.
Everybody will be able to afford [a car], and about everyone will have one.”
HENRY FORD, 1909
Cleaning Up Local Government
Cities faced some of the most obvious social problems of the new industrial age. In many large cities, political bosses rewarded their supporters with jobs and kick-backs and openly bought votes with favors and bribes. Efforts to reform city politics stemmed in part from the desire to make government more efficient and more responsive to its constituents. But those efforts also grew from distrust of immigrants' participation in politics.
REFORMING LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Natural disasters sometimes played an important role in prompting reform of city governments. In 1900, a hurricane and tidal wave almost demolished Galveston, Texas. The politicians on the city council botched the huge relief and rebuilding job so badly that the Texas legislature appointed a five-member commission of experts to take over. Each expert took charge of a different city department, and soon Galveston was rebuilt. This success prompted the city to adopt the commission idea as a form of government, and by 1917, 500 cities had followed Galveston's example. Another natural disaster—a flood in Dayton, Ohio, in 1913—led to the widespread adoption of the council-manager form of government. Staunton, Virginia, had already pioneered this system, in which people elected a city council to make laws. The council in turn appointed a manager, typically a person with training and experience in public administration, to run the city's departments. By 1925, managers were administering nearly 250 cities.
The Progressive Era 309
REFORM MAYORS
In some cities, mayors such as Hazen Pin8^ee ° . Michigan (1890-1897), and Tom Johnson of Cleveland, Ohio (1901-1909), introduced progressive reforms without changing how government was organized
Concentrating on economics, Pingree instituted a fairer tax structure, ow ered fares for public transportation, rooted out corruption, and set up a system of work relief for the unemployed. Detroit city workers built schools, parks, and a municipal lighting plant.
Johnson was only one of 19 socialist mayors who worked to institute progressive reforms in America's cities. In general, these mayors focused on dismissing corrupt and greedy private owners of utilities—such as gasworks, waterworks, and transit lines—and converting the utilities to publicly owned enterprises. Johnson believed that citizens should play a more active role in city government. He held meetings in a large circus tent and invited them to question officials about how the city was managed. Dj
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
How did city government change during the Progressive Era?
JAMES S. HOGG, TEXAS GOVERNOR
(1891-1895) Among the most colorful of the reform governors was James S. Hogg of Texas. Hogg helped to drive illegal insurance companies from the state and championed antitrust legislation. His chief interest, however, was in regulating the railroads. He pointed out abuses in rates—noting, for example, that it cost more to ship lumber from East Texas to Dallas than to ship it all the way to Nebraska. A railroad commission, established largely as a result of his efforts, helped increase milling and manufacturing in Texas by lowering freight rates.
Reform at the State Level
Local reforms coincided with progressive efforts at the state level. Spurred by progressive governors, many states passed laws to regulate railroads, mines, mills, telephone companies, and other large businesses.
REFORM GOVERNORS
Under the progressive Republican leadership of Robert M. La Follette, Wisconsin led the way in regulating big business. "Fighting Bob" La Follette served three terms as governor before he entered the U.S. Senate in 1906. He explained that, as governor, he did not mean to "smash corporations, but merely to drive them out of politics, and then to treat them exactly the same as other people are treated." La Follette's major target was the railroad industry. He taxed railroad property at the same rate as other business property, set up a commission to regulate rates, and forbade railroads to issue free passes to state officials. Other reform governors who attacked big business interests included Charles B. Aycock of North Carolina and James S. Hogg of Texas.
PROTECTING WORKING CHILDREN
As the number of child workers rose dramatically, reformers worked to protect workers and to end child labor. Businesses hired children because they performed unskilled jobs for lower wages and because children's small hands made them more adept at handling small parts and tools. Immigrants and rural migrants often sent their children to work because they viewed their children as part of the family economy. Often wages were so low for adults that every family member needed to work to pull the family out of poverty. In industrial settings, however, children were more prone to accidents caused by fatigue. Many developed serious health problems and suffered from stunted growth. E,
Formed in 1904, the National Child Labor Committee sent investigators to gather evidence of children working in harsh conditions. They then organized exhibitions with photographs and statistics to dramatize the children's plight. They were joined by labor union members who argued that child labor lowered wages for all workers. These groups pressured
Analyzing
Causes
Ej Why did reformers seek to end child labor?
310 Chapter 9
History Through
IMAGES OF CHILD LABOR
In 1908, Lewis Hine quit his teaching job to document child labor practices. Hine’s photographs and descriptions of young laborers—some only three years old—were widely distributed and displayed in exhibits. His compelling images of exploitation helped to convince the public of the need for child labor regulations.
Hine devised a host of clever tactics to gain access to his subjects, such as learning shop managers’ schedules and arriving during their lunch breaks. While talking casually with the children, he secretly scribbled notes on paper hidden in his pocket.
national politicians to pass the Keating-Owen Act in 1916. The act prohibited the transportation across state lines of goods produced with child labor.
Two years later the Supreme Court declared the act unconstitutional due to interference with states' rights to regulate labor. Reformers did, however, succeed in nearly every state by effecting legislation that banned child labor and set maximum hours.
EFFORTS TO LIMIT WORKING HOURS
The Supreme Court sometimes took a more sympathetic view of the plight of workers. In the 1908 case of Muller v. Oregon, Louis D. Brandeis—assisted by Florence Kelley and Josephine Goldmark— persuasively argued that poor working women were much more economically insecure than large corporations. Asserting that women required the state's protection against powerful employers, Brandeis convinced the Court to uphold an Oregon law limiting women to a ten-hour workday. Other states responded by enacting or strengthening laws to reduce women’s hours of work. A similar Brandeis brief in Bunting v. Oregon in 1917 persuaded the Court to uphold a ten-hour workday for men. Progressives also succeeded in winning workers' compensation to aid the families of workers who were hurt or killed on the job. Beginning with Maryland in 1902, one state after another passed legislation requiring employers to pay benefits in death cases.
The Progressive Era 311
REFORMING ELECTIONS
In some cases, ordinary citizens won state reforms. William S. U'Ren prompted his state of Oregon to adopt the secret ballot, the initiative, the referendum, and the recall. The initiative allows voters to put a proposed law on the ballot for public approval. Then voters, instead of the legislature, accepted or rejected the initiative by referendum, a vote on the initiative. The recall enabled voters to remove public officials from elected positions by forcing them to face another election before the end of their term if enough voters asked for it. By 1920, 20 states had adopted at least one of these procedures. In 1899, Minnesota passed the first mandatory statewide primary system. This enabled voters, instead of political machines, to choose candidates for public office through a special popular election. About two-thirds of the states had adopted some form of direct primary by 1915.
DIRECT ELECTION OF SENATORS
It was the success of the direct primary that paved the way for the Seventeenth Amendment to the Constitution. Before 1913, each state's legislature had chosen its own United States senators, which put even more power in the hands of party bosses and wealthy corporation heads. To force senators to be more responsive to the public, progressives pushed for the popular election of senators. At first, the Senate refused to go along with the idea, but gradually more and more states began allowing voters to nominate senatorial candidates in direct primaries. As a result, Congress approved the Seventeenth Amendment in 1912. Its ratification in 1913 made direct election of senators the law of the land.j£> Each of these measures was designed to make politicians more accountable to voters and to give Americans more of a voice. As a whole, they have become powerful tools with which voters can influence public policy. Additionally, government reform drew increased numbers of women into public life. It also focused renewed attention on the issue of woman suffrage.
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
Summarize the impact of the direct election of senators.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•progressive movement •Florence Kelley •prohibition
•	muckraker
•scientific management
•	Robert M. La Follette
•initiative
•referendum
•recall
•Seventeenth Amendment
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Copy the web below on your paper. Fill it in with examples of organizations that worked for reform in the areas named.
Which group was most successful and why?
CRITICAL THINKING
FORMING GENERALIZATIONS 4.
In what ways might individuals in this chapter be considered trailblazers in progressive reform?
How did their actions impact American society? Support your 5 answers. Think About:
•	the efforts of those who supported Prohibition
•	the leadership of William U’Ren and Robert La Follette
•	Florence Kelley’s appointment as chief inspector of factories for Illinois
EVALUATING
Evaluate the impact of Progressive era reforms, including initiative, referendum, recall, and the passage of the Seventeenth Amendment. ANALYZING EFFECTS
How were management innovations applied in Progressive era workplaces and how did they impact labor and productivity?
.2 Chapter 9
TEKS 3C, 5B, 26A, 26D
Women in Public Life
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
As a result of social and economic change, many women entered public life as workers and reformers.
Women won new opportunities in labor and education that are enjoyed today.
•NACW	‘suffrage
B.
Anthony «NAWSA OneAmerican'sStory
hmhsocialstudies.com
■TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes about women and work in the late 1800s.
In 1879, Susette La Flesche, a young Omaha woman, traveled east to translate into English the sad words of Chief Standing Bear, whose Ponca people had been forcibly removed from their homeland in Nebraska. Later, she was invited with Chief Standing Bear to go on a lecture tour to draw attention to the Ponca's situation.
A
Personal Voice susette la flesche “We are thinking men and women. ... We have a right to be heard in whatever concerns us. Your government has driven us hither and thither like cattle. . . . Your government has no right to say to us, Go here, or Go there, and if we show any reluctance, to force us to do its will at the point of the bayonet. ... Do you wonder that the Indian feels outraged by such treatment and retaliates, although it will end in death to himself?” —quoted in Bright Eyes Susette La Flesche
La Flesche testified before congressional committees and helped win passage of the Dawes Act of 1887, which allowed individual Native Americans to claim reservation land and citizenship rights. Her activism was an example of a new role for American women, who were expanding their participation in public life.
Women in the Work Force
Before the Civil War, married middle-class women were generally expected to devote their time to the care of their homes and families. By the late 19th century, however, only middle-class and upper-class women could afford to do so. Poorer women usually had no choice but to work for wages outside the home.
FARM WOMEN
On farms in the South and the Midwest, women's roles had not changed substantially since the previous century. In addition to household tasks such as cooking, making clothes, and laundering, farm women handled a host of other chores such as raising livestock. Often the women had to help plow and plant the fields and harvest the crops. WOMEN IN INDUSTRY
As better-paying opportunities became available in towns and especially cities, women had new options for finding jobs, even though men's'labor unions excluded them from membership. At the turn of the century, The Progressive Era 313
sow THEty
Telephone operators manually connect phone calls in 1915.
i I :
TELEPHONE OPERATORS
Today, when Americans use the telephone, an automated voice often greets them with instructions about which buttons to press. In the 19th century, every telephone call had to be handled by a telephone operator, a person who connected wires through a switchboard.
Young men, the first telephone operators, proved unsatisfactory. Patrons complained that the male operators used profane language and talked back to callers. Women soon largely replaced men as telephone operators, and were willing to accept the ten-do I-lar weekly wage.
Department stores advertised shopping by telephone as a convenience. One ad in the Chicago telephone book of 1904 declared, “Every [telephone] order, inquiry, or request will be quickly and intelligently cared for.” The ad pictured a line of female telephone operators.
one out of five American women held jobs; 25 percent of them worked in manufacturing.
The garment trade claimed about half of all women industrial workers. They typically held the least skilled positions, however, and received only about half as much money as their male counterparts or less. Many of these women were single and were assumed to be supporting only themselves, while men were assumed to be supporting families.
Women also began to fill new jobs in offices, stores, and classrooms. These jobs required a high school education, and by 1890, women high school graduates outnumbered men. Moreover, new business schools were preparing bookkeepers and stenographers, as well as training female typists to operate the new machines. Ay
DOMESTIC WORKERS
Many women without formal education or industrial skills contributed to the economic survival of their families by doing domestic work, such as cleaning for other families. After almost 2 million African-American women were freed from slavery, poverty quickly drove nearly half of them into the work force. They worked on farms and as domestic workers, and migrated by the thousands to big cities for jobs as cooks, laundresses, scrubwomen, and maids. Altogether, roughly 70 percent of women employed in 1870 were servants. Unmarried immigrant women also did domestic labor, especially when they first arrived in the United States. Many married immigrant women contributed to the family income by taking in piecework or caring for boarders at home.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
£ What kinds of job opportunities prompted more women to complete high school?
Women Lead Reform
Dangerous conditions, low wages, and long hours led many female industrial workers to push for reforms. Their ranks grew after 146 workers, mostly Jewish and Italian immigrant girls, died in a 1911 fire in the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory in New York City. Middle- and upper-class women also entered the public sphere. By 1910, women's clubs, at which these women discussed art or literature, were nearly half a million strong. These clubs sometimes grew into reform groups that addressed issues such as temperance or child labor.
WOMEN IN HIGHER EDUCATION
Many of the women who became active in public life in the late 19th century had attended the new women's colleges. Vassar 314 Chapter 9
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
What social and economic effects did higher education have on women?
College with a faculty of 8 men and 22 women—accepted its first students in 1865. Smith and Wellesley Colleges followed in 1875. Though Columbia, Brown, and Harvard Colleges refused to admit women, each university established a separate college for women.
Although women were still expected to fulfill traditional domestic roles, women's colleges sought to grant women an excellent education. In her will, Smith College's founder, Sophia Smith, made her goals clear.
A
Personal Voice sophia smith “ [It Is my desire] to furnish for my own sex means and facilities for education equal to those which are afforded now in our College to young men. ... It is not my design to render my sex any the less feminine, but to develop as fully as may be the powers of womanhood & furnish women with means of usefulness, happiness, & honor now withheld from them. ”
—quoted in Alma Mater
By the late 19th century, marriage was no longer a woman's only alternative. Many women entered the work force or sought higher education. In fact, almost half of college-educated women in the late 19th century never married, retaining their own independence. Many of these educated women began to apply their skills to needed social reforms. ©
WOMEN AND REFORM
Uneducated laborers started efforts to reform workplace health and safety. The participation of educated women often strengthened existing reform groups and provided leadership for new ones. Because women were not allowed to vote or run for office, women reformers strove to improve conditions at work and home. Their "social housekeeping” targeted workplace reform, housing reform, educational improvement, and food and drug laws. In 1896, African-American women founded the National Association of Colored Women, or NACW, by merging two earlier organizations. Josephine Ruffin identified the mission of the African-American women's club movement as "the moral education of the race with which we are identified." The NACW managed nurseries, reading rooms, and kindergartens.
After the Seneca Falls convention of 1848, women split over the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments, which granted equal rights including the right to vote to African American men, but excluded women. Susan B. Anthony, a leading proponent of woman suffrage, the right to vote, said "[I] would sooner cut off my right hand than ask the ballot for the black man and not for women." In 1869 Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton had founded the National Women Suffrage Association (NWSA), which united with another group in 1890 to
Suffragists recruit supporters for a march.
▼
become the National American Woman Suffrage Association, or NAWSA. Other prominent leaders included Lucy Stone and Julia Ward Howe, the author of "The Battle Hymn of the Republic."
Woman suffrage faced constant opposition. The liquor industry feared that women would vote in support of prohibition, while the textile industry worried that women would vote for restrictions on child labor. Many men simply feared the changing role of women in society.
A THREE-PART STRATEGY FOR SUFFRAGE
Suffragist leaders tried three approaches to achieve their objective. First, they tried to convince state legislatures to grant women the right to vote. They achieved a victory in the territory of Wyoming in 1869, and by the 1890s Utah, Colorado, and Idaho had also granted voting rights to women. After 1896, efforts in other states failed. Second, women pursued court cases to test the Fourteenth Amendment, which declared that states denying their male citizens the right to vote would lose congressional representation. Weren't women citizens, too? In 1871 and 1872, Susan B. Anthony and other women tested that question by attempting to vote at least 150 times in ten states and the District of Columbia. The Supreme Court ruled in 1875 that women were indeed citizens—but then denied that citizenship automatically conferred the right to vote.
Third, women pushed for a national constitutional amendment to grant women the vote. Stanton succeeded in having the amendment introduced in California, but it was killed later. For the next 41 years, women lobbied to have it reintroduced, only to see it continually voted down. &
Before the turn of the century, the campaign for suffrage achieved only modest success. Later, however, women's reform efforts paid off in improvements in the treatment of workers and in safer food and drug products—all of which President Theodore Roosevelt supported, along with his own plans for reforming business, labor, and the environment.
PLAY£ft
SUSAN B. ANTHONY 1820-1906
Born to a strict Quaker family, Susan B. Anthony was not allowed to enjoy typical childhood entertainment such as music, games, and toys. Her father insisted on self-discipline, education, and a strong belief system for all of his eight children. At an early age, Anthony developed a positive view of womanhood from a teacher named Mary Perkins who educated the children in their home.
After voting illegally in the presidential election of 1872, Anthony was fined $100 at her trial. “Not a penny shall go to this unjust claim,” she defiantly declared. She never paid the fine.
MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
Why did
suffragist leaders employ a three-part strategy for gaining the right to vote?

1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. •NACW	•Susan B. Anthony	• suffrage
•NAWSA
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one below, fill in details about working women in the late 1800s.
Women Workers:
Late 1800s
Z, i .. 1
Farm Women	Domestic Workers	Factory Workers	White- Collar Workers
What generalizations can you make about women workers at this time?
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	SYNTHESIZING
What women and movements during the Progressive Era helped dispel the stereotype that women were submissive and nonpolitical?
EXPLAINING IMPACT
What actions did women take to expand their political rights in American society?
ANALYZING ISSUES
Identify the social contributions of women to American society during the Progressive Era. Explain how you might use these to recruit other women to support reform movements. Think About:
•	the problems that each movement was trying to remedy
•	how women benefited from each cause
316 Chapter 9
Teddy Roosevelt's Square Deal
MAIN IDEA | WHY IT MATTERS NOW 1
i Terms & Names As president, Theodore Roosevelt worked to give citizens a Square Deal through progressive reforms.	As part of his Square Deal, Roosevelt’s conservation efforts made a permanent impact on environmental resources.	•Upton Sinclair • The Jungle •Theodore Roosevelt •Square Deal	•Meat Inspection Act •Pure Food and Drug Act •conservation
•NAACP
American'si
' hmhsocialstudies.com
IMK.INU
NUlCb Use the graphic organizer online to take notes about Theodore Roosevelt’s presidency.
When muckraking journalist Upton Sinclair began research for a novel in 1904, his focus was the human condition in the stock-yards of Chicago. Sinclair intended his novel to reveal "the breaking of human hearts by a system [that] exploits the labor of men and women for profits." What most shocked readers in Sinclair's book The Jungle (1906), however, was the sickening conditions of the meatpacking industry.
A
Personal Voice upton Sinclair “ There would be meat that had tumbled out on the floor, In the dirt and sawdust, where the workers had tramped and spit uncounted billions of consumption [tuberculosis] germs. There would be meat stored in great piles in rooms; . . . and thousands of rats would race about on it. ... A man could run his hand over these piles of meat and sweep off handfuls of the dried dung of rats. These rats were nuisances, and the packers would put poisoned bread out for them; they would die, and then rats, bread, and meat would go into the hoppers together. —The Jungle
▲
Upton Sinclair poses with his son at the time of the writing of The Jungle.
President Theodore Roosevelt, like many other readers, was nauseated by Sinclair's account. The president invited the author to visit him at the White House, where Roosevelt promised that "the specific evils you point out shall, if their existence be proved, and if I have the power, be eradicated."
A
Rough-Riding President Theodore Roosevelt was not supposed to be president. In 1900, the young governor from New York was urged to run as McKinley's vice-president by the state's political bosses who found Roosevelt impossible to control. The plot to nominate Roosevelt worked, taking him out of state office. However, as vice-president,
The Progressive Era 317
When the president spared a bear cub on a hunting expedition, a toymaker marketed a popular new product, the teddy bear.
Roosevelt stood a heartbeat away from becoming president. Indeed, President McKinley had served barely six months of his second term before he was assassinated, making Roosevelt the most powerful person in the government.
ROOSEVELT’S RISE
Theodore Roosevelt was born into a wealthy New York family in 1858. An asthma sufferer during his childhood, young Teddy drove himself to accomplish demanding physical feats. As a teenager, he mastered marksmanship and horseback riding. At Harvard College, Roosevelt boxed and wrestled. At an early age, the ambitious Roosevelt became a leader in New York politics. After serving three terms in the New York State Assembly, he became New York City's police commissioner and then assistant secretary of the U.S. Navy. The aspiring politician grabbed national attention, advocating war against Spain in 1898. His volunteer cavalry brigade, the Rough
Riders, won public acclaim for its role in the battle at San Juan Hill in Cuba. Roosevelt returned a hero and was soon elected governor of New York and then later won the vice-presidency.
THE MODERN PRESIDENCY
When Roosevelt was thrust into the presidency in 1901, he became the youngest president ever at 42 years old. Unlike previous presidents, Roosevelt soon dominated the news with his many exploits. While in office, Roosevelt enjoyed boxing, although one of his opponents blinded him in the left eye. On another day, he galloped 100 miles on horseback, merely to prove the feat possible. In politics, as in sports, Roosevelt acted boldly, using his personality and popularity to advance his programs. His leadership and publicity campaigns helped create the modern presidency, making him a model by which all future presidents would be measured. Citing federal responsibility for the national welfare, Roosevelt thought the government should assume control whenever states proved incapable of dealing with problems. He explained, "It is the duty of the president to act upon the theory that he is the steward of the people, and ... to assume that he has the legal right to do whatever the needs of the people demand, unless the Constitution or the laws explicitly forbid him to do it."

Teddy Roosevelt enjoyed an active lifestyle, as this 1902 photo reveals.
,318
MAIN IDEA
Roosevelt saw the presidency as a "bully pulpit," from which he could influ-« th ’	ence the news media and shape legislation. If big business victimized workers,
JiWhatactions then President Roosevelt would see to it that the common people received what and characteristics ca^e<^ a Square Deal. This term was used to describe the various progressive of Teddy Roosevelt reforms sponsored by the Roosevelt administration. Jb
contributed to his reputation as the
first modem Using Federal Power
president?	....,	s
Roosevelt's study of history—he published the first of his 44 books at the age of 24 convinced him that modern America required a powerful federal government. "A simple and poor society can exist as a democracy on the basis of sheer individualism," Roosevelt declared, "but a rich and complex industrial society cannot so exist." The young president soon met several challenges to his assertion of federal power.
TRUSTBUSTING
By 1900, trusts—legal bodies created to hold stock in many companies—controlled about four-fifths of the industries in the United States. Some trusts, like Standard Oil, had earned poor reputations with the public by the use of unfair business practices. Many trusts lowered their prices to drive competitors out of the market and then took advantage of the lack of competition to jack prices up even higher. Although Congress had passed the Sherman Antitrust Act in 1890, the act's vague language made enforcement difficult. As a result, nearly all the suits filed against the trusts under the Sherman Act were ineffective. President Roosevelt did not believe that all trusts were harmful, but he sought to curb the actions of those that hurt the public interest. The president concentrated his efforts on filing suits under the Sherman Antitrust Act. In 1902, Roosevelt made newspaper headlines as a trustbuster when he ordered the Justice Department to sue the Northern Securities Company, which had established a monopoly over northwestern railroads. In 1904, the Supreme Court dissolved the company. Although the Roosevelt administration filed 44 antitrust suits, winning a number of them and breaking up some of the trusts, it was unable to slow the merger movement in business.
iCK
HISTORY
VIDEO
Teddy Roosevelt vs. Corporate America
I
Political Cartoons )- “THE LION-TAMER”
As part of his Square Deal, President Roosevelt aggressively used the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 to attack big businesses engaging in unfair practices. His victory over his first target, the Northern Securities Company, earned him a reputation as a hard-hitting trustbuster committed to protecting the public interest. This cartoon shows Roosevelt trying to tame the wild lions that symbolize the great and powerful companies of 1904.
SKILLBUILDER
Analyzing Political Cartoons 1.	What do the lions stand for?
2.	Why are all the lions coming out of a door labeled Wall St. ?
3.	What do you think the cartoonist thinks about trustbusting? Cite details from the cartoon that support your interpretation.
Analyzing
71 hmhsocialstudies.com
THE LION-TAMER
The Progressive Era 319
COAL STRIKE
When 140,000 coal miners in Pennsylvania went on strike and demanded a 20 percent raise, a nine-hour workday, and the right to organize a union, the mine operators refused to bargain. Five months into t e stn e, coa reserves ran low. Roosevelt, seeing the need to intervene, called hot si es o e White House to talk, and eventually settled the strike. Irked by the "extraor mary stupidity and bad temper" of the mine operators, he later confessed that only the dignity of the presidency had kept him from taking one owner "by the seat of t e breeches" and tossing him out of the window.
Faced with Roosevelt's threat to take over the mines, the opposing sides finally agreed to submit their differences to an arbitration commission—a third party that would work with both sides to mediate the dispute. In 1903, the commission issued its compromise settlement. The miners won a 10 percent pay hike and a shorter, nine-hour workday. With this, however, they had to give up their demand for a closed shop—in which all workers must belong to the union and their right to strike during the next three years.
In life as in a	President Roosevelt's actions had demonstrated a new principle.
£ th 11 p thp From then on' when a strike threatened the Public welfare, the fed-fOOWail game, me government was expected to intervene. In addition, Roosevelt's principle . . . IS. „ actions reflected the progressive belief that disputes could be settled in Hit the line hard. ” an orderiy way with the help of experts, such as those on the arbitra-THEODORE ROOSEVELT	tion commission. JEp
RAILROAD REGULATION
Roosevelt's real goal was federal regulation. In 1887, Congress had passed the Interstate Commerce Act, which prohibited wealthy railroad owners from colluding to fix high prices by dividing the business in a given area. The Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) was set up to enforce the new law but had little power. With Roosevelt's urging, Congress passed the Elkins Act in 1903, which made it illegal for railroad officials to give, and shippers to receive, rebates for using particular railroads. The act also specified that railroads could not change set rates without notifying the public. The Hepburn Act of 1906 strictly limited the distribution of free railroad passes, a common form of bribery. It also gave the ICC power to set maximum railroad rates. Although Roosevelt had to compromise with conservative senators who opposed the act, its passage boosted the government's power to regulate the railroads.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
What was significant about the way the 1902 coal strike was settled?
Vocabulary collude: to act
together secretly to achieve an illegal or deceitful purpose
Health and the Environment
President Roosevelt's enthusiasm and his considerable skill at compromise led to laws and policies that benefited both public health and the environment. He wrote, "We recognize and are bound to war against the evils of today. The remedies are partly economic and partly spiritual, partly to be obtained by laws, and in greater part to be obtained by individual and associated effort."
REGULATING FOODS AND DRUGS
After reading The Jungle by Upton Sinclair, Roosevelt responded to the public's clamor for action. He appointed a commission of experts to investigate the meatpacking industry. The commission issued a scathing report backing up Sinclair's account of the disgusting conditions in the industry. True to his word, in 1906 Roosevelt pushed for passage of the Meat Inspection Act, which dictated strict cleanliness requirements for meatpacken and created the program of federal meat inspection that was in use until it wa< replaced by more sophisticated techniques in the 1990s. The compromise that won the act's passage, however, left the government paying for the inspections and did not require companies to label their cannec goods with date-of-processing information. The compromise also granted meat-packers the right to appeal negative decisions in court.
!0 Chapter 9
Government workers inspect meat as it moves through the packinghouse. ►
A typical late-19th-century product advertisement.
PURE FOOD AND DRUG ACT
Before any federal regulations were established for advertising food and drugs, manufacturers had claimed that their products accomplished everything from curing cancer to growing hair. In addition, popular children's medicines often contained opium, cocaine, or alcohol. In response to concerns about these practices as well as the harmful preservatives that manufacturers added to food, Congress passed the Pure Food and Drug Act in 1906, which halted the sale of contaminated foods and medicines and called for truth in labeling. Although this act did not ban harmful products outright, its requirement of truthful labels reflected the progressive belief that given accurate information, people would act wisely. Along with the Meat Inspection Act, the Pure Food and Drug Act reflects the continuation of the changing relationship between the federal government and private businesses during this period. This act marks the first general pure food and drug law at the federal level. The government's Bureau of Chemistry, which later became the Food and Drug Administration, took responsibility for enforcement of the law. Unfortunately, enforcement met with mixed results. On the whole, the law helped to protect consumers by improving product standards and reducing confusion about the benefits and dangers of various products. However, some critics point out that the law reduced marketplace competition by forcing out smaller producers. Also, efforts to regulate the patent medicine industry were largely unsuccessful until new legislation was passed in 1938.
CONSERVATION AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Before Roosevelt's presidency, the federal government had paid very little attention to the nation's natural resources. In 1872, Yellowstone National Park was established as the country s first national park, and the U.S. Forest Bureau was formed in 1887. The government also set aside 45 million acres of timberlands for a national forest reserve. Despite such measures, the government mostly stood by while private interests gobbled up the shrinking wilderness. MAIN IDEA
Comparing
What
similarities did the Meat Inspection Act and Pure Food and Drug Act share?
Chapter 9
In the late 19th century Americans had shortsightedly exploited their natural environment. Pioneer farmers leveled the forests and plowed up the prairies. Ranchers allowed their cattle to overgraze the Great Plains. Coal companies cluttered the land with refuse from mines. Lumber companies ignored the effect of their logging operations on flood control and neglected to plant trees to replace those they had cut down. Cities dumped untreated sewage and industrial wastes into rivers, poisoning the streams and creating health hazards.
CONSERVATION MEASURES
Roosevelt condemned the view that America's resources were endless and made conservation a primary concern. John Muir, a naturalist and writer with whom Roosevelt camped in California's Yosemite National Park in 1903, persuaded the president to set aside 148 million acres of forest reserves. Roosevelt also set aside 1.5 million acres of water-power sites and another 80 million acres of land that experts from the U.S. Geological Survey would explore for mineral and water resources. Roosevelt also established more than 50 wildlife sanctuaries and several national parks. True to the Progressive belief in using experts, in 1905 the president named Gifford Pinchot as head of the U.S. Forest Service. A professional conservationist, Pinchot had administrative skill as well as the latest scientific and technical information. He advised Roosevelt to conserve forest and grazing lands by keeping large tracts of federal land exempt from private sale.
Conservationists like Roosevelt and Pinchot, however, did not share the views of Muir, who advocated complete preservation of the wilderness. Instead, conservation to them meant that some wilderness areas would be preserved while others would be developed for the common good. Indeed, Roosevelt's federal water projects transformed some dry wilderness areas to make agriculture possible. Under the National Reclamation Act of 1902, known as the Newlands
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1	Region Prior to 1901, which regions had the	—*
greatest amount of conservation lands?
2	Human Environment Interaction Describe ——
’ the effects of Roosevelt’s conservation efforts	\ O
and the impact he had on the environment.	\
The Progressive Era
HISTORICAL
SPOTLIGHT

Act, money from the sale of public lands in the West funded large-scale irrigation projects, such as the Roosevelt Dam in Arizona and the Shoshone Dam in Wyoming. The Newlands Act established the precedent that the federal government would manage the precious water resources of the West.
Roosevelt and Civil Rights
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
Summarize Roosevelt’s approach to environmental problems.


YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK
The naturalist John Muir visited the Yosemite region of central California in 1868 and made it his home base for a period of six years while he traveled throughout the West.
Muir was the first to suggest that Yosemite’s spectacular land formations had been shaped by glaciers. Today the park’s impressive cliffs, waterfalls, lakes, and meadows draw sports enthusiasts and tourists in all seasons.
Roosevelt's concern for the land and its inhabitants was not matched in the area of civil rights. Though Roosevelt's father had supported the North, his mother, Martha, may well have been the model for the Southern belle Scarlett O'Hara in Margaret Mitchell's famous novel, Gone with the Wind. In almost two terms as president, Roosevelt—like most other progressives—failed to support civil rights for African Americans. He did, however, support a few individual African Americans.
Despite opposition from whites, Roosevelt appointed an African American as head of the Charleston, South Carolina, customhouse. In another instance, when some whites in Mississippi refused to accept the black postmistress he had appointed, he chose to close the station rather than give in. In 1906, however, Roosevelt angered many African Americans when he dismissed without question an entire regiment of African-American soldiers accused of conspiracy in protecting others charged with murder in Brownsville, Texas.
As a symbolic gesture, Roosevelt invited Booker T. Washington to dinner at the White House. Washington-head of the Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute, an all-
black training school—was then the African-American leader most respected by powerful whites. Washington faced opposition, however, from other African
Civil rights leaders gather at the 1905 Niagara Falls conference. ►
14 Chapter 9
J
ij
Vocabulary
accommodation:
adapting or making
adjustments in order to satisfy someone else
Background
The Niagara Movement was comprised of 29 black intellectuals. They met secretly in 1905 to compose a civil rights manifesto.
Americans, such as W. E. B. Du Bois, for his accommodation of segregationists and for blaming black poverty on blacks and urging them to accept discrimination.
Persistent in his criticism of Washington's ideas, Du Bois renewed his demands for immediate social and economic equality for African Americans. In his 1903 book The Souls of Black Folk, Du Bois wrote of his opposition to Washington's position.
A
Personal Voice w. e. b. du bois “ So far as Mr. Washington preaches Thrift, Patience, and Industrial Training for the masses, we must hold up his hands and strive with him. . . . But so far as Mr. Washington apologizes for injustice, North or South, does not rightly value the privilege and duty of voting, belittles the emasculating effects of caste distinctions, and opposes the higher training and ambition of our brighter minds,—so far as he, the South, or the Nation, does this,—we must unceasingly and firmly oppose them. ’ ’ —The Souls of Black Folk
Du Bois and other advocates of equality for African Americans were deeply upset by the apparent progressive indifference to racial injustice. In 1905 they held a civil rights conference in Niagara Falls, and in 1909 a number of African Americans joined with prominent white reformers in New York to found the NAACP—the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. The NAACP, which had over 6,000 members by 1914, aimed for nothing less than full equality among the races. That goal, however, found little support in the Progressive Movement, which focused on the needs of middle-class whites. The two presidents who followed Roosevelt also did little to advance the goal of racial equality.
^V.Y PLAY£#
W. E. B. DU BOIS 1868-1963
In 1909, W. E. B. Du Bois helped to establish the NAACP and entered into the forefront of the early U.S. civil rights movement. However, in the 1920s, he faced a power struggle with the NAACP’s executive secretary, Walter White.
Ironically, Du Bois had retreated to a position others saw as dangerously close to that of Booker T. Washington. Arguing for a separate economy for African Americans, Du Bois made a distinction, which White rejected, between enforced and voluntary segregation. By mid-century, Du Bois was outside the mainstream of the civil rights movement. His work remained largely ignored until after his death in 1963.
i
t ■
i, i
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•Upton Sinclair	•Theodore Roosevelt	*Meat Inspection Act	• conservation
• The Jungle	• Square Deal	• Pure Food and Drug Act	• NAACP
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Create five problem-solution diagrams like the one below to show how the following problems were addressed during Roosevelt’s presidency:
(a) 1902 coal strike, (b) Northern Securities Company monopoly,
(c)	unsafe meat processing,
(d)	exploitation of the environment, and (e) racial injustice.
Problems
■>
Solutions
Write headlines announcing the solutions.
CRITICAL THINKING
FORMING GENERALIZATIONS
How do you think the progressive belief in using experts shaped Roosevelt’s reforms? Think About:
•	Roosevelt’s use of experts to help him tackle problems
•	how experts’ findings affected legislative actions
IDENTIFYING ROLES
How did the responsibility of managing the environment shift from private citizens to government entities during Roosevelt’s presidency?
5.	EVALUATING
Describe how the Pure Food and Drug Act reflected the changing relationship between the federal government and private business. What were the costs and the benefits of the act?
ANALYZING ISSUES
Why did W. E. B. Du Bois oppose Booker T. Washington’s views on racial discrimination?
The Progressive Era 325
L
AMERICAN LITERATURE
(1902-1917) The Muckrakers
The tradition of the investigative reporter uncovering corruption was established early in the 20th century by the writers known as muckrakers. Coined by President Theodore Roosevelt, the term muckraker alludes to the English author John Bunyan's famous 17th-century religious allegory The Pilgrim's Progress, which features a character too busy raking up the muck to see a heavenly crown held over him. The originally negative term soon was applied to many writers whose reform efforts Roosevelt himself supported. The muckraking movement spilled over from journalism as writers such as Upton Sinclair made use of the greater dramatic effects of fiction.
IDA M. TARBELL
Ida M. Tarbell’s “The History of the Standard Oil Company” exposed the ruthlessness with which John D. Rockefeller had turned his oil business into an all-powerful monopoly. Her writing added force to the trustbusting reforms of the early 20th century. Here Tarbell describes how Standard Oil used lower transportation rates to drive out smaller refineries, such as Hanna, Baslington and Company.
Mr. Hanna had been refining since July, 1869. . . . Some time in February, 1872, the Standard Oil Company asked [for] an interview with him and his associates. They wanted to buy his works, they said. "But we don't want to sell," objected Mr. Hanna. "You can never make any more money, in my judgment," said Mr. Rockefeller. "You can't compete with the Standard. We have all the large refineries now. If you refuse to sell, it will end in your being crushed." Hanna and Baslington were not satisfied. They went to see . . . General Devereux, manager of the Lake Shore road. They were told that the Standard had special rates; that it was useless to try to compete with them. General Devereux explained to the gentlemen that the privileges granted the Standard were the legitimate and necessary advantage of the larger shipper over the smaller.. • • General Devereux says they "recognised the propriety" of his excuse. They certainly recognised its authority. They say that they were satisfied they could no longer get rates to and from Cleveland which would enable them to live, and "reluctantly" sold out. It must have been reluctantly, for they had paid $75,000 for their works, and had made thirty per cent, a year on an average on their investment, and the Standard appraiser allowed them $45,000.
Ida M. Tarbell, The History of the Standard Oil Company" (19^
LINCOLN STEFFENS
Lincoln Steffens is usually named as a leading figure of the muckraking movement He published exposes of business and government corruption in McClure's Magazine and other magazines. These articles were then collected in two books:
The Shame of the Cities and The Struggle for Self-Government. Below is a section from an article Steffens wrote to expose voter fraud in Philadelphia.
The police are forbidden by law to stand within thirty feet of the polls, but they are at the box and they are there to see that the [Republican political] machine's orders are obeyed and that repeaters whom they help to furnish are permitted to vote without "intimidation" on the names they, the police, have supplied.
The editor of an anti-machine paper who was looking about for himself once told me that a ward leader who knew him well asked him into a polling place. "I'll show you how it's done," he said, and he had the repeaters go round and round voting again
and again on the names handed them on slips. . . . The business proceeds with very few hitches; there is more jesting than fighting. Violence in the past has had its effect; and is not often necessary nowadays, but if it is needed the police are there to apply it.
—Lincoln Steffens, The Shame of the Cities (1904)
UPTON SINCLAIR
Upton Sinclair’s chief aim in writing The Jungle was to expose the shocking conditions that immigrant workers endured. The public, however, reacted even more strongly to the novel’s revelations of unsanitary conditions in the meatpacking industry. Serialized in 1905 and published in book form one year later, The Jungle prompted a federal investigation that resulted in passage of the Meat Inspection Act in 1906.
Jonas had told them how the meat that was taken out of pickle would often be found sour, and how they would rub it up with [baking] soda to take away the smell, and sell it to be eaten on free-lunch counters; also of all the miracles of chemistry which they performed, giving to any sort of meat, fresh or salted, whole or chopped, any color and any flavor and any odor they chose. . . .
It was only when the whole ham was spoiled that it came into the department of Elzbieta. Cut up by the two-thousand-revolu-tions-a-minute flyers, and mixed with half a ton of other meat, no odor that ever was in a ham could make any difference. There was never the least attention paid to what was cut up for sausage; there would come all the way back from Europe old sausage that had been rejected, and that was moldy and white—it would be dosed with borax and glycerine, and dumped into the hoppers, and made over again for home consumption.
—Upton Sinclair, The Jungle (1906)
thinking critically
1. Comparing and Contrasting State the main idea of each of these selections. What role do details play in making the passages convincing?
hmhsocialstudies.com
INTERNET ACTIVITY
X®TUMY
Visit the links for American Literature: The Muckrakers to learn more about the muckrakers. What topics did they investigate? How did they affect public opinion? What legal changes did they help to bring about? Write a summary of the muckrakers’ impact on society.
The Progressive Era 327
Taft’s ambivalent approach to progressive reform led to a split in the Republican Party and the loss of the presidency to the Democrats.
Third-party candidates continue to wrestle with how to become viable candidates.
Gifford Pinchot William Howard Taft
Payne-Aldrich
Tariff
• Bull Moose Party •Woodrow Wilson
OneAmerican'sStbry
hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes about difficulties during Taft’s presidency.
Early in the 20th century, Americans' interest in the preservation of the country's wilderness areas intensified. Writers proclaimed the beauty of the landscape, and new groups like the Girl Scouts gave city children the chance to experience a different environment. The desire for preservation clashed with business interests that favored unrestricted development. Gifford Pinchot (pin'shcf), head of the U.S. Forest Service under President Roosevelt, took a middle ground.
He believed that wilderness areas could be scientifically managed to yield public enjoyment while allowing private development.
A
Personal Voice gifford pinchot 66 The American people have evidently made up their minds that our natural resources must be conserved. That is good. But it settles only half the question. For whose benefit shall they be conserved— for the benefit of the many, or for the use and profit of the few? . . . There is no other question before us that begins to be so important, or that will be so difficult to straddle, as the great question between special Interest and equal opportunity, between the privileges of the few and the rights of the many, between government by men for human welfare and government by money for profit. ”
—The Fight for Conservation
President Roosevelt, a fellow conservationist, favored Pinchot's multi-use land program. However, when he left office in 1909, this approach came under increasing pressure from business people who favored unrestricted commercial development.
▲
Gifford Pinchot
Taft Becomes President
After winning the election in 1904, Roosevelt pledged not to run for reelection in 1908. He handpicked his secretary of war, William Howard Taft, to run against William Jennings Bryan, who had been nominated by the Democrats for the third
Unnler phe SlTn "V°te f°r tWS time' Y°U Can vote for Bryan any time,”
latt and the Republicans won an easy victory.
128 Chapter 9
TA A" STUMBLES
As president, Taft pursued a cautiously progressive agenda, seeking to consolidate rather than to expand Roosevelt's reforms. He received little credit for his accomplishments, however. His legal victories, such as busting 90 trusts in a four-year term, did not bolster his popularity. Indeed, the new president confessed in a letter to Roosevelt that he never felt like the president. "When I am addressed as 'Mr. President,"' Taft wrote, "I turn to see whether you are not at my elbow." The cautious Taft hesitated to use the presidential bully pulpit to arouse public opinion. Nor could he subdue troublesome members of his own party. Tariffs and conservation posed his first problems.
THE PAYNE-ALDRICH TARIFF
Taft had campaigned on a platform of lowering tariffs, a staple of the progressive agenda. When the House passed the Payne Bill, which lowered rates on imported manufactured goods, the Senate proposed an alternative bill, the Aldrich Bill, which made fewer cuts and increased many rates. Amid cries of betrayal from the progressive wing of his party, Taft signed the Payne-Aldrich Tariff, a compromise that only moderated the high rates of the Aldrich Bill. This angered progressives who believed Taft had abandoned progressivism. The president made his difficulties worse by clumsily attempting to defend the tariff, calling it "the best [tariff] bill the Republican party ever passed." DIFFICULT
pKCISIONs
CONTROLLING RESOURCES
Historically, conservationists such as Gifford Pinchot have stood for the balanced use of natural resources, preserving some and using others for private industry. Free-market advocates like Richard Ballinger pressed for the private development of wilderness areas. Preservationists such as John Muir advocated preserving all remaining wilderness.
1.	Examine the pros and cons of each position. With which do you agree? What factors do you think should influence decisions about America’s wilderness areas?
2.	If you’d been asked in 1902
to decide whether to develop or preserve America’s wilderness areas, what would you have decided? Why?
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Issues
$ How did Taft’s appointee Richard Ballinger anger conservationists?
DISPUTING PUBLIC LANDS
Next, Taft angered conservationists by appointing as his secretary of the interior Richard A. Ballinger, a wealthy lawyer from Seattle. Ballinger, who disapproved of conservationist controls on western lands, removed 1 million acres of forest and mining lands from the reserved list and returned it to the public domain. When a Department of the Interior official was fired for protesting Ballinger's actions, the fired worker published a muckraking article against Ballinger in Collier's Weekly magazine. Pinchot added his voice. In congressional testimony he accused Ballinger of letting commercial interests exploit the natural resources that rightfully belonged to the public. President Taft sided with Ballinger and fired Pinchot from the U.S. Forest Service.
The Republican Party Splits
Taft's cautious nature made it impossible for him to hold together the two wings of the Republican Party: progressives who sought change and conservatives who did not. The Republican Party began to fragment.
PROBLEMS WITHIN THE PARTY
Republican conservatives and progressives split over Taft's support of the political boss Joseph Cannon, House Speaker from Illinois. A rough-talking, tobacco-chewing politician, "Uncle Joe" often disregarded seniority in filling committee slots. As chairman of the House Rules Committee, which decides what bills Congress considers, Cannon often weak-ened or ignored progressive bills. Reform-minded Republicans decided that their only alternative was to strip Cannon of his power. With the help of Democrats, they succeeded in March 1910 with a resolution that called for the entire House to elect the Committee on Rules and excluded the Speaker from membership in the committee.
William Howard Taft
The Progressive Era 329
WILLIAM HOWARD TAFT 1857-1930
William Howard Taft never wanted to be president. After serving one term, Taft left the White House, which he called "the lonesomest place in the world,” and taught constitutional law at Yale for eight years.
In 1921, President Harding named Taft chief justice of the Supreme Court. The man whose family had nicknamed him “Big Lub” called this appointment the highest honor he had ever received. As chief justice, Taft wrote that “in my present life I don’t remember that I ever was President.”
However, Americans remember Taft for, among many other things, initiating in 1910 the popular presidential custom of throwing out the first ball of the major league baseball season.
By the midterm elections of 1910, however, the Republican Party was in shambles, with the progressives on one side and the "old guard" on the other. Voters voiced concern over the rising cost of living, which they blamed on the Payne-Aldrich Tariff. They also believed Taft to be against conservation. When the Republicans lost the election, the Democrats gained control of the House of Representatives for the first time in 18 years.
THE BULL MOOSE PARTY
After leaving office, Roosevelt headed to Africa to shoot big game. He returned in 1910 to a hero's welcome, and responded with a rousing speech proposing a "New Nationalism," under which the federal government would exert its power for "the welfare of the people." By 1912, Roosevelt had decided to run for a third term as president. The primary elections showed that Republicans wanted Roosevelt, but Taft had the advantage of being the incumbent—that is, the holder of the office. At the Republican convention in June 1912, Taft supporters maneuvered to replace Roosevelt delegates with Taft delegates in a number of delegations. Republican progressives refused to vote and formed a new third party, the Progressive Party. They nominated Roosevelt for president.
The Progressive Party became known as the Bull Moose Party, after Roosevelt's boast that he was "as strong as a bull moose." The party's platform called for the direct election of senators and the adoption in all states of the initiative, referendum, and recall. It also advocated woman suffrage, workmen's compensation, an eight-hour workday, a minimum wage for women, a federal law against child labor, and a federal trade commission to regulate business. jay
The split in the Republican ranks handed the Democrats their first real chance at the White House since the election of Grover Cleveland in 1892. In the 1912 presidential election, they put forward as their candidate a reform governor of New Jersey named Woodrow Wilson.
Vocabulary “old guard”:
conservative members of a group
MAIN IDEA
Contrasting
What were the differences between Taft's and Roosevelt’s campaign platforms?
Democrats Win in 1912
Under Governor Woodrow Wilson's leadership, the previously conservative New Jersey legislature had passed a host of reform measures. Now, as the Democratic presidential nominee, Wilson endorsed a progressive platform called the New Freedom. It demanded even stronger antitrust legislation, banking reform, and reduced tariffs.
The split between Taft and Roosevelt, former Republican allies, turned nasty during the fall campaign. Taft labeled Roosevelt a "dangerous egotist ” while Roosevelt branded Taft a "fathead" with the brain of a "guinea pig." Wilson distanced himself, quietly gloating, "Don't interfere when your enemy is destroying himself."	1	°
The election offered voters several choices: Wilson's New Freedom Taft's con-
servatism, Roosevelt's progressivism, or the Socialist Party policies of Eugene V
Debs. Both Roosevelt and Wilson supported a stronger government role in eco-
nomic affairs but differed over strategies. Roosevelt supported government action
supervise lg business but did not oppose all business monopolies, while Debs
JO
Chapter 9 called for an end to capitalism. Wilson supported small business and free-market competition and characterized all business monopolies as evil. In a speech, Wilson explained why he felt that all business monopolies were a threat.
A
Personal Voice WOODROW WILSON
“ If the government is to tell big business men how to run their business, then don’t you see that big business men have to get closer to the government even than they are now? Don’t you see that they must capture the government, in order not to be restrained too much by it? ... I don’t care how benevolent the master is going to be, I will not live under a master. That Is not what America was created for. America was created in order that every man should have the same chance as every other man to exercise mastery over his own fortunes. ”
—quoted in The New Freedom
Presidential Election of 1912
Party	Candidate Electoral votes Popular vote
Democratic	Woodrow Wilson	435	6,296,547
■	Progressive	Theodore Roosevelt 88	4,118,571
■	Republican	William H. Taft	8	3,486,720
Socialist	Eugene V. Debs	0	900,672
MAIN IDEA
Predicting
Effects
Q)
What might be one of Wilson’s first issues to address as president? Although Wilson captured only 42 percent of the popular vote, he won an overwhelming electoral victory and a Democratic majority in Congress. As a third-party candidate, Roosevelt defeated Taft in both popular and electoral votes. But reform claimed the real victory, with more than 75 percent of the vote going to the reform candidates—Wilson, Roosevelt, and Debs. In victory, Wilson could claim a mandate to break up trusts and to expand the government's role in social reform. w
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. •Gifford Pinchot	• Payne-Aldrich Tariff	•Woodrow Wilson
•William Howard Taft	’Bull Moose Party
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Re-create the chart below on your paper. Then fill in the causes Taft supported that made people question his leadership.
Which causes do you think would upset most people today? Explain.
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	HYPOTHESIZING
What if Roosevelt had won another term in office in 1912? Speculate on how this might have affected the future of progressive reforms. Support your answer. Think About:
•	Roosevelt’s policies that Taft did not support
•	the power struggles within the Republican Party
•	Roosevelt’s perception of what is required of a president
FORMING AND SUPPORTING OPINIONS
Both Roosevelt and Taft resorted to mudslinging during the 1912 presidential campaign. Do you approve or disapprove of negative campaign tactics? Support your opinion.
5.	EVALUATING
Evaluate the impact of the Progressive Party as a third party.
The Progressive Era 331
Wilson's New Freedom
MAIN IDEA
H
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
Woodrow Wilson established a strong reform agenda as a progressive leader.
The passage of the Nineteenth Amendment during Wilson’s administration granted women the right to vote.
•	Carrie Chapman Catt
•	Clayton Antitrust Act
•	Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
i hmhsocialstudies.com
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes about progressivism during Wilson’s first term.
One.American'sStory.
On March 3, 1913, the day of Woodrow Wilson's inauguration, 5,000 , woman suffragists marched through hostile crowds in Washington, D.C.
Alice Paul and Lucy Burns, the parade's organizers, were members of the National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA). As police failed to restrain the rowdy gathering and congressmen demanded an investigation, Paul and Burns could see the momentum building for suffrage.
By the time Wilson began his campaign for a second term in 1916, the NAWSA's president, Carrie Chapman Catt, saw victory on the horizon.
Catt expressed her optimism in a letter to her friend Maud Wood Park.
A
Personal Voice carrie chapman catt “ I do feel keenly that the turn of the road has come. ... I really believe that we might pull off a campaign which would mean the vote within the next six years if we could secure a Board of officers who would have sufficient momentum, confidence and working power in them. . . . Come! My dear Mrs. Park, gird on your armor once more. ”
—letter to Maud Wood Park
> monetary policy
*	Federal Reserve System
•	Nineteenth Amendment
▲
Carrie Chapman Catt
Catt called an emergency suffrage convention in September 1916, and invited President Wilson, who cautiously supported suffrage. He told the convention, "There has been a force behind you that will... be triumphant and for which you can afford. ... to wait.” They did have to wait, but within four years, the passage of the suffrage amendment became the capstone of the progressive movement.
Chapter 9
Wilson Wins Financial Reforms
Like Theodore Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson claimed progressive ideals, but he
had a different idea for the federal government. He believed in attacking large
concentrations of power to give greater freedom to average citizens. As president
Wilson moved to enact his program, the "New Freedom," and planned his attack
on what he called the triple wall of privilege: the trusts, tariffs, and high finance
Vocabulary injunction: a court order prohibiting a party from a specific course of action
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
What was the impact of the two antitrust measures?
WILSON’S BACKGROUND
Wilson grew up in the South during the Civil War and Reconstruction. The son of a Presbyterian minister, he received a strict upbringing. Before entering politics, Wilson worked as a lawyer, a history professor, and later as president of Princeton University. In 1910, he became governor of New Jersey, where he supported progressive legislation such as a direct primary, worker’s compensation, and the regulation of public utilities and railroads. TWO KEY ANTITRUST MEASURES
"Without the watchful . . . resolute interference of the government," Wilson said, "there can be no fair play between individuals and such powerful institutions as the trusts. Freedom today is something more than being let alone." During Wilson’s administration, Congress enacted two key antitrust measures. The first, the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914, sought to strengthen the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890. The Clayton Act prohibited corporations from acquiring the stock of another if doing so would create a monopoly; if a company violated the law, its officers could be prosecuted. The Clayton Act also specified that labor unions and farm organizations not only had a right to exist but also would no longer be subject to antitrust laws. Therefore, strikes, peaceful picketing, boycotts, and the collection of strike benefits became legal. In addition, injunctions against strikers were prohibited unless the strikers threatened damage that could not be remedied. Samuel Gompers, president of the American Federation of Labor (AFL), saw great value to workers in the Clayton Act. He called it a Magna Carta for labor, referring to the English document, signed in 1215, in which the English king recognized that he was bound by the law and that the law granted rights to his subjects.
The second major antitrust measure, the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914, set up the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). This "watchdog" agency was given the power to investigate possible violations of regulatory statutes, to require periodic reports from corporations, and to put an end to a
number of unfair business practices. Under Wilson, the FTC administered almost 400 cease-and-desist orders to companies engaged in illegal activity.
Critics of antitrust laws contend that the federal government should not regulate private businesses. They argue that such regulation punishes the businesses that have been most successful in outperforming their competition, leading to inefficiency. They believe such regulation also needlessly consumes government resources. Supporters argue that such regulation is necessary to ensure that markets stay competitive.
A NEW TAX SYSTEM
In an effort to curb the power of big business, Wilson worked to lower tariff rates, knowing that supporters of big business hadn’t allowed such a reduction under Taft. Wilson lobbied hard in 1913 for the Underwood Act, which would substantially reduce tariff rates for the first time since the Civil War. He summoned Congress to a special session to plead his case, and established a precedent of delivering the State of the Union message in person. Businesses lobbied too, looking to block tariff reductions.
When manufacturing lobbyists—people hired by manufacturers to present their case to government officials-descended on the capital to urge senators to vote no, passage seemed unlikely. Wilson denounced the lobbyists and urged voters to monitor their senators' votes. Because of the new president's use of the bully pulpit, the Senate voted to cut tariff rates even more deeply than the House had done.
sow THEfr
DEREGULATION
In recent years the railroad, airline, and telecommunications industries have all been deregulated, or permitted to compete without government control. It is hoped that this will improve their efficiency and lower prices.
During the Progressive Era, reformers viewed regulation as a necessary role of government to ensure safety and fairness for consumers as well as industrial competitors. Opponents of regulation, however, believed that government regulation caused inefficiency and high prices.
Modern critics of deregulation argue that deregulated businesses may skimp on safety. They may also neglect hard-to-serve populations, such as elderly, poor, or disabled people, while competing for more profitable customers.
The Progressive Era 333
Revenue from Individual Federal Income Tax, 1915-1995
Total
Sources: Historical Statistics of the United States; Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1987,1995,1999
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs 1.	About what year did income tax revenues first begin to rise sharply?
2.	About how much revenue did the income tax bring in 1995?
FEDERAL INCOME TAX
With lower tariff rates, the federal government had to replace the revenue that tariffs had previously supplied. Ratified in 1913, the Sixteenth Amendment legalized a federal income tax, which provided revenue by taxing individual earnings and corporate profits. Under this graduated tax, larger incomes were taxed at higher rates than smaller incomes. The tax began with a modest tax on family incomes over $4,000, and ranged from 1 percent to a maximum of 6 percent on incomes over $500,000. Initially, few congressmen realized the potential of the income tax, but by 1917, the government was receiving more money on the income tax than it had ever gained from tariffs. Today, income taxes on corporations and individuals represent the federal government’s main source of revenue.
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Next, Wilson turned his attention to financial reform. The nation needed a way to strengthen the ways in which banks were run, as well as a way to quickly adjust the amount of money in circulation. Both credit availability and money supply had to keep pace with the economy. Wilson's solution was to establish a decentralized private banking system under federal control. The Federal Reserve Act of 1913 divided the nation into 12 districts and established a central bank in each district. These "banker's banks" then served the other banks within the district. The federal reserve banks could issue new paper currency in emergency situations, and member banks could use the new currency to make loans to their customers. Federal reserve banks could transfer funds to member banks in trouble, saving the banks from closing and protecting customers' savings. This marked the emergence of monetary policy, in which changes are made to the money supply in order to influence the economy. By 1923, roughly 70 percent of the nation's banking resources were part of the Federal Reserve System. One of Wilson's most enduring achievements, this system still serves as the basis of the nation's banking system.
Women Win Suffrage
While Wilson pushed hard for reform of trusts, tariffs, and banking, determined women intensified their push for the vote. The educated, native-born, middle-class women who had been active in progressive movements had grown increasingly impatient about not being allowed to vote. As of 1910, women had federal voting rights only in Wyoming, Utah, Colorado, Washington, and Idaho.
Determined suffragists pushed on, however. They finally saw success come within reach as a result of three developments: the increased activism of local groups, the use of bold new strategies to build enthusiasm for the movement, and the rebirth of the national movement under Carrie Chapman Catt.
LOCAL SUFFRAGE BATTLES
The suffrage movement was given new strength by growing numbers of college-educated women. Two Massachusetts organiza-
tions, the Boston Equal Suffrage Association for Good Government and the
College Equal Suffrage League, used door-to-door campaigns to reach potential
MAIN IDEA
Evaluating
Why were tariff reform and the Federal Reserve System important?
14 Chapter 9
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Events
Why do you think women won the right to vote in 1920, after earlier efforts had failed?
Vocabulary appease: pacify by granting concessions
supporters. Founded by Radcliffe graduate Maud Wood Park, the Boston group spread the message of suffrage to poor and working-class women. Members also took trolley tours where, at each stop, crowds would gather to watch the unusual sight of a woman speaking in public.
Many wealthy young women who visited Europe as part of their education became involved in the suffrage movement in Britain. Led by Emmeline Pankhurst, British suffragists used increasingly bold tactics, such as heckling government officials, to advance their cause. Inspired by their activism, American women returned to the United States armed with similar approaches in their own campaigns for suffrage.
CATT AND THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT
Susan B. Anthony's successor as president of NAWSA was Carrie Chapman Catt, who served from 1900 to 1904 and resumed the presidency in 1915. When Catt returned to NAWSA after organizing New York's Women Suffrage Party, she concentrated on five tactics: (1) painstaking organization;
(2)	close ties between local, state, and national workers;
(3)	establishing a wide base of support; (4) cautious lobbying; and (5) gracious, ladylike behavior.
Although suffragists saw victories, the greater number of failures led some suffragists to try more radical tactics.
Lucy Burns and Alice Paul formed their own more radical organization, the Congressional Union, and its successor, the National Woman's Party. They pressured the federal government to pass a suffrage amendment, and by 1917 Paul had organized her followers to mount a round-the-clock picket line around the White House. Some of the picketed were arrested, jailed, and even force-fed when they attempted a hunger strike.
These efforts, and America's involvement in World War I, finally made suffrage inevitable. Patriotic American women who headed committees, knitted socks for soldiers, and sold liberty bonds now claimed their overdue reward for supporting the war effort. In 1919, Congress passed the Nineteenth Amendment, granting women the right to vote. The amendment won final ratification in August 1920—72 years after women had first convened and demanded the vote at the Seneca Falls convention in 1848.
The Limits of Progressivism
Despite Wilson's economic and political reforms, he disappointed Progressives who favored social reform. In particular, on racial matters Wilson's Southern prejudices led him to appease conservative Southern Democratic voters but disappoint his Northern white and black supporters. He placed segregationists in charge of federal agencies, thereby expanding racial segregation in the federal government, the military, and Washington, D.C.
WILSON AND CIVIL RIGHTS
Like Roosevelt and Taft, Wilson retreated on civil rights once in office. During the presidential campaign of 1912, he won the support of the NAACP's black intellectuals and white liberals by promising to treat blacks equally and to speak out against lynching. EMMELINE PANKHURST
American women struggling for suffrage received valuable tutoring from their English counterparts, whose bold maneuvers had captured media coverage.
The noted British suffragist Emmeline Pankhurst, who helped found the National Women’s Social and Political Union, often engaged in radical tactics. Pankhurst and other suffragists staged parades, organized protest meetings, endured hunger strikes, heckled candidates for Parliament, and spat on policemen who tried to quiet them. They were often imprisoned for their activities, before Parliament granted them the right to vote in 1928.
The Progressive Era 335
History Through
| Architecture}—
FROM SPLENDOR TO SIMPLICITY
The progressive movement, which influenced numerous aspects of society, also impacted the world of American architecture. One of the most prominent architects of the time was Frank Lloyd Wright, who studied under the renowned designer Louis Sullivan. In the spirit of progressivism, Wright sought to design buildings that were orderly, efficient, and in harmony with the world around them.
Architecture of the Gilded Age featured ornate decoration and detail, as seen here in this Victorian-style house built between 1884 and 1886. Wright rejected these showy and decorative styles in favor of more simplistic designs.
▲
Wright's "prairie style" design features a low, horizontal, and well-defined structure made predominantly of wood, concrete, brick, and other simple materials. Shown here is the Robie House (1909), one of Wright's most famous prairie-style structures, which incorporates these architectural qualities.
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Visual Sources 1.	What are the most striking differences between the two houses? Cite examples that contrast the two buildings.
2.	How does Wright’s style reflect the progressive spirit?
As president, however, Wilson opposed federal antilynching legislation, arguing that these crimes fell under state jurisdiction. In addition, the Capitol and the federal offices in Washington, D.C., which had been desegregated during Reconstruction, resumed the practice of segregation shortly after Wilson's election.
Wilson appointed to his cabinet fellow white Southerners who extended segregation. Secretary of the Navy Josephus Daniels, for example, proposed at a cabinet meeting to do away with common drinking fountains and towels in his department. According to an entry in Daniels's diary, President Wilson agreed because he had "made no promises in particular to negroes, except to do them justice." Segregated facilities, in the president's mind, were just.
African Americans and their liberal white supporters in the NAACP felt betrayed. Oswald Garrison Villard, a grandson of the abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison, wrote to Wilson in dismay, "The colored men who voted and worked for you in the belief that their status as American citizens was safe in your hands are deeply cast down." Wilson's response—that he had acted "in the interest of the negroes" and "with the approval of some of the most influential negroes I know"— only widened the rift between the president and some of his former supporters
336 Chapter 9
On November 12, 1914, the president's reception of an African-American delegation brought the confrontation to a bitter climax. William Monroe Trotter, editor-in-chief of the Guardian, an African-American Boston newspaper, led the delegation. Trotter complained that African Americans from 38 states had asked the president to reverse the segregation of government employees, but that segregation had since increased. Trotter then commented on Wilson's inaction.
A
Personal Voice william monroe trotter Only two years ago you were heralded as perhaps the second Lincoln, and now the Afro-American leaders who supported you are hounded as false leaders and traitors to their race. ... As equal citizens and by virtue of your public promises we are entitled at your hands to freedom from discrimination, restriction, imputation, and insult in government employ. Have you a ‘new freedom’ for white Americans and a new slavery for your Afro-American fellow citizens’? God forbid! ”
—address to President Wilson, November 12, 1914
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
What actions of Wilson disappointed civil rights advocates?
Wilson found Trotter's tone infuriating. After an angry Trotter shook his finger at the president to emphasize a point, the furious Wilson demanded that the delegation leave. Wilson's refusal to extend civil rights to African Americans pointed to the limits of progressivism under his administration. America's involvement in the war raging in Europe would soon reveal other weaknesses. Jg)
THE TWILIGHT OF PROGRESSIVISM
After taking office in 1913, Wilson had said, "There's no chance of progress and reform in an administration in which war plays the principal part." Yet he found that the outbreak of World War I in Europe in 1914 demanded America's involvement. Meanwhile, distracted Americans and their legislators allowed reform efforts to stall. As the pacifist and reformer Jane Addams mournfully reflected, "The spirit of fighting burns away all those impulses .. . which foster the will to justice." International conflict was destined to be part of Wilson's presidency. During the early years of his administration, Wilson had dealt with issues of imperialism that had roots in the late 19th century. However, World War I dominated most of his second term as president. The Progressive Era had come to an end.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•Carrie Chapman Catt	•Federal Trade Commission • monetary policy	• Nineteenth Amendment
•Clayton Antitrust Act	(FTC)	-Federal Reserve System
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a time line of key events relating to Progressivism during Wilson’s first term. Use the dates already plotted on the time line below as a guide.
1913	1914	1915	1916
Write a paragraph explaining which event you think best demonstrates progressive reform.
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
Wilson said, “Without the watchful . . . resolute interference of the government, there can be no fair play between individuals and ... the trusts.” How does this statement reflect the changing relationship between the federal government and private business?
4.	analyzing effects
Describe how the Federal Reserve Act
of 1913 affected the emergence of
monetary policy in the United States.
ANALYZING MOTIVES
Why do you think Wilson failed to push for equality for African Americans? Think About:
•	other progressive presidents
•	Wilson’s background
•	the primary group of people progressive reforms targeted
6.	EVALUATING
What was the impact of the Nineteenth Amendment? Was it an effective means of achieving equality of political rights? Explain.
The Progressive Era 337
CHAPTER
ASSESSMENT
TERMS & NAMES
For each term or name below, ing its connection to the Progressive Era.
1.	progressive movement
2.	muckraker
3.	suffrage
4.	Susan B. Anthony
5.	Theodore Roosevelt
6.	NAACP
write a sentence explain-Era.
7.	Gifford Pinchot
8.	Woodrow Wilson
9.	Clayton Antitrust Act
10.	Federal Reserve System
MAIN IDEAS
! r
Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
The Origins of Progressivism (pages 306-312)
1.	What were the four goals that various progressive reform movements struggled to achieve?
2.	Evaluate the impact of muckrakers on American society.
3.	How did government change during the Progressive Era? How were these changes important?
Women in Public Life (pages 313-316)
4.	In the late 1890s, what job opportunities were available to uneducated women without industrial skills?
5.	Give two examples of national women’s organizations committed to social activism. Briefly describe their progressive missions.
Teddy Roosevelt's Square Deal (pages 317-32:
6.	What scandalous practices did Upton Sinclair expose in his novel The Jungle? How did the American public, Roosevelt, and Congress respond?
7.	How did Roosevelt earn his reputation as a trust-buster?
Progressivism Under Taft (pages 328-331)
8.	As a progressive, how did Taft compare with Roosevelt?
9.	Why did the Republican Party split during Taft’s administration?
Wilson's New Freedom (pages 332-337)
10.	How did the Clayton Antitrust Act benefit labor?
11.	What are the costs and benefits of antitrust acts?
12.	What was the impact of the passage of the Sixteenth Amendment?
CRITICAL THINKING
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a Venn diagram to show some of the similarities and differences between Roosevelt’s Square Deal and Wilson’s New Freedom. DEVELOPING HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
How did the Nineteenth Amendment fit into the historical development of the civil rights movement in the 20th century? Support your answer with details from the text.
338
<

r
TEXAS TEST PRACTICE
Use the quotation and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 1.
“ Labor began to organize itself in Trade Unions and to confront the industrialists with a stiff bargaining power. These developments were to lead to a period of protest and reform in the early twentieth century. The gains conferred by large-scale industry were great and lasting, but the wrongs that had accompanied their making were only gradually righted. ”
—Winston Churchill, The Great Republic:
A
History of America 1.	In the passage, Winston Churchill attempts to explain what prompted Progressive Era reformers. The passage explains the actions of which of the following labor reform leaders?
A
Maria Mitchell B Carry Nation C Susan B. Anthony D Florence Kelley 2.	The muckrakers served Progressivism by —
F informing people about abuses so that they could protest.
G enacting legislation to prevent political corruption.
H cleaning up unhealthy meat processing plants. J filing and prosecuting antitrust lawsuits.
3.	In the presidential election of 1912, three candidates attempted to win the liberal, progressive vote. Which candidate for president in 1912 ran on a conservative platform?
A
Woodrow Wilson B William Taft C Theodore Roosevelt D Eugene V. Debs 71 hmhsocialstudies.com
TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests • Tutorials
INTERACT WITH HISTORY
'"J'WriteSmart COLLABORATIVE LEARNI

Think about the issues you recorded in myNotebook as you read the chapter. As a class, discuss what progressive reformers did to bring about changes in government and society. Consider what else they might have done to be more effective. Rank their efforts in order of effectiveness and offer suggestions for improvement. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write out your suggestions.
XgEtjTURY
Imagine you are a reporter covering a 1912 congressional hearing investigating labor conditions in a textile mill. Work with a partner to write two newspaper articles—one that shows bias in favor of the mill workers, and one that shows bias in favor of the mill. Share the articles with the class and analyze how language can affect the reporting of information.
my WriteSmart
Conservation of natural resources became a focus of federal attention in the early 1900s. Write an explanation of the two different perspectives on conservation advocated by Gifford Pinchot and John Muir. Then decide which position you agree with and explain why. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your explanation.
The Progressive Era 339
End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Creating Written Presentations
DEFINING THE SKILL
Written presentations are in-depth reports on a topic in history. Often, written presentations take a stand on an issue or try to support a specific conclusion or point of view on a social studies issue or event. To successfully report on an event or to make a point, your writing needs to be clear, concise, and supported by factual details.
Historians must perform careful research and cite all sources in written presentations. They also narrow their focus to a specific part of an issue or event. For example, a historian might choose to write about one aspect of the Progressive Era rather than the whole time period. As a student, a written presentation is one way for you to present information on a topic you have researched. You can identify and support a point of view about a social studies issue or event using historical evidence to back up your thoughts.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: MAKE AN OUTLINE
When planning a presentation, identify your point of view on an issue or event and narrow your focus to relevant information. Then use an outline like the one shown below to organize the information to communicate your point of view with details and facts supported by historical evidence. o Identify a topic that you wish to research. Focus on one or more questions that you hope to answer about the topic. Then research the topic using library and Internet sources.
& Formulate a hypothesis. This will serve as the main idea, or thesis, of your presentation. Analyze the information in your sources and develop a hypothesis that answers your questions about the topic.
0 Organize the facts and supporting details around your main idea. These facts and examples should be presented in a way that helps you build a logical case to prove your point.
0 To express your ideas clearly, use standard grammar, spelling, sentence structure, and punctuation. Proofread your work to make sure it is well organized and grammatically correct.
^^The Goals of Progressivism 1.0AII progressive reforms had one of four goals.
A.
Protecting Social Welfare 0 1. Social Gospel movement sought to help the poor.
2.	Settlement houses provided aid to poor city dwellers.
S.
Promoting Moral Improvement 1.	Reformers sought to improve Americans’ personal behavior.
2.	WCTU worked for prohibition.
C.
Creating Economic Reform 1.	Writers criticized capitalism.
2.	The American Socialist Party formed.
3.	Muckrakers exposed corruption in business and government.
D.
Fostering Efficiency 1.	Businesses introduced scientific management in the workplace.
2.	Manufacturers developed the assembly line.
39 SKI
; I.
STRATEGY: EDIT AND REVISE
Once you have completed your first draft, read through it and make corrections to improve your writing so that you communicate your ideas as clearly as possible. | The Goals of Progressivism
As America approached the 20th century a number of citizens tried to reform society. Their efforts formed what become known as the progressive movement. Progressive reformers had the following four goal^gsocial welfare, moral improvement, economic reform, and efficiency.
Many reformers sought to promote social welfare—especially in the
crowded, run-down, and unhealthy areas of the cities. The Social Gospel
movement inspired followers to erect churches in poor communities. It
also persuaded business leaders to treat workers more fairather reform- k
s
ers established settlement housejn slum neighborhoods to provide educational, cultural, and social services to people—especially to immigrants.
Another group of reformers felt that the lives of poor people could be improved through moral instruction. These reformers offer programs to I-improve personal behavior. The Women's Christian Temperence Union, for [-	,
instance, promoted prohibition. It believed that alcohol was the root of many of society's problems.
Other progressives, such as Henry George and Edward Bellamy, blamed the competitive nature of capitalism for creating a large underclass. Some Americans, especially workers, embraced^dal^nr Eugene Debs helped organize the_american socialistparty^^dvocatea communal living and a classless society. During the e~arly 20th century, joumalists^xposed the corrupt side of business and politics^)
(known as muckraker^------------------------------
Meanwhile, some tried to make American society more efficient.
Frederick Winslow Taylor popularized scientific management, the effort to improve efficiency in the workplace by applying scientific principles. Out of this concept emerged the assembly line, which required workers to perform the same task over and over, and thus sped up production.
Through their hard work, the progressives reformed many levels of society and helped Americans live better lives.	J
<	_________ I,,,	,1 i „ n	....

(-h
Use punctuation marks for their correct purposes. A colon precedes a list.
Use the correct parts of speech. An adverb modifies a verb. Check for common agreement errors. Subjects and verbs must agree in person and number.
Use consistent verb tense. Use past tense for events in the past.
Check spelling with both an electronic spell checker and a dictionary.
Capitalize all proper nouns, including names of political parties.
Use correct sentence structure. Every sentence needs a subject and a verb.
Be sure sentence structure leads clearly from one phrase to the next. Correct misplaced modifiers..
applying the skill
Identify your point of view on a social studies issue or event and create a two-page written presentation on that topic, supported with historical evidence. Use the strategies to help you create your presentation.
339 SK2
' > -J
Essential Question
Which individuals and events moved
the United States into the role of a world power?
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
2D,4A,4B, 12A, 15C, 15D,29A,29D
SECTION 1: Imperialism and America Main Idea Beginning in 1867 and continuing through the century, global competition caused the United States to expand.
SECTION 2: The Spanish-American War
Main Idea In 1898, the United States went to war to help Cuba win its independence from Spain.
SECTION 3: Acquiring New Lands
Main Idea In the early 1900s, the United States engaged in conflicts in Puerto Rico, Cuba, and the Philippines.
SECTION 4: America as a World Power
Main Idea The Russo-Japanese War, the Panama Canal, and the Mexican Revolution added to America's military and economic power.
USA
WORLD
erica Claims mpire
w * '







This lithograph of Roosevelt leading the Rough Riders at San Juan Hill shows the men on horseback, although they actually fought on foot
: i.1893] Business - groups, aided by j U.S. marines, over-: throw Hawaii’s : Queen Liliuokalani.
U.S.S.
Maine : explodes and : sinks. The Spanish-: .Arner!ca.n War begins. : [X90X] Theodore
•	Roosevelt ‘ becomes
: president
•	after McKinley
•	is assassinated.
: 1908] William : Howard Taft is : elected president.
: [19121 : Woodrow J Wilson is : elected : president.

]l914j The Panama Canal opens.
1890
1900
1910
•	1X895j Guglielmo
: Marconi develops : the technology that
*	led to the modern : radio.
1898;
: Marie Curie • discovers I : radium.
1900 In China, the Boxers rebel.
1903 Panama: declares its :
independence .
from Colombia.:
1910 The Mexican Revolution begins.
: [1914] World : War I begins : in Europe.
WAKE UR AMERICA!
r da
£3§J|P I
cnnuzAT ion calls
fVtRY milWOtlAHaCHIUli

myNotebouk !
INTERACT
WITH HISTORY
In the late 1890s, American newspapers are running sensational stories about Spain's harsh rule of Cuba. Such articles anger Americans. Among those willing to fight for Cuba's freedom are a group of volunteers, the Rough Riders. Led by future president Theodore Roosevelt, the Rough Riders become a model for others to follow. As you read the chapter and explore the issues below, use the annotation tools in your eBook to record your thoughts.
Explore the Issues
•	When should the U.S. intervene in the affairs of another country?
•	In what ways do dramatic headlines influence American opinion?
: [19171 Puerto Ricans : become U.S. citizens.
: [I917i The United - States enters World : War I.
1920
i 1917] Mexico revises and adopts its constitution.
America Claims an Empire 341
J40
