560 Chapter 17
I


1943 Rommel’s forces surrender in North Africa.
1944 Gl Bill of Rights is passed...
y,-i! PwMdent ,g .cvcH is elected
„ fourth term.
i 1945J U.S. Marines take Iwo Jima.
[~1945~| Harry S. Truman becomes president when Roosevelt dies.
1944 On June 6, the Allies launch a massive invasion of Europe.
I 1945J
Nazi retreat begins after the Battle of the Bulge................... 119451 Japan surrenders after atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
The United States in World War II 56:
w
Mobilizing for Defense
MAIN IDEA
Following the attack on Pearl Harbor, the United States mobilized for war.
WHY ITT MATTERS NOW
Military industries in the United States today are a major part of the American economy.
Terans & Names
•George Marshall •Women’s Auxiliary Army Corps (WAAC)
A.
Philip Randolph •	Manhattan Project
•	Office of Price
Administration
(OPA)
•War Production
Board (WPB)
•	rationing
fi hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes about how the United States prepared for war.
One. American's Story
As soldiers went off to fight in Europe and the Pacific, many American families were separated by the war effort. This letter from Marine 1st Lt. Leonard Isacks expresses the emotions that many soldiers felt when thinking of their loved ones back home.
A
Personal Voice Leonard isacks “ My dear little boys:
I am writing to you today, just a week before Christmas eve, in the hope that you will get this little note at Christmas time. All of this coming week will be holidays, and I can just imagine the fun you will be having,...
I won’t be able to give you a Christmas present personally this year, but I do want you to know that I think of you all the time .... I know that you would like to give me a Xmas present too, so I will tell you what you can do, and this will be your Xmas present to me. Everyday ask Mummie If there are any errands that you can do for her, and when there are errands to run, say, “sure Mummie” and give her a big smile; ...”
—from "Letter from Marine 1st Lt. Leonard Isacks”
As the United States began to mobilize for war, the Isacks, like most Americans, had few illusions as to what lay ahead. It would be a time filled with hard work, hope, sacrifice, and sorrow.
Leonard Isacks’s children at home.
Americans Join the War Effort
The Japanese had attacked Pearl Harbor with the expectation that once Americans had experienced Japan's power, they would tremble with fear and shrink from further conflict. But if Americans were trembling, it was with rage, not fear. American patriotism drove citizens to incredible acts of bravery and sacrifice, on the battlefields of Europe and the Pacific as well as at home. Uniting under the battle cry "Remember Pearl Harbor!" they set out to prove Japan wrong.
562 Chapter 17
Background
The initials Gl originally stood for “galvanized iron” but were later reinterpreted as “government issue," meaning uniforms and supplies. In time, the abbreviation came to stand for American soldiers.
SELECTIVE SERVICE AND THE
Gl After Pearl Harbor, patriotic young Americans jammed recruiting offices. "I wanted to be a hero, let's face it," admitted Roger Tuttrup. "1 was havin' trouble in school. . . . The war'd been goin' on for two years. I didn't wanna miss it. . .
. I was an American. I was seventeen."
Even the 5 million who volunteered for military service, however, were not enough to face the challenge of an all-out war on two global fronts—Europe and the Pacific. The Selective Service System expanded the draft and eventually provided another 10 million soldiers to meet the armed forces' needs.
The volunteers and draftees reported to military bases around the country for eight weeks of basic training. In this short period, seasoned sergeants did their best to turn raw recruits into disciplined, battle-ready GIs. Army Chief of Staff General George Marshall, the leader of the armed forces mobilization effort, ensured that American soldiers were well equipped and properly trained. Marshall also played an important role in developing the nation's military strategy.
EXPANDING THE MILITARY
The military's work force needs were so great that Marshall pushed for the formation of a Women's Auxiliary Army Corps (WAAC). "There are innumerable duties now being performed by soldiers that can be done better by women," Marshall said in support of a bill to establish the Women's Auxiliary Army Corps. Under this bill, women volunteers would serve in noncombat positions. Despite opposition from some members of Congress who scorned the bill as "the silliest piece of legislation" they had ever seen, the bill establishing the WAAC became law on May 15, 1942. The law gave the WAACs an official status and salary but few of the benefits granted to male soldiers. In July 1943, after thousands of women had enlisted, the U.S. Army dropped the "auxiliary" status, and granted WACs full U.S.
Army benefits. WACs worked as nurses, ambulance drivers, radio operators, electricians, and pilots—nearly every duty not involving direct combat.
RECRUITING AND DISCRIMINATION
For many minority groups—especially African Americans, Native Americans, Mexican Americans, and Asian Americans the war created new dilemmas. Restricted to racially segregated neighborhoods and reservations and denied basic citizenship rights, some members of these groups ques-tioned whether this was their war to fight. "Why die for democracy for some foreign country when we don t even have it here?" asked an editorial in an African-American newspaper. On receiving his draft notice, an African American responded unhappily, "Just carve on my tombstone, 'Here lies a black man killed fighting a yellow man for the protection of a white man The United States in World War II 5l
DRAMATIC CONTRIBUTIONS
Despite discrimination in the military, more than 300,000 Mexican Americans joined the armed forces. While Mexican Americans in Los Angeles made up only a tenth of the city's population, they suffered a fifth of the city's wartime casualties. About one million African Americans also served in the military. African-American soldiers lived and worked in segregated units and were limited mostly to noncombat roles. After much protest, African Americans did finally see combat beginning in April 1943.
Asian Americans took part in the struggle as well. More than 13,000 Chinese Americans, or about one of every five adult males, joined the armed forces. In addition, 33,000 Japanese Americans put on uniforms. Of these, several thousand volunteered to serve as spies and interpreters in the Pacific war. "During battles," wrote an admiring officer, "they crawled up close enough to be able to hear [Japanese] officers' commands and to make verbal translations to our soldiers."
Some 25,000 Native Americans enlisted in the armed services, too, including 800 women. Their willingness to serve led The Saturday Evening Post to comment, "We would not need the Selective Service if all volunteered like Indians."
A
Production Miracle Early in February 1942, American newspapers reported the end of automobile production for private use. The last car to roll off an automaker's assembly line was a gray sedan with "victory trim,"—that is, without chrome-plated parts. This was just one more sign that the war would affect almost every aspect of life.
RAPID MOBILIZATION
President Roosevelt recognized the importance of quickly mobilizing domestic industry. The federal government spent tens of billions of dollars on weapons and supplies following the outbreak of war. Roosevelt set the ambitious goal of building 60,000 new planes in 1942 and 125,000 more the next year. He asked for 120,000 new tanks in the same period. He also created a series of agencies to regulate what factories produced, what prices they charged, and how the nation's raw materials would be used. Roosevelt also established the National War Labor Board to resolve disputes between labor and management in the best interest of the war effort. THE INDUSTRIAL RESPONSE
Within weeks of the shutdown in production, the nation's automobile plants had been retooled to produce tanks, planes, boats, and MAIN IDEA
Contrasting
A/How did the American response to the Japanese raid on Pearl Harbor differ from Japanese expectations?
The Production Miracle
Aircraft and Ship Production, 1940-45
U.S.
Budget Expenditure, 1941-45 Source: The Times Atlas of the Second World War
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs 1.	Study the first graph. In what year did aircraft and ship production production levels?
reach their highest
2. How does the second graph help explain how this production miracle was possible?
564 Chapter 17
command cars. They were not alone. Across the nation, factories were quickly converted to war production. A maker of mechanical pencils turned out bomb parts. A bedspread manufacturer made mosquito netting. A soft-drink company converted from filling bottles with liquid to filling shells with explosives.
Meanwhile, shipyards and defense plants expanded with dizzying speed. By the end of 1942, industrialist Henry J. Kaiser had built seven massive new shipyards that turned out Liberty ships (cargo carriers), tankers, troop transports, and "baby" aircraft carriers at an astonishing rate. Late that year, Kaiser invited reporters to Way One in his Richmond, California, shipyard to watch as his workers assembled Hull 440, a Liberty ship, in a record-breaking four days. Writer Alyce Mano Kramer described the first day and night of construction.
A
Personal Voice alyce mano kramer “ At the stroke of 12, Way One exploded Into life. Crews of workers, like a champion football team, swarmed into their places in the line. Within 60 seconds, the keel was swinging into position. . . . Hull 440 was going up. The speed of [production] was unbelievable. At midnight, Saturday, an empty way—at midnight Sunday, a full-grown hull met the eyes of graveyard workers as they came on shift. ”
—quoted in Home Front, U.S.A.
Forming Generalizations
& What difficulties did Wen and Minorities face in
wartime work force?
Before the fourth day was up, 25,000 amazed spectators watched as Hull 440 slid into the water. How could such a ship be built so fast? Kaiser used prefabricated, or factory-made, parts that could be quickly assembled at his shipyards. Equally important were his workers, who worked at record speeds.
LABOR’S CONTRIBUTION
When the war began, defense contractors warned the Selective Service System that the nation did not have enough workers to meet both its military and its industrial needs. They were wrong. By 1944, despite the draft, nearly 18 million workers were laboring in war industries, three times as many as in 1941. More than 6 million of these new workers were women.
At first, war industries feared that most women lacked the necessary stamina for factory work and were reluctant to hire them. But once women proved they could operate welding torches or riveting guns as well as men, employers could not hire enough of them—especially since women earned only about 60 percent as much as men doing the same jobs.
Defense plants also hired more than 2 million minority workers during the war years.
Like women, minorities faced strong prejudice at first. Before
the war, 75 percent of defense contractors simply refused to hire African Americans, while another 15 percent employe them only in menial jobs. "Negroes will be considered only as janitors," declared the general manager of North American Aviation. "It is the company policy not to employ them as mechanics and aircraft workers." g)
During the war, women took many jobs previously held by men. In this 1943 photo, a young woman is seen operating a hand drill in Nashville, Tennessee.
The United States in World War II 5i
To protest such discrimination both in the military and in industry, A. Philip Randolph, president and founder of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters and the nation's most respected African-American labor leader, organized a march on Washington. Randolph called on African Americans everywhere to come to the capital on July 1, 1941, and to march under the banner "We Loyal Colored Americans Demand the Right to Work and Fight for Our Country."
Fearing that the march might provoke white resentment or violence, President Roosevelt called Randolph to the White House and asked him to back down. "I'm sorry Mr. President," the labor leader said, "the march cannot be called off." Roosevelt then asked, "How many people do you plan to bring?" Randolph replied, "One hundred thousand, Mr. President." Roosevelt was stunned. Even half that number of African-American protesters would be far more than Washington—still a very segregated city—could feed, house, and transport.
In the end it was Roosevelt, not Randolph, who backed down. In
A.
Philip Randolph return for Randolph's promise to cancel the march, the president issued an execu- in 1942.	tive order calling on employers and labor unions "to provide for the full and equi-
table participation of all workers in defense industries, without discrimination
because of race, creed, color, or national origin."
History Through
Filing
HOLLYWOOD HELPS MOBILIZATION
In the aftermath of Pearl Harbor, Hollywood churned out war-oriented propaganda films. Heroic movies like Mission to Moscow and Song of Russia glorified America’s new wartime ally, the Soviet Union. On the other hand, “hiss-and-boo” films stirred up hatred against the Nazis. In this way, movies energized people to join the war effort.
As the war dragged on, people grew tired of propaganda and war themes. Hollywood responded with musicals, romances, and other escapist fare designed to take filmgoers away from the grim realities of war, if only for an hour or two.
Hitler, Beast of Berlin, produced in 1939, was one of the most popular hiss-and-boo films. Viewing audiences watched in rage as the Nazis conducted one horrible act after another.
Moviemakers also turned out informational films. The most important of these films—the Why We Fight series—were made by the great director Frank Capra. Capra is shown (right) consulting with Colonel Hugh Stewart (commander of the British Army film unit) in a joint effort in the making of Tunisian Victory, the first official film record of the campaign that expelled Germany from North Africa.
SKILLBUILDER
Interpeting Visual Sources 1.	How does the image from Hitler, Beast of Berlin portray the Nazis?
2.	How might audiences have responded to propaganda films?
566 Chapter 17
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
J/
Why did President Roosevelt create the OSRD, and what did it do? main idea
identifying
Problems
What basic Problems were the opA and WPB boated to solve?
OF SCIENTISTS
That same year, in 1941, Roosevelt created the Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD) to bring scientists into the war e ort. e OSRD spurred improvements in radar and sonar, new technologies or ocating submarines underwater. It encouraged the use of pesticides like DDT to ig t insects. As a result, U.S. soldiers were probably the first in history to be relatively free from body lice. The OSRD also pushed the development of "miracle drugs, such as penicillin, that saved countless lives on and off the battlefield. The most significant achievement of the OSRD, however, was the secret development of a new weapon, the atomic bomb. Interest in such a weapon began in 1939, after German scientists succeeded in splitting uranium atoms, releasing an enormous amount of energy. This news prompted physicist and German refugee Albert Einstein to write a letter to President Roosevelt, warning that the Germans could use their discovery to construct a weapon of enormous destructive power.
Roosevelt responded by creating an Advisory Committee on Uranium to study the new discovery. In 1941, the committee reported that it would take from three to five years to build an atomic bomb. Hoping to shorten that time, the OSRD set up an intensive program in 1942 to develop a bomb as quickly as possible. Because much of the early research was performed at Columbia University in Manhattan, the Manhattan Project became the code name for research work that extended across the country. £1
The Federal Government Takes Control
As war production increased, there were fewer consumer products available for purchase. Much factory production was earmarked for the war. With demand increasing and supplies dropping, prices seemed likely to shoot upwards.
ECONOMIC CONTROLS
Roosevelt responded to this threat by creating the Office of Price Administration (OPA). The OPA fought inflation by freezing prices on most goods. Congress also raised income tax rates and extended the tax to millions of people who had never paid it before. The higher taxes reduced consumer demand on scarce goods by leaving workers with less to spend. In addition, the government encouraged Americans to use their extra cash to buy war bonds. As a result of these measures, inflation remained below 30 percent—-about half that of World War I—for the entire period of World War II. Besides controlling inflation, the government needed to ensure that the armed forces and war industries received the resources they needed to win the war. The War Production Board (WPB) assumed that responsibility. The WPB decided which companies would convert from peacetime to wartime production and allocated raw materials to key industries. The WPB also organized drives to collect scrap iron, tin cans, paper, rags, and cooking fat for recycling into war goods. Across America, children scoured attics, cellars, garages, vacant lots, and back alleys, looking for useful junk. During one five-month-long paper drive in Chicago, schoolchildren collected 36 million pounds of old paper about 65 pounds per child. Dy
WINNING AMERICAN SUPPORT
American leaders were well aware that public support was vital to the success of the war effort. In June 1942, the government created the Office of War Information (OWI). This agency was responsible for spreading propaganda to influence the thoughts, feelings, and actions of the pub-lie in favor of the war effort. The OWI produced dozens of posters and films during the war. Many of these evoked a positive vision of the United States and encouraged Americans to help the war effort. For example, they encouraged men to join the armed forces and women to take jobs in war industries. The OWI also issued stark warnings to the public about the dangers they faced. Another technique was to show the harmful outcomes of improper actions, such as sharing sensitive military information.
The United States in World War
II
567
Patriotism Inspires Sacrifice at Home
World War II made demands of every American. Life in the home changed significantly as citizens did their part to help the cause of victory in Europe and the Pacific.
CONSERVING FOOD AND OTHER GOODS
Meeting the food needs of the military took top priority in the United States. One way to grow more food was to plant victory gardens. Americans armed with a few simple tools, some seed and fertilizer, and a patriotic spirit farmed small plots of land to overcome food shortages. In small towns and large cities, any spare piece of land was likely to be used to grow food. Many victory gardens were small and humble, but the combined efforts of millions of Americans produced big results. In 1943, the nation's 20 million victory gardens yielded an astounding 8 million tons of produce. However, victory gardens alone could not fulfill all of the nation's food needs. Some foods could not be grown in home gardens and there were shortages of other products as well. As a result, the OPA set up a system for rationing, or establishing fixed allotments of goods deemed essential for the military. Under this system, households received ration books with coupons to be used for buying such scarce goods as meat, shoes, sugar, coffee, and gasoline. Most Americans willingly accepted rationing as a personal contribution to the war effort. Inevitably, some cheated by hoarding scarce goods or by purchasing them through the "black market," where rationed items could be bought illegally at inflated prices without coupons. However, the penalties for breaking the rules could be severe.
INVESTING IN VICTORY
As you previously read, another way that Americans supported the war effort was by buying war bonds. The money invested by ordinary citizens helped pay for the vast quantities of ships, aircraft, and other weaponry being produced in American factories. By war's end, 85 million Americans had purchased war bonds, raising over $185 billion. Patriotic Americans also invested their time, volunteering for organizations such as the Red Cross and the Victory Corps. They made bandages, knitted socks, and collected books to be sent to the troops abroad. Celebrities also volunteered to promote the sale of war bonds and other wartime endeavors. While people tightened their belts and gave where they could at home, millions of other Americans put their lives on the line in battles on the other side of the world.
1.
magmas
TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
George Marshall
Women’s Auxiliary Army Corps (WAAC)
•A. Philip Randolph
•Manhattan Project
•Office of Price Administration (OPA)
•War Production Board (WPB) •rationing
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Re-create the web below on your paper, and fill in ways that America prepared for war.
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING EFFECTS
How did the war provide increased employment opportunities for women and minorities?
ANALYZING VISUAL SOURCES
Why was the Office of War Information important? How does the poster at right relate to the efforts of the OWI?
5.	EVALUATING
Why were George Marshall’s military contributions significant?
When you ride ALONE
you vid* with H§j2s^
Join a	.
Car-Sharing Club TOO#.
568 Chapter 17
The War for Europe and North Africa
MAIN IDEA
WHY nr MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
Allied forces, led by the United States and Great Britain, battled Axis powers for control of Europe and North Africa.
During World War II, the United States assumed a leading role in world affairs that continues today.
•	Dwight D.	• George Patton
Eisenhower	• Battle of the Bulge
•Omar Bradley	*V-E Day
•	D-Day	• Harry S. Truman

Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the war in North Africa and Europe.
It was 1951, and John Patrick McGrath was just finishing his second year in drama school. For an acting class, his final exam was to be a performance of a death scene. McGrath knew his lines perfectly. But as he began the final farewell, he broke out in a sweat and bolted off the stage. Suddenly he had a flashback to a frozen meadow in Belgium during the Battle of the Bulge in 1945. Three German tanks were spraying his platoon with machine-gun fire.
A
Personal Voice john Patrick mcgrath “ Only a few feet away, one of the men in my platoon falls. ... He calls out to me. 'Don’t leave me. Don’t. . . .’ The tanks advance, one straight for me. I grab my buddy by the wrist and pull him across the snow. . . . The tank nearest to us is on a track to run us down. . . . When the German tank is but 15 yards away, I grab my buddy by the wrist and feign a lurch to my right. The tank follows the move. Then I lurch back to my left. The German tank clamors by, only inches away. ... In their wake the meadow is strewn with casualties. I turn to tend my fallen comrade. He is dead. ” Private John P. McGrath carried this bullet-riddled letter in a pack that saved his life. In 1990, he visited Anzio, where members of his company were buried.
—A Cue for Passion
Like countless other soldiers, McGrath would never forget both the heroism and the horrors he witnessed while fighting to free Europe.
The United States and Britain Join Forces
"Now that we are, as you say, 'in the same boat,'" British Prime Minister Winston
Churchill wired President Roosevelt two days after the Pearl Harbor attack,
"would it not be wise for us to have another conference .... and the sooner the
better." Roosevelt responded with an invitation for Churchill to come at once. So
began a remarkable alliance between the two nations.
The United States in World War II 569
▲
A convoy of British and American ships ride at anchor in the harbor of Hvalfjord, Iceland.

WAR PLANS
Prime Minister Churchill arrived at the White House on December 22, 1941, and spent the next three weeks working out war plans with President Roosevelt and his advisors. Believing that Germany and Italy posed a greater threat than Japan, Churchill convinced Roosevelt to strike first against Hitler. Once the Allies had gained an upper hand in Europe, they could pour more resources into the Pacific War. By the end of their meeting, Roosevelt and Churchill had formed, in ChurchilPs words, "a very strong affection, which grew with our years of comradeship." When Churchill reached London, he found a message from the president waiting for him. "It is fun," Roosevelt wrote in the message, to be in the same decade with you."
THE BATTLE OF THE ATLANTIC
After the attack on Pearl Harbor, Hitler ordered submarine raids against ships along America's east coast. The German aim in the Battle of the Atlantic was to prevent food and war materials from reaching Great Britain and the Soviet Union. Britain depended on supplies from the sea. The 3,000-mile-long shipping lanes from North America were her lifeline. Hitler knew that if he cut that lifeline, Britain would be starved into submission. For a long time, it looked as though Hitler might succeed in his mission. Unprotected American ships proved to be easy targets for the Germans. In the first four months of 1942, the Germans sank 87 ships off the Atlantic shore. Seven months into the year, German wolf packs had destroyed a total of 681 Allied ships in the Atlantic. Something had to be done or the war at sea would be lost.
The Allies responded by organizing their cargo ships into convoys. Convoys were groups of ships traveling together for mutual protection, as they had done in the First World War. The convoys were escorted across the Atlantic by destroyers equipped with sonar for detecting submarines underwater. They were also accompanied by airplanes that used radar to spot U-boats on the ocean's surface. With this improved tracking, the Allies were able to find and destroy German U-boats faster than the Germans could build them. In late spring of 1943, Admiral Karl Doenitz, the commander of the German U-boat offensive, reported that his losses had "reached an unbearable height."
At the same time, the United States launched a crash shipbuilding program By early 1943, 140 Liberty ships were produced each month. Launchings of Allied ships began to outnumber sinkings.
By mid-1943, the tide of the Battle of the Atlantic had turned. A happy Churchill reported to the House of Commons that June "was the best month [at sea] from every point of view we have ever known in the whole 46 months of the war." &
Analyzing Causes £ Why had the tide turned in the Battle of the Atlantic by
570 Chapter 17
MAIN IDEA
Synthesizing
|| What two key decisions determined the final outcome at Stalingrad?
P1?
Eastern Front and the Mediterranean By the winter of 1943, the Allies began to see victories on land as well as sea. The first great turning point came in the Battle of Stalingrad.
THE BATTLE OF STALINGRAD
The Germans had been fighting in the Soviet Union since June 1941. In November 1941, the bitter cold had stopped them in their tracks outside the Soviet cities of Moscow and Leningrad. When spring came, the German tanks were ready to roll. In the summer of 1942, the Germans took the offensive in the southern Soviet Union. Hitler hoped to capture Soviet oil fields in the Caucasus Mountains. He also wanted to wipe out Stalingrad, a major industrial center on the Volga River. (See map, page 572.)
The German army confidently approached Stalingrad in August 1942. "To reach the Volga and take Stalingrad is not so difficult for us," one German soldier wrote home. "Victory is not far away." The Luftwaffe—the German air force—prepared the way with nightly bombing raids over the city. Nearly every wooden building in Stalingrad was set ablaze. The situation looked so desperate that Soviet officers in Stalingrad recommended blowing up the city's factories and abandoning the city. A furious Stalin ordered them to defend his namesake city no matter what the cost.
For weeks the Germans pressed in on Stalingrad, conquering it house by house in brutal hand-to-hand combat. By the end of September, they controlled nine-tenths of the city—or what was left of it. Then another winter set in. The Soviets saw the cold as an opportunity to roll fresh tanks across the frozen landscape and begin a massive counterattack. The Soviet army closed around Stalingrad, trapping the Germans in and around the city and cutting off their supplies. The Germans' situation was hopeless, but Hitler's orders came: "Stay and fight! I won't go back from the Volga."
The fighting continued as winter turned Stalingrad into a frozen wasteland. "We just lay in our holes and froze, knowing that 24 hours later and 48 hours later we should be shivering precisely as we were now," wrote a German soldier, Benno Zieser. "But there was now no hope whatsoever of relief, and that was the worst thing of all." The German commander surrendered on January 31, 1943. Two days later, his starving troops also surrendered.
In defending Stalingrad, the Soviets lost a total of 1,100,000 soldiers—more than all American deaths during the entire war. Despite the staggering death toll, the Soviet victory marked a turning point in the war. From that point on, the Soviet army began to move westward toward Germany.
HISTORY
VIDEO
Battle of Stalingrad
7\ hmhsocialstudies.com
Dazed, starved, and freezing, these German soldiers were taken prisoner after months of struggle. But they were the lucky ones. More than 230,000 of their comrades died in the Battle of Stalingrad.
▼

V
American journalist Ernie Pyle, shown here in 1944, was one of the most famous war correspondents of World War II.
THE NORTH AFRICAN FRONT
While the Battle of Stalingrad raged, Stalin pressured Britain and America to open a "second front" in Western Europe. He argued that an invasion across the English Channel would force Hitler to divert troops from the Soviet front. Churchill and Roosevelt didn't think the Allies had enough troops to attempt an invasion on European soil. Instead, they launched Operation Torch, an invasion of Axis-controlled North Africa, commanded by American General Dwight D. Eisenhower. In November 1942, some 107,000 Allied troops, the great majority of them Americans, landed in Casablanca, Oran, and Algiers in North Africa. From there they sped eastward, chasing the Afrika Korps led by General Erwin Rommel, the legendary Desert Fox. After months of heavy fighting, the last of the Afrika Korps surrendered in May 1943. British general Harold Alexander sent a message to Churchill, reporting that "All enemy resistance has ceased. We are masters of the North African shores." American war correspondent Ernie Pyle caught the mood of the victorious troops.
A
Personal Voice ernie pyle 66 This colossal German surrender has done more for American morale here than anything that could possibly have happened. Winning in battle Is like winning at poker or catching lots of fish. ... As a result, the hundreds of thousands of Americans In North Africa now are happy men.” —Ernie's War: The Best of Ernie Pyle's World War II Dispatches
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
What was the outcome of the North African campaign?
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
$ What were the results of the Italian campaign?
THE ITALIAN CAMPAIGN
Even before the battle in North Africa was won, Roosevelt, Churchill, and their commanders met in Casablanca. At this meeting, the two leaders agreed to accept only the unconditional surrender of the Axis powers. That is, enemy nations would have to accept whatever terms of peace the Allies dictated. The two leaders also discussed where to strike next. The Americans argued that the best approach to victory was to assemble a massive invasion fleet in Britain and to launch it across the English Channel, through France, and into the heart of Germany. Churchill, however, thought it would be safer to first attack Italy. The Italian campaign got off to a good start with the capture of Sicily in the summer of 1943. Stunned by their army's collapse in Sicily, the Italian government forced dictator Benito Mussolini to resign. On July 25, 1943, King Victor Emmanuel III summoned II Duce (Italian for "the leader") to his palace, stripped him of power, and had him arrested. "At this moment," the king told Mussolini, "you are the most hated man in Italy." Italians began celebrating the end of the war.
Their cheers were premature. Hitler was determined to stop the Allies in Italy rather than fight on German soil. One of the hardest battles the Allies encountered in Europe was fought less than 40 miles from Rome. This battle, "Bloody Anzio," lasted four months—until the end of May 1944—and left about 25,000 Allied and 30,000 Axis casualties. During the year after Anzio, German armies continued to put up strong resistance. The effort to free Italy did not succeed until 1945, when Germany itself was close to collapse.
HEROES IN COMBAT
Among the brave men who fought in Italy were pilots of the all-black 99th Pursuit Squadron—the Tuskegee Airmen. In Sicily, the squadron registered its first victory against an enemy aircraft and went on to more impressive strategic strikes against the German forces throughout Italy. The Tuskegee Airmen won two Distinguished Unit Citations (the military's highest commendation) for their outstanding aerial combat against the German Luftwaffe.
Another African-American unit to distinguish itself was the famous 92nd Infantry Division, nicknamed the Buffaloes. In just six months of fighting in Europe, the Buffaloes won 7 Legion of Merit awards, 65 Silver Stars, and 162 Bronze Stars for courage under fire.
Like African Americans, most Mexican Americans served in segregated units. Seventeen Mexican-American soldiers were awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor. An all-Chicano unit—Company E of the 141st Regiment, 36th Division became one of the most decorated of
the war.	T , . £ .
Japanese Americans also served in Italy and North Africa.
At the urging of General Delos Emmons, the army created the 100th Battalion, which consisted of 1,300 Hawaiian Niser (The word Nisei refers to American citizens whose parents had emigrated from japan.) The 100th saw brutal eombatand became known as the Purple Hear. Battalion. Later he 100th was merged into the all-Nisei 442nd Regiments Combat Team. It became the most decorated unit in	Y-
On May 31,1943, the 99th Pursuit Squadron, the first group of African-American pilots trained at the Tuskegee Institute, arrived in North Africa. Below is their regimental insignia.
▼
The United States in World War II 573
DWIGHT D. “IKE” EISENHOWER 1890-1969
When Army Chief of Staff General George Marshall chose modest Lieutenant General Dwight David Eisenhower to become the Supreme Commander of U.S. forces in Europe, he knew what he was doing. Ike was a superb planner and possessed a keen mind for military tactics.
More important, Eisenhower had an uncommon ability to work with all kinds of people, even competitive and temperamental allies. After V-E Day, a grateful Marshall wrote to Ike, saying, “You have been selfless in your actions, always sound and tolerant in your judgments and altogether admirable in the courage and wisdom of your military decisions. You have made history, great history for the good of mankind.” In 1953, Dwight D. Eisenhower became president of the United States.
The Allies Liberate Europe
Even as the Allies were battling for Italy in 1943, they had begun work on a dramatic plan to invade the Normandy region of northern France and free Western Europe from the Nazis. General Dwight D. Eisenhower commanded Operation Overlord, as the plan was called. He selected General Omar Bradley to lead the American forces participating in the mission. From this point on, Bradley commanded all U.S. ground troops invading Europe from the west.
D-DAY
Under Eisenhower's direction in England, the Allies gathered a force of nearly 3 million British, American, and Canadian troops and mountains of military equipment and supplies. To keep their plans secret, the Allies set up a huge phantom army with its own headquarters and equipment. In radio messages they knew the Germans could read, Allied commanders sent orders to this make-believe army to attack the French port of Calais—150 miles away—where the English Channel is narrowest. As a result, Hitler maintained a large army at Calais. The Allied invasion, was originally set for June 5, but bad weather forced a delay. Banking on a forecast for clearing skies, Eisenhower gave the go-ahead for D-Day—June 6, 1944, the first day of the invasion. Shortly after midnight, three divisions parachuted down behind German lines. They were followed in the early morning hours by thousands upon thousands of seaborne soldiers—the largest land-sea-air operation in army history.
Despite the massive air and sea bombardment by the Allies, German retaliation was brutal, particularly at Omaha Beach. "People were yelling, screaming, dying, running on the beach, equipment was flying everywhere, men were bleeding to death, crawling, lying everywhere, firing coming from all directions," soldier Felix Branham wrote of the scene there. "We dropped down behind anything that was the size of a golf ball."
THE ALLIES GAIN GROUND
Despite heavy casualties, the Allies held the beachheads. The invasion of Normandy was a success. After seven days of fighting, the Allies held an 80-mile strip of France. Within a month, they had landed a million troops, 567,000 tons of supplies, and 170,000 vehicles in France. On July 25, General Bradley unleashed massive air and land bombardment against the enemy at St. Lo, providing a gap in the German line of defense through which General George Patton and his Third Army could advance. On August 23, Patton and the Third Army reached the Seine River south of Paris. Two days later, French resistance forces and American troops liberated the French capital from four years of German occupation. Parisians were delirious with joy. Patton announced this joyous event to his commander in a message that read, "Dear Ike: Today I spat in the Seine." By September 1944, the Allies had freed France, Belgium, and Luxembourg. This good news—and the American people's desire not to "change horses in midstream "-helped elect Franklin Roosevelt to an unprecedented fourth term in November, along with his running mate, Senator Harry S. Truman. JE/
Background
American paratroopers on D-Day carried a simple signaling device to help them find one another in the dark. Each had a metal toy cricket to click. No German radio operators could intercept these messages.
main idea j
Evaluating
Was the Allied invasion of Europe successful? Explain your answer.
574 Chapter 17
D-Day, June 6,1944
Allied forces I i Flooded area
Glider landing
DI______i
6 miles
- Canal
0	3	6 kilometers

A


London
D-Day morning, a platoon of American infantry wade ashore to Omaha Beach.
E n g I i s h C h a n n e I
ARMY GROUP COMMANDER OF GROUND FORCES
Montgomery U.S. 1st ARMY Bradley
Vierville-sur-Mer
GOLD
BEACH
Isigny
Trdvieres
to St. L6,
J,4 '
I . '71
OMAHA
BEACH

GREAT
BRITAIN
rnANbt



Mulberry Harbor
In order to accommodate the vast number of invading ships, the Allies built two enormous concrete ports and towed them to Gold Beach on the French coast on D-Day. They sank 70 old ships to create a breakwater for the artificial harbor.
y>
GEOGRAPHY skillbuilder
1-	Place How does the inset map at the top of the page help
explain why Hitler was expecting the invasion to cross from Dover to Calais over the Strait of Dover?	.	»
2-	Human-Environment Interaction Was D-Day a si p < or complex operation? How can you tell?
u

HISTORICAL
SPOTLIGHT
AUDIE MURPHY
Near the end of the Second World War, Audie Murphy became famous as the most decorated American soldier of the war. He received 24 medals from the United States—including the Congressional Medal of Honor.
He was also awarded three medals by France and one more by Belgium.
Born in Kingston, Texas, Murphy enlisted in the army in 1942. He served in North Africa and Europe, and in 1944 he rose to the rank of second lieutenant.
His most impressive act of bravery occurred in January 1945 near Colmar, France, when in the midst of a furious German attack, he jumped onto a burning tank destroyer and killed about 50 Axis troops with his machine gun. Although wounded in the leg, he rallied his troops to retake the ground the Germans had gained earlier in the day.
THE BATTLE OF THE BULGE
In October 1944, Americans captured their first German town, Aachen. Hitler responded with a desperate last-gasp offensive. He ordered his troops to break through the Allied lines and to recapture the Belgian port of Antwerp. This bold move, the Fuhrer hoped, would disrupt the enemy's supply lines and demoralize the Allies. On December 16, under cover of dense fog, eight German tank divisions broke through weak American defenses along an 80-mile front. Hitler hoped that a victory would split American and British forces and break up Allied supply lines. Tanks drove 60 miles into Allied territory, creating a bulge in the lines that gave this desperate last-ditch offensive its name, the Battle of the Bulge. As the Germans swept westward, they captured 120 American GIs near Malmedy. Elite German troops—the SS troopers— herded the prisoners into a large field and mowed them down with machine guns and pistols.
The battle raged for a month. When it was over, the Germans had been pushed back, and little seemed to have changed. But, in fact, events had taken a decisive turn. The Germans had lost 120,000 troops, 600 tanks and assault guns, and 1,600 planes in the Battle of the Bulge— soldiers and weapons they could not replace. From that point on, the Nazis could do little but retreat. Fj
LIBERATION OF THE DEATH CAMPS
Meanwhile, Allied troops pressed eastward into the German heartland, and the Soviet army pushed westward across Poland toward Berlin. Soviet troops were the first to come upon one of the Nazi death camps, in July 1944. As the Soviets drew near a camp called Majdanek in Poland, SS guards worked feverishly to bury and burn all evidence of their hideous crimes. But they ran out of time. When the Soviets entered Majdanek, they found a thousand starving prisoners barely alive, the world's largest crematorium, and a storehouse containing 800,000 shoes. "This is not a concentration camp," reported a stunned Soviet war correspondent, "it is a gigantic murder plant." The Americans who later liberated Nazi death camps in Germany were equally horrified. Vocabulary elite: a small and privileged group
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
Why was the Battle of the Bulge important?
A
Personal Voice Robert t. Johnson “ We started smelling a terrible odor and suddenly we were at the concentration camp at Landsberg. Forced the gate and faced hundreds of starving prisoners.
We saw emaciated men whose thighs were smaller than wrists, many had bones sticking out thru their skin. . . . Also we saw hundreds of burned and naked bodies. . . . That evening I wrote my wife that ‘For the first time I truly realized the evil of Hitler and why this war had to be waged.’ ”
—quoted in Voices: Letters from World War II
UNCONDITIONAL SURRENDER
By April 25, 1945, the Soviet army had stormed Berlin. As Soviet shells burst overhead, the city panicked. "Hordes of soldiers stationed in Berlin deserted and were shot on the spot or hanged from the nearest tree, wrote Claus Fuhrmann, a Berlin clerk. "On their chests they had placards reading, 'We betrayed the Fuhrer.’" P 576 Chapter 17
Vocabulary
capitulation:
surrender
In his underground headquarters in Berlin, Hitler prepared for the end. On April 29, he married Eva Braun, his longtime companion. The same day, he wrote out his last address to the German people.
In it he blamed the Jews for starting the war and his generals for losing it. "I die with a happy heart aware of the immeasurable deeds of our soldiers at the front. I myself and my wife choose to die in order to escape the disgrace of . . . capitulation/' he said. The next day Hitler shot himself while his new wife swallowed poison. In accordance with Hitler's orders, the two bodies were carried outside, soaked with gasoline, and burned.
A week later, General Eisenhower accepted the unconditional surrender of the Third Reich. On May 8, 1945, the Allies celebrated V-E Day—Victory in Europe Day. The war in Europe was finally over.
ROOSEVELT’S DEATH
President Roosevelt did not live to see V-E Day. On April 12, 1945, while posing for a portrait in Warm Springs, Georgia, the president had a stroke and died. That night, Vice President Harry S. Truman became the nation's 33rd president. New Yorkers celebrate V-E Day with a massive party that began in Times Square and went on for days at sites throughout the city.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance. •Dwight D. Eisenhower	• D-Day	-Battle of the Bulge
•Omar Bradley	‘George Patton	’V-E Day
S.
Truman MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a time line of the major events influencing the fighting in Europe and North Africa.
Write a paragraph indicating how any two of these events are related.
CRITICAL THINKING
EVALUATING LEADERSHIP
Evaluate the military contributions of leaders during World War II. Think About:
•	Dwight Eisenhower
•	Omar Bradley
•	George Patton
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
Why did Stalin want the other Allied nations to open a second front? Why did Roosevelt and Churchill resist?
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
Review the "A Personal Voice" primary source on page 576. Why was the liberation of concentration camps an important event in World War II?
ANALYZING EVENTS
Why was the invasion of Normandy significant?
The United States in World War II 57j
TEKS7D,7E,7F, 7G
The War in the Pacific
MAIN IDEA
WHY
IfT MATTERS NOW Terms & Names
In order to defeat Japan and end the war in the Pacific, the United States unleashed a terrible new weapon, the atomic bomb.
Countries of the modern world struggle to find ways to prevent the use of nuclear weapons.
•Douglas	*J. Robert
MacArthur	Oppenheimer
•	Chester Nimitz	• Hiroshima
•	Battle of Midway	• Nagasaki
•	kamikaze	• Nuremberg trials
One American's Story ’
k" :	:	' '	■ -J
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the war in the Pacific.
rr....
The writer William Manchester left college after Pearl Harbor to join the marines. Manchester says that, as a child, his "horror of violence had been so deep-seated that I had been unable to trade punches with other boys." On a Pacific island, he would have to confront that horror the first time he killed a man in face-to-face combat. Manchester's target was a Japanese sniper firing on Manchester's buddies from a fisherman's shack.
A
Personal Voice william Manchester “ My mouth was dry, my legs quaking, and my eyes out of focus. Then my vision cleared. I... kicked the door with my right foot, and leapt inside....
I... saw him as a blur to my right.... My first shot missed him, embedding itself in the straw wall, but the second caught him dead-on .... A wave of blood gushed from the wound.... He dipped a hand in it and listlessly smeared his cheek red.... Almost immediately a fly landed on his left eyeball.... A feeling of disgust and self-hatred clotted darkly in my throat, gagging me. ’ ’
American soldiers on Leyte in the Philippine Islands in late 1944.
—from Goodbye Darkness: A Memoir of the Pacific War
The Pacific War was a savage conflict fought with raw courage. Few who took part in that fearsome struggle would return home unchanged.
The Allies Stem the Japanese Tide
While the Allies agreed that the defeat of the Nazis was their first priority, the United States did not wait until V-E Day to move against Japan. Fortunately the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 had missed the Pacific Fleet's submarines Even more importantly, the attack had missed the fleet's aircraft carriers which were out at sea at the time.	'
578 Chapter 17
Background
Allied forces held out against 200,000 invading Japanese troops for four months on the Bataan Peninsula. Hunger, disease, and bombardments killed 14,000 Allied troops and wounded 48,000.
MAIN! IDEA
Comparing
if In what ways Were the American victory at Midway and the Japanese Wumph at Pearl harbor alike?
JAPANESE ADVANCES
In the first six months after Pearl Harbor, the Japanese conquered an empire that dwarfed Hitler's Third Reich. On the Asian mainland, Japanese troops overran Hong Kong, French Indochina, Malaya, Burma, Thailand, and much of China. They also swept south and east across the Pacific, conquering the Dutch East Indies, Guam, Wake Island, the Solomon Islands, and countless other outposts in the ocean, including two islands in the Aleutian chain, which were part of Alaska.
In the Philippines, 80,000 American and Filipino troops battled the Japanese for control. At the time of the Japanese invasion in December 1941, General Douglas MacArthur was in command of Allied forces on the islands. When American and Filipino forces found themselves with their backs to the wall on Bataan, President Roosevelt ordered MacArthur to leave. On March 11, 1942,
MacArthur left the Philippines with his wife, his son, and his staff. As he left, he pledged to the many thousands of men who did not make it out, "I shall return."
Though the fighting was over, the suffering of the soldiers had just begun. For five days and nights, the Japanese forced the soldiers on the so-called Bataan Death March. They had little food or water, and those who dropped out of line were beaten or shot. Thousands perished.
DOOLITTLE’S RAID
In the spring of 1942, the Allies began to turn the tide against the Japanese. The push began on April 18 with a daring raid on Tokyo and other Japanese cities. Lieutenant Colonel James Doolittle led 16 bombers in the attack. The next day, Americans awoke to headlines that read "Tokyo Bombed! Doolittle Do'od It." Pulling off a Pearl Harbor-style air raid over Japan lifted America's sunken spirits. At the same time, it dampened spirits in Japan.
BATTLE OF THE CORAL SEA
The main Allied forces in the Pacific were Americans and Australians. In May 1942 they succeeded in stopping the Japanese drive toward Australia in the five-day Battle of the Coral Sea. During this battle, the fighting was done by airplanes that took off from enormous aircraft carriers. Not a single shot was fired by surface ships. For the first time since Pearl Harbor, a Japanese invasion had been stopped and turned back.
THE BATTLE OF MIDWAY
Japan's next thrust was toward Midway, a strategic island which lies northwest of Hawaii. Here again the Allies succeeded in stopping the Japanese. Americans had broken the Japanese code and knew that Midway was to be their next target. Admiral Chester Nimitz, the commander of American naval forces in the Pacific, moved to defend the island. On June 3, 1942, his scout planes found the Japanese fleet. The Americans sent torpedo planes and dive bombers to the attack. The Japanese were caught with their planes still on the decks of their carriers.
The results were devastating. By the end of the Battle of Midway, the Japanese had lost four aircraft carriers, a cruiser, and 250 planes. In the words of a Japanese official, at Midway the Americans had “avenged Pearl Harbor." $
The Battle of Midway was a turning point in the Pacific War. Soon the Allies began “island hopping." Island by island they won territory back from the Japanese. With each island, Allied forces moved closer to Japan American diversity and ingenuity aided their progress. Hundreds of Native Americans of the Nava o nation worked as code talkers, translating messages into a coded version of the own language. This unwritten language was so complex the Japanese never eci-phered it, allowing quick and secure transmission of vital military informatio .
The United States in World War II
Four hundred Navajo were recruited into the Marine Corps as code talkers.
Their primary duty was transmitting telephone and radio messages.
•U.S. surrenders Bataan in the Philippines.
•Allies turn back Japanese fleet In Battle of the Coral Sea.
•Allies defeat Japan In Battle of Midway.
* U.S. marines land on Guadalcanal.
War in the Pacific and in Europe
PACIFIC
1941
EUROPE
•U.S. declares •war on Japan.
~ Apr-Juir« -	-
: Germany invades the •Soviet Union.
: Germany invades Greece e and Yugoslavia.
Apr May JunAug
• Germany and Italy declare e war on the United States.
'■ Hitler orders ■ attack on •Stalingrad.

”’,’r1949^ebwww
Allies land In eNorth Africa.
: German : troops sur-: render at •Stalingrad.
Axis forces surrender In North •Africa.
World War II: The War in the Pacific, 1942-1945

SOVIET
UNION
IS'i'S
INDIAN
Pearl Harbor
•T
" 0 Hawaiian Is.
(U.S.)
"Guadalcanal,
Aug. 1942-Feb. 1943
Fiji Is.
165iE
1,600 kilometers
165W

ALASKA
(U.S.)
./A

^oral
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Movement Which island served as a jumping-off point for several Pacific battles?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction How do you think the distances between the Pacific islands affected U.S. naval strategy?

Japanese Empire and conquest Major Allied campaign
.. Limit of Japanese advance
Atomic bombing Major battle
800	1,600 miles
150W
’ *
<2
580 Chapter 17
• Allies win Battle of : the Philippine Sea.
* Allies win Battle of Leyte Gulf.
* Allies capture Iwo Jima.
•Allies capture Okinawa.
•U.S. drops atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
•Japan surrenders.


1944-May -Jun Jiti Aug
Oct Dec 1.945 MarAprMayJiun AttgSep

Allies
invade
•Sicily.
Italy secretly surrenders •to Allies.
Germans attack Allies . M .	>in Battle of the Bulge.
• Soviets first liberate death camps.
• Allies invade Europe on D-Day. e”Bloody Anzio" ends.
• Allies liberate Paris.
•V-E Day ends war In Europe. •Italians execute Mussolini.
•Hitler commits suicide.
The Allies Go on the Offensive
The first Allied offensive began in August 1942 when 19,000 troops stormed Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands. By the time the Japanese abandoned Guadalcanal six months later, they called it the Island of Death. To war correspondent Ralph Martin and the troops who fought there, it was simply "hell."
A
Personal Voice Ralph g. martin “ Hell was red furry spiders as big as your fist, giant lizards as long as your leg, leeches falling from trees to suck blood, armies of white ants with a bite of fire, scurrying scorpions inflaming any flesh they touched, enormous rats and bats everywhere, and rivers with waiting crocodiles. Hell was the sour, foul smell of the squishy Jungle, humidity that rotted a body within hours,.. . stinking wet heat of dripping rain forests that sapped the strength of any man. ”
—The Gl War
I main idea I
??***■"....I...J
Rawing
delusions
& Why was the Battle of Leyte Gulfso crucial to
Allies?
Guadalcanal marked Japan's first defeat on land, but not its last. The Americans continued leapfrogging across the Pacific toward Japan, and in October 1944, some 178,000 Allied troops and 738 ships converged on Leyte Island in the Philippines. General MacArthur, who had left the Philippines two years earlier, waded ashore and announced, "People of the Philippines: I have returned."
THE JAPANESE DEFENSE
The Japanese threw their entire fleet into the Battle of Leyte Gulf. They also tested a new tactic, the kamikaze (ka'mTka'ze), or suicide-plane, attack in which Japanese pilots crashed their bomb-laden planes into Allied ships. (Kamikaze means "divine wind" and refers to a legendary typhoon that saved Japan in 1281 by destroying a Mongol invasion.) In the Philippines, 424 kamikaze pilots embarked on suicide missions, sinking 16 ships and damaging another 80.
Americans watched these terrifying attacks with "a strange mixture of respect and pity" according to Vice Admiral Charles Brown. "You have to admire the devotion to country demonstrated by those pilots," recalled Seaman George Marse. "Yet, when they were shot down, rescued and brought aboard our ship, we were surprised to find the pilots looked like ordinary, scared young men, not the wide-eyed fanatical 'devils we imagined them to be."
Despite the damage done by the kamikazes, the Battle of Leyte Gulf was a disaster for Japan. In three days of battle, it lost 3 battleships, 4 aircraft carriers, 13 cruisers, and almost 500 planes. From then on, the Imperial Navy played only a minor role in the defense of Japan. Q
The United States in World War II 5i

History Through
RAISING THE FLAG ON IWO JIMA
On February 19,1945, the war in Europe was nearing its end, but in the Pacific one of the fiercest battles of World War II was about to erupt. On that day, 70,000 marines converged on the tiny, Japanese-controlled island of Iwo Jima. Four days later, they had captured Mount Suribachi, the island’s highest point, but the battle for Iwo Jima would rage on for four more weeks.
Six marines and a navy corpsman were sent to replace the flag with an even larger one. Joe Rosenthal, a wire-service photographer, saw the second flag raising, grabbed his camera, and clicked off a frame without even looking through his viewfinder. Rosenthal’s photo appeared the next morning on the front pages of American newspapers. In the minds of Americans, it immediately replaced the gloomy, blurred images of Pearl Harbor going up in flames.
SKILLBUILDER
Interpeting Visual Sources X.
One of the Mount Suribachi images became one of the most recognized, most reproduced images of World War II. Study the details and point of view in each photo. Explain why you think o iA/hSenJ^a'S 'mage’ rather than Lowery’s, became important.
■ What human qualities or events do you think Rosenthal’s
photograph symbolizes?
582 Chapter 17
J MAIN IDEA
Drawing
Conclusions
$ Why was Okinawa a significant island in the war in the Pacific?
IWO JIMA
After retaking much of the Philippines and liberating the American prisoners of war there, the Allies turned to Iwo Jima, an island that writer William Manchester later described as “an ugly, smelly glob of cold lava squatting in a surly ocean." Iwo Jima (which means sulfur island" in Japanese) was critical to the United States as a base from which heavily loaded bombers might reach Japan. It was also perhaps the most heavily defended spot on earth, with 20,700 Japanese troops entrenched in tunnels and caves. More than 6,000 marines died taking this desolate island, the greatest number in any battle in the Pacific to that point. Only 200 Japanese survived. Just one obstacle now stood between the Allies and a final assault on Japan—the island of Okinawa. THE BATTLE FOR OKINAWA
In April 1945, U.S. Marines invaded Okinawa. The Japanese unleashed more than 1,900 kamikaze attacks on the Allies during the Okinawa campaign, sinking 30 ships, damaging more than 300 more, and killing almost 5,000 seamen. Once ashore, the Allies faced even fiercer opposition than on Iwo Jima. By the time the fighting ended on June 21, 1945, more than 7,600 Americans had died. But the Japanese paid an even ghastlier price—110,000 lives— in defending Okinawa. This total included two generals who chose ritual suicide over the shame of surrender. A witness to this ceremony described their end: "A simultaneous shout and a flash of the sword . . . and both generals had nobly accomplished their last duty to their Emperor.”
The Battle for Okinawa was a chilling foretaste of what the Allies imagined the invasion of Japan's home islands would be. Churchill predicted the cost would be a million American lives and half that number of British lives. C>
The Atomic Bomb Ends the War
The taking of Iwo Jima and Okinawa opened the way for an invasion of Japan. However, Allied leaders knew that such an invasion would become a desperate struggle. Japan still had a huge army that would defend every inch of homeland. President Truman saw only one way to avoid an invasion of Japan. He decided to use a powerful new weapon that had been developed by scientists working on the Manhattan Project—the atomic bomb.
THE MANHATTAN PROJECT
Led by General Leslie Groves with research directed by jewish American scientist J. Robert Oppenheimer, the development of the atomic bomb was not only the most ambitious scientific enterprise in history, it was also the best-kept secret of the war. At its peak, more than 600,000 Americans were involved in the project, although few knew its ultimate purpose. Even Truman did not learn about it until he became president. The first test of the new bomb took place on the morning of July 16, 1945, in an empty expanse of desert near Alamogordo, New Mexico. A blinding flash, which was visible 180 miles away, was followed by a deafening roar as a tremendous shock wave rolled across the trembling desert. Otto Frisch, a scientist on the project, described the huge mushroom cloud that rose over the desert as “a red-hot elephant standing balanced on its trunk." The bomb worked!
DOUGLAS MACARTHUR 1880-1964
Douglas MacArthur was too arrogant and prickly to be considered a "regular guy” by his troops. But he was arguably the most brilliant Allied strategist of World War II. For every American soldier killed in his campaigns, the Japanese lost ten.
He was considered a real hero of the war, both by the military and by the prisoners on the Philippines, whom he freed. “MacArthur took more territory with less loss of life,” observed journalist John Gunther, “than any military commander since Darius the Great [king of Persia, 522-486 b.c.].”
The United States in World War II 58:
President Truman now faced a difficult decision. Should the Allies use the bomb to bring an end to the war? Truman did not hesitate. On July 25, 1945, he ordered the military to make final plans for dropping two atomic bombs on Japanese targets. A day later, the United States warned Japan that it faced "prompt and utter destruction" unless it surrendered at once. Japan
refused. Truman later wrote, "The final decision of where and when to use the atomic bomb was up to me. Let there be no mistake about it. I regarded the bomb as a military weapon and never had any doubt that it should be used."
HIROSHIMA AND NAGASAKI
On August 6, a B-29 bomber named Enola Gay released an atomic bomb, codenamed Little Boy, over Hiroshima, an important Japanese military center. Forty-three seconds later, almost every building in the city collapsed into dust from the force of the blast. Hiroshima had ceased to exist. Still, Japan's leaders hesitated to surrender. Three days later, a second bomb, code-named Fat Man, was dropped on Nagasaki, leveling half the city. By the end
of the year, an estimated 200,000 people had died as a result of injuries and radiation poisoning caused by the atomic blasts.
Yamaoka Michiko was 15 years old and living near the center of Hiroshima when the first bomb hit.
A
Personal Voice yamaoka michiko “ They say temperatures of 7,000 degrees centigrade hit me. . . .
Nobody there looked like human beings. . . . Humans had lost the ability to speak. People couldn’t scream, Mt hurts!’ even when they were on fire. . . . People with their legs wrenched off. Without heads. Or with faces burned and swollen out of shape. The scene I saw was a living hell. ”
—quoted in Japan at War: An Oral History
Emperor Hirohito was horrified by the destruction wrought by the bomb. "I cannot bear to see my innocent people suffer any longer," he told Japan's leaders tearfully. Then he ordered them to draw up papers "to end the
war." On September 2, formal surrender ceremonies took place on the U.S. battleship Missouri in Tokyo Bay. "Today the guns are silent," said General MacArthur in a speech marking this historic moment. "The skies no longer rain death—the seas bear only commerce—men everywhere walk upright in the sunlight.
The entire world is quietly at peace."

COUNTERPOINT
“The only way to end the war against Japan was to bomb the Japanese mainland.”
Many advisors to President Truman, including Secretary of War Henry Stimson, had this point of view. They felt the bomb would end the war and save American lives. Stimson said, “The face of war is the face of death.”
Some scientists working on the bomb agreed-even more so as the casualty figures from Iwo Jima and Okinawa sank in. “Are we to go on shedding American blood when we have available a means to a steady victory?" they petitioned. “No! If we can save even a handful of American lives, then let us use this weapon—now!"
Two other concerns pushed Americans to use the bomb. Some people feared that if the bomb were not dropped, the project might be viewed as a gigantic waste of money.
The second consideration involved the Soviet Union. Tension and distrust were already developing between the Western
Allies and the Soviets.
Some American officials believed that a successful use of the atomic bomb would give the United States a powerful advantage over the Soviets in shaping the postwar world.
THINKING CRITICALLY
CONNECT TO HISTORY
Summarizing What were the main arguments for and against dropping the atomic bomb on Japan? CONNECT TO TODAY
Evaluating Decisions Do you think the United States was justified in using the bomb against the Japanese? In a paragraph, explain why or why not.
“Japan’s staggering losses were enough to force Japan’s surrender.”
Many of the scientists who had worked on the bomb, as well as military leaders and civilian policymakers, had doubts about using it. Dr. Leo Szilard, a jewish Hungarian-born physicist who had helped President Roosevelt launch the project and who had a major role in developing the bomb, was a key figure opposing its use.
A petition drawn up by Szilard and signed by 70 other scientists argued that it would be immoral to drop an atomic bomb on Japan without fair warning. Many supported staging a demonstration of the bomb for Japanese leaders, perhaps by exploding one on a deserted island near Japan, to convince the Japanese to surrender.
Supreme Allied Commander General Dwight D. Eisenhower agreed. He maintained that "dropping the bomb was completely unnecessary” to save American lives and that Japan was already defeated. Ike told Secretary of War Henry Stimson, “I was against it [the bomb] on two counts. First the Japanese were ready to surrender and it wasn’t necessary to hit them with that awful thing. Second, I hated to see our country be the first to use such a weapon."
Rebuilding Begins
t Why was R°°sevelt anxious tomake
Concessions to Stalin concerning ttlefate of P°stwar Germany?
With Japan's surrender, the Allies turned to the challenge of rebuilding war-torn nations. Even before the last guns fell silent, they began thinking about principles that would govern the postwar world.
THE YALTA CONFERENCE
In February 1945, as the Allies pushed toward victory in Europe, an ailing Roosevelt had met with Churchill and Stalin at the Black Sea resort city of Yalta in the Soviet Union. Stalin graciously welcomed the president and the prime minister, and the Big Three, as they were called, toasted the defeat of Germany that now seemed certain. For eight grueling days, the three leaders discussed the fate of Germany and the postwar world. Stalin, his country devastated by German forces, favored a harsh approach He wanted to keep Germany divided into occupation zones areas controlled by Allied military forces-so that Germany would never again threaten
iX Jk
HISTORY
VIDEO
The Atomic Bomb
hmhsodalstudies.com
he Soviet Union.
When Churchill strongly disagreed, Roosevelt acted as a mediator. He was irepared to make concessions to Stalin for two reasons. First, he hoped that the bviet Union would stand by its commitments to join the war against Japan that vas still waging in the Pacific. (The first test of the atom bomb was still five nonths away.) Second, Roosevelt wanted Stalin's support for a new world peace-:eeping organization, to be named the United Nations.
The United States in World War II 585
The historic meeting at Yalta produced a series of compromises. To pacify Stalin, Roosevelt convinced Churchill to agree to a temporary division of Germany into four zones, one each for the Americans, the British, the Soviets, and the French. Churchill and Roosevelt assumed that, in time, all the zones would be brought together in a reunited Germany. For his part, Stalin promised 'Tree and unfettered elections" in Poland and other Soviet-occupied Eastern European countries.
Stalin also agreed to join in the war against Japan. That struggle was expected to continue for another year or more. In addition, he agreed to participate in an international conference to take place in April in San Francisco. There, Roosevelt's dream of a United Nations (UN) would become a reality.
THE NUREMBERG WAR TRIALS
Besides geographic division, Germany had another price to pay for its part in the war. The discovery of Hitler's death camps led the Allies to put 24 surviving Nazi leaders on trial for crimes against humanity, crimes against the peace, and war crimes. The trials were held in the southern German town of Nuremberg. At the Nuremberg trials, the defendants included Hitler's most trusted party officials, government ministers, military leaders, and powerful industrialists. As the trial began, U.S. Supreme Court Justice Robert Jackson explained the significance of the event.
A
Personal Voice justice Robert jackson “ The wrongs which we seek to condemn and punish have been so calculated, so malignant and so devastating, that civilization cannot tolerate their being ignored because it cannot survive their being repeated. ... It is hard now to perceive in these miserable men . . . the power by which as Nazi leaders they once dominated much of the world and terrified most of it. Merely as individuals, their fate is of little consequence to the world. What makes this inquest significant is that these prisoners represent sinister influences that will lurk in the world long after their bodies have returned to dust. They are living symbols of racial hatreds, of terrorism and violence, and of the arrogance and cruelty of power. . . . Civilization can afford no compromise with the social forces which would gain renewed strength if we deal ambiguously or indecisively with the men in whom those forces now precariously survive. ”
—quoted in opening address to the Nuremberg War Crimes Trial
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
$ What decisions did Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin make at the Yalta Conference?
War Criminals on Trial, 1945-1949
Each defendant at the Nuremberg trials was accused of one or more of the following crimes:
•Crimes Against the Peace—planning and waging an aggressive war
•War Crimes—acts against the customs of warfare, such as the killing of hostages and prisoners, the plundering of private property, and the destruction of towns and cities
•Crimes Against Humanity—the murder, extermination, deportation, or enslavement of civilians
586 Chapter 17
1 was only following orders.99
DEFENDANTS AT THE NUREMBERG TRIALS
In the end, 12 of the 24 defendants were sentenced to death, and most of the remaining were sent to prison. In later trials of lesser leaders, nearly 200 more Nazis were found guilty of war crimes. Still, many people have argued that the trials did not go far enough in seeking out and punishing war criminals. Many Nazis who took part in the Holocaust did indeed go free.
Yet no matter how imperfect the trials might have been, they did establish an important principle—the idea that individuals are responsible for their own actions, even in times of war. Nazi executioners could not escape punishment by claiming that they were merely "following orders." The principle of individual responsibility was now firmly entrenched in international law.
THE OCCUPATION OF JAPAN
Japan was occupied by U.S. forces under the command of General Douglas MacArthur. In the early years of the occupation, more than 1,100 Japanese, from former Prime Minister Hideki Tojo to lowly prison guards, were arrested and put on trial. Seven, including Tojo, were sentenced to death. In the Philippines, in China, and in other Asian battlegrounds, additional Japanese officials were tried for atrocities against civilians or prisoners of war. During the seven-year American occupation, MacArthur reshaped Japan's economy by introducing free-market practices that led to a remarkable economic recovery. MacArthur also worked to transform Japan's government. He called for a new constitution that would provide for woman suffrage and guarantee basic freedoms. In the United States, Americans followed these changes with interest. The New York Times reported that "General MacArthur . . . has swept away an autocratic regime by a warrior god and installed in its place a democratic government presided over by a very human emperor and based on the will of the people as expressed in free elections." The Japanese apparently agreed. To this day, their constitution is known as the MacArthur Constitution.
•Douglas MacArthur •Chester Nlmitz

1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence
•Battle of Midway •kamikaze
explaining its significance.
•J. Robert Oppenheimer •Hiroshima
• Nagasaki •Nuremberg trials
main idea
USING YOUR NOTES
Using a chart such as the one below, describe the significance of key military actions in the Pacific during World War II.
 Military Action	Significance
1.	
2.	
3.	
4.	
5.	
Which military action was a turning Point for the Allies?
CRITICAL THINKING
DEVELOPING HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Analyze the significance of the Battle of Midway as a turning point in the War in the Pacific.
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
Do you think the decision to develop and use nuclear weapons was justified? Explain.
ANALYZING EVENTS
What was the Bataan Death March? How do you think it affected the Allied war effort? Support your answer.
EVALUATING DECISIONS
Is it legitimate to hold people accountable for crimes committed during wartime? Why or why not?
Think About:
•	the laws that govern society
•	the likelihood of conducting a fair trial
•	the behavior of soldiers, politicians, and civilians during war
EVALUATING LEADERSHIP
Evaluate the military contributions of leaders during World War II. Think About:
•	Douglas MacArthur
•	Chester Nimitz
The United States in World War II 587
TRACING THEMES
Science and Technology
Radar, guided missiles, nuclear submarines, reconnaissance satellites, atomic bombs—the inventions of the 20th century seem intended mainly for war, with the usual dreaded results. But these technological developments have also had far-reaching applications in peacetime. Because the innovations were originally intended for the battlefield, they were developed quickly and with a narrow purpose. However, their applications during peacetime have led to life-enhancing benefits that will extend far into the 21st century.
FIGHTER PLANES TO
COMMUTER FLIGHTS
Airplanes were first used to gather military information but were soon put to work as fighters and bombers. The Sopwith Camel (shown at right), was one of the most successful British fighter planes, bringing down almost 1,300 enemy aircraft during World War I. The development of flight technology eventually led to sophisticated supersonic aircraft. Today, non-military aircraft are primarily used for travel and cargo transport. Jumbo jets carry hundreds of passengers with each takeoff.
atom bombs to brain scans
Faced with alarming rumors of work on a German atomic bomb, America mobilized some of the finest scientific minds in the world to create its own atomic bomb. The energy released by its nuclear reaction was enough to kill hundreds of thousands of people, as evidenced by the destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. But the resulting ability to harness the atom’s energy also led to new technologies for diagnosing and treating human diseases. Techniques such as positron emission tomography (PET) now reveal the inner workings of the human brain itself.
Z’j


AOOITORY ST1HULATION
IF' » r
TECHNOLOGY
Semiconductors Computers Freeze-dried food Synthetic materials
Radar
Applications of World War II Technology
MILITARY USE PEACETIME USE
Navigation	Transistors, radios, electronics	1
Code breaking	Software programs, video games
Soldiers’ rations	TV dinners, space-shuttle rations
Parachutes, weapons	Telephones, automobile fenders,
parts, tires	pacemakers
Tracking and surveillance	Weather tracking, air traffic
	control, archaeological digs
SATELLITES TO CELLULAR PHONES
The Soviet Union launched Sputnik, the first successful artificial space satellite, in 1957. As the United States raced to catch up with the Soviets in space, both countries eventually produced satellites that have improved life for people around the world. Satellites not only track weather patterns and control air traffic but also link the continents in a vast communications network.
The United States in World War II 58!
The Home Front
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
After World War II, Americans adjusted to new economic opportunities and harsh social tensions.
Economic opportunities afforded by World War II led to a more diverse middle class in the United States.
Gl Bill of Rights James Farmer Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)
•Internment •Japanese American Citizens League (JACL)
American's Story
R^TAKfNC NOTE?"
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the war’s effects on the home front.
The writer and poet Maya Angelou was a teenager living in San Francisco when the United States got involved in World War II. The first change she noticed was the disappearance of the city's Japanese population. The second change was an influx of workers, including many African Americans, from the South. San Franciscans, she noted, maintained that there was no racism in their city by the bay. But Angelou knew differently.
A
Personal Voice maya angelou 66 A story went the rounds about a San Ranciscan white matron who refused to sit beside a Negro civilian on the streetcar, even after he made room for her on the seat. Her explanation was that she would not sit beside a draft dodger who was a Negro as well. She added that the least he could do was fight for his country the way her son was fighting on Iwo Jima. The story said that the man pulled his body away from the window to show an armless sleeve. He said quietly and with great dignity, ‘Then ask your son to look around for my arm, which I left over there.’ 99
—I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings
TWICE A PATRIOT
EX-PRIVATE OBIE BARTLETT LOST LEFT ARM-MARL HMM RELEASED: DEC, I94I-NOW AT WORK WELDING IN A WEST COAST SHIPYARD...
At the end of the war, returning veterans—even those who weren't disabled—had Like many to begin dealing with the very real issues of reentry and adjustment to a society minority veterans,
that offered many opportunities but still had many unsolved problems.	Obfe Ba,tlett was
twice a patriot—
~	and was still
Opportunity and Adjustment	second-class
—	,	- „	,	....... :citizen.
In contrast to the Great Depression, World War II was a time of opportunity for millions of Americans. Jobs abounded, and despite rationing and shortages people had money to spend. At the end of World War II, the nation emerged as the world's dominant economic and military power.
590 Chapter 17
ECONOMIC GAINS
The war years were good ones for working people. As defense industries boomed, unemployment fell to a low of 1.2 percent in 1944. Even with price and wage controls, average weekly pay (adjusted for inflation) rose 10 percent during the war. And although workers still protested long hours, overtime, and night shifts, they were able to save money for the future. Some workers invested up to half their paychecks in war bonds. Farmers also prospered during the war. Unlike the depression years, when farmers had battled dust storms and floods, the early 1940s had good weather for growing crops. Farmers benefited from improvements in farm machinery and fertilizers and reaped the profits from rising crop prices. As a result, crop production increased by 50 percent, and farm income tripled. Before the war ended, many farmers could pay off their mortgages.
Women also enjoyed employment gains during the war, although many lost their jobs when the war ended. Over 6 million women had entered the work force for the first time, boosting the percentage of women in the total work force to 35 percent. A third of those jobs were in defense plants, which offered women more challenging work and better pay
than jobs traditionally associated with women, such as as waitressing, clerking, and domestic service. With men away at war, many women also took advantage of openings in journalism and other professions. "The war really created opportunities for women," said Winona Espinosa, a wife and mother who became a riveter and bus driver during the war. "It was the first time we got a chance to show that we could do a lot of things that only men had done before."
Vocabulary migration: the act
of moving from one country or region to another
,-------------
1 man idea
Analyzing
Causes
A
How did World War II cause the U-S- population to shift? The war gave women the chance to prove they could be just as productive as men. But their pay usually did not reflect their productivity.
POPULATION SHIFTS
In addition to revamping the economy, the war triggered one of the greatest mass migrations in American history. Americans whose families had lived for decades in one place suddenly uprooted themselves to seek work elsewhere. More than a million newcomers poured into California between 1941 and 1944. Towns with defense industries saw their populations double and even triple, sometimes almost overnight. As shown in the map to the right, African Americans left the South for cities in the North in record numbers. &
African-American Migration, 1940-1950
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Movement To which geographic region did the greatest number of African Americans migrate?
2.	Movement How did the wartime economy contribute to this mass migration? 
The United States in World War II
Attending Pennsylvania State College under the Gl Bill of Rights, William Oskay, Jr., paid $28 a month for the trailer home in which you see him working. ►
SOCIAL ADJUSTMENTS
Families adjusted to the changes brought on by war as best they could. With millions of fathers in the armed forces, mothers struggled to rear their children alone. Many young children got used to being left with neighbors or relatives or in child-care centers as more and more mothers went to work. Teenagers left at home without parents sometimes drifted into juvenile delinquency. And when fathers finally did come home, there was often a painful period of readjustment as family members got to know one another again. The war helped create new families, too. Longtime sweethearts—as well as couples who barely knew each other—rushed to marry before the soldier or sailor was shipped overseas. In booming towns like Seattle, the number of marriage licenses issued went up by as much as 300 percent early in the war. A New Yorker observed in 1943, "On Fridays and Saturdays, the City Hall area is blurred with running soldiers, sailors, and girls hunting the license bureau, floral shops, ministers, blood-testing laboratories, and the Legal Aid Society."
In 1944, to help ease the transition of returning servicemen to civilian life, Congress passed the Servicemen's Readjustment Act, better known as the GI Bill of Rights. This bill provided education and training for veterans, paid for by the federal government. Just over half the returning soldiers, or about 7.8 million veterans, attended colleges and technical schools under the GI Bill. The act also provided federal loan guarantees to veterans buying homes or farms or starting new businesses.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
How did the war affect families and personal lives?
Discrimination and Reaction
Despite the opportunities that opened up for women and minorities during the war, old prejudices and policies persisted, both in the military and at home.
CIVIL RIGHTS PROTESTS
African Americans made some progress on the home front. During the war, thousands of African Americans left the South. The majority moved to the Midwest, where better jobs could be found. Between 1940 and 1944, the percentage of African Americans working in skilled or semiskilled jobs rose from 16 to 30 percent. 592 Chapter 17
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
Gj What caused the race riots in the 1940s?
Mexican Americans also experienced prejudice dur-violent summer of 1943, Los Angeles exploded
Wherever African Americans moved, however, discrimination presented tough hurdles. In 1942, civil rights leader James Farmer founded an interracial organization called the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) to confront urban segregation in the North. That same year, CORE staged its first sit-in at a segregated Chicago restaurant.
As African-American migrants moved into already overcrowded cities, tensions rose. In 1943, a tidal wave of racial violence swept across the country. The worst conflict erupted in Detroit on a hot Sunday afternoon in June. What started as a tussle between blacks and whites at a beach on the Detroit River mushroomed into a riot when white sailors stationed nearby joined the fray. The fighting raged for three days, fueled by false rumors that whites had murdered a black woman and her child and that black rioters had killed 17 whites. By the time President Roosevelt sent federal troops to restore order, 9 whites and 25 blacks lay dead or dying.
The violence of 1943 revealed to many Americans—black and white alike— just how serious racial tensions had become in the United States. By 1945, more than 400 committees had been established by American communities to improve race relations. Progress was slow, but African Americans were determined not to give up the gains they had made. Cj
TENSION IN LOS ANGELES
ing the war years. In the in anti-Mexican "zoot-suit" riots. The zoot suit was a style of dress adopted by Mexican-American youths as a symbol of their rebellion against tradition. It consisted of a long jacket and pleated pants. Broad-brimmed hats
were often worn with the 09	h 1
suits.
The riots began when 11 sailors in Los Angeles reported that they had been attacked by zoot-suit-wear-ing Mexican Americans.
This charge triggered violence involving thousands of servicemen and civilians.
Mobs poured into Mexican neighborhoods and grabbed any zoot-suiters they could find. The attackers ripped off their victims’ clothes and beat them senseless. The riots lasted almost a week and resulted in the beating of hundreds of Mexican-American youth and other minorities.
Despite such unhappy experiences with racism, many Mexican Americans believed that their sacrifices during wartime would lead to a better future.
A
Personal Voice manuel de la raza “ This war. . . Is doing what we in our Mexican-American movement had planned to do In one generation. ... It has shown those ‘across the tracks’ that we all share the same problems. It has shown them what the Mexican American wiII do, what responsibility he will take and what leadership qualities he will demonstrate. After this struggle, the status of the Mexican Americans will be different.
—quoted in A Different Mirror: A History of Multicultural America

hi
These Mexican Americans, involved in the 1943 Los Angeles riots, are seen here leaving jail to make court appearances.
The United States in World War II
Japanese Relocation Camps, 1942

IDAHO
Minidoka

Tule
Lake
CALIFORNIA
Manzanar
UTAH
Topaz
ARIZONA
a Heart * Mountain
WYOMING ; X ; : ,
//.>//■
COLORADO
X-Granada ; (Amache) <
Poston Gila

lillllb
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Location How many Japanese internment camps existed in 1942?
2.	Place Why do you think the majority of these camps were located in the West?
ARKANSAS,	'
Rohwer \ < Jerome * ’	:
On March 3,1942, a Japanese-American mother carries her

sleeping daughter during their relocation to an internment camp.
Internment of Japanese Americans
After Pearl Harbor, government officials began to fear that people of German, Italian, and Japanese descent would help the enemy. Italians and Germans who had immigrated to the United States but not yet completed the citizenship process were considered "enemy aliens." Many were forced to register and carry identification cards. In addition, the government restricted certain areas, which enemy aliens were not allowed to enter or remain in. Such restrictions placed a huge burden on those living or working in these areas. Thousands of Germans and Italians were placed in prison camps. But the worst treatment was reserved for Japanese Americans.
This sense of fear and uncertainty following Pearl Harbor caused a wave of prejudice against Japanese Americans. Early in 1942, the War Department called for the mass evacuation of all Japanese Americans from Hawaii. General Delos Emmons, the military governor of Hawaii, resisted the order because 37 percent of the people in Hawaii were Japanese Americans. To remove them would have destroyed the islands' economy and hindered U.S. military operations there. However, he was eventually forced to order the internment, or confinement, of 1,444 Japanese Americans, 1 percent of Hawaii's Japanese-American population.
On the West Coast, however, panic and prejudice ruled the day. In California, only 1 percent of the people were Japanese, but they constituted a minority large enough to stimulate the prejudice of many whites, without being large enough to effectively resist internment. Newspapers whipped up anti-Japanese sentiment by running ugly stories attacking Japanese Americans.
On February 19, 1942, President Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066 requiring the removal of people of Japanese ancestry from California and parts of Washington, Oregon, and Arizona. Based on military recommendations, he justified this step as necessary for national security. In the following weeks/the army rounded up some 110,000 Japanese Americans and shipped them to ten hastily constructed remote "relocation centers," euphemisms for prison camps.
594 Chapter 17
main idea
Analyzing
Motives
Why did President Roosevelt order the internment of Japanese Americans?
About two-thirds were Nisei, or Japanese people born in this country of parents who emigrated from Japan. Thousands of Nisei had already joined the armed forces, and to Ted Nakashima, an architectural draftsman from Seattle, the evacuation seemed utterly senseless.
A
Personal Voice ted nakashima [There are] electricians, plumbers, draftsmen, mechanics, carpenters, painters, farmers—every trade—men who are able and willing to do all they can to lick the Axis. . . . We’re on this side and we want to help. Why won’t America let us? ”
—from New Republic magazine, June 15,1942
No specific charges were ever filed against Japanese Americans, and no evidence of subversion was ever found. Faced with expulsion, terrified families were forced to sell their homes, businesses, and all their belongings for less than their true value.
Japanese Americans fought for justice, both in the courts and in Congress. The initial results were discouraging. In 1944, the Supreme Court decided, in Korematsu v. United States, that the government's policy of evacuating Japanese Americans to camps was justified on the basis of "military necessity." (See pages 596-597.) After the war, however, the Japanese American Citizens League 0ACL) pushed the government to compensate those sent to the camps for their lost property. In 1965, Congress authorized the spending of $38 million for that purpose—less than a tenth of Japanese Americans' actual losses.
The J ACL did not give up its quest for justice. In 1978, it called for the payment of reparations, or restitution, to each individual that suffered internment. A decade later, Congress passed, and President Ronald Reagan signed, a bill that promised $20,000 to every Japanese American sent to a relocation camp. When the checks were sent in 1990, a letter from President George Bush accompanied them, in which he stated, "We can never fully right the wrongs of the past. But we can take a clear stand for justice and recognize that serious injustices were done to Japanese Americans during World War II."
ASSESSMENT
1. TERMS & NAMES •Gl Bill of Rights •James Farmer
For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
• Congress of Racial	•internment
Equality (CORE)
•Japanese American Citizens League (JACL)
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
List the advances and problems in the economy and in civil rights during World War II.
	Advances	Problems
Economy		
civil Rights		
Which of these advances and problems do you think had the most far-reaching effect? Explain your answer.
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	COMPARING
How were the experiences of African Americans, Mexican Americans, and Japanese Americans similar during World War II? How were they different?
ANALYZING ISSUES
Do you think the treatment of German, Italian, and Japanese Americans was justified on the basis of “military necessity”? Explain your answer.
ANALYZING EFFECTS
What effect did World War II have on American families? Think About:
•	the role of women in families and the economy
•	the relationship between the races
•	the impact of the federal government on society
The United States in World War II 595
KOREMATSU v. UNITED STATES (1944)
ORIGINS OF THE CASE
Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, U.S. military officials argued that Japanese Americans posed a threat to the nation's security. Based on recommendations from the military, President Franklin Roosevelt issued Executive Order 9066, which gave military officials the power to limit the civil rights of Japanese Americans. Military authorities began by setting a curfew for Japanese Americans. Later, they forced Japanese Americans from their homes and moved them into detention camps. Fred Korematsu was convicted of defying the military order to leave his home. At the urging of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), Korematsu appealed that conviction. THE RULING
The Court upheld Korematsu’s conviction and argued that military necessity made internment constitutional. LEGAL REASONING
Executive Order 9066 was clearly aimed at one group of people—Japanese Americans. Korematsu argued that this order was unconstitutional because it was based on race. Writing for the Court majority, Justice Hugo Black agreed "that all legal restrictions which curtail the civil rights of a single racial group are immediately suspect." However, in this case, he said, the restrictions were based on "a military imperative" and not "group punishment based on antagonism to those of Japanese origin." As such, Justice Black stated that the restrictions were constitutional.
“Compulsory exclusion of large groups,. . . except under circumstances of direct emergency and peril, is inconsistent with our basic governmental institutions. But when under conditions of modern warfare our shores are threatened by hostile forces, the power to protect must be commensurate with the threatened danger. 99
Justice Frank Murphy, however, dissented—he opposed the majority. He believed that military necessity was merely an excuse that could not conceal the racism at the heart of the restrictions.
“ This exclusion ... ought not to be approved. Such exclusion goes over ‘the very brink of constitutional power’ and falls into the ugly abyss of racism.99
Two other justices also dissented, but Korematsu's
conviction stood.
LEGAL SOURCES
LEGISLATION
U.S. CONSTITUTION, FIFTH AMENDMENT
(1791) “No person shall... be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.” EXECUTIVE ORDER 9066
(1942) “I hereby authorize and direct the Secretary of War... to prescribe military areas in such places and of such extent as he ... may determine, from which any or all persons may be excluded.”
RELATED CASES
HIRABAYASHI v. UNITED STATES (JUNE 1943)
The Court upheld the conviction of a Japanese-American man for breaking curfew. The Court argued that the curfew was within congressional and presidential authority.
EX PARTE ENDO (DECEMBER 1944)
The Court ruled that a Japanese-American girl, whose loyalty had been clearly established, could not be held in an internment camp.
596 Chapter 17

WHY IT MATTERED
About 110,000 Japanese Americans were forced into internment camps, as shown above, during World War II. Many had to sell their businesses and homes at great loss. Thousands were forced to give up their possessions. In the internment camps, Japanese Americans lived in a prison-like setting under constant guard.
The Court ruled that these government actions did not violate people's rights because the restrictions were based on military necessity rather than on race. But the government treated German Americans and Italian Americans much differently. In those instances, the government identified potentially disloyal people but did not harass the people it believed to be loyal. By contrast, the government refused to make distinctions between loyal and potentially disloyal Japanese Americans.
historical impact
In the end, the internment of Japanese Americans became a national embarrassment. In 1976, President Gerald R. Ford repealed Executive Order 9066.
A
President Clinton presents Fred Korematsu with a Presidential Medal of Freedom during a ceremony at the White House on January 15,1998.
Similarly, the Court's decision in Korematsu became an embarrassing example of court-sanctioned racism often compared to the decisions on Dred Scott (1857) and Plessy v. Ferguson (1896). In the early 1980s, a scholar conducting research obtained copies of government documents related to the Hirabayashi and Korematsu cases. The documents showed that the army had lied to the Court in the 1940s. Japanese Americans had not posed any security threat. Korematsu's conviction was overturned in 1984. Hirabayashi's conviction was overturned in 1986. In 1988, Congress passed a law ordering reparations payments to surviving Japanese Americans who had been detained in the camps.

thinking critically
CONNECT TO HISTORY
Hypothesizing The internment of Japanese Americans during World War II disrupted lives and ripped apart families. What do you think can be done today to address this terrible mistake? How can the government make amends?
CONNECT TO TODAY
^o^my 2.	Visit the links for Historic Decisions of the Supreme Court to locate the three dissenting opinions in Korematsu written by Justices Frank Murphy, Robert Jackson, and Owen Roberts. Read one of these opinions, and then write a summary that states its main idea. What constitutional principle, if any, does the opinion use?
INTERNET ACTIVITY |
"tT hmhsocialstudies.com
The United States in World WarJI_
For each term or name below, write a sentence explaining its connection to World War II.
A.
Philip Randolph 2.	Manhattan Project
3.	rationing
4.	Dwight D. Eisenhower
5.	D-Day
V-E
Day 7.	Douglas MacArthur
8.	Hiroshima
9.	Gl Bill of Rights 10. internment
MAIN IDEAS
Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
Mobilizing for Defense (pages 562-568)
1.	How did the U.S. military reflect the diversity of American society during World War II?
2.	How did the federal government’s actions influence civilian life during World War II?
3.	What role did the media play in helping the country mobilize?
The War for Europe and North Africa (pages 569-577)
4.	How did the Allies win control of the Atlantic Ocean between 1941 and 1943?
5.	What was the significance of the Battle of Stalingrad?
6.	How did the Battle of the Bulge signal the beginning of the end of World War II in Europe?
The War in the Pacific (pages 578-587)
7.	Briefly describe the island war in the Pacific.
8.	Why did President Truman decide to use atomic weapons?
The Home Front (pages 590-595)
9.	How did the U.S. economy change during World War II?
10.	How did Executive Order 9066 affect the home front?
CRITICAL THINKING
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one shown, explain the opportunities and obstacles that women and ethnic minorities faced during World War II. 	Women	Minorities
Opportunities		
Obstacles		
ANALYZING ISSUES
Read the feature on pages 596-59? ■ What constitutional issues were raised by Executive Order 9066 and internment of German, Italian, and Japanese Americans during World War II? Do you think the governments actions were constitutional? Explain. SUMMARIZING
Explain the bravery and contributions of ethnic minorities in the armed forces during World War II, including the Tuskegee Airmen and the Navajo code talkers. EXPLAINING TURNING POINTS
What is the significance of the years 1939-194!=; ac a	»____;	Exola
Use the map and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 1.
H
2.	How did World War II lead to one of the largest population shifts in U.S. history?
Service men and women were forced to leave their homes for Europe.
The loss of loved ones led people to move in with their families.
People moved to states with military bases and factories for better jobs.
J
People moved to the middle of the country to escape wars on both coasts. 3.	How did natural geography contribute to Germany’s defeat in World War II?
A
Large bodies of water stood between Germany and its enemies. B
Germany had to fight a war on three fronts: North Africa, Western Europe, and Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. C
There were too few rivers to be used for German supplies. D
Switzerland pledged to remain neutral throughout the war. 1. Why was it critical for the Allies to take the Japanese-held islands of Iwo Jima and Okinawa?
A
The islands were highly populated areas with little military protection. B
The islands were critical as bases from which Allied bombers could reach Japan. C
The islands were centers for Japanese development of a nuclear bomb. D
The Allies intended to drop atomic bombs on the islands. hmhsocialstudies.com
TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests • Tutorials
INTERACT WITH HISTORY
"^WriteSmart ■ MULTIMEDIA ACTIVITY Think about the issues you recorded in myNotebook as you read the chapter. Write a newspaper article in which you explain how American patriotism inspired actions of great sacrifice and courage among U.S. citizens during World War II. Discuss the high levels °f military enlistment as well as efforts on the home front, such as the planting of victory gardens, Purchases of war bonds, and volunteerism. Use wyWriteSmart in your eBook to write your article.
"’t'WriteSmart
hmhsocialstudies.com
Write an expository essay in which you evaluate the ^ornestic and international leadership of Presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman during World War II. Consider the U.S. domestic industry’s rapid mobilization for the war effort and the nation’s relationship with its allies. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your essay.
XggmjRY
As you read in the chapter, the Allies fought World War II on multiple fronts, with engagements in both the European and Pacific theaters. How do you think fighting the war on multiple fronts affected the war effort? Consider personnel and supply needs and what challenges the Allies faced. Make an inference about the effects of fighting the war on multiple fronts, and then do additional research to confirm or challenge your conclusions. Create a website detailing how fighting the war on multiple fronts affected the Allies. Include primary sources and images to support your inference.
End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Clarifying and Summarizing
I
DEFINING THE SKILL
Clarifying means checking to be sure you clearly understand what you have read. One way to do this is by asking yourself questions about the material. In your answers, you might restate in your own words what you have read.
When you summarize, you condense what you have read into a shorter, easier-to-understand format. A good summary should include only a passage's main ideas and its most important supporting details. When summarizing, remember to use your own words. Knowing how to summarize can help you understand and recall the main ideas of what you read.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: UNDERSTAND AND CONDENSE THE TEXT
Think about what a passage is trying to say and identify the main ideas. Clarify any words or concepts you don't know. Then, in your own words, write a summary that condenses and also clarifies key information. The passage below tells about ways women, men, and children helped the war efforts at home. Following the description is a summary that condenses and also clarifies key information. Sacrifice and Struggle at Home	I
© World War II made demands of every American. Allied soldiers, sailors, and pilots risked life and I limb so that others could enjoy freedom.The women, children, and men who remained in the United I States also played a key role in ensuring success overseas. Millions of Americans contributed to the | war effort by taking jobs in factories or offices. In addition, men, women, and children did their part at | home to help the United States win the war.	|
Meeting the food needs of the military took top priority in the United States. ©The planting of | victory gardens was one way in which Americans filled these needs. Victory gardens planted at home I allowed more commercially produced food to be sent from farms to troops overseas. Victory gardens I alone did not solve all the nation's food needs. Some foods could not be produced in home gardens | and there was simply not enough of certain products to go around. As a result, ©the United States began ©rationing food shortly after the nation entered the war. During the war, the government rationed products such as coffee, butter, sugar, and meat. Each member of the family received a ration book, which entitled that person to a certain amount of certain foods.	I
The shortage of materials such as metal, glass, rubber, and gasoline during the war also changed life for Americans. Gasoline was rationed. © Americans helped meet the demand for other | materials by holding scrap drives, in which citizens collected waste materials of all sorts that might be I used in the war efforts. Empty tin cans, bits of rubber and glass—anything that could be useful was | salvaged. Even women's silk and nylon stockings were recycled to make parachutes. Scrap drives I provided a way for young Americans to help with the war effort.	I
i
599 SKI
0 Identify the main Idea of the passage. Often, a main idea is located at the beginning of the passage.
0 Look for key supporting details. Include only the most important facts and details in the summary. Pay attention to numbers, dates, quantities, and other data.
0 Clarify understanding. Try to use your prior knowledge and experience to understand unfamiliar words or concepts. For instance, you may know that a food drive is an organized effort to collect food, which should help yon to understand scrap drive. If you still don't understand something, look it up. For example, the word rationing means limiting the amount of a certain product that each individual can get. Then restate the passage’s main idea and most important details in your own words in a summary.
STRATEGY: WRITE A SUMMARY
You can write your summary in a paragraph. The paragraph below summarizes the passage. After writing your summary, review it to see that you have included only the most important details. Summary
During World War II, people helped support the war both overseas and at home. Women, children, and men that remained in the United States supported the efforts by getting jobs to make needed materials, growing victory gardens to supply food, and following rationing efforts. To combat a scarcity of metal, glass, and rubber goods, young people started scrap drives to collect waste materials that could then be recycled into items soldiers could use, ouch as parachutes.
APPLYING THE SKILL
Turn to Chapter 17, Section 3, pages 583-584, and read the section headed "The Atomic Bomb Ends the War/' Make notes of the main ideas. Then note important details, including facts and statistics. Look up any words you don't recognize. Then write a summary of the section, using the summary above as a model.
1.	Identify the main Ideas of the passage.
What is the main idea of the passage called “The Manhattan Project?
What are the main ideas in the section called “Hiroshima and Nagasaki?
2.	Look for key supporting details.
What details support the main idea in each section of the passage?
What important facts and dates tell you more about the Manhattan Project?
3.	Clarify understanding.	. .	. o
Why was the Manhattan Project kept a secret? What is radiation poisoning. Write a summary of the passage. Include only the main ideas and most important details.
599 SF


h' ‘
-?r''


iv * ’’

A global conflict. World War II shaped the history of both the United States and the world. Americans contributed to the war effort in numerous ways. Many enlisted in the military and served in Africa, Europe, and the Pacific, Others contributed by working in factories to produce the massive amounts of ships, planes, guns, and other supplies necessary to win the war. In the
process, these Americans left behind firsthand accounts of their experiences during the war, both at home and abroad.
Explore some of the personal stories and recolleC" tions of World War II online. You can find a wealth informatioixyideo clips, primary sources, activities'afl more at

\
America Mobilizes for War
Watch the video to see how the United States mobilized its citizens for war and how society changed as a result.
“I am allowed to write of my own personal combat experiences and I can say that I have been fortunate so far. War is like something you cannot imagine. I had no J' idea what it was about and still don’t.”
— Erwin Blonder, U.S. soldier
--MAIL
A
Soldier's Letter Home Read the document to learn about one soldier's wartime experiences in southern France.
Air War Over Germany
Watch the video to see how the P-51 Mustang helped the Allies win the air war over Germany.
x : The Pacific Islands
Watch the video to hear veterans describe their experiences fighting in the Pacific theater.
MAniCC AAC
OPI r
'i WAR
599 MC
2
11
Eisenhower is elected president.
USA!
WORLD!
1945
1950
0.945] United Nations Is established.
: Li946]
: Churchill : gives his : “Iron Curtain” :speech.
; Berlin : airlift begins.
L194<] state of Israel is : created.
£949 China becomes Communist under
Mao Zedong.
: 1950 Korean : War begins.
