894 Chapter 27
Tactics and Motives
Most terrorists target high profile events or crowded places such as subway stations, restaurants, or shopping malls. Terrorists choose these spots carefully to gain the most attention and to achieve the highest level of intimidation.
Terrorists use bullets and bombs as their main weapons. In recent years, however, some terrorist groups have used biological and chemical agents in their attacks. These actions involve the release of bacteria or poisonous gas into the air.
The reasons for terrorist attacks vary. Traditional motives include gaining independence, expelling foreigners, or changing society. These objectives frequently give rise to domestic terrorism—violence used by people to change the policies of their own government or to overthrow their government.
In the late 20th century, another type of terrorism began to emerge. Terrorists wanted to achieve political ends or destroy what they considered to be forces of evil. They attacked targets not just in their own country, but anywhere in the world. These terrorists were even willing to commit suicide to ensure the success of their attacks.
9/11 and Its Impact
On September 11, the weapons the terrorists used were planes loaded with fuel. The planes became destructive missiles when they crashed into their targets. Firefighters worked around the clock trying to find survivors in the wreckage. Medical workers rushed to staff the city's trauma centers. But after the first wave of injured were rescued, there were few survivors to treat.
A flood of volunteers assisted rescue workers. From around the country, people sent donations of blood, food, and money to New York City. After the first few days, the work at "ground zero," the World Trade Center disaster site, shifted to recovering bodies and removing the massive amount of debris.
Once the area was cleared, plans to rebuild the site were proposed. In February 2003, a development committee chose a design for a new building complex comprised of several buildings—including Freedom Tower, intended to be the tallest building in New York City—and a memorial park with reflecting pools. Construction of the new design began in 2006.
The attacks of September 11 dramatically altered the way Americans looked at life. For the first time, many Americans became afraid that terrorism could happen in their own country at any time.
This sense of vulnerability intensified when another wave of attacks hit the United States a few days after September 11. Letters containing anthrax spores were sent to people in the news media and to members of Congress in Washington, D.C. When inhaled, these spores could damage the lungs and cause death. Five people died after inhaling the spores in tainted letters.
Some investigators believed that the letters were sent by a lone terrorist and not by a terrorist group. No link between the letters and the September 11 attacks was ever found. The anthrax letters increased Americans' fear of terrorism.
The twin towers of the World Trade Center in New York burn after the September 11 attacks.
▼
Issues for the 21st Century
To help share information about the risk of terrorist attacks with the American people, the department created the Homeland Security Advisory System.
The United States Responds

After conducting a massive investigation, the U.S. government determined that Osama bin Laden, a Saudi Arabian millionaire, had directed the terrorists responsible for the September 11 attacks. The terrorists were part of the al-Qaeda network. The home base for al-Qaeda was Afghanistan, ruled by a strict Islamic regime called the Taliban. The Taliban supported the terrorist group. In return, bin Laden provided fighters to the Taliban.
The United States, led by President George W. Bush, built an international coalition, or alliance, to fight terrorism and the al-Qaeda
network. After the Taliban refused to turn over bin Laden, coalition forces led by the United States began military action in Afghanistan. In October 2001, the United States launched Operation Enduring Freedom. The military began bombing Taliban air defenses, airfields, and command centers, as well as al-Qaeda training camps. Within two months, U.S. special forces and marines and fighters from the Northern Alliance, a coalition of anti-Taliban Afghan troops, drove the Taliban from power.
American forces stormed into Iraq in March of 2003 over intelligence of weapons of mass destruction. By early April, Iraqi president Saddam Hussein's regime had fallen. He was later captured and the United States moved to establish a new Iraqi government. In the years that have followed, U.S. troops have been stationed throughout the Middle East to train local security forces and help resolve conflicts. President Barack Obama worked towards the withdrawal of military forces in Iraq from 2009-2011. In 2011, President Obama announced U.S. forces had finally succeeded in killing Osama bin Laden in Pakistan.
FIGHTING TERRORISM AT HOME
To combat terrorism on the home front, the Bush administration created the Department of Homeland Security in 2002. This executive department was designed to analyze threats, guard the nation's borders, seaports, and airports, and coordinate the country's response to attacks. The Department of Homeland Security also searched for terrorists in the United States. The government soon discovered that the al-Qaeda network had used "sleepers" to carry out its terrorist attacks. Sleepers are agents who enter a country, blend into a community, and when called upon, secretly prepare for and commit terrorist acts. U.S. officials detained and questioned Arabs and other Muslims who behaved suspiciously or violated immigration regulations. Many suspects captured in Afghanistan were held in a prison camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. The United States faced criticism at home and abroad regarding its treatment of detainees. Critics claimed that detaining people without charging them and without access to attorneys violated their civil rights. The government argued that limiting civil liberties in wartime to protect national security was not unusual. U.S. officials used the same argument to try some terrorist suspects in military tribunals rather than in criminal courts.
USA PATRIOT ACT
In Congress, lawmakers took up the question about how to prevent future terrorist attacks. In the years before 2001, many lawmakers opposed measures that infringed on the civil rights of Americans. After 9/11, Congress quickly passed the USA PATRIOT Act on October 26, 2001 to give the government power to conduct search and surveillance of suspected terrorists. This law allowed the government to: 896 Chapter 27
•	detain foreigners suspected of terrorism for seven days without charging them with a crime. In some cases, prisoners were held indefinitely.
•	tap all phones used by suspects and monitor their e-mail and Internet use.
•	make search warrants valid across states.
•	order U.S. banks to investigate sources of large foreign accounts.
•	prosecute terrorist crimes without any time restrictions or limitations.
Some people questioned the constitutionality of the law. They claimed that it violated the First, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Amendments. In 2005 it was revealed that President Bush had ordered the National Security Agency (NSA) to spy on American citizens' international telephone calls and e-mails without obtaining warrants.
Some critics complained that it gave law enforcement too much power and posed a threat to basic freedoms. To address these concerns, Congress agreed to let some provisions of the law expire after a certain period of time. Since that time, there have been repeated extensions on certain provisions for security purposes. In 2011, President Obama signed the PATRIOT Sunsets Extension Act.
An airport security official inspects a traveler’s shoe at a security checkpoint.
AVIATION SECURITY
The federal government's role in aviation security also increased. National Guard troops began patrolling airports, and sky marshals were assigned to airplanes. In November 2001, President Bush signed into law the Aviation and Transportation Security Act, which made airport security the responsibility of the federal government. Previously, individual airports had been responsible for their own security. Because of this new law, an agency called the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) was created to inspect airline passengers, baggage, and cargo, as well as noncitizens training to be pilots. The TSA is also responsible for safety on railroads, buses, and mass transit systems. As the United States fights terrorism and tries to balance national security with civil rights, the public debate over security measures continues. 1.	SUMMARIZING
How would you summarize the reaction of the American people to the attacks of 9/11?
ANALYZING EFFECTS
How did the U.S. government respond to the threat of terrorism after 9/11?
3.	EVALUATING
Why do some people think the USA PATRIOT Act is unconstitutional? Explain the constitutional issues raised by this act and other responses to the 9/11 terrorist attack.
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
Why do you think that certain provisions of the USA PATRIOT Act have been continually renewed?
Issues for the 21st Century 81

Global Involvement
How does the United States participate in international organizations and treaties?
Issues regarding the sovereignty of the United States have been up for debate since the nation's beginnings. The nation's first President, George Washington, warned about maintaining America's independence and not giving up power to other nations. In the 21st century, the U.S. has continued to be widely involved in world affairs. In doing so, America's leaders have had many debates about the nation's sovereignty and the role it should take on the world stage.
Historical Perspective
The UN General Assembly meets in the UN headquarters before a vote on a resolution to condemn abuses by the Syrian government.
In George Washington's Farewell Address of 1796, he advised America's current and future leaders to not give into foreign influence. He warned that the United States should avoid permanent alliances and not let the affairs of other countries interfere with the nation's peace and prosperity. For about 100 years, U.S. leaders mostly followed Washington's advice and kept the nation largely isolated from world affairs outside of the Western Hemisphere.
U.S. foreign policy changed during the 20th century. Some leaders wanted to remain isolationist, but ultimately America was drawn into the First World War. After World War I ended, debates over America's sovereignty were ignited when President Woodrow Wilson called for the formation of the League of Nations. Wilson believed that having such an international organization would help secure lasting peace in the world. Opponents of the League complained that it would limit America's independence in international affairs. In the end, the United States did not join the League of Nations.
Following World War II, an international organization known as the United Nations (UN) was formed to replace the League of Nations. This time, the United States took an active role in its creation. The UN continues to operate as a kind of world government.
Today, the debate continues over whether international organiza-
tions and treaties should have authority over America's actions in global affairs. The U.S. continues to grapple with the UN and international treaties regarding military and other actions it takes that affect the whole world.
War In Iraq
After the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the United States called for a renewal of the arms inspections in Iraq. In November 2002, the UN Security Council passed a resolution designed to force Iraq to give up all weapons of mass destruction (WMD). The Security Council is responsible for maintaining international peace and security. The United States is one of the council's five
898 Chapter 27
permanent members. Being a permanent member gives the United States more influence in the council. When the arms inspections resumed, Hussein refused to cooperate fully. Soon, the United States and Great Britain cut off diplomatic relations with Iraq.
In early February 2003, U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell gave a presentation to the UN Security Council, maintaining that Iraq was hiding WMD. Soon thereafter, the United States and Great Britain pressed the UN to pass a resolution that authorized the use of military force against Iraq. As an alternative, France, Germany, and Russia presented a plan that called for intensifying the inspections.
The United States and Great Britain countered by claiming that a new UN resolution was not necessary since Iraq was in violation of the old agreement. They also claimed that Iraq's violation justified the use of military force to overturn Hussein's regime.
OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM
In March 2003, the United States and Great Britain launched Operation Iraqi Freedom without the approval of the UN Security Council. The war began with massive air raids; sections of Baghdad were the primary targets. Coalition troops had taken control of most of Iraq by April 14. Hussein was captured on December 13, 2003. He was convicted of crimes against humanity and hanged in 2006. SEARCH FOR WMD
The case for going to war against Iraq was based on assertions by the United States, and British governments that Saddam Hussein had WMD. Once major combat ended on May 1, U.S forces began an extensive search for WMD. Movable biological laboratories were located, but by mid-2005, no WMD had been found. This led many in the United States and Great Britain to question the necessity for the war. Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair responded by claiming that they had based their decision on intelligence that was later proved faulty. Critics also questioned the legitimacy of the war given that the UN Security Council had not approved of taking military action. In May 2005, a top-secret memo known as the Downing Street memo became public. It suggested that the Bush administration had planned to invade Iraq as early as July 2002. IRAQ AFTER HUSSEIN
After the fall of Hussein's regime, the United States led in the establishment □f the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) to temporarily govern Iraq and oversee its reconstruction. The creation of the CPA had the approval of the United Nations Security Council. On June 28, 2004, the CPA was replaced by a temporary government made up of Iraqis. And □n January 30, 2005, Shiite Muslim parties won a majority of seats in Iraq's election for a transitional National Assembly that would draft Iraq's constitution. Shiites eventually agreed to allow members of the Sunni Muslim minority to participate in shaping the country's constitution. On October 15, 2005, Iraqi voters narrowly accepted
a new constitution. In December, Iraq held elections to choose a permanent parliament. The Shiites captured a majority of seats, but not enough to control the government.
Despite this progress, violence between Sunnis and Shiites continued to plague Iraq. Insurgents, or rebels, engaged in acts of violence that killed thousands Militants also attacked U.S. troops. In response, President Bush announced i plan in January 2007 to send 20,000 more U.S. troops to Iraq. In February 2009, President Obama unveiled a plan to remove all U.S. troops from Iraq. The last U.S. ;ombat forces left Iraq on December 18, 2011.
In Baghdad, Iraqis pull down a statue of Saddam Hussein after the
dictator’s regime is overthrown.
Issues for the 21st Century 8!
International Criminal Court
Another organization that seeks to help govern the international community is the International Criminal Court (ICC). It is the first treaty-based international criminal court. It is set up to try individuals who are accused of serious crimes that affect the international community. The court was adopted in July 1998, but did not become active until July 2002.
The ICC was ratified by 122 countries, but it did not receive approval from the United States. Some Americans think it is a good idea to have a neutral international court that deals with genocide and other crimes against humanity. Others do not want to see U.S. soldiers or other Americans tried in an international court for crimes. They say that America's founders never intended for Americans to be tried in courts outside the United States.
Treaties Regulating Global Energy
In the 21st century, members of the international community have made efforts to combat climate change. One of the main goals has been to reduce the amount of air pollution created from burning fossil fuels. Many believe that these pollutants are causing Earth's climate to change in a negative way. Many experts think that the carbon dioxide gas released when people use fossil fuels is building up and warming Earth's climate. They believe that by reducing greenhouse emissions, the negative effects of climate change can be offset or reduced. Differing opinions about climate change, including whether or not humans are causing it, have made it difficult to reach a consensus on what should be done about it.
THE KYOTO PROTOCOL
The Kyoto Protocol is an international treaty that seeks to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases. The agreement is connected to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The Kyoto Protocol was adopted in Kyoto, Japan, in December 1997 and went into effect in February 2005. Under the Protocol, countries' emissions of greenhouse gases have to be recorded and revealed in annual reports. Students in Beijing, China, show their support for the Kyoto Protocol.
900 Chapter 27
Many who think that Earth's climate is changing and is affected by human activity believe that the Kyoto Protocol is a necessary step in the right direction. Critics of the Protocol do not like the idea of American industries being monitored by an international organization and governed by the terms of an international treaty. They believe that no Americans should be subjected to any jurisdiction outside of the U.S. Constitution. The United States is a signatory, or signer, of the treaty, but so far it has declined to ratify it.
THE COPENHAGEN ACCORD
The Copenhagen Accord is an international treaty that calls for a continuation of the Kyoto Protocol. It also encourages a strengthening of worldwide efforts to combat climate change. Like the Kyoto Protocol, the Accord stresses that dramatic cuts in greenhouse gas emissions is necessary to slowing the effects of climate change. The Accord set an initial deadline of January 31, 2010, for countries to submit their goals for reducing emissions. The goal is to significantly reduce emissions by 2020. In the United States, support for the Accord is divided along similar lines as the Kyoto Protocol. Many who believe that climate change is real support the Accord. They want to reign in industries' emissions of air pollutants and other factors that can magnify climate change. Those who think climate change is not occurring do not support the Accord. They believe American industries should not be regulated by an international organization.
Civil War In Syria
In 2013, a brutal civil war continued in the Middle Eastern nation of Syria. In August that year, there was a suspicious and deadly attack that killed more than 1,000 people. Members of the international community suspected that President Assad of Syria had used chemical weapons on his own people. President Barack Obama and members of his administration wanted to punish Assad's regime with military action. However, other member nations of the UN, such as China and Russia, thought there was not enough evidence to connect the chemical attacks to Assad.
Some UN member nations voted against taking forceful action against the Assad regime. Different sides argued whether or not the United States should intervene without UN approval and support. Americans continue to debate who decides when it is necessary to use military force. People have different views on whether the final authority should come from the UN Security Council or the President, Congress, or the American people. Ultimately, the United States decided to follow a diplomatic path with the UN approval and avoided military conflict with the Syrian government.
ANALYZING ISSUES
What are the pros and cons of the United States’ participation in international organizations and treaties?
EVALUATING DECISIONS
Do you think the United States had the authority to launch Operation Iraqi Freedom without the approval of the UN Security Council? Explain your answer. Think About:
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
Why do you think there is so much disagreement over American industries reducing greenhouse gases? Explain your answer.
2. SUMMARIZING
What are the main goals of the Kyoto Protocol and the Copenhagen Accord?
• the circumstances that led up to
the military operation • the intelligence that the United
States and Great Britain were aware of up to that point
FORMING OPINIONS
Some Americans believe that global organizations are attempting to
undermine U.S. sovereignty through
the use of treaties. Do you agree or
disagree? Support your answer.
Issues for the 21st Century 91
TEKS9A.9B, 10E, 11B,26C
Civil Rights in the
21st Century
How has the Civil Rights movement grown and changed in the 21st Century?
At the dedication of the Martin Luther King, Jr., Memorial in Washington, D.C. in October 2011, President Obama acknowledged that if Dr. King were alive today, he would recognize that the nation still faces many civil rights challenges. President Obama said that these challenges include neighborhoods with schools that are underfunded and lack of good health care for all. Much has changed since Dr. King’s time, but the Civil Rights movement continues in the 21st century. African Americans, Hispanic Americans, women, and other groups continue to work for equal rights. Although there are many issues that still need to be resolved, many victories have been achieved in the present-day Civil Rights movement.
Historical Perspective
The Civil Rights movement in the United States had its start during the colonial days with those colonists who opposed slavery. It continued in the 1800s with the abolition movement.
In December 1865, after the Civil War, the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution was ratified. It officially outlawed slavery in the United States and its territories. In 1868, the Fourteenth Amendment was ratified. This amendment recognized the citizenship of African Americans and granted the same civil rights to all people in the United States except for Native Americans. Two years later, the Fifteenth Amendment was passed to guarantee the right to vote to African American men. Women had not yet gained the right to vote.
African-American civil rights suffered setbacks after Reconstruction. In the late 1800s, legalized racism returned to the South. Some states passed new laws that defied the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments. These so-called black codes differed from state to state, but they often prevented African Americans from voting or traveling freely. They also kept African Americans from owning certain kinds of property or working at certain kinds of jobs. Supported by the Supreme Court's 1896 ruling in Plessy v. Ferguson, the segregation of African Americans and white people was the law of the land in much of the United States in the early 1900s.
In the late 1800s and early 1900s, a new group of champions joined the battle for civil rights. They included Booker T. Washington and W. E. B. Du Bois. Du Bois helped found the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). This organization was established in 1909. In the decades ahead, the NAACP would be a powerful voice in the struggle to improve the legal rights of African Americans.
902 Chapter 27
Hispanic Civil Rights
Issues for the 21st Century
African-American Civil Rights
The Civil Rights movement continues to work for equal rights for African Americans. In August 2013, on the 50th anniversary of Dr. King's March on Washington, civil rights leaders named three areas that they believe still need correction. These areas are the gap between rich and poor, efforts to restrict voters' access to the polls, and discrimination in the criminal justice system.
Many leaders have also criticized the recent ruling from the Supreme Court that struck down a key part of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Martin Luther King III, the son of Dr. King, has said that more work needs to be done to achieve his father's vision of a country free of racial prejudice.
Congressman John Lewis, who nearly died in a march for voting rights in Selma, Alabama, in 1963, also spoke at the March on Washington anniversary. He summed up the work that lies ahead for the Civil Rights movement. He said, "We have come a great distance
since that day, but many of the issues that gave rise to that march are still pressing needs in our society—violence, poverty, hunger, long-term unemployment, homelessness, voting rights, and the need to protect human dignity."
Today's civil rights workers hope to bring about as much progress as was made a half-century ago. They are taking up the cause of justice and equality with new tools. They use the Internet and social media to spread their message. They register student voters electronically and also file online petitions.
Pro-immigration supporters take part in a rally held by LULAC in Dallas,
Texas.
their appearance resembled those who perpetrated the attacks. This led to more Americans being suspicious of other immigrant groups as well. Many Americans began calling for better border security, including between the United States and Mexico. Even though many Hispanic Americans had been living in the United States for hundreds of years, they faced increased discrimination.
In 2004, some anti-immigrant activists began organizing along the U.S.-Mexico border. Groups who supported immigrant rights held rallies to counter those activists. In 2006, Latin American immigrants and their supporters began holding demonstrations across the country in support of immigrant rights. They also protested the growing hostility toward undocumented workers. In May 2006, some Hispanic immigrants took part in a Day without Immigrants, in which they boycotted work, school, and shopping areas to remind people of the importance of immigrants to the U.S. economy.
In the discussion of Hispanic civil rights, immigration reform remains one of the most important and most polarizing issues. The president and leaders from both parties in Congress continue to debate the issue, but it has been difficult to reach agreement between all the different sides involved. Meanwhile, advocacy groups such as the League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC) continue to work for equal rights and equal opportunities for Hispanic Americans.
Women’s Rights
U.S.
Appeals Court Judge Rosemary Barkett (center) delivers the keynote address during a special session of Florida's high court honoring the state's first 150 female lawyers on June 15, 2000, in Tallahassee, Florida. In 1961, President John F. Kennedy named a commission to study the status of women in the workplace. Its report revealed that employers paid women less than men for equal work. The report also said that women were rarely promoted to top positions in their fields. About 40 years later, the U.S. Census Bureau found that more women than ever before worked outside the home—about 60 percent. Women made up 47 percent of the American work force. Yet in 2005 they held only 16.4 percent of the most senior jobs, according to a sampling of
the Fortune 500, the nation's 500 largest companies.
Women have made great strides in recent decades. In 2002, they filled half of all jobs in managerial and professional specialty areas. Women have also been entering new fields, including construction work and equipment repair. The increase in the number of women in managerial and other professional jobs has helped change and shape American culture.
Despite these positive signs, the key issues of unequal pay and unequal representation remain. Women are still making less than their male counterparts— averaging only 77 cents for every dollar earned by men.
In the nation's most top-level jobs, men continue to vastly outnumber women. As of 2007, women headed only ten Fortune 500 companies. Very few women who became corporate officers held line positions, jobs with profit-and-loss responsibility. In 2005, women held only 10.6 percent of line positions while men held 89.4 percent of them.
904 Chapter 27
Civil Rights for All
In the 21st century, advocacy groups have become concerned that the constitutional rights of some Americans are being violated. Gay rights groups are working to secure what they view as "marriage equality" for gay people. Groups who believe that some laws violate their right to bear arms are working to expand gun rights.
GAY RIGHTS
The gay rights movement in the United States has made great strides in recent years toward equal rights and opportunities. For instance, after years of protesting the U.S. military's policies regarding gay soldiers, the "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" policy that prevented openly gay individuals from joining the military was repealed in 2011. In addition, gay rights activists and many other American citizens believe that gay people should have the same right to marry the people they love that straight, or heterosexual, people have. Marriage Equality USA is one organization that is working to get same-sex marriage legalized in the United States. It does this through education, outreach, and media campaigns. Those supporting same-sex marriage have seen progress at the state level and in federal court. Supporters of the traditional idea of marriage, as the union of one man and one woman, have fought back. Groups like the National Organization for Marriage oppose what they call the "redefinition" of the institution.
GUN OWNERSHIP RIGHTS
In 1993, President Bill Clinton signed the Brady Act, which called for states to place a five-day waiting period on the sale of handguns. During that period, police check the potential buyer's background. If they find a criminal record, a gun permit is denied. However, four years later, in June 1997, the Brady Act was substantially weakened when the Supreme Court ruled that the federal government could not force state or local officials to run background checks on potential buyers of handguns. At the center of the gun-control issue lies a long-standing constitutional debate. The Second Amendment to the Constitution states this: "A well-regulated militia, being necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed." The National Rifle Association (NRA), which is opposed to tougher gun-control laws, argues that gun control laws violate this right to bear arms. Founded in 1871, the NRA is an American non-profit organization that promotes firearm ownership. The group's involvement in politics centers on its belief that firearm ownership is a civil right protected by the Second Amendment.
Others contend that the Second Amendment was not intended to guarantee a right to personal weapons. Rather, its purpose is to protect the state's right to maintain military units. However, recent rulings from the Supreme Court have affirmed that it is an individual right.
1. SUMMARIZING
What new rights did the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments guarantee to African Americans?
3. EVALUATING
ANALYZING EFFECTS
How do you think increasing numbers of women in managerial and other professional roles help shape American culture? Explain your answer.
How is today’s Civil Rights movement different from how it was in the past? How is it similar?
Think About:
• rights that African Americans
ANALYZING CAUSES
Now that about a third of the states have legalized same-sex marriage, do you think more states will follow? Explain your answer.
fought for in the past • rights that African Americans
fight for today
5. CATEGORIZING
Identify and describe the organizations promoting civil rights for African Americans, Hispanic Americans, women, and other civil rights movements.
Issues for the 21st Century
TEKS13B, 22C, 26A, 26C
Immigration
How does immigration affect the United States?
For hundreds of years, immigrants have come to the United States from numerous places throughout the world. The many immigrants who became U.S. citizens are held together by a common bond. That bond is their shared belief in the self-evident truths stated in the Declaration of Independence, that all people are created equal and have the right to "Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness."
Immigrants who came to the United States looking for a better life have also helped shape the country. Latino ranchers developed many of the tools and skills of the American cowboy. Chinese laborers laid the tracks of the transcontinental railroad. African Americans, though not voluntary immigrants, labored to develop the agriculture of the South and the industry of the North. Farmers and workers of every origin built the nation we know today.
Today's immigrants from Latin America, Asia, and other parts of the world continue to shape American culture. They bring new ideas and new traditions. They also affect America's demographic patterns, which are the ways in which the nation's population changes.
Historical Perspective
America has always been a nation of immigrants. From 1900 into the 1940s, economic troubles and rapid population growth spurred more than 16 million Europeans to move to the United States. The same pressures have more recently hit Asia and Latin America, with the same effect on the United States. Between 1989 and 2009, more than 21 million new immigrants came to the United States. Many immigrants eventually choose to become naturalized citizens.
The pros and cons of immigration have been argued throughout American history. In the 1700s, Benjamin Franklin worried about the number of Germans immigrating to Pennsylvania. Sharp anti-immigration sentiment spurred the nativist movement that developed in the 1830s and the America First campaign of the 1920s.
Americans today are divided on the issue. Some agree with former New York City mayor Rudolph Giuliani that immigrants "challenge us with new ideas and new perspectives." They look at America's history of diversity and believe that immigrants bring new energy to the country. Others side with Dan Stein of the Federation for American Immigration Reform, who has said that "large-scale immigration is not serving the needs and interests of the country."
The Debate Over Immigration
Complicating the debate over immigration has been the issue of immigrantswho enter the country illegally. By 2009, the number of immigrants who have arrived
906 Chapter 27
in the United States illegally was estimated at close to 11 million. A 2004 report by the Center for Immigration Studies suggested that households headed by immigrants who are in the country illegally each used about $2,700 more in federal government services than they paid in taxes.
Congress had addressed such issues in the 1990s, passing laws that toughened measures to bar illegal entry and limit benefits to immigrants who arrived illegally. In February 2005, President George W. Bush proposed a new approach. Stating that "America's immigration system is . . . unsuited to the needs of our economy and the values of our country," he endorsed a guest worker program. This program would have allowed foreigners to work in the United States for a set period of time. However, as of 2010, a guest worker program had not been enacted into law. In 2013, the debate over immigration reform continued.
In the meantime, some states took action on the illegal entry of immigrants. For example, in 2010 Arizona passed a law that enhanced state and local police authority to enforce federal immigration laws.
ECONOMIC DEBATE
Those who favor immigration limits claim that immigrants take jobs from Americans. However, data suggest that immigration has not hurt the economy and may have helped fuel its growth. At the same time that millions of immigrant workers—including some undocumented workers—were joining the work force, the overall trend in unemployment was downward. However, in 2009, when unemployment rose above 9 percent, the number of illegal immigrants in the United States fell. Another argument focuses on wages. Economists agree that immigrants tend to work for lower wages than native-born workers. Harvard University economists estimated that one-third of the gap between low-paid and high-paid workers results from higher numbers of immigrants. But they also reported that other factors—foreign trade, declining union membership, and new technology—play a greater role in lowering wages.
Immigrants fill skilled, high-paying jobs as well. Current law limits the number of immigrants who may enter the United States within specific employment categories, or preferences. The 2009 limit was set at about 140,000. However, there were more applicants than places in 2009.
RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITIZENSHIP
Some people are concerned that certain immigrants never become citizens and so fail to completely participate in American life. Statistics show that legal immigrants are becoming citizens in ever-higher numbers. Even so, many immigrants eligible for citizenship have not applied to become citizens. Experts attribute this to a variety of factors, including the rising cost of filing for citizenship, a backlog of applications, and a presumed lack of interest among some immigrants. The oath of U.S. citizenship carries with it such responsibilities as voting, serving on juries, and, in some cases, military service. CULTURAL CONCERNS
The diversity of the U.S. population has raised concerns that America has no common culture. Some say that at 12.6 percent of the population, the foreign-born are too numerous in America. Historian David Kennedy points out that in 1910 the percentage was even higher—14.7 percent. Those who favor limits claim that new immigrants do not mix with other groups and instead form ethnic neighborhoods that divide society. Others believe that immigrants enrich American cultural life. Historically, many immigrants have joined together in tight-knit ethnic communities. This has helped them to keep many of their native customs alive, even as they have begun to blend into American society. Aspects of their vibrant heritages and religions have shaped the broader culture. The traditions of immigrants from Africa, Asia, Europe, and Latin America, as well as other newcomers representing a variety of racial and ethnic groups, have contributed to the nation's diverse culture and identity.
Issues for the 21st Century
MORAL ISSUES
The issue of asylum—providing a safe place for people fleeing oppression—has been the toughest of all. While immigration is allowed for
political asylum, those who flee famine or poverty are turned away. Are such
policies fair?
Some rules allow relatives of immigrants to enter the country. Representative Lamar Smith of Texas believes that these rules admit immigrants who "have no marketable skills and end up on welfare." Yet, social scientist Nathan Glazer says that concern about the number of immigrants conflicts with sympathy for those "trying to bring in wives, children, parents, brothers, and sisters."
Some observers believe that there are simply too many immigrants. Slow immigration for a time, they suggest. In polls taken in mid-2010, about a third of the population seemed to agree with this idea, expressing the opinion that the level of legal immigration should be decreased.
Immigration and Religion
Immigrants coming to the United States have always brought their cultures, languages, and traditions with them. They also bring their religious beliefs. Most settlers in the original English colonies were Protestant Christians. Later immigration increased the numbers of Catholics, Jews, and other groups. Recently, new immigrants have brought even greater diversity. As more immigrants come from Asia and Africa, various cultures and religions have been introduced to the United States.
Today about 80 percent of people in the United States identify themselves as Christians. Among organized religions, the next largest group is Judaism, with about 2 percent of the population. Religions such as Islam, Buddhism, and Hinduism are growing, although members of each faith still make up less than 1 percent of the total U.S. population.
The First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution guarantees the "free exercise" of religion, which means that anyone may practice his or her beliefs. By guaranteeing freedom of religion, the Constitution has enabled the United States to become increasingly diverse in terms of religion.
Unfortunately, some religious minorities have faced persecution in the United States. In the wake of terrorist actions against the United States committed by Muslim extremists, some Muslim American citizens and Muslim
s
5
Religious leaders from Muslim, Christian, and Jewish faiths gather to oppose an anti-Muslim incident in 2011.
I
908 Chapter 27
Tomorrow’s Population
immigrants have been the targets of discrimination, violence, and other civil rights abuses. In response, organizations such as the Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR) have been working to protect and expand the political rights of Muslim Americans, to ensure that they are able to enjoy full and equal participation in American society and government.
1 Members of the Latin American community in Los Angeles raise their hands to bless fruit baskets as a sign of immigrants’ daily work in California’s fields. The sign reads “This fruit is the product of immigrants’ labor.”
The U.S. census, which measures the population every 10 years, reveals several trends changing the face of America. For example, a comparison of 1980 and 2000 census data shows that the U.S. population has grown more diverse, a trend expected to continue. Ethnic minorities—such as African, Asian, and Hispanic Americans—currently make up about 30 percent of the U.S. population. Of the more than 30 million foreign-born residents in the United States, more than 50 percent were born in Latin America and about 25 percent were born in Asia. By 2050 these groups are expected to form about half of America's total population. The number of Asian Americans is expected to more than triple. Hispanic Americans are expected to become nearly one-fourth of the U.S. population. The nation's growing minority groups will likely play a leading role in the future.
In part because much recent immigration has come from Latin America, Hispanic Americans are the largest and fastest growing minority group in the United States. It is estimated that by 2020, Hispanics will total an estimated 60.4 million people and account for half of the growth of the U.S. labor force. With their rising numbers have come newfound political and economic powers. Many people point to the Hispanic vote as a key factor in recent state and national elections.
About 50 percent of Hispanics in the United States live in either Texas or California. After California, Texas has the largest Hispanic population, mostly of Mexican origin. Unlike with earlier European immigrants, Mexican immigration has not come in a single wave but rather a continuous flow for more than 100 years.
ANALYZING ISSUES
What are some of the benefits of continued immigration to the United States? What are some of the drawbacks?
2.	SUMMARIZING
Explain actions taken to expand
political rights for religious
minorities in American society.
ANALYZING EFFECTS
How have immigrants who have entered the United States illegally affected the debate over immigration? Think About:
•	the number of immigrants who have arrived illegally
•	their use of federal government resources
4.	EVALUATING
In what ways do you think U.S. citizens today embrace the self-evident truths stated in the Declaration of Independence? Explain your answer.
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
How have Hispanic Americans helped change the demographic patterns of the United States? Explain your answer.
Issues for the 21st Century
|J TEKS11B,UF
Social Issues and Government Responses
Who has the responsibility of helping the poor, the uninsured, and the retired in the United States?
Politicians come into office with their own goals. President Lyndon Johnson, a former Texas high school teacher and long-time member of Congress, became president with the bold goal of creating a Great Society in which problems such as poverty and racism would be eliminated. Many of these programs passed and still exist today, such as Medicare and Medicaid. Medicare provides health insurance for senior citizens, while Medicaid provides medical care for the poor.
Many conservatives opposed Johnson's Great Society programs. They argued that his costly programs would increase both the size of government and the country's debt. They feared a larger central government would rob people of their democratic freedoms. Since the founding of our country, political leaders have disagreed about the role of government in business and our private lives and no one has yet found a solution to eradicate these issues.
Historical Perspective
The United States was established on such ideals as human equality, limited government, and democratic representation. Today, as when our nation was founded, the American government is separated into three branches—the executive branch, the legislative branch, and the judicial branch. For over two hundred years, these three branches have worked under a system of checks and balances so that no one branch ever becomes too powerful. When the government gets involved in social issues, it needs to work within this system to pass laws and garner support.
With each new administration, leaders across the political spectrum propose and enact different approaches to solving social issues such as poverty, health care, and financial support for retirees. Some leaders advocate for government to play an expanded role in people's lives, creating government programs to provide benefits. Others believe that government should take a more limited approach, allowing state and local programs to solve problems. They are wary of the cost of these government programs and the risk of taking away individual control.
Citizens influence these views by voting for candidates whose ideals most closely match their own. People also try to influence government through political and social advocacy groups. These groups do not hold office, but they try to influence lawmakers by swaying public opinion and arguing for certain legislation. Each group has its own motive for action and advocates for its cause. For example, the Republican National Hispanic Organization advocates within the Republican Party for more electoral participation by Hispanic minorities for Hispanic interests and issues. Americans for Democratic Action advocates for progressive approaches to economic and social justice, environmental policy, and civil rights.
910 Chapter 27

Health Care
One major challenge for the future is health
care. Advances in medical science are help-
ing Americans live longer. The nation's
average life expectancy today is 78 years.
By 2025 it is expected to be about 80.
The U.S. population is aging, and people typ-
ically require more health care as they age.
Thus, as older Americans make up a large
part of the population, health care issues will
affect more people.
At the same time, the costs of health care and health insurance are rising. The availability of health care and the role of government in health care have been major concerns in the United States in the 21st century. Political leaders across the spectrum have debated for over fifty years how medical coverage for the uninsured should be funded.
HEALTH CARE AND POLITICS
National health insurance for Americans was first proposed by President Truman in 1949, but Congress failed to approve it. It took President Lyndon B. Johnson to enact Medicare in 1965. The program covered most of the cost of medical care for people age 65 and above. By the 1990s, Medicare required an increasing share of federal spending. In hopes of controlling costs and providing universal coverage, President Clinton proposed a complex plan. However, lobbying by doctors and private insurers and the public's mistrust of big government caused Congress to defeat Clinton's plan in 1994.
Meanwhile, many Americans were afraid they would be denied health insurance because of preexisting conditions—medical conditions that are already present when a person applies for coverage. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, passed in 1996, partly addressed that concern. It limited the situations under which insurers could exclude from coverage those with preexisting conditions.
HEALTH CARE AND THE ELECTION
Health care continued to be a hot topic during the 2000 presidential campaign and beyond. One of the issues was the rising cost of prescription drugs. About 40 percent of people on Medicare were without prescription-drug coverage. In 2003, President George W. Bush signed the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act (MMA). This law provided access to drug coverage for elderly and disabled people on Medicare, beginning in 2006. Another worrying issue for policymakers in the early 2000s was the number of people without health insurance. This problem was extensive—some 17.4 percent of nonelderly Americans were uninsured in 2008. About 8 million of the uninsured were children.
In 2008, Barack Obama made health care reform one of his major campaign issues as he ran for president. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), was signed into law in 2010 by President Obama. It extended the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP), a program that provides health coverage to children of low-income families. It also tackled the issue of uninsured adults. It extended private insurance coverage through individual mandates— that is, requiring individuals to get some level of health coverage. Beginning on October 1, 2013, uninsured individuals could purchase health insurance plans that had been set up in accordance with the Affordable Care Act. Individuals continue to discuss whether the government should be able to mandate that people obtain health insurance.
▲
The Affordable Care Act is trying to address issues surrounding access to medical care for more Americans.
Issues for the 21st Century
CHECKS AND BALANCES
The PPACA, also known as Obamacare, shows the system of checks and balances in action in tackling social issues. President Barack Obama, from the executive branch, suggested the law to Congress. Members of the legislative branch, in Congress, passed the law in 2010. When some critics opposed the law, they brought a case to the Supreme Court. The Court, part of the judicial branch, ruled that the law was constitutional and should be enacted. Poverty
Poverty has long been a problem in America. A variety of factors, including illness, discrimination, natural disaster, and economic downturns, have caused people to struggle to support themselves. In the 1960s, President Lyndon B. Johnson declared "unconditional war on poverty." His administration expanded education, training, and financial aid for the poor. The proportion of people living below the poverty level—the minimum income necessary to provide basic living standards— fell from 20 percent in 1962 to only 11 percent in 1973. However, economic hard times reappeared in the early 1980s and the poverty rate began to rise. Although the poverty level has both risen and fallen since then, in recent years it has continued to grow.
FEDERAL WELFARE REFORM
Throughout the 20th century and into the 21st, political leaders have disagreed about the best way for the government to help alleviate poverty. Some leaders feel that the government should provide relief programs, despite the cost, as it is the obligation of the government to help the citizens. Other leaders feel that there is little the government can do to solve the problem, so funds should go toward growing the economy instead. Their criticism led to cries for welfare reform. In 1996, the Republican Congress and President Clinton passed the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act—a law that cut more than $55 billion in welfare spending over six years and limited recipients' eligibility to receive cash assistance to a five-year maximum. In addition, the bill cut benefits to recipients who had not found a job within two years. Supporters cheered the reforms, claiming that they transformed a system from one that fosters dependence to one that encourages self-reliance. Opponents of the law accused the federal government of turning its back on the poor—especially children.
In February 2006, Congress reauthorized the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program created by the 1996 bill. Between August 1996—when the bill creating TANF passed—and March 2006, the number of people on welfare declined to its lowest percentage since 1969.
NEW LEGISLATION A
new economic crisis caused President Obama to sign into law the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act in 2009. Funds from the Act could be used to fight hunger through the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), alleviate homelessness through Neighborhood Stabilization Funds, provide job training through the Workforce Investment System, and increase income support for the unemployed. Opponents of these programs want to create tougher qualification guidelines. Despite the approaches and programs, in 2012, around 16% of the United States population lived in poverty—almost 50 million people. Social Security
Another area that has been debated by political leaders is how to reform Social Security so that it will have enough money to pay retirees. Providing monthly pensions to retired people or their survivors is the best-known Social Security program.
912 Chapter 27
PREDICTING EFFECTS
What issues do you think impact the solvency of long-term entitlement programs such as Social Security and Medicare? Discuss these issues in a small group.
The Social Security Act, or FICA, began as a centerpiece of the Second New Deal in 1935 and was funded by a tax on workers and employers. It created a pension fund for retired people over age 65 and offered government aid to poor people for the first time. Since its beginning in the 1930s, Social Security has been expanded to cover children, people with disabilities, and others. It also manages numerous welfare programs.
Funding Social Security poses several problems. One problem relates to population—when the baby boomers (those born between 1946 and 1964)
retire, their huge numbers—about 70 million by the year 2020—may overburden the entitlement programs. A second problem relates to longevity—Americans now live longer, so an individual's share of benefits from the program is greater than in the past. Third, the number of workers paying into Social Security per beneficiary will drop when the boomers start retiring.
Currently, Social Security collects more in taxes than it pays in benefits. The extra goes into a trust fund that is invested. Around the year 2016 the program will begin paying out more to beneficiaries than it takes in from the payroll tax. The program will begin to rely on the Social Security Trust Fund to pay retirees. If that trend continues, after 2037, Social Security will be able to cover only about 75 percent of scheduled benefits.
AN ISSUE OF REFORM
Most experts recommend reforming the system. One suggestion is to replace Social Security, or part of it, with private retirement accounts. Other options include raising social security taxes, cutting benefits to recipients, raising the retirement age, and allowing individual investing. Political advocacy groups such as the American Association of Retired People (AARP) and the National Center for Policy Analysis (NCPA) are also actively involved in the policy reform efforts with Social Security. A SOCIAL AND POLITICAL ISSUE
Not surprising, the issue of Social Security has been a political issue in recent elections. President George W. Bush outlined an approach to privatization in 2000 and 2004 that did not garner enough support to pass. In 2008, Republican John McCain favored a partial privatization plan and Democrat Barack Obama called for raising the cap on the amount of income subject to the FICA tax. The unresolved issue continued to be debated in 2012. 1.	EVALUATING
What political leaders have made changes to health care? Do you agree or disagree with their actions?
MAKING INFERENCES
Why do you think the AARP is
involved in issues around Social
Security reform?
ANALYZING
What role do you think the govern-
ment should have in solving social
issues such as health care and
poverty?
Issues for the 21st Century
TEKS11B, 14A, 14B
Conservation and
the Environment
Can the nation balance conservation with economic progress?
In 1990, Oregon logger Bill Haire hung a new ornament on the mirror of his truck: a tiny owl with an arrow through its head. The trinket represented Haire's feelings about the federal government's decision to declare millions of acres of forest off limits to the logging industry in order to protect the endangered spotted owl.
"If it comes down to my family or that bird," said Haire, "that bird's going to suffer." The battle between loggers and environmentalists over the fate of the spotted owl is just one example of the nation's ongoing struggle to balance conservation with industrial progress.
Historical Perspective
Conservation, the management and protection of the earth's resources, began as a national movement in the United States during the early 1900s. In the wake of the country's industrial revolution, the federal government enacted numerous measures to protect the nation's natural surroundings.
In the early 1900s, President Theodore Roosevelt made a powerful impact on protecting natural resources. Roosevelt expressed a particular interest in preserving America's forestlands. "Like other men who had thought about the national future at all," he once remarked, "I had been growing more and more concerned over the destruction of the forests.” The first national park, Yellowstone, had been signed into law in 1872 by President Ulysses S. Grant. Thirty years later, Roosevelt established the first wildlife refuge in Florida and added more than 150 million acres to the nation's forest preserves. He used his executive power to set aside national forests as public lands, establish parks, monuments and historic landmarks, and urge Congress to create the Forest Service to manage this land in 1905. In 1916, President Woodrow Wilson signed an Act passed by Congress that created the National Park Service to oversee the parks. Today, there are over 400 national parks throughout the United States and its territories.
The 1960s and 1970s witnessed a resurgence of the conservation movement. In 1962, marine biologist Rachel Carson published her book Silent Spring, which warned of the destructive effects of pesticides. The book awakened Americans to the damage they were inflicting on the environment. In the two decades that followed, Congress created the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and enacted such measures as the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, and the Endangered Species Act—all in an effort to restore the health of the country's natural resources. And, since 1970, the country nearly tripled the size of its national park space.
By the early 2000s, Americans had done much to improve the environment. Between 1970 and 2008, for example, the nation's yearly production of carbon monoxide emissions dropped from 204 million to about 72 million tons.
914 Chapter 27
Challenges of Population Growth and Distribution
Despite the strides Americans have made in protecting their natural resources over the past half century, environmental problems still exist, and the nation still struggles to strike a balance between conservation and economic growth.
Business is deeply tied to resource development. As the world's population grows, so do the demands for housing materials, food, and other resources. Increased population growth and distribution in urban areas causes strain on the environment as people and businesses compete for and deplete resources. As businesses and corporations extract resources to meet these demands, the ecosystems are altered through these losses. Our increased demand for natural resources continues to drive the debate between environmentalists and industrialists around how to ensure supply of resources while also conserving the environment.
THE GREENHOUSE EFFECT
Such a struggle is clearly visible in the greenhouse effect. The greenhouse effect is the rise in temperature that Earth experiences because certain gases in the atmosphere trap energy from the sun. Without these gases, heat would escape back into space and Earth's average temperature would be about 60°F colder. Greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide, occur naturally in the air. But the burning of fossil fuels and other human activities add to the levels of these gases, amplifying the greenhouse effect and causing an increase in global warming. Global warming is the rise in the earth's surface temperature over time. Earth's temperature has steadily increased over the last 100 years due in part to increased pollution caused by humans' activities. Global warming could prompt a range of environmental calamities, from severe flooding in some parts of the world to drought in others.
In 2005, a treaty called the Kyoto Protocol took effect. It aims to reduce greenhouse gases overall by requiring developed countries to lower their emissions. The United States—the world's largest producer of greenhouse gases—signed the treaty but did not ratify it. President George W. Bush expressed doubt about global warming for several years. He also claimed that the protocol was unfair because developing countries such as China were exempt. As of 2013, the Obama administration had not pushed for ratification.
▲
Hikers enjoy a wilderness trail.
Issues for the 21st Century 91
I
Energy Sources	__________________
One issue of great concern to Americans today is the nation's growing appetite for energy. The United States is by far the world's largest consumer of energy. The United States consumes 19 percent of the world's energy, nearly all of it in the form of non-renewable fossil fuels such as oil, coal, and natural gas. In fact, the gap between how much energy the United States uses and how much it produces is widening. To fill this gap, the United States imports about a third of its energy. Much of the fuel America uses comes from places such as the oil-rich Middle East. The reliance on foreign sources has left the United States vulnerable to price increases and fuel shortages.
In 2005, President Bush outlined a plan to lessen U.S. dependence on oil imports. He proposed using more nuclear power, giving tax credits to buyers of energy-efficient cars and appliances, building new refineries, and drilling for more oil at home. Five years later, President Obama presented a similar plan. However, he also pushed for heavier use of renewable energy sources and for taxes on businesses that produce high levels of carbon pollution.
Fluctuating gasoline prices in 2007 and 2008 and a massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 caused new energy worries. Balancing energy needs with environmental concerns is an issue that Americans will grapple with for years.
Managing the Environment
Since the early 1900s, the federal government has had an active, although often debated, role in protecting natural resources. Since the creation of the National Park System, over 84 million acres of land have been protected from mining for minerals, raising trees for lumber, and diverting water for waterpower. Yet corporate and business interests argue that resources are needed to support the needs of the growing population.
Conservation efforts look to conserve, or protect, ecosystems and the diversity of life that they support. Over the past fifty years, these conservation efforts have grown to include not only land resources but also the protection of air and water. As the population grows and businesses expand, particularly in urban areas, our impact on the environment has grown and pollution levels have grown. The federal government has responded by enacting legislation and creating federal agencies connected to conservation and resource management.
THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
In 1970, President Richard Nixon created the Environmental Protection Agency, or EPA, to address environmental issues surrounding pollution. The agency was charged with strengthening and enforcing laws that govern water and air quality and monitoring the creation and emissions of toxic substances. THE ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT
In addition to protecting the air and water, Congress has passed laws to protect plants and animals. As humans continue to utilize resources and impact the environment, their actions affect ecosystems. In 1966, Congress passed the Endangered Species Preservation Act. This aimed to list species as endangered and protect their habitats to avoid extinction. In 1973, Congress passed the Endangered Species Act, which expanded protections for threatened and endangered wildlife. Congress has continued to amend this Act over the past twenty years as the specifics for conservation have grown and changed. CONTINUED EFFORTS
In addition to federal efforts, a number of states have made independent efforts to help. California, for instance, has some of the
nation's strictest air-pollution control laws, and these have helped to provide the
916 Chapter 27
Golden State with much cleaner air. Other states are playing their part as well in the nation's ongoing conservation effort.
However, there is still much to be done, especially about water pollution. One indicator is data collected by the Environmental Protection Agency for the first decade of the 2000s, which showed that beach closings—mostly due to unsafe levels of water pollution—were at historically high levels.
Social Action Groups and Private Citizens
Not all action has been through government.
Advocacy groups, such as the Marine Conservation Institute and Oceana, advocate for ocean and marine life conservation and protection. Private groups, such as the Nature Conservancy and local land trusts, have raised money to purchase forest and watershed lands and keep them pristine. In Texas several entrepreneurs created the Fossil Rim Wildlife Center, a 1,700-acre wildlife sanctuary for more than 50 animal species.
Private citizens also help. Private citizens can conserve resources such as water, land, plants,
and animals and protect them for future generations. People can choose energy-efficient appliances to help reduce energy and water use. Water management is a critical issue in some states where the demand exceeds the supply. In such cases, water ecosystems must be protected and managed carefully.
Another way to become involved is by contributing money and time to conservation efforts. Some individuals join advocacy groups or non-profits that work for land and water conservation or support political candidates who support their beliefs.
In Texas, 97 percent of the land is privately owned. The governor's office issued a report outlining specific programs designed to help landowners with conservation efforts on their land. One example is the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department's Private Lands and Habitat Program, which provides support to individual landowners in helping them conserve wildlife habitats found on their property.
Many states have wildlife departments, such as the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, to address issues such as land use, wildlife, education, and conservation.
CRITICAL THINKING
PREDICTING EFFECTS
Do you think the United States eventually will engage in greater domestic exploration of its natural resources to meet its growing energy needs? Why or why not?
FORMING GENERALIZATIONS
What role do you think the government and private citizens should have in managing the environment?
ANALYZING EFFECTS
What are two effects of population growth and distribution on the physical environment?
Think About:
•	energy use
•	manufacturing
•	supply and demand of resources
4.	HYPOTHESIZING
Is it possible for political leaders to address issues of conservation and balance economic progress simultaneously? Support your answer with details from the text.
Issues for the 21st Century
TEKS25C, 25D
Globalization and
Cultural Diffusion
How does American pop culture spread to other countries around the world?
In 1851, Louise Amelia Knapp Smith Clappe wrote letters to her sister in Massachusetts to describe her life in the gold mining camps near San Francisco. Each letter took over three months to deliver. Today, Olivia can sit down at a computer in San Antonio and update her blog about Hollywood movies. Once she publishes her article online, Akili in Kenya and Hisako in Japan can read her thoughts and share their own ideas about popular culture instantaneously. Technological advances and new inventions have changed the way people communicate ideas.
Historical Perspective
Smartphones allow people to have wireless Internet access from almost any location.
In the 1940s, when computers first came into use, they took up huge rooms and required fans or elaborate air-conditioning systems to cool the parts that provided them with power. In the years since, the parts that power computers have become miniaturized and have become much more powerful. Today, not only can personal computers perform operations more quickly than the first giant computer did, but they are also affordable for many people. The development of inexpensive personal computers has made it possible for ordinary families to use the latest technology.
The numbers alone demonstrate the influence of computer technology on modern life. In 1984, only 8.2 percent of households in the United States had a personal computer. By 2003, more than 60 percent owned one. By 2011, that number had grown to nearly 76 percent and nearly 72 percent were logging onto the Internet both at home and at work. What's more, nearly every business in the nation, from hospitals to accounting firms and airports, has implemented computer systems to handle many daily operations.
Technology and Daily Life
The Internet has linked computer users around the world. Developed in the late 1960s by the U.S. Department of Defense, the Internet soon spread to universities. In the 1990s, it boomed in popularity among the general public. Now millions of Americans use the Internet daily for activities that range from working to shopping for groceries to getting the news.
Cellular phones have also transformed communication by allowing people to carry their phones anywhere. In 1985, about 340,000 Americans were cell phone subscribers. In 2012, the Pew Research Center noted that 88% of adults in the United States owned a cell phone. The invention of tablets and smartphones has expanded access to music, maps, email, news, businesses, and social networks from any location.
918 Chapter 27
A
Global Economy Computer technology has not only improved how Americans work, but has also dramatically altered how they live. Millions of citizens now buy everything from flowers to books to stock online. Technology has helped to build a more global economy—one in which countries around the world are linked through business. Via the Internet, companies on different continents do business as though they are in the same city. Trade and investments among nations have expanded, and the economies of various countries are more closely linked. This increased trade has led to globalization, connecting the cultures and economies of the world more quickly than ever before.
▲
Globalization connects cultures around the world.
GLOBALIZATION AND TRADE
Expanded and improved transportation, communication, and technology systems allow for better distribution of goods, services, and ideas around the world. Economic globalization has opened up the traditional marketplaces for acquiring raw materials and creating and distributing goods and services. Businesses choose more diverse geographic locations to source the different aspects of production and distribution. Stronger transportation systems and instantaneous communication systems allow access for these goods more quickly and economically, taking away barriers that existed in the past. Computers have changed not just industries but also the lives of individual workers. Technology has given people access to far more information than ever before, which has improved productivity in many industries. Workers share information through computer networks. Laptops and cell phones have enabled increasing numbers of people to work at home or in multiple locations. Communication and technology advances allow many large companies to outsource various tasks such as support services. For example, a company in Florida may outsource technology support for customers to telephone operators in India.
BENEFITS AND CHALLENGES
Globalization has allowed people around the world to have access to materials, goods, and services they may not have had in the past. But with each change comes challenges as well as benefits. In the United States, people have different opinions about economic globalization, as businesses build factories in different countries and outsource work to employees abroad. People worry about job loss as domestic companies move their factories and hire workers abroad to take advantage of lower wages and costs. Others feel globalization creates jobs as new international markets increase exports and new workers are needed to create products. Regardless, globalization affects the economy of countries around the world as imports and exports are affected through these transactions. Cultural Diffusion
Just as globalization has impacted the economies of the world as countries interact
through business, it has also affected their cultures. In our global market, citizens
interact more frequently with one another. In doing so, they share their culture
and influence each other in their beliefs, behaviors, and actions. This has led to
social globalization and cultural diffusion.
Issues for the 21st Century

I
Cultural diffusion describes the way cultural practices diffuse, or spread, from
one community to another and how cultures borrow traits such as beliefs, ideas,
and material objects from one another. With increased contact comes increased
diffusion. In today's world of instantaneous communication, cultural diffusion is
constant.
Cultural diffusion is not a new concept. People of various cultures have interacted with each other for centuries as people have journeyed, done business, and moved around the world. The United States has always drawn business people, travelers, and immigrants from other lands. In doing so, people have brought and shared their foods, languages, traditions, and values.
Today, you can find Ethiopian, Chinese, Brazilian, and French restaurants in the United States. Likewise, American fast-food restaurants can be found in places such as Australia, India, and Argentina. For example, McDonald's has restaurants in more than 100 countries, and Starbucks has opened coffee shops in 37 countries.
Tools such as videos, digital photography, cell phones, and the Internet allow for people around the world to share and expand upon popular culture.
POPULAR CULTURE
Popular culture is a collection of ideas, attitudes, and images that are part of a mainstream culture heavily influenced by and spread through the media. Pop culture can include movies, music, fashion, and values that are popular in a particular culture. Technology has made the spread of pop culture more dramatic. In the 1920s, new media such as radio and movies were able to reach a growing share of the nation's population. The radio helped break down barriers that had once separated country folk from city folk. Increasingly, people all across the country were sharing the same information and enjoying the same pastimes, creating a shared culture. Printed materials and television also helped spread pop culture.
Today, the Internet is a driving force spreading popular culture around the world. People around the world can hear the same news and listen to the same music. They can hear the same advertisements and buy the same products. Not only can individuals receive the information, but they can help create and share it as well.
The Internet and media sources such as radio, movies, and social media sites have spread American pop culture quickly. Young people around the world can be found listening to American music, wearing American fashions, and watching American movies. Movies can be seen, made, and distributed around the world, providing viewers the opportunity to experience different cultures and to have a shared global experience.

*
▼
THE SPREAD OF HIP-HOP
To look at how cultural diffusion can permeate the global market, examine the spread of hip-hop around the world. Originating in New York City in the 1970s, hip-hop usually includes rap music, deejaying, graffiti painting, and hip-hop dancing. Hip-hop quickly took hold of popular American culture in New York City and spread through the country. Globalization allowed the hip-hop culture to spread even farther as youth around the world identified with the themes and styles of hip-hop. American movies such as Wild Style introduced people as far as Japan to the new style of dance and music in the 1980s. In the 1990s, global media companies saw an opportunity and began marketing hip-hop-related items to other countries. These included music, movies, clothing, and dance. Soon the hip-hop culture had become popular on six continents.
920 Chapter 27
THE GLOBAL SPREAD OF HIP-HOP
, j-' v
«
O
Hip-hop originated in New York in the 1970s. Q
Hip-hop developed from dub, a musical form brought to New York by Jamaican immigrants in the 1960s and 1970s. © Other U.S. Cities: Late 1970s, Early 1980s.
© Western Europe: Early to Mid-1980s; Africa: Early to Mid-1980s; Eastern Europe: Late 1980s, Early 1990s.
© South America and Caribbean: Mid-1980s.
© Southeast Asia and Australia: Early to Mid-1980s; South Asia: 1990s; China: 2000s.
As hip-hop spread, youth both borrowed elements of American hip-hop dance, music, and art, and influenced others as they incorporated their own cultural elements into their style and shared it with others. For example, in Japan, hip-hop fashion incorporate the Japanese language and symbols representing samurai. Lyrics often refer to Japanese food and other cultural references.
Today, hip-hop continues to be popular and the Internet draws the hip-hop community even more closely together. A video by South Korean rapper PSY spread like wildfire over the Internet after being promoted on social media. Although sung in Korean, the song and video found their way onto the top music charts for American audiences and influenced American pop culture.
New technologies continue to spread, promote, and alter popular culture around the world as ideas, values, fashion, media, and practices are shared. A website focusing on hip-hop allows people from around the world to come together to share their thoughts about current trends or to sell hip-hop-related goods and services. Video-sharing websites, blogs, and social media allow people to post videos, photos, music, and commentary instantaneously and remove any international barriers.
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING CAUSES
How do new technologies, movies, and the Internet help to create a common culture throughout the world?
2.	SUMMARIZING
What are the benefits and challenges of globalization?
3.	SYNTHESIZING
In what ways do you think the entertainment industry contributes to the global diffusion of American culture?
Think About:
•	Technology
•	Culture
•	Various media sources
ANALYZING EFFECTS
Identify the impact of popular American culture on the rest of the world over time.
MAKING INFERENCES
How would you account for the quick spread of hip-hop around the world? Support your answer.
Issues for the 21st Century
CHAPTER
ASSESSMENT
War on Terrorism
The United States created the Department of Homeland Security and passed new laws to fight terrorism.
Global Involvement
The United States has been involved in international organizations and treaties to address various global issues.
Civil Rights in the 21st Century
African Americans, Hispanic Americans, women, and other groups continue to work for their civil rights in the 21st century.
Immigration
Immigrants who have entered the United States legally and illegally have changed the country's demographic patterns.
MAIN IDEAS
Use your notes and the information In the chapter to answer the following questions.
The War on Terrorism (pages 894-897)
1.	What constitutional issues are raised by policy changes by the federal government in relation to terrorism?
Global Involvement (pages 898-901)
2.	In what ways does the United States participate in international organizations and treaties?
Civil Rights in the 21st Century (pages 902-905)
3.	Trace the development of the civil rights movement in the 19th century, including the ratification of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments.
4.	Describe the efforts of the National Rifle Association.
Immigration (pages 906-909)
5.	How have people of different ethnicities changed the demographics of the United States?
6.	In what ways have people of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups shaped American culture?
Social Issues and Government Responses
(pages 910-913)
7.	What are two political issues related to social issues in the United States?
8.	What are some controversies around how medical coverage for the insured is funded and what does this reflect about differences in political parties’ ideologies?
Conservation and the Environment (pages 914-917)
9.	What are the roles of government entities such as the National Park System, the EPA, and the Endangered Species Act in managing the environment?
Social Issues ano Government Responses
Political leaders disagree about the role that government should play in social issues such as poverty and health care.
Globalization and Cultural Diffusion (pages 918-921) 10. How does American pop culture spread to other countries?
CRITICAL THINKING
EVALUATING
How would the economy be both helped and hurt if Social Security benefits were cut? Conservation and the Environment
A growing population has caused challenges related to resource conservation, energy management, and greenhouse gases.
Globalization and Cultural Diffusion
American pop culture has spread around the world through cultural diffusion, and technological advances have led to social globalization.
PREDICTING EFFECTS
What impact do you think continued population growth in the United States will have on the physical environment? DEVELOPING HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Create a continuum similar to the one below, labeled with more liberal at the left end and more conservative at the right end. Identify significant social and political leaders and advocacy organizations from throughout the chapter and mark where you think they would fall on the continuum. Write a paragraph to explain your conclusions. ◄ more liberal
more conservative
►
922 Chapter 27

TEXAS TEST PRACTICE
Use the quotation and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer questions 1 and 2.
6 In the end, the American dream is not a sprint, or even a marathon, but a relay. Our families don’t always cross the finish line in the span of one generation. But each generation passes on to the next the fruits of their labor. My grandmother never owned a house. She cleaned other people’s houses so she could afford to rent her own. But she saw her daughter become the first In her family to graduate from college. And my mother fought hard for civil rights so that Instead of a mop, I could hold this microphone.99
—San Antonio Mayor Julian Castro, keynote address to the Democratic National Convention,
September 4, 2012
1.	Based on the quotation, it is reasonable to conclude that many people from various ethnic groups —
A take part in marathons.
B work hard to make their children’s lives better.
C grow fruits and vegetables.
D always send their children to college.
2.	Based on the quotation, it is reasonable to infer that Mayor Castro’s mother fought for —
F integrated schools.
G the right to peacefully assemble.
H equal opportunities.
J the right to vote.
Use the chart as well as your knowledge of United States history to answer question 3.
U.S.
Life Expectancy, 1970-2010 Year	Expectation of Life Span at Birth
1970	70.8 years
1980	73.7 years
1990	75.4 years
2000	76.8 years
2010	78.7 years
Sources: U.S. Census Bureau and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention	
3.	Which of the following is true about the table?
A
There is no need to worry about Social Security. B
In 1990, life expectancy was around 75 years. C
After 2010, life expectancy started to drop. D
Life expectancy has decreased in the United States. INTERACT WITH HISTORY
"WriteSmart Think about the issues you recorded as you read the chapter. Select one of the issues discussed in the chapter and discuss it with a partner. Each partner should write three questions about the chosen issue. Consider what an informed voter would need to know. Then each partner should ask the other his or her questions. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to record your questions and your partner’s answers.
K*1	" ........
\CEMTURY
You have been asked to promote a civil rights cause that is important to your or your community. Think about the many civil rights challenges that people still face in the twenty-first century. Working with a partner, design and create a poster that supports the civil rights cause that you have chosen.
COLLABORATIVE LEARNI
5’.	/	"’J'WriteSmart
Imagine you are a member of Congress in October 2001. Consider whether you would support or oppose the USA PATRIOT Act legislation. Write a persuasive essay to bring others around to your point of view. Support your position with examples and address the concerns of those who take the opposite position. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your essay.
Issues For the 21st Century
End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Using Databases to Pose and Answer Geographic Questions
DEFINING THE SKILL
Historians pose geographic questions to learn more about where and how people live in the world. They ask questions to learn more about geographic patterns and distributions. A geographic distribution shows where people, plants, and animals can be found in a certain area on Earth. Geographic patterns refer to the pattern of a geographic idea or event you are discussing. They can refer to repetitive distribution of such events as births, deaths, and life expectancies over time. One way to find information about geographic patterns and distributions is by using a database. A database is a collection of data, or information, that is organized so that you can find and retrieve information on a specific topic quickly and easily. The database will provide a list of all information related to your topic.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: POSE AND ANSWER QUESTIONS USING A DATABASE
The following is a chart containing data from the American FactFinder database on the U.S. Census Bureau website. Use the following strategies to use a database to pose and answer questions about geographic patterns and distributions. l Cumulative Estimates of the Components of Population Change, April 1, 2010, to July 1, 2012							
©Geography	Total Population Change	Natural Increase	Vital Events		Net Migration		
			Births	Deaths	Total	International	Domestic
United States	5,166,532	3,315,603	8,918,468	5,602,865	1,850,929	1,850,929	n/a
Northeast Region	443,846	395,229	1,436,538	1,041,309	60,214	481,109	-420,895
Midwest Region	388,808	573,004	1,875,748	1,302,744	-181,688	237,208	-418,896
South Region	2,700,074	1,224,387	3,387,504	2,163,117	1,457,189	691,462	765,727
West Region	1,633,804	1,122,983	2,218,678	1,095,695	515,214	441,150	74,064
© Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American FactFinder Database
o Choose your topic. Think about specific geographic patterns or distribution information you would like to examine. For instance, you might pose questions about the regional distribution of the U.S. population and how migration and vital events such as births and deaths affect that distribution.
© Identify a database you want to use to find Information. Do research to determine the best database to use
for the topic you are studying. The U.S. Census Bureau is a good resource for data about the population of the
United States. Another database might be a better choice for information about a different topic.
923 SKI
© Identify the headings and entries. Identify the column headings-or categories—and the row headings of the database to learn more about specific data. This database provides information about such categories as total population change, vital events, and net migration.
© Use the database to help you quickly find the information to answer your questions. You might ask, “Which region of the United States experienced the greatest increase in population from April 1,2010, to July 1,2012 due to international migration?”
STRATEGY: WRITE A SUMMARY
Databases can provide an overwhelming amount of information. It may help to summarize the information from the database in a paragraph. The population rates continue to grow steadily in the United States. The birth rate is almost twice the death '• rate. Population increases within the United States reflect both the natural increase due to birth and death	;
rates as well as the effect of international migration. From April 1, 2010, to July 1, 2012, the greatest net	1
increase was seen in the South. In this region, there was almost an even split between natural increase and	net	I
international and domestic migration to the area. The West also had a large increase in population, but the	f
majority was due to a natural increase. The net effect of international and domestic migration was a decrease in ? the Northeast and Midwest during this period. However, the overall population in these regions increased as a result of the birth rate.	‘
APPLYING THE SKILL
Turn to Chapter 27, Section 4, pages 906-909 and read the passage titled "The Debate Over Immigration." Read about the changing demographic patterns resulting from illegal immigration to the United States. Use a database to find out more about the geographic patterns of illegal immigration in the United States over the course of ten years. Then use the information in the database to write a summary of your findings.
1.	Choose your topic.
In this case, your topic is geographic patterns of illegal immigration in the United States over the past decade.
2.	Identify a database you want to use to find information.
Consider what database might be the best choice for your topic. Do you think the U.S. Census Bureau would have the data you need? Why or why not? Research your options.
3.	Identify the headings and entries.
Study the headings and entries to be sure that you understand the information presented in the database. What headings clarify the information in the database you found? What entries exist to help you pose and answer questions about illegal immigration to the United States?
4.	Use the database to help you quickly find the information to answer your questions.
Draft a few questions to help you write a summary that focuses on your topic. Include the answers in your summary.
