Nobel Peace Prize. • unemployed. Chapter 14
J 1932 The Bonus : Army arrives in : Washington, D.C.
1932 Rankim Delano Roosevelt is elected president.
: 1933 “Century of Progress : Exposition” begins.
1933 TheTwenty-
•	first Amendment
•	ends Prohibition.
119331 More than 13 million Americans are unemployed.
Women serve soup and slices of bread to unemployed men in an outdoor breadline in Los Angeles, California during the Great Depression.
1932
1932 Ibn Sa'ud becomes king of newly-united Saudi
1932 From prison, Mohandas K. Gandhi leads a protest against British policies in India.
1933 Adolf Hitler takes power in Germany.
1933 Japan withdraws from the League of Nations.
1934
The Great Depression Begins 463
As the prosperity of the 1920s ended, severe economic problems gripped the nation.
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
The Great Depression has had lasting effects on how Americans view themselves and their government.

Terms & Names
• price support	•speculation
• credit	• buying on margin
E.
Smith • Black Tuesday • Dow Jones	•Great Depression
Industrial	• Hawley-Smoot
Average	Tariff Act
OneAmerican’sStory
' hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the causes of the 1929 stock market crash.
▲
Gordon Parks, shown here in 1968 discussing the movie version of his
autobiographical

Gordon Parks, the well-known photographer, author, and filmmaker, was a 16-year-old high school student in the fall of 1929. He supported himself as a busboy at the exclusive Minnesota Club, where prosperous club members spoke confidently about the economy. Parks, too, looked forward to a bright future. Then came the stock market crash of October 1929. In his autobiography, Parks recalled his feelings at the time.
A
Personal Voice Gordon parks “I couldn’t Imagine such financial disaster touching my small world; it surely concerned only the rich. But by the first week of November ... I was without a job. All that next week I searched for any kind of work that would prevent my leaving school. Again it was, 'We’re firing, not hiring.’. . . I went to school and cleaned out my locker, knowing it was impossible to stay on. A piercing chill was in the air as I walked back to the rooming house.”
—A Choice of Weapons
The crash of 1929, and the depression that followed, dealt a crushing blow to the hopes and dreams of millions of Americans. The high-flying prosperity of the 1920s was over. Hard times had begun.
Economic Troubles on the Horizon
As the 1920s advanced, serious problems threatened economic prosperity.
Though some Americans became wealthy, many more could not earn a
decent living. Important industries struggled, and farmers grew more crops and	j
raised more livestock than they could sell at a profit. Both consumers and	;
farmers were steadily going deeper into debt. As the decade drew to a close, these
slippages in the economy signaled the end of an era.	'	:
Chapter 14
MAIN IDEA
Identifying
Problems
What industrial weakness signaled a declining economy in the 1920s?
INDUSTRIES IN TROUBLE
The superficial prosperity of the late 1920s shrouded weaknesses that would signal the onset of the Great Depression. Key basic industries, such as railroads, textiles, and steel had barely made a profit. Railroads lost business to new forms of transportation (trucks, buses, and private automobiles, for instance). Mining and lumbering, which had expanded during wartime, were no longer in high demand. Coal mining was especially hard-hit, in part due to stiff competition from new forms of energy, including hydroelectric power, fuel oil, and natural gas. By the early 1930s, these sources supplied more than half the energy that had once come from coal. Even the boom industries of the 1920s—automobiles, construction, and consumer goods—weakened. One important economic indicator that declined during this time was housing starts—the number of new dwellings being built. When housing starts fall, so do jobs in many related industries, such as furniture manufacturing and lumbering.
FARMERS NEED A LIFT
Perhaps agriculture suffered the most. During World War I, prices rose and international demand for crops such as wheat and corn soared. Farmers had planted more and taken out loans for land and equipment. However, demand fell after the war, and crop prices declined by 40 percent or more. Farmers boosted production in the hopes of selling more crops, but this only depressed prices further. Between 1919 and 1921 annual farm income declined from $10 billion to just over $4 billion. Farmers who had gone into debt had difficulty in paying off their loans. Many lost their farms when banks foreclosed and seized the property as payment for the debt. As farmers began to default on their loans, many rural banks began to fail. Auctions were held to recoup some of the banks' losses.
Congress tried to help out farmers with a piece of legislation called the McNary-Haugen bill. This called for federal price supports for key products such as wheat, corn, cotton, and tobacco. The government would buy surplus crops at guaranteed prices and sell them on the world market.
President Coolidge vetoed the bill twice. He commented, "Farmers have never made money. I don't believe we can do much about it.'
CONSUMERS HAVE LESS MONEY TO SPEND
As farmers' incomes fell, they bought fewer goods and services, but the problem was larger. By the late 1920s, i
V ( ONOM/f BACKGROUND
UNEVEN INCOME DISTRIBUTION, 1929
The 1920s were an era that favored big business. Life was good for the rich. They made up just 0.1 percent of the population and had yearly incomes of more than $100,000. Conversely, much of the population had to scrape to get by. Many earned so little that everyone in the family, including children, had to work. Nearly 80 percent of all families had no savings.
$1,999 and under
65%
$2,000 - $4,999
29%
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970
$10,000 and over
1%
- $9,999
$5,000 -
5%
Americans were buying less—mainly because of rising prices, stagnant wages, unbalanced distribution of income, and overbuying on credit in the preceding years. Production had also expanded much faster than wages, resulting in an ever-widening gap between the rich and the poor.
LIVING ON CREDIT
Although many Americans appeared to be prosperous during the 1920s, in fact they were living beyond their means. They often bought goods on credit an arrangement in which consumers agreed to buy now and pay later for purchases. This was often in the form of an installment plan (usually in monthly payments) that included interest charges. By making credit easily available, businesses encouraged Americans to pile up a large consumer debt. Many people then had trouble paying off their growing debts. Faced with debt, consumers cut back on spending.
UNEVEN DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME
During the 1920s, the rich got richer, and the poor got poorer. Between 1920 and 1929, the income of the wealthiest 1 percent of the population rose by 75 percent, compared with a 9 percent increase for Americans as a whole. More than 70 percent of the nation's families earned less than $2,500 per year, then considered the minimum amount needed for a decent standard of living. Even families earning twice that much could not afford many of the household products that manufacturers produced. Economists estimate that the average man or woman bought a new outfit of clothes only once a year. Scarcely half the homes in many cities had electric lights or a furnace for heat. Only one city home in ten had an electric refrigerator. This unequal distribution of income meant that most Americans could not participate fully in the economic advances of the 1920s. Many people did not have the money to purchase the flood of goods that factories produced. The prosperity of the era rested on a fragile foundation. JEU
MAIN IDEA
Forming
Generalizations
$ What did the experience of farmers and consumers at this time suggest about the health of the economy?
Hoover Takes the Nation
“ We in America are nearer to the final triumph over poverty than ever before. ” HERBERT HOOVER
Although economic disaster was around the corner, the election of 1928 took place in a mood of apparent national prosperity. This election pitted Republican candidate Herbert Hoover against Democrat Alfred E. Smith.
THE ELECTION OF 1928
Hoover, the secretary of commerce under Harding and Coolidge, was a mining engineer from Iowa who had never run for public office. Smith was a career politician who had served four terms as governor of New York. He was personable and enjoyed being in the limelight, unlike the quiet and reserved Hoover. Still, Hoover had one major advantage: he could point to years of prosperity under Republican administrations since 1920. Many Americans believed him when he declared, "We in America are nearer to the final triumph over poverty than ever before." It was an overwhelming victory for Hoover. The message was clear: most Americans were happy with Republican leadership.
DREAMS OF RICHES IN THE STOCK MARKET
By 1929, some economists had warned of weaknesses in the economy, but most Americans Chapter 14
Vocabulary stock: a share of ownership in a company
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Events
How did
speculation and margin buying cause stock prices to rise?
maintained the utmost confidence in the nation's economic health. In increasing numbers, those who could afford to invested in the stock market. The stock market had become the most visible symbol of a prosperous American economy. Then, as now, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was the most widely used barometer of the stock market's health. The Dow is a measure based on the stock prices of 30 representative large firms trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Through most of the 1920s, stock prices rose steadily. The Dow had reached a high of 381 points, nearly 300 points higher than it had been five years earlier. Eager to take advantage of this "bull market"—a period of rising stock prices—Americans rushed to buy stocks and bonds. One observer wrote, "It seemed as if all economic law had been suspended and a new era opened up in which success and prosperity could be had without knowledge or industry." By 1929, about 4 million Americans— or 3 percent of the nation's population—owned stocks. Many of these investors were already wealthy, but others were average Americans who hoped to strike it rich.
However, the seeds of trouble were taking root. People were engaging in speculation—that is, they bought stocks and bonds on the chance of a quick profit, while ignoring the risks. Many began buying on margin—paying a small percentage of a stock's price as a down payment and borrowing the rest. With easy money available to investors, the unrestrained buying and selling fueled the market's upward spiral. The government did little to discourage such buying or to regulate the market. In reality, these rising prices did not reflect companies' worth. Worse, if the value of stocks declined, people who had bought on margin had no way to pay off the loans.
The trend of buying on margin troubled the governing board of the Federal Reserve System, which serves as the nation's central bank. The Federal Reserve Board sets monetary policy in order to promote healthy economic activity. In the late 1920s, the Board decided to make it harder for brokers to offer margin loans to investors. Their strategy was partly successful, at least at first. Borrowing from banks decreased, but large corporations began providing brokers with the cash to make margin loans. As a result, the run-up of the stock market continued despite the Board's shift in monetary policy.
Analyzing
Political Cartoons
DAY OF WRATH
After the apparent prosperity of the 1920s, virtually few were prepared for the devastating effects of the stock market crash. This cartoon by James N. Rosenberg, which shows Wall Street crumbling on October 29, 1929, is titled Dies irae, Latin for “day of wrath.”
SKILLBUILDER
Analyzing Political Cartoons 1.	What does the cartoonist suggest will happen to individuals because of the crash?
2.	How does the cartoonist convey the sense of fear and shock?
3.	What do the looks on people’s faces indicate about the impact of the crash?
The Great Depression Begins 467
The Stock Market Crashes
In early September 1929, stock prices peaked and then fell. Confidence in the market started to waver, and some investors quickly sold their stocks and pulled out. On October 24, the market took a plunge. Panicked investors unloaded their shares. But the worst was yet to come.
I'

NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE
In the twenty-first century, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) remains at its core what it has been since it opened its doors in 1792: the nation’s premier marketplace for the buying and selling of stocks. There, stockbrokers known as “members” take orders from their customers to buy and sell shares of stock in any one of more than 3,000 companies.
To execute their customers’ orders, the members offer and receive bids in what resembles a loud and fast-paced auction. In general, customers submit two types of orders. A limit order tells the broker to buy or sell only if the stock reaches a certain price. A market order tells the broker to execute a transaction immediately, no matter what the price.
Despite remaining close to its roots, the NYSE is today undergoing perhaps the most significant changes in its long history, in large part due to the use of computers and the Internet.
I
A
Pen and Paper Operation In the 1920s, orders to buy or sell a stock arrived at brokers’ telephone booths located around the edge of the trading floor. They were then carried by hand or sent by pneumatic tube to the trading post where that stock would be traded.
NYSE employees called
reporters had to record every transaction. For each new sale, they wrote out a slip of paper containing the stock’s abbreviation, the number of shares, and the price, and then transmitted it to the ticker room. Market information was typed into a keyboard that converted the keystrokes into electrical impulses that drove the clattering print wheels in ticker machines along the network. People would read the current display at the trading posts.
Technological Changes
With the introduction of computer technology, the activities of the exchange are less and less centered on human interaction. For example, some 99 percent of trades on the NYSE now go through an electronic database known as the Super Display Book system. With this system, a trade can be completed in milliseconds. Further, electronic communications networks now allow individuals to buy and sell stocks themselves over the Internet at a fraction of what it would cost to use a specialist.
Such innovation has prompted some to insist that all future trading will be done via computers, thus eliminating the need for physical exchanges such as the NYSE.
SKILLBUILDER
1- Hypothesizing What scenarios can you imagine that might prompt someone to submit a market order on a certain stock?
2, Comparing How has technology on the trading floor changed since the 1920s?
The trading floor in 1914. A
The trading floor in 2000. ▼
Chapter 14
BLACK TUESDAY
On October 29—now known as Black Tuesday—the bottom fell out of the market and the nation's confidence. Shareholders frantically tried to sell before prices plunged even lower. The number of shares dumped that day was a record 16.4 million. Additional millions of shares could not find buyers. People who had bought stocks on credit were stuck with huge debts as the prices plummeted, while others lost most of their savings. The damage was widespread and catastrophic. While the sell-offs of earlier days had affected mainly the stocks of weaker businesses, the collapse on Black Tuesday affected the stock of even the most solid companies. During October, the stock market dropped in value by about $16 billion, nearly one-half of the market's pre-crash value. By mid-November, investors had lost about $30 billion, an amount equal to how much America spent in World War I. The stock market bubble had finally burst.
Financial Collapse
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
What
happened to ordinary workers during the Great Depression?
The stock market crash signaled the beginning of the Great Depression—the period from 1929 to 1940 in which the economy plummeted and unemployment skyrocketed. The crash alone did not cause the Great Depression, but it hastened the collapse of the economy and made the depression more severe.
BANK AND BUSINESS FAILURES
After the crash, many people panicked and withdrew their money from banks. But some couldn't get their money because the banks had invested it in the stock market. In 1929, 600 banks closed. By 1933, 11,000 of the nation's 25,000 banks had failed. Because the government did not protect or insure bank accounts, millions of people lost their savings accounts. The Great Depression hit other businesses, too. Between 1929 and 1932, the gross national product—the nation's total output of goods and services—was cut nearly in half, from $104 billion to $59 billion. Approximately 90,000 businesses went bankrupt. Among these failed enterprises were once-prosperous automobile and railroad companies.
As the economy plunged into a tailspin, millions of workers lost their jobs. Unemployment leaped from 3 percent (1.6 million workers) in 1929 to 25 percent (13 million workers) in 1933. One out of every four workers was out of a job. Those who kept their jobs faced pay cuts and reduced hours.
Not everyone fared so badly, of course. Before the crash, some speculators had sold off their stocks and made money. Joseph P. Kennedy, the father of future president John F. Kennedy, was one who did. Most, however, were not so lucky or shrewd. .J$
WORLDWIDE SHOCK WAVES
The United States was not the only country gripped by the Great Depression. Much of Europe, for example, had suffered throughout the 1920s. European countries trying to recover from the ravages of World War I faced high war debts. In addition, Germany had to pay war reparations—payments to compensate the Allies for the damages Germany had caused. The Great Depression compounded these problems by limiting America's ability to import European goods. This made it difficult to sell American farm products and manufactured goods abroad. This British election poster shows that the Great Depression was a global event.
The Great Depression Begins 469
Depression Indicators
Economic indicators are measures that signal trends in a nation’s economy.
During the Great Depression several trends were apparent. Those indicated at the right are linked—the conditions of one can affect another. For instance, when banks fail Q, some businesses may have to close down 0, which can cause unemployment to rise 0. Thus, people have less money and spending declines 0.
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs 1.	In what year did the biggest jump in bank failures occur?
2.	What measure on the graphs seems to indicate an improvement in the U.S. economy during the Depression? What might explain this?
Bank Failures						
						
5 I 4 ! 3 S 2 £ 1						?	•
					J	
J L
			y	s	1	
		r				
u 1928 ’29 '30 '31 ’32 '33						
B
Business Failures
35 30 25 20 i e				/	
			H	<	V
	>—<				
						0
1928 ’29 ’30 ’31 ’32 '33					
El
Income and Spending
Unemployment						
People (in millions) 3 W 0)	<0 M S						
						)
				/\		
			J			
		J				
	N	n				
V 1928 '29 ’30 ’31 '32 '33						

Chapter 14
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
Jjj How did the Great Depression affect the world economy?
In 1930, Congress passed the Hawley-Smoot Tariff Act, which established the highest protective tariff in United States history. It was designed to protect American farmers and manufacturers from foreign competition. Yet it had the opposite effect. By reducing the flow of goods into the United States, the tariff prevented other countries from earning American currency to buy American goods. The tariff made unemployment worse in industries that could no longer export goods to Europe. Many countries retaliated by raising their own tariffs. Within a few years, world trade had fallen more than 40 percent. jy
CAUSES OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION
Although historians and economists differ on the main causes of the Great Depression, most cite a common set of factors, among them: •	tariffs and war debt policies that cut down the foreign market for American goods
•	a crisis in the farm sector
•	the availability of easy credit
•	an unequal distribution of income
These factors led to falling demand for consumer goods, even as newly mechanized factories produced more products. The federal government contributed to the crisis by keeping interest rates low, thereby allowing companies and individuals to borrow easily and build up large debts. Some of this borrowed money was used to buy the stocks that later led to the crash.
At first people found it hard to believe that economic disaster had struck. In November 1929, President Hoover encouraged Americans to remain confident about the economy. Yet, the most severe depression in American history was well on its way.
VJORLHJTAg/?
, i
i i ■ i
GLOBAL EFFECTS OF THE DEPRESSION
As the American economy collapsed, so too did Europe’s.
The world’s nations had become interdependent; international trade was important to most countries. However, when the U.S. economy failed, American investors withdrew their money from European markets.
To keep U.S. dollars in America, the government raised tariffs on goods imported from other countries. World trade dropped. Unemployment rates around the world soared. Germany and Austria were particularly hard hit. In 1931 Austria’s largest bank failed. In Asia, both farmers and urban workers suffered as the value of exports fell by half between 1929 and 1931. The crash was felt in Latin America as well. As U.S. and European demand for Latin American products like sugar, beef, and copper dropped, prices collapsed.
i
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
• price support •credit
E.
Smith •	Dow Jones Industrial Average
•	speculation
•	buying on margin
•	Black Tuesday
•Great Depression •Hawley-Smoot Tariff Act
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a diagram like this, identify the causes of the Great Depression.
Which do you see as the biggest cause? Why?
CRITICAL THINKING
MAKING INFERENCES
How did the economic trends of the 1920s help cause the Great Depression? Think About:
•	what happened in industry
•	what happened in agriculture
•	what happened with consumers
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
Judging from the events of the late 1920s and early 1930s, how important do you think public confidence is to the health of the economy? Explain. Think About:
•	what happened when overconfidence in the stock market led people to speculate and buy on margin
•	how confidence affects consumer borrowing
The Great Depression Begins 471
!
» .,.b
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
Hardship and Suffering During the Depression
During the Great Depression Americans did what they had to do to survive.
Since the Great Depression, many Americans have been more cautious about saving, investing, and borrowing.
•shantytown •soup kitchen • bread line
■ hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the impact of the Great Depression on farmers and city dwellers.
OneAmerican'sStory
•Dust Bowl •direct relief
A
Ann Marie Low
Ann Marie Low lived on her parents' North Dakota farm when the stock market crashed in 1929 and the Great Depression hit. Hard times were familiar to Ann's family. But the worst was yet to come.
In the early 1930s, a ravenous drought hit the Great Plains, destroying crops and leaving the earth dry and cracked. Then came the deadly dust storms. On April 25, 1934, Ann wrote an account in her diary.
A
Personal Voice ann marie low “[T]he air is just full of dirt coming, literally, for hundreds of miles. It sifts Into everything. After we wash the dishes and put them away, so much dust sifts into the cupboards we must wash them again before the next meal.... Newspapers say the deaths of many babies and old people are attributed to breathing in so much dirt. ”
—Dust Bowl Diary
The drought and winds lasted for more than seven years. The dust storms in Kansas, Colorado, New Mexico, Nebraska, the Dakotas, Oklahoma, and Texas were a great hardship—but only one of many—that Americans faced during the Great Depression.
The Depression Devastates People’s Lives
Statistics such as the unemployment rate tell only part of the story of the Great Depression. More important was the impact that it had on people's lives: the Depression brought hardship, homelessness, and hunger to millions.
THE DEPRESSION IN THE CITIES
In cities across the country, people lost their jobs, were evicted from their homes and ended up in the streets. Some slept in parks or sewer pipes, wrapping themselves in newspapers to fend off the cold. Chapter 14
Background
Relief programs largely discriminated against African Americans. However, some black organizations, like the National Urban League, were able to give private help.
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
4/ How did the Great Depression affect minorities?
Others built makeshift shacks out of scrap materials. Before long, numerous shantytowns—little towns consisting of shacks—sprang up. An observer recalled one such settlement in Oklahoma City: "Here were all these people living in old, rusted-out car bodies. . . . There were people living in shacks made of orange crates. One family with a whole lot of kids were living in a piano box. . . . People were living in whatever they could junk together."
Every day the poor dug through garbage cans or begged. Soup kitchens offering free or low-cost food and bread lines, or lines of people waiting to receive food provided by charitable organizations or public agencies, became a common sight. One man described a bread line in New York City.
A
Unemployed people built shacks in a shantytown in New York City in 1932. A
Personal Voice Herman shumlin “Two or three blocks along Times Square, you’d see these men, silent, shuffling along in a line. Getting this handout of coffee and doughnuts, dealt out from great trucks. ... I’d see that flat, opaque, expressionless look
which spelled, for me, human disaster. Men . . . who had responsible positions. Who had lost their jobs, lost their homes, lost their families . . . They were destroyed men. ”
—quoted in Hard Times
yfrRSPECTlVp
Conditions for African Americans and Latinos were especially difficult. Their unemployment rates were higher, and they were the lowest paid. They also dealt with increasing racial violence from unemployed whites competing for the same jobs. Twenty-four African Americans died by lynching in 1933.
Latinos—mainly Mexicans and Mexican Americans living in the Southwest—were also targets. Whites demanded that Latinos be deported, or expelled from the country, even though many had been born in America. By the late 1930s, hundreds of thousands of people of Mexican descent relocated to Mexico. Some left voluntarily,* others were deported by the federal government.
THE DEPRESSION IN RURAL AREAS
Life in rural areas was hard, but it did have one advantage over city life: most farmers could grow food for their families. With falling prices and rising debt, though, thousands of farmers lost their land. Between 1929 and 1932, about 400,000 farms were lost through foreclosure—the process by which a mortgage holder takes back property if an occupant has not made payments. Many farmers turned to tenant farming and barely scraped out a living. AN AFRICAN-AMERICAN
VIEW OF THE DEPRESSION
Although the suffering of the 1930s was severe for many people, it was especially grim for African Americans. Hard times were already a fact of life for many blacks, as one African-American man noted:
“The Negro was born in depression. It didn’t mean too much to him, The Great American Depression. . . . The best he could be is a janitor or a porter or shoeshine boy. It only became official when it hit the white man.”
Nonetheless, the African-American community was very hard hit by the Great Depression. In 1932, the unemployment rate among African Americans stood at over 50 percent, while the overall unemployment rate was approximately 25 percent.
The Great Depression Begins 473
w
New York City, May 12,1934
Dust lowers humidity from normal 57% to 34%. Dust is reported on ships 500 miles out to sea.
Nebraska, 1935-1937
Over two years, federal workers help soil conservation by planting 360,000 trees and completing 62 dams, 517 ponds, and 500 acres of terracing.
Chicago, Nov. 1933
Crowds at Chicago Exposition world’s fair are caught in 50 mph gale of dust
""a-
.
A
Beaver, Okla., March 24,1936
Grain-elevator operators estimate that 20% of wheat crop has been blown away by dust storms.

Boston, May 1934
Midwestern dust is found on airplanes landing in Boston; it collected on the planes at altitudes of up to 20,000 ft.
.7?
1
PACIFIC
OCEAN
w	' / Area of Dust Bowl
	Area of damage	“
1 _ -	- Area covered by
	May 1934 dust storm
0	150	300 miles
0	150	300 kilometers
'■X
Tucumcari, N. Mex. March 30,1936
Clouds of dust blown by 50-mph winds cause complete darkness.


W-
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Region Which states were in the region known as the Dust Bowl?
2.	Movement Why might most of the migrants who left the Dust Bowl have traveled west?

A farmer and his sons brave a dust storm in 1936.
THE DUST BOWL
The drought that began in the early 1930s wreaked havoc on the Great Plains, a result of physical and human geographic factors. Drought is a part of a weather cycle, naturally occurring on the Great Plains every few decades. By the 1930s, however, careless agricultural practices had left the region vulnerable. Farmers from Texas to North Dakota had used tractors to break up the grasslands and plant millions of acres of new farmland. Plowing had removed the thick protective layer of prairie grasses. Farmers had then exhausted the land through overproduction of crops. When the drought and winds began, little vegetation was left to hold the soil down. Wind scattered the topsoil, exposing sand and grit underneath. The dust traveled hundreds of miles.
The region that was the hardest hit, including parts of Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, New Mexico, and Colorado, came to be known as the Dust Bowl. Plagued by dust storms and evictions, thousands of farmers and sharecroppers left their land behind. They packed up their families and few belongings and headed west, following Route 66 to California. Some of these migrants—known as Okies (a term that originally referred to Oklahomans but came to be used negatively for all migrants)—found work as farmhands. But others continued to wander in search of work. By the end of the 1930s, hundreds of thousands of farm families had migrated to California and other Pacific Coast states.
Effects on the American Family
Background
The most severe storms were called “black blizzards.” They were said to have darkened the sky in New York City and Washington, D.C.
In the face of the suffering caused by the Great Depression, the family stood as a source of strength for most Americans. Although some people feared that hard times would undermine moral values, those concerns were largely unfounded. In
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing Causes Bj Why did so many men leave their homes during the Depression?
general, Americans believed in traditional values and emphasized the importance of family unity. At a time when money was tight, many families entertained themselves by staying at home and playing board games, such as Monopoly (invented in 1933), and listening to the radio. Nevertheless, the economic difficulties of the Great Depression put severe pressure on family life. Making ends meet was a daily struggle, and, in some cases, families broke apart under the strain.
MEN IN THE STREETS
Many men had difficulty coping with unemployment because they were accustomed to working and supporting their families. Every day, they would set out to walk the streets in search of jobs. As Frederick Lewis Allen noted in Since Yesterday, "Men who have been sturdy and self-respecting workers can take unemployment without flinching for a few weeks, a few months, even if they have to see their families suffer; but it is different after a year . . . two years. . . three years." Some men became so discouraged that they simply stopped trying. Some even abandoned their families. During the Great Depression, as many as 300,000 transients—or "hoboes" as they were called—wandered the country, hitching rides on railroad boxcars and sleeping under bridges. These hoboes of the 1930s, mainly men, would occasionally turn up at homeless shelters in big cities. The novelist Thomas Wolfe described a group of these men in New York City.
SPOTLIGHT
HISTORICAL
HOBO SYMBOLS
Hoboes shared a hidden language that helped them meet the challenges of the road. Over time a set of symbols developed for hoboes to alert each other as to where they could get food or work or a place to sleep, and what houses to avoid. They often marked the symbols, such as those shown below, on the sides of houses and fences near railroad yards.
Zr	Sit down meal
	Only bread given here
	Good place for a handout
	Sleep in barn
zvwvv O1O	Good water
o	Danger
A
Personal Voice thomas wolfe “These were the wanderers from town to town, the riders of freight trains, the thumbers of rides on highways, the uprooted, unwanted male population of America. They . . ■ gathered in the big cities when winter came, hungry, defeated, empty, hopeless, restless . . . always on the move, looking everywhere for work, for the bare crumbs to support their miserable lives, and finding neither work nor crumbs. ”
—You Can’t Go Home Again
During the early years of the Great Depression, there was no federal system of direct relief—cash payments or food provided by the government to the poor. Some cities and charity services did offer relief to those who needed it, but the benefits were meager. In New York City, for example, the weekly payment was just $2.39 per family. This was the most generous relief offered by any city, but it was still well below the amount needed to feed a family.
WOMEN STRUGGLE TO SURVIVE
Women worked hard to help their families survive adversity during the Great Depression. Many women canned food and sewed clothes. They also carefully managed household budgets. Jeane Westin, the author of Making Do: How Women Survived the '30s, recalled, "Those days you did everything to save a penny.... My next door neighbor and I used to shop together You could get two pounds of hamburger for a quarter, so we'd buy two pounds and split it—then one week she'd pay the extra penny and the next week I'd pay." Many women also worked outside the home, though they usually received less money than men did. As the Depression wore on, however, working women became the targets of enormous resentment. Many people believed that women, especially married women had no right to work when there were men who were unemployed.
The Great Depression Begins 475
“If I leave my mother, it will mean one less
In the early 1930s, some cities refused to hire married women as schoolteachers. Many Americans assumed that women were having an easier time than men
during the Great Depression because few were seen begging or standing in bread lines. As a matter of fact, many women were starving to death in cold attics and rooming houses. As one writer pointed out, women were often too ashamed to reveal their hardship.
A
Personal Voice meridel le seuer 66 I’ve lived in cities for many months, broke, without help, too timid to get in bread lines. I’ve known many women to live like this until they simply faint in the street. ... A woman will shut herself up in a room until it is taken away from her, and eat a cracker a day and be as quiet as a mouse. . . . [She] will go for weeks verging on starvation,. . . going through the streets ashamed, sitting in libraries, parks, going for days without speaking to a living soul, shut up in the terror of her own misery/’
—America in the Twenties
CHILDREN SUFFER HARDSHIPS
Children also suffered during the 1930s. Poor diets and a lack of money for health care led to serious health problems. Milk consumption declined across the country, and clinics and hospitals reported a dramatic rise in malnutrition and diet-related diseases, such as rickets. At the same time, child-welfare programs were slashed as cities and states cut their budgets in the face of dwindling resources. Falling tax revenues also caused school boards to shorten the school year and even close schools. By 1933, some 2,600 schools across the nation had shut down, leaving more than 300,000 students out of school. Thousands of children went to work instead; they often labored in sweatshops under horrendous conditions.
Many teenagers looked for a way out of the suffering. Hundreds of thousands of teenage boys and some girls hopped aboard America's freight trains to zigzag the country in search of work, adventure, and an escape from poverty. These "wild boys" came from every section of the United States,
mouth to feed. ” from every corner of society. They were the sons of poor farmers, and out-of-work miners, and wealthy parents who had lost everything. "Hoover tourists," as they were called, were eager to tour America for free.
From the age of eleven until seventeen, George Phillips rode the rails, first catching local freights out of his home town of Princeton, Missouri.
"There is no feeling in the world like sitting in a side-door Pullman and watching the world go by, listening to the clickety-clack of the wheels, hearing that old steam whistle blowing for crossings and towns."
While exciting, the road could also be deadly. Many riders were beaten or jailed by "bulls"—armed freight yard patrolmen. Often riders had to sleep standing up in a constant deafening rumble. Some were accidentally locked in ice cars for days on end. Others fell prey to murderous criminals. From 1929 to 1939, 24,647 trespassers were killed and 27,171 injured on railroad property.
◄ Two young boys, ages 15 and 16, walk beside freight
cars in the San Joaquin Valley.
Background
Rickets is caused by a vitamin D deficiency and results in defective bone growth.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
How did the Great Depression affect women and children?
EUGENE WILLIAMS, AGE 13
Vocabulary stigma: a mark or indication of disgrace
.1 !
SOCIAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL EFFECTS
The hardships of the Great Depression had a tremendous social and psychological impact. Some people were so demoralized by hard times that they lost their will to survive. Between 1928 and 1932, the suicide rate rose more than 30 percent. Three times as many people were admitted to state mental hospitals as in normal times.
The economic problems forced many Americans to accept compromises and make sacrifices that affected them for the rest of their lives. Adults stopped going to the doctor or dentist because
they couldn't afford it. Young people gave up their dreams of going to college. Others put off getting married, raising large families, or having children at all.
For many people, the stigma of poverty and of having to scrimp and save never disappeared completely. For some, achieving financial security became the primary focus in life. As one woman recalled, "Ever since I was twelve years old there was one major goal in my life . . . one thing . . . and that was to never be poor again."
During the Great Depression many people showed great kindness to strangers who were down on their luck. People often gave food, clothing, and a place to stay to the needy. Families helped other families and shared resources and strengthened the bonds within their communities. In addition, many people developed habits of saving and thriftiness—habits they would need to see themselves through the dark days ahead as the nation and President Hoover struggled with the Great Depression. These habits shaped a whole generation of Americans.
This Ozark sharecropper family was photographed in Arkansas during the 1930s by the artist Ben Shahn.
ASSESSMENT
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance, •shantytown	• bread line	•direct relief
•soup kitchen	•Dust Bowl
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a Venn diagram, list the effects that the Great Depression had on farmers and city dwellers. Find the differences and the similarities.
Farmers
Both
City
Dwellers
CRITICAL THINKING
3. CONTRASTING
How was what happened to men during the Great Depression different from what happened to women? children? Think About:
•	each group’s role in their families
•	the changes each group had to make
•	what help was available to them
ANALYZING EFFECTS
How did physical and human geographic factors impact the Dust Bowl?
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
In what ways did the Great Depression affect people’s outlook?
Which group do you think suffered less?
The Great Depression Begins 477
MAIN IDEA
President Hoover’s conservative response to the Great Depression drew criticism from many Americans.
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Worsening conditions in the country caused the government to become more involved in the health and wealth of the people.
Terms & Names
•	Herbert Hoover »Boulder Dam
•	Federal Home Loan Bank Act
»Reconstruction
Finance Corporation • Bonus Army
Hoover Struggles with the Depression
American's

hmhsocialstudies.com
»TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on President Hoover’s response to the Great Depression.
Oscar Ameringer was a newspaper editor in Oklahoma City during the Great Depression. In 1932, he traveled around the country collecting information on economic and social conditions. Testifying in unemployment hearings that same year, Ameringer described desperate people who were losing patience with the government. "Unless something is done for them and done soon you will have a revolution on hand." Ameringer told the following story.
A
Personal Voice oscar ameringer 66 The roads of the West and Southwest teem with hungry hitchhikers. . . .
Between Clarksville and Russellville, Ark., I picked up a family. The woman was hugging a dead chicken under a ragged coat. When I asked her where she had procured the fowl, first she told me she had found It dead in the road, and then added In grim humor, 'They promised me a chicken in the pot, and now I got mine.’”
—quoted in The American Spirit
The woman was recalling President Hoover’s empty 1928 campaign pledge: "A chicken in every pot and a car in every garage." Now many Americans were disillusioned. They demanded that the government help them.
▲
AI family from Arkansas walks through Texas, looking for work in the cotton fields along the Rio Grande.
Hoover Tries to Reassure the Nation
After the stock market crash of October 1929, President Herbert Hoover tried to reassure Americans that the nation’s economy was on a sound footing. "Any lack of confidence in the economic future ... is foolish," he declared. In his view, the important thing was for Americans to remain optimistic and to go about their business as usual. Americans believed depressions were a normal part of the business cycle. According to this theory, periods of rapid economic growth were naturally followed by periods of depression. The best course in a slump, many
experts believed, was to do nothing and let the economy fix itself. Hoover took a slightly different position. He felt that government could play a limited role in helping to solve problems.
HOOVER S PHILOSOPHY
Herbert Hoover had been an engineer, and he put great faith in the power of reason. He was also a humanitarian, as he made clear in one of his last speeches as president. A
Personal Voice Herbert hoover Our first objective must be to provide security from poverty and want. . . . We want to see a nation built of home owners and farm owners. We want to see their savings protected. We want to see them in steady jobs. We want to see more and more of them insured against death and accident, unemployment and old age. We want them all secure.99
—“Challenge to Liberty,” October 1936
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
$ What were some of Hoover’s key convictions about government?
Like many Americans of the time, Hoover believed that one of government's chief functions was to foster cooperation between competing groups and interests in society. If business and labor were in a conflict, for example, government should step in and help them find a solution that served their mutual interests. This cooperation must be voluntary rather than forced, he said. Government's role was to encourage and facilitate cooperation, not to control it.
On the other hand, Americans also valued "rugged individualism"—the idea that people should succeed through their own efforts. They should take care of themselves and their families, rather than depend on the government to bail them out. Thus, Hoover opposed any form of federal welfare, or direct relief to the needy. He believed that handouts would weaken people's self-respect and "moral fiber." His answer to the needy was that individuals, charities, and local organizations should pitch in to help care for the less fortunate. The federal government should direct relief measures, but not through a vast federal bureaucracy. Such a bureaucracy, he said, would be too expensive and would stifle individual liberties, jy
However, when the Depression took hold, moral fiber wasn't what people were worried about. Hoover's response shocked and frustrated suffering Americans.
HOOVER TAKES CAUTIOUS STEPS
Hoover's political philosophy caused him to take a cautious approach to the depression. Soon after the stock market crash, he called together key leaders in the fields of business, banking, and labor. He urged them to work together to find solutions to the nation's economic woes and to act in ways that would not make a bad situation worse. For example, he asked employers not to cut wages or lay off workers, and he asked labor leaders not to demand higher wages or go on strike. He also created a special organization to help private charities generate contributions for the poor.
None of these steps made much of a difference. A year after the crash, the economy was still shrinking, and unem-ployment was still rising. More companies went out of business, soup kitchens became a common sight, and general misery continued to grow. Shantytowns arose in every city, and hoboes continued to roam.
V<EY PLAY£R
HERBERT HOOVER 1874-1964
Born to a Quaker family in Iowa, Herbert Hoover was orphaned at an early age. His life was a rags-to-riches story. He worked his way through Stanford University and later made a fortune as a mining engineer and consultant in China, Australia, Europe, and Africa. During and after World War I, he coordinated U.S. relief efforts in Europe, earning a reputation for efficiency and humanitarian ideals.
As president, Hoover asserted, “Every time we find solutions outside of government, we have not only strengthened character, but we have preserved our sense of real government.”
The Great Depression Begins 479
This 1930s postcard, displaying a hand-colored photograph, shows the mammoth scale of Boulder Canyon and Boulder Dam.
LOOKING DOWNSTREAM, COLORADO RIVER
SHOWING THE IMMENSE CONCRETE FORMS OF BOULDER DAM
BOULDER DAM
One project that Hoover approved did make a difference. Years earlier, when Hoover served as secretary of commerce, one of his earliest proposed initiatives was the construction of a dam on the Colorado River. Aiming to minimize federal intervention, Hoover proposed to finance the dam's construction by using profits from sales of the electric power that the dam would generate. He also helped to arrange an agreement on water rights among the seven states of the Colorado River basin— Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming. By the time the massive project won congressional approval in 1928, as part of a $700 million public works program, Hoover had been elected to the White House. In the fall of 1929, nearly one year into his presidency, Hoover was finally able to authorize construction of Boulder Dam (later called Hoover Dam). At 726 ft. high and 1,244 ft. long it would be the world's tallest dam and the second largest. In addition to providing electricity and flood control, the dam also provided a regular water supply, which enabled the growth of California's massive agricultural
economy. Today, the dam also helps to provide water for cities such as Los Angeles and Las Vegas.
DEMOCRATS WIN IN 1930 CONGRESSIONAL ELECTIONS
As the country's economic difficulties increased, the political tide turned against Hoover and the Republicans. In the 1930 congressional elections, the Democrats took advantage of anti-Hoover sentiments to win more seats in Congress. As a result of that election, the Republicans lost control of the House of Representatives and saw their majority in the Senate dwindle to one vote. As Americans grew more and more frustrated by the Depression, they expressed their anger in a number of ways. Farmers stung by low crop prices burned their corn and wheat and dumped their milk on highways rather than sell it at a loss. Some farmers even declared a "farm holiday" and refused to work their fields. A number blocked roads to prevent food from getting to market, hoping
that food shortages would raise prices. Some farmers also used force to prevent authorities from foreclosing on farms.
By 1930, people were calling the shantytowns in American cities "Hoovervilles"—a direct slap at the president’s policies. Homeless people called the newspapers they wrapped themselves in "Hoover blankets." Empty pockets turned inside out were "Hoover flags." Many Americans who had hailed Hoover as a great humanitarian a few years earlier now saw him as a cold and heartless leader.
;er 14
MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
Why do you think people blamed Hoover for the nation’s difficulties?
Vocabulary refinance: to
provide new financing; to discharge a mortgage with a new mortgage obtained at a lower interest rate
main idea
Evaluating
Decisions
What were some of the projects proposed by Hoover, and how effective were they?
This cartoon’s caption plays on the two different meanings of the word credit to suggest that farmers and the president should help each other.
Despite public criticism, Hoover contin-ued to hold firm to his principles. He refused to support direct relief or other forms of federal welfare. Some Americans were going hungry, and many blamed Hoover for their plight. Criticism of the president and his policies continued to grow. An anonymous ditty of the time was widely repeated. Jjy
“ Mellon pulled the whistle
Hoover rang the bell
Wall Street gave the signal
And the country went to hell. ”
Hoover Takes Action
As time went on and the depression deepened, President Hoover gradually softened his position on government intervention in the economy and took a more activist approach to the nation's economic troubles.
HOOVER BACKS COOPERATIVES
In Hoover's view, Boulder Dam was a model of how the federal government could encourage cooperation. His attempts to relieve the
depression involved negotiating agreements among private entities, again reflecting his belief in small government. For example, he backed the creation of the Federal Farm Board, an organization of farm cooperatives. The Farm Board was intended to raise crop prices by helping members to buy crops and keep them off the market temporarily until prices rose.
In addition, Hoover tried to prop up the banking system by persuading the nation's largest banks to establish the National Credit Corporation. This organization loaned money to smaller banks, which helped them stave off bankruptcy.
DIRECT INTERVENTION
By late 1931, however, many people could see that these measures had failed to turn the economy around. With a presidential election looming, Hoover appealed to Congress to pass a series of measures to reform banking, provide mortgage relief, and funnel more federal money into business investment. In 1932, Hoover signed into law the Federal Home Loan Bank Act, which lowered mortgage rates for homeowners and allowed farmers to refinance their farm loans and avoid foreclosure. It was not until Hoover's time in office was over that Congress passed the Glass-Steagall Banking Act, which separated investment from commercial banking and would, Congress hoped, prevent another crash. Hoover's most ambitious economic measure, however, was the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC), approved by Congress in January 1932. It authorized up to $2 billion for emergency financing for banks, life insurance companies, railroads, and other large businesses. Hoover believed that the money would trickle down to the average citizen through job growth and higher wages. Many critics questioned this approach; they argued that the program would benefit only corporations and that the poor still needed direct relief. Hungry people could not wait for the benefits to trickle down to their tables.
In its first five months of operation, the RFC loaned more than $805 million to large corporations, but business failures continued. The RFC was an unprecedented example of federal involvement in a peacetime economy, but in the end it was too little, too late.
The Great Depression Begins 481
DIFFICULT
qVCISIOYs
HOOVER AND FEDERAL PROJECTS
On the one hand, President Hoover opposed federal welfare and intervention in the economy. On the other, he felt that government had a duty to help solve problems and ease suffering.
The question was, What kind of assistance would be proper and effective?
1.	Consider the pros and cons of Hoover’s actions during the Depression. Did he do enough to try to end the Depression? Why or why not?
2.	If you had been president during the Great Depression, what policies would you have supported? Explain the approach you would have taken.
Gassing the Bonus Army
In 1932, an incident further damaged Hoover's image and public morale. That spring, between 10,000 and 20,000 World War I veterans and their families arrived in Washington, D.C., from various parts of the country. They called themselves the Bonus Expeditionary Force, or the Bonus Army.
THE PATMAN BILL DENIED
Led by Walter Waters, an unemployed cannery worker from Oregon, the Bonus Army came to the nation's capital to support a bill under debate in Congress. The Patman Bill authorized the government to pay a bonus to World War I veterans who had not been compensated adequately for their wartime service. This bonus, which Congress had approved in 1924, was supposed to be paid out in 1945 in the form of cash and a life insurance policy, but Congressman Wright Patman believed that the money—an average of $500 per soldier—should be paid immediately. Hoover thought that the Bonus Marchers were "communists and persons with criminal records" rather than veterans. He opposed the legislation, but he respected the marchers' right to peaceful assembly. He even provided food and supplies so that they could erect a shantytown within sight of the Capitol. On June 17, however, the Senate voted down the Patman Bill. Hoover then called on
In 1932, these veterans from Muncie, Indiana, decided to remain in the capital until their bonus was paid to them. ▼
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
What did the Bonus Army want?
the Bonus Army marchers to leave. Most did, but approximately 2,000, still hop-ing to meet with the president, refused to budge, jj/
HOOVER DISBANDS THE BONUS ARMY
Nervous that the angry group could become violent, President Hoover decided that the Bonus Army should be disbanded. On July 28, a force of 1,000 soldiers under the command of General Douglas MacArthur and his aide, Major Dwight D. Eisenhower, came to roust the veterans. A government official watching from a nearby office recalled what happened next. A
Personal Voice a. everette mcintyre “The 12th infantry was in full battle dress. Each had a gas mask and his belt was full of tear gas bombs. ... At orders, they brought their bayonets at thrust and moved in. The bayonets were used to jab people, to make them move. Soon, almost everybody disappeared from view, because tear gas bombs exploded. The entire block was covered by tear gas. Flames were coming up, where the soldiers had set fire to the buildings to drive these people out. . . . Through the whole afternoon, they took one camp after another/9
—quoted in Hard Times
In the course of the operation, the infantry gassed more than 1,000 people, including an 11-month-old baby, who died, and an 8-year-old boy, who was partially blinded. Two people were shot and many were injured. Most Americans were stunned and outraged at the government's treatment of the veterans.
Once again, President Hoover's image suffered, and now an election was nearing. In November, Hoover would face a formidable opponent, the Democratic candidate Franklin Delano Roosevelt. When Roosevelt heard about the attack on the Bonus Army, he said to his friend Felix Frankfurter, "Well, Felix, this will elect me." The downturn in the economy and Hoover's inability to deal effectively with the Depression had sealed his political fate.
ASSESSMENT
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•Herbert Hoover	-Federal Home Loan Bank • Reconstruction Finance -Bonus Army
•Boulder Dam	Act	Corporation
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
In a cluster diagram, record what Hoover said and did in response to
Which response was most helpful? Explain your choice.
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING ISSUES
How did Hoover’s belief in “rugged individualism” shape his policies during the Great Depression?
Think About:
•	what his belief implies about his view of people
•	how that translates into the role of government
•	Hoover’s policies
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
When Franklin Delano Roosevelt heard about the attack on the Bonus Army, why was he so certain that he would defeat Hoover?
Think About:
•	the American public’s impression of Hoover
•	Hoover’s actions to alleviate the Great Depression
•	how people judged Hoover after the attack
The Great Depression Begins 483
TERMS & NAMES
For each term below, write a sentence explaining its connection to the period 1929-1933. For the person below, explain his role in the events of the period.
6.
7.
8. 9.
10.
Great Depression Dust Bowl direct relief Herbert Hoover Bonus Army
Herbert Hoover’s Philosophy
AASSESSMENT
F
! period.
1.	credit
2.	speculation
3.	buying on margin
4.	Black Tuesday
5.	Dow Jones Industrial Average
MAIN IDEAS
Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
The Nation's Sick Economy (pages 464-471)
1.	How did what happened to farmers during the 1920s foreshadow events of the Great Depression?
2.	What were some of the effects of the stock market crash in October 1929?
Hardship and Suffering During the Depression
(pages 472-477)
3.	How were shantytowns, soup kitchens, and bread lines a response to the Depression?
4.	Why did minorities often experience an increase in discrimination during the Great Depression?
5.	What pressures did the American family experience during the Depression?
Hoover Struggles with the Depression
(pages 478-483)
6.	How did Hoover’s treatment of the Bonus Army affect his standing with the public?
7.	In what ways did Hoover try to use the government to relieve the Depression?
CRITICAL THINKING
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one shown below, show Hoover’s responses to the Great Depression. Indicate how his philosophy changed and the reasons for that change. Initial Response
—>	Change	—>	Secondary
	(reasons)		Response^
EXPLAINING TURNING POINTS
What is the significance of year 1929 as a turning point in American history? Explain- DEVELOPING HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
How do you thini the Great Depression changed Americans' view of themse Consider the roles of men, women, and children in society in the family.
iR 14
Use the cartoon and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 1.
Life
2.	In the 1930s, some areas of the country suffered from especially harsh environmental conditions. Thousands of farmers and sharecroppers were forced to abandon their land and look for other work. In which of the following areas were these conditions worst?
F parts of Idaho, Wyoming, and Oregon G parts of Missouri, Illinois, and Iowa H parts of Florida, Alabama, and Georgia J parts of Kansas, Texas, and Oklahoma
3.	How did World War I contribute to causing the Great Depression?
A
Soldiers returning from the war were unskilled and so had difficulty finding employment. B
Foreign countries had borrowed heavily to pay for the war and so could not afford to buy American goods. C
Americans had spent their money on war bonds and so had little savings. D
American industry was geared for producing weapons and could not retool to produce consumer goods. 1. The cartoon illustrates which event leading to the Great Depression?
A bank failures B Black Tuesday C Bonus March
D the election of Herbert Hoover

7\ hmhsocialstudies.com
TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests •Tutorials
INTERACT WITH HISTORY
WriteSmart Recall the issues that you recorded in myNotebook as you read the chapter. Suppose the year is 1930 and your household is feeling the effects of the Great Depression. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write a letter to a relative overseas in which you describe your family’s situation and how you are handling the crisis. Discuss the effects of the Great Depression on the U.S. economy and society and what you’ve learned as a result of enduring such hardships.
COLLABORATIVE
LEARNf XCEKTURY
In a small group read and discuss the “One American’s Story” at the beginning of Section 2. Then use the Internet and library resources to research accounts of the Dust Bowl. Use your findings to create an illustrated magazine article about the impact of the Dust Bowl on the lives of Americans in rural areas.


Imagine you are President Hoover’s head speechwriter in the year 1931. The president is scheduled to give a radio address and needs a persuasive speech. Write a speech in which you present Hoover’s proposed economic policies to help end the Great Depression. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your speecn.
End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Using a Problem-Solving Process
DEFINING THE SKILL
Identifying problems means finding and understanding the difficulties faced by a particular individual or group of people at a certain time. Understanding how those affected solved their problem is identifying solutions. Working through the steps for yourself to solve a new dilemma is using a problem-solving process.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: LOOK FOR PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS
Examining how historical figures have applied a problem-solving process to address the issues that they faced can help you understand how to apply the process to current problems that you or your community face. The passage below summarizes Hoover's approach to halting the Great Depression. Qin 1929, the American stock market crashed, sending the country into economic upheaval. Panicked Americans withdrew their life savings from banks. Banks ran out of money, and many had to close. Cash became scarce and people stopped buying goods. Businesses closed and laid off workers. Farms failed. Unemployment and homelessness soared.
President Hoover was faced with a dilemma. ©He could provide federal aid and support laws and programs to help people, or he could encourage local organizations to help. Q As a Republican, Hoover wanted to limit government's role in controlling the economy. QHe believed that government should seek to avoid direct involvement in the lives of individuals and businesses. ©Hoover believed that federal aid to the needy would make people too dependent on government.
So,©rather than create new laws to assist the poor and homeless, Hoover encouraged churches and private charities to aid people in need. He also encouraged businesses not to lay off workers or cut wages. ©This strategy earned Hoover the reputation as a "do-nothing" president because many people felt he should have done more to stop the effects of the Great Depression. Unemployment, hunger, and homelessness grew. Eventually, Hoover softened his stance against government relief. In the early 1930s, he created numerous public works projects—government-funded programs to assist individuals, families, or communities in need. Hoover also urged Congress to pass legislation to provide loans to banks, insurance companies, and other institutions.
Q
Identify the problem. Note the problem to be solved. Some problems are directly stated, while others are not. Q
Gather information. Ask questions and conduct research to learn more about the problem, such as its history. In this example, what beliefs about government did President Hoover have that influenced his decisions?
© List and consider options. Note possible solutions to the problem. Can you think of other possible solutions?
O
Consider advantages and disadvantages. Because there is usually more than one way to solve a problem identify and weigh all the alternatives. 0 Choose and implement a solution. Choose the solution that seems to be most advantageous to as many people as possible. Try out the solution.	J
© Evaluate the etetl.en.se ul the solution. See how well the solution worked. Sometimes the solution to one of the "Z0«n|-’,O““-" ““ *imeS' S°ll,,i“nbe	a"d
STRATEGY: MAKE A CHART
Summarize the problems and solutions in a chart. Identify the problem or problems and the steps taken to solve them. Look for the short-and long-term effects of the solutions. Problem-Solving Steps	
1. Identify the problem.	Unemployment, hunger, homelessness, bank closures, farm failures, business closures
2. Gather information.	Hoover believed in a limited role of government in controlling the economy.
3. List and consider options.	Government gets involved in solving problems. Keep government out of problem solving.
4. Consider advantages and disadvantages.	Government Involvement Advantages	Disadvantages help more people, increase big role of government, differing access to services	opinions of what laws to create No Government involvement Advantages	Disadvantages smaller role of government, fewer people get help, businesses fewer rules on businesses act in own self-interest
5. Choose and Implement a solution.	Hoover chose to encourage charities to help those in need and limit government’s involvement.
6. Evaluate the effectiveness of the solution.	This solution was not very effective as homelessness and unemployment remained. Hoover reassessed his stance on government aid and started to create public-works programs.
APPLYING THE SKILL
Use the problem-solving process to solve a present-day problem. With a group, organize your work in a chart like the one above.
1.	Identify a problem. What problem facing Texas or your community could be solved by applying this skill? Read the local newspaper or community Internet sites for ideas.
2.	Gather Information. Check newspapers, magazines, and reliable websites for more information. Review your findings for reliability and bias.
3.	List and consider options. Define the problem clearly. Then brainstorm various options. If you are working with others, accept all possibilities and write them down.
4.	consider advantages and disadvantages. You may need to narrow down your list of options to the most feasible suggestions. Then write down the ben-efits and drawbacks for each.
5.	Choose and Implement a solution. Which solution is the best choice? How do you best put it into effect?
e . . ..	the solution. Did the solution solve the prob-
6.	Evaluate the effectiveness	„n nonces9 What short-term and long-term
lem? Were there unexpected consequences, wrwi snu
results can you expect?
485 SK2
!
H !
j -n
*"5	•
1 1L.1L, I
W^-J
V^t KZ. Iwl The Great
1 lie VilCdl e
Depression
The Great Depression, which lasted from 1929 to 1939, was the most severe economic downturn in the history of the United States. The
boom times of the 1920s concealed severe weaknesses in the American economy. The stock market crash of 1929 exposed the economy's shaky foundations and plunged the country into a deep economic depression. To stimulate the economy. President Franklin Delano Roosevelt introduced a host of
government programs. This New Deal alleviated the worst aspects of the Great Depression. However.it would take a world war to bring the country to full economic recovery.
Explore the impact of the Great Depression online. You can find a wealth of information, video clips, primary sources, activities, and more at
hmhsocialstudies.com
JEJl CLICKTHROUGH
INTER ACTIVITIES
hmhsocialstudies.com
F-'	*

ihSTORY
A
Picture Worth 1,000 Words Watch the video to learn about the work of photographer Dorothea Lange, who chronicled the Great Depression.

BI
- - > z' -:>*% ■■

how Presid eat Depres
Public Works
Watch the video to see examples of the New Deal programs introduced by President Roosevelt.





I 1
<; From Depression to War
Watch the video to see how the American economy finally recovered from the Great Depression.
IX V’X “
r"‘i , -fk-j H
i v >;	*■
THE GREAT DEPRESSION 485 MC2
1

MCI MULTIMEDIA CONNECTIONS
AV ’
5,
The New Deal


?
rnyNotebook
Essential Question
How did the government's reaction to the Great Depression affect the United States?

J

Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
15E, 16D, 16E, 17A, 19A, 19B, 20B, 25A, 26D, 29B
SECTION 1: A New Deal Fights the Depression
Main Idea After becoming president, Franklin Delano Roosevelt used government programs to combat the Depression.
SECTION 2: The Second New Deal Takes Hold
Main Idea The Second New Deal included new programs to extend federal aid and stimulate the nation’s economy.
SECTION 3: The New Deal Affects Many Groups
Main Idea New Deal policies and actions affected various social and ethnic groups.
SECTION 4: Culture In the 1930s
Main Idea Motion pictures, radio, art, and literature blossomed during the New Deal.
SECTION 5: The Impact of the New Deal
Main Idea The New Deal affected American society not only in the 1930s but also in the decades that followed.









& * w




, The Civil Works Administration | provided millions of jobs during the* Great Depression.




1933 Franklin
Delano Roosevelt is inaugurated.
11934 i Congress creates 1: the SEC to regulate the ' stock market.
L1?34,
Indian Reorganization : Act is passed. 11935 Congress passes the Social Security Act.
MR
•Roosewlt
USA
WORLD
1933
1934
1935
QCMhJ'
ilnSP*
'nJ
L1933 j Hitler and the
Nazi party come to
power In Germany.
L1935J
Mussolini leads : Italian invasion of Ethiopia. : 1935 British Parliament
: passes the Government of
: India Act.

1937 Labor unions begin using sit-down strikes.
1938 Route 66 is completed, linking Chicago, Illinois, to
Los Angeles, California.
1939 The Wizard ofOz is released in movie theaters.
f 1939] Germany Irivacles Poland.
The New Deal 487
TEKS15E, 160,196,20B
A
New Deal Fights the Depression MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
After becoming president, Franklin Delano Roosevelt used government programs to combat the Depression.
Americans still benefit from programs begun in the New Deal, such as bank and stock market regulations and the Tennessee Valley Authority.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt New Deal Glass-Steagall Act Federal Securities Act
Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA)
•Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC)
•National Industrial
Recovery Act (NIRA)
•deficit spending •Huey Long

Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on Roosevelt’s proposed solutions to the problems of the Great Depression.
Hank Oettinger was working as a printing press operator in a small town in Wisconsin when the Great Depression began. He lost his job in 1931 and was unemployed for the next two years. In 1933, however, President Roosevelt began creating work programs. Through one of these programs, the Civil Works Administration (CWA), Oettinger went back to work in 1933. As he later recalled, the CWA was cause for great celebration in his town.
A
Personal Voice hank oettinger “I can remember the first week of the CWA checks. It was on a Friday. That night everybody had gotten his check. The first check a lot of them had in three years.... I never saw such a change of attitude. Instead of walking around feeling dreary and looking sorrowful, everybody was joyous. Like a feast day. They were toasting each other. They had money in their pockets for the first time. ” ▲
The Civil Works Administration enabled these men to get jobs repairing typewriters and sewing machines-
—quoted in Hard Times
Programs like the CWA raised the hopes of the American people and sparked great enthusiasm for the new president. To many Americans, it appeared as if the country had turned a corner and was beginning to emerge from the nightmare of the Great Depression.
Americans Get a New Deal
The 1932 presidential election showed that Americans were clearly ready for a change. Because of the depression, people were suffering from a lack of work,
