CHAPTER 1
Exploration and the Colonial Era Beginnings to 1763
CHAPTER 2 Revolution and the Early Republic
4763-4800
THE LIVING
constitution
CHAPTER 3	/
The Growth of a Young .Nation /W0-4850
CHAPTER 4
The Union in Peril
1850-1877
JOHREROlBCT
As you read this textbook, you will encounter various historical eras. 7ou will use your knowledge of these eras, the unit's content, and the major characteristics of U.S. history to create a webpage that, identifies the eras in this unit and describes their defining characteristics. Use pages 192-197 to help you organize your thoughts.
Sigdng of the Constitution by Howard Chandler Christy
to 1877

iR




te $




■1

• ■ \
. r-
■yir-



*

and Skills (TEKS)
SECTION 1: The Americas, West Africa, and Europe
Main Idea On the eve of their interaction, Native American, West African, and European peoples lived in complex societies.
is founded.
b.c. corresponds to b.c.e., or “before the common era" a.d. corresponds to c.e., or “common era”
2 Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
SECTION 2: Spanish North America Main Idea Beginning with the voyage of Christopher Columbus, the Spanish built a vast colonial empire in the Americas.
SECTION 3: Early British Colonies Main Idea Beginning in the early 1600s, the English established colonies along the eastern shore of North America.
SECTION 4: The Colonies Come of Age Main Idea Even though both Northern and Southern colonies prospered, many colonists began to question British authority.
: [c. 20,000 Bdh]
: Asian peoples • migrate to America,
AMERICAS
WORLD
20,000 1000


HISTORY
Mexico's Ancient Civilizations
7\ lhmhsocialstudies.com
VIDEO

I NT ERAGT



You live in the 15th century. Your society hunts freely, grows crops of great variety, and trades with nearby cultures. Now you sense that your world is about to change; the ships you see approaching are like nothing you have encountered before.
As you read the chapter and explore the issues below, use the annotation tools in your eBook to record your thoughts.
Explore the Issues
• How would you react to a people whose appearance and language are unlike anything you have ever known?
•What can happen when one culture imposes its values on another?
: ’1492; Columbus : first reaches : North America.
: [1521] The : Spanish destroy the Aztec empire.
[1607) Jamestown is founded.
1620; “Pilgrims” ; : settle in Plymouth.
1400
1500
1600
1440; Johann Gutenberg develops his printing press.
1534 The Reformation begins in England with the Act of Supremacy.
jl681| William Penn founds Pennsylvania.
: 117541 French : and Indian : War begins.
3-588	:	1642 English Civil
England	>	War begins between	i
defeats	:	royalist forces and	|
Spanish	•	parliamentary forces
Armada.	:	led by Oliver Cromwell.
17631 With the Treaty of Paris, Britain acquires a vast North American empire.
Review Unit 3

The Americas,
West Africa, and Europe
MAIN IDEA J ( WHY IT MATTERS NOW J !
Terms & Names On the eve of their interaction, Native American, West African, and European peoples lived in complex societies.	The interaction of these cultures helped create the present-day culture of the United States.	•nomadic •Aztec •Anasazi • Pueblo •Iroquois •Benin	•Kongo •Islam •Christianity •Reformation •Renaissance
One American'sStory

TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on how trade and commerce affected particular societies.
Essie Parrish, a Native American spiritual leader and healer, kept alive stories from a time when her people, the Kashaya Porno, flourished along the northern California coast. One day in 1958, she invited Robert Oswalt, an anthropologist at the University of California, to time travel with her to the 1540s. As Parrish spoke, the centuries rolled back.
A
Personal Voice essie parrish “In the old days, before the white people came up here, there was a boat sailing on the ocean from the south. Because before that...
[the Kashaya Porno] had never seen a boat, they said, “Our world must be coming to an end. Couldn’t we do something? This big bird floating on the ocean is from somewhere, probably from up high....” [T]hey promised Our Father [a feast,] saying that destruction was upon them. When they had done so, they watched [the ship] sail way up north and disappear.... They were saying that nothing had happened to them —the big bird person had sailed northward without doing anything— because of the promise of a feast.... Consequently they held a feast and a big dance.99
—quoted in Kashaya Texts
Dressed for a ceremony in the 1950s, spiritual leader Essie Parrish wears a feathered headdress and holds two bead-covered staffs.
In this chapter, you will learn about three complex societies that met in North America in the late 1400s: the European, the West African, and the Native American. However, it is with the ancient peoples of the Americas that American history actually begins.
Ancient Cultures in the Americas
No one knows for sure when the first Americans arrived, but it may have been as long as 22,000 years ago. At that time, the glaciers of the last Ice Age had frozen
4	Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
What were the effects of agriculture on the hunting and gathering people of the Americas?
vast quantities of the earth's water, lowering sea levels and possibly creating a land bridge between Asia and Alaska across what is now the Bering Strait. Ancient hunters may have trekked across the frozen land, known as Beringia, into North America.
HUNTING AND GATHERING
Archaeologists believe that the earliest Americans lived as big-game hunters. That way of life changed around 12,000 to 10,000 years ago when temperatures warmed, glaciers melted, and sea levels rose once again. The land bridge disappeared under the Bering Sea, bringing to an end land travel between the Asian and North American continents. As the climate grew warmer, the large animals no longer thrived. People gradually switched to hunting smaller game and fish and gathering nuts and berries. AGRICULTURE DEVELOPS
While many ancient groups settled in North America, others continued south into what is now Mexico and South America. Between 10,000 and 5,000 years ago, an agricultural revolution quietly took place in what is now central Mexico. There, people began to plant crops. Eventually, agricultural techniques spread throughout the Americas. The introduction of agriculture made it possible for people to settle in one place and to store surplus food. From this agricultural base developed larger communities. However, some Native American cultures never adopted agriculture and remained nomadic, moving from place to place in search of food and water. Other tribes mixed nomadic and non-nomadic lifestyles.
MAYA, AZTEC, AND INCA SOCIETIES FLOURISH
The first empire of the Americas emerged as early as 1200 b.c. in what is now southern Mexico, where the Olmec people created a thriving civilization. In the wake of the Olmec's mysterious collapse, around 400 b.c., the Maya built a dynamic culture in Guatemala and the Yucatan Peninsula between a.d. 250 and 900. Later, the Aztec settled the Valley of Mexico in the 1200s and developed a sophisticated civilization. In South America, the most prominent empire builders were the Inca. Around a.d. 1400, the Inca created a glittering empire that stretched nearly 2,500 miles along the mountainous western coast of South America.
COMPLEX SOCIETIES ARISE IN NORTH AMERICA
In time, several North American groups, including the Hohokam and the Anasazi (a'ne-sa'ze), introduced crops into the arid deserts of the Southwest. Later, between 300 b.c. and a.d. 1400, each group had established its own culture. Hunters roaming over 10,000 years ago in what is now southern Arizona may have used this spear point to kill large prey.
Artist’s rendering of Tenochtitlan, the Aztec capital in the middle of Lake Texcoco.

Review Unit 5
«. I.
HISTORY
VIDEO
Secret Mounds of Pre-Historic
America
A
Northwest powwow, or multitribal gathering, in Cashmere, Washington state, 1989. Gatherings like these preserve a 500-year cultural tradition. ▼
To the east and west of the Mississippi River, another series of complex societies developed—the Adena, the Hopewell, and the Mississippian. These societies excelled at trade and at building massive earthen mounds as tombs and as platforms for temples and other buildings. Bj>
These early peoples were the ancestors of the many Native American groups that inhabited North America on the eve of its encounter with the European world.
Native American Societies of the 1400s
The varied regions of the North American continent provided for many different ways of life. The native groups that populated the continent's coasts, deserts, and forests 500 years ago were as diverse as their surroundings.
DIVERSE PEOPLES
The inhabitants of California adapted to the region's varied environments. The Kashaya Porno lived in marshlands along the central coast, hunting waterfowl with slingshots and nets. To the north of them, the Yurok and Hupa searched the forests for acorns and trapped fish in mountain streams. The waterways and forests of the Northwest Coast sustained large communities year-round. On a coastline that stretched from what is now southern Alaska to northern California, groups such as the Kwakiutl, Nootka, and Haida collected shellfish from the beaches and hunted the ocean for whales, sea otters, and seals.
In the dry Southwest, the Pueblo and Pima tribes, descendants of the Anasazi and Hohokam, lived in multistory houses made of stone or adobe, a sun-dried brick of clay and straw, and grew maize (corn), beans, melons, and squash.
Beneath the forest canopy of the Northeast, members of the Iroquois (Tr'e-kwof) nation hunted fish and game, such as wild turkeys, deer, and bear. In the Northeast, where winters could be long and harsh, Northeast peoples relied heavily on wild animals for clothing and food. In the warmer Southeast, groups lived mainly off the land, growing such crops as maize, squash, and beans.
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
In what ways did early Native American societies leave their mark upon the landscape?
Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
0
|gjjg| Southeastern Southwest
O
Great Basin | ] Mesoamerican ■ Caribbean
-----Major trade routes
500 miles
Kwakiutl of the Northwest Coast
□ Subarctic |	|	Northwest	Coast
|	|	California
r	1	Plateau
r	|	Plains
E J
Eastern Woodlands 0 250 250	500 kilometers
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Region What does this map reveal about North America in the 1400s?
2.	Location Why do you think some regions had more trade routes than others?
Review Unit 7
COMMON CHARACTERISTICS
Many of the Native American cultures had in common certain patterns of trade, attitudes toward land use, religious beliefs, and social values. As in other parts of the world, trade helped the spread of customs and beliefs. Tribes traded among each other both locally and over long distances. So extensive was the network of forest trails and river roads that an English sailor named David Ingram claimed in 1568 to have walked along Native American trade routes all the way from the Gulf of Mexico to Nova Scotia. Native Americans traded many things, but land was not one of them. Land was regarded as the source of life, not as a commodity to be sold. "We cannot sell the lives of men and animals," said one Blackfoot chief in the 1800s, "therefore we cannot sell this land.
Nearly all Native Americans thought of the natural world as filled with spirits. Every object—both living and nonliving—possessed a voice that might be heard if one listened closely. Some cultures worshiped one supreme being, variously called "Great Spirit," "Great Mystery," or "the Creative Power."
The basic unit of organization among all Native American groups was the family, which included aunts, uncles, cousins, and other relatives. Some tribes further organized the families into clans, or groups of families descended from a common ancestor.
In the late 1400s, on the eve of the first encounter with Europeans, the rhythms of Native American family life were highly developed. All phases of a person's life—birth, marriage, and death—were guided by traditions that often went back hundreds or perhaps thousands of years. On the other side of the Atlantic, in West Africa, customs equally ancient guided another diverse group of people.
goods that passed through their realms. In 1067 an Arab geographer in Spain, named A1 Bakri, described the duties (import and export taxes) levied in Ghana.
MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
© Why would Native American attitudes toward land ownership lead to conflict with Europeans?
A
Personal Voice al bakri “For every donkey loaded with salt that enters the country, the king takes a duty of one golden dinar [about one-eighth ounce of gold], and two dinars from every one that leaves. From a load of copper the duty due to the king Is five mithquals [also about one-eighth ounce of gold], and from a load of merchandise ten mithquals. . . . The [gold] nuggets found in all the mines .. . are reserved for the king, only gold dust being left for the people. ”
—quoted in Africa in the Days of Exploration
With such wealth, the rulers who controlled the north-south trade routes could raise large armies and conquer new territory. They could also build cities, administer laws, and support the arts and education.
KINGDOMS OF BENIN AND KONGO
At its height in the 1500s, Songhai's power extended across much of West Africa. However, it did not control the forest kingdoms along the southern coast. In the 1400s, one of these kingdoms, Benin, dominated a large region around the Niger Delta. Leading the expansion was a powerful oba, or ruler, named Ewuare, who developed Benin City. Within another stretch of rain forest, in West Central Africa, the powerful kingdom of Kongo arose on the lower Congo (Zaire) River. In the late 1400s, Kongo consisted of a series of small kingdoms ruled by a single leader called the manikongo, who lived in what is today Angola.
West African Societies of the 1400s
A desert caravan approaches the fabled Songhai city of Timbuktu.
Like North America, West Africa in the 1400s was home to a variety of long-established, sophisticated societies. From this region, especially from the coasts, originated most of the people who were enslaved and brought to the Americas in the centuries that followed. Their African traditions and beliefs played a major role in forming American history and culture. Notable among West African societies in the late 1400s were three powerful kingdoms: Songhai, Benin, and Kongo.
THE KINGDOM OF SONGHAI
From about 600 to 1600, a succession of empires— first Ghana, then Mali, and finally Songhai—gained power and wealth by controlling the trans-Sahara trade. The rulers of these empires grew rich by taxing the MAIN IDEA
Comparing
What did the kingdoms of West Africa have in common?
WEST AFRICAN CULTURE
Most West Africans lived in small villages, where life revolved around family, the com-munity, and tradition. Bonds of kinship—that is, family ties—formed the basis of most aspects of life. Political leaders claimed authority on the basis of religion. Although West Africans might worship a variety of gods and ancestral spirits, most believed in a single creator.
Throughout West Africa, people supported themselves by farming, herding, hunting, fishing, and by mining and trading. Almost all groups believed in collective ownership of land. Individuals farmed the land, but it reverted to family or village ownership when not in use.
TRADING PATTERNS WITH THE WIDER WORLD
By the 1400s, West Africa had long been connected to the wider world through trade. The city of Timbuktu was the hub of a well-established trading network that connected most of West Africa to the ports of North Africa, and through these ports to markets in Europe and Asia. Along trade routes across the Sahara Desert, merchants carried goods from Mediterranean cities and salt from Saharan mines to exchange for gold, ivory, and dyed cotton cloth.
Along with goods, traders from North Africa also brought across the Sahara the Islamic faith, which increasingly influenced West African cultures. Islam is a monotheistic religion—that is, one based on the belief in a single god. The religion of Islam was founded in Arabia in 622 by Muhammad and spread quickly across the Middle East and North Africa.
SPOTLIGHT
HISTORICAL
ISLAM
Islam was founded by Muhammad (about a.d. 570-632), who worked as a merchant in Mecca, a trading city on the Arabian peninsula. When he was about 40, he believed the angel Gabriel appeared to him and told him to preach a new religion to the Arabs. This religion became known as Islam, which in Arabic means “surrender [to Allah].” (Allah is the Arabic word for God.) The followers of Islam are called Muslims, “those who submit to God’s will.”
The words that Muhammad claimed he had received from the angel were recorded by his followers in the Qur’an, the holy book of Islam. The Qur’an teaches that “there is no God but Allah, and Muhammad is His Prophet.” The Qur’an also sets forth certain duties for righteous Muslims, including a series of daily prayers, the giving of charity, and a pilgrimage to the holy city of Mecca.
Review Unit 9
PLAY£#
“KING” ISABELLA 1451-1504
Queen Isabella, who played a central role in European exploration by sponsoring Christopher Columbus’s voyages to the Americas, made her mark on the Old World as well. As co-ruler of Spain, Isabella actively participated in her country’s religious and military affairs.
In championing Spain’s Catholicism, the queen often fought openly with the pope to make sure that her candidates were appointed to positions in the Spanish church. In addition, Isabella had tasted battle far more than most rulers, either male or female. The queen rode among her troops in full armor, personally commanding them in Ferdinand’s absence. Whenever Isabella appeared on a horse, her troops shouted, “Castile, Castile, for our King Isabella!”
THE PORTUGUESE
Mariners from Portugal made trading contacts along the West African coast starting in the 1440s. These early contacts with Portuguese traders had two significant consequences for West Africa and the Americas. First, direct trade between the Portuguese and the coastal people of West Africa bypassed the routes across the Sahara and pulled the coastal region into a closer relationship with Europe. Second, the Portuguese began the European trade m enslaved West Africans. European Societies of the 1400s
In the late 1400s, most Europeans, like most Native Americans and most Africans, lived in small villages, bound to the land and to rhythms of life that had been in place for centuries. For the majority of Europeans, change came slowly.
THE SOCIAL HIERARCHY
European communities were based on social hierarchy, that is, they were organized according to rank. At the top of the hierarchy were monarchs and the aristocracy, the landowning elite, who held most of the wealth and power. Members of the clergy also ranked high in the social order. At the bottom were agricultural laborers, or peasants. Few individuals rose above the social position of their birth. One group that did achieve mobility was the growing number of artisans and merchants, the people who created and traded goods for money. There were relatively few members of this group in the 1400s. However, the profit they earned from trade would eventually make them a valuable source of tax revenue to monarchs seeking to finance costly overseas exploration and expansion. O
CHRISTIANITY SHAPES THE EUROPEAN OUTLOOK
The dominant religion in Western Europe was Christianity, a religion based on the life and teachings of Jesus. The leader of the church—the pope—and his bishops held great political as well as spiritual authority. As the influence of Christianity and Islam spread, the two religions came into conflict. In 1096, Christian armies from all over Western Europe responded to the church's call to force the Muslims out of the Holy Land around Jerusalem. Over the next two centuries, Europeans launched the Crusades, a series of military expeditions to the Middle East in the name of Christianity.
In the end, these bloody Crusades failed to "rescue" the Holy Land, but they resulted in two consequences that encouraged European exploration and expansion. First, the Crusades opened up Asian trade routes, supplying Europeans with luxuries from the East, especially spices such as cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, and pepper. Second, the Crusades weakened the power of European nobles, many of whom lost their lives or fortunes in the wars. Monarchs eventually took advantage of the nobles' weakened ranks to consolidate their own power.
By the early 1500s, many church leaders and ordinary people were eager for reforms. This desire for change led to a movement called the Reformation, which criticized church practices and challenged the authority of the pope.
MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
Why were merchants able to achieve social mobility?
Background
Spices were important in the Middle Ages when European farmers preserved meat by packing it between layers of salt. Spices helped disguise the bad taste of the meat.
10 Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
History Through
Arty
JUNE, FROM LES TRES RICHES HEURES DU DUC DE BERRY
This miniature painting, representing the month of June, is a page from a prayer book calendar begun by the Limbourg brothers around the year 1412. The book was made for a younger son of the French king, and tells us a great deal about the aristocratic view of the European social order.
In the background, the walls of the city of Paris protect a palace and the royal chapel, buildings that represent the two most powerful institutions in medieval European society: church and aristocracy.
In the foreground, peasants mow the fields, in an orderly world of peace and tranquility. However, the image is a fantasy, an idealized vision painted to please the aristocracy. There is no hint of the peasants’ grinding poverty or of the violence of the Hundred Years’ War that was at that moment devastating northern France.
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Visual Sources 1.	What does the painting tell you about the importance of gender in the division of labor during the 1400s?
2.	Why might images of poverty have displeased the aristocracy?
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing Causes $ How did religious events in Europe help spur exploration and settlement of new lands?
Vocabulary medieval: of or
during the Middle Ages, often dated from a.d. 476 to 1453
The Reformation led to a religious schism, or split, throughout Europe: those who supported the Reformation became known as Protestants because of their opposition to the established Catholic church. This split deepened the rivalries among European nations during the period of North American colonization a century later and sent some Protestants and some Catholics across the Atlantic to seek religious freedom. ®
EUROPEAN NATIONS TAKE SHAPE
During the 1400s, four major nations were taking shape in Europe: Portugal, Spain, France, and England. Ambitious monarchs extended their reach by collecting new taxes, raising professional armies, and forming stronger governments. Among their new allies were the merchants, who paid taxes in exchange for the protection and expansion of trade. THE RENAISSANCE
The 1400s also saw a cultural awakening in Europe, known as the Renaissance (renT-sans")_a term meaning "rebirth" of the kind of interest in the physical world that had characterized ancient Greece and Rome. In the arts, this meant rejecting the flat, two-dimensional images of medieval painting in favor of the deep perspectives and fully rounded forms of ancient sculpture and painting. Starting in Italy, a region stimulated by commercial contact with Asia and Africa, the Renaissance soon spread throughout Europe. Renaissance artists created works of lasting influence, while European scholars reexamined the texts of ancient philosophers, mathematicians, geographers, and scientists. Although their themes were still often religious in nature, Renaissance artists portrayed their subjects more realistically than had medieval artists, using new
Review Unit 11
THE CARAVEL
The caravel, the ship used by most early Portuguese and Spanish explorers, had many advantages over earlier vessels |§p It was lighter, swifter, and more maneuverable than other ships.
techniques such as perspective. Leonardo da Vinci, investigating how things worked, kept notebooks in which he made detailed drawings of human anatomy and of his inventions, including a flying machine. This energetic spirit of inquiry infused the early explorers and adventurers who, like Christopher Columbus, grew up during the Renaissance.
The spread of the Renaissance was advanced by Johann Gutenberg's introduction of printing from movable type in the 1450s. This development made books easier and cheaper to produce, which aided the spread of ideas.
The Renaissance encouraged people to think of themselves as individuals, to have confidence in their capabilities, and to look forward to the fame their achievements might bring. This attitude prompted many to seek glory through adventure, discovery, and conquest.
EUROPE ENTERS A NEW AGE OF EXPANSION
The European interest in overseas expansion probably began in the 1200s with the journey of Marco Polo to China. Later, the publication in 1477 of the first printed edition of Polo's vivid—and sometimes exaggerated—account caused renewed interest in the East. Like other merchants, Polo traveled to Asia by land. The expense and peril involved in such journeys led Europeans to seek alternative routes. In the 1400s, Europeans used the work of Ptolemy, a second-century scholar, along with the work of Arab and j MAIN IDEA
Developing
Historical
Perspective
How did Renaissance attitudes encourage the European age of exploration?
.2 Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
Vocabulary
bureaucracies:
government departments staffed with nonelected officials
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
What military advantages did Europeans have over Africans and Native Americans?
The best ships that
Jewish scholars, to revive the art of cartography, or mapmaking. Although imper-
fect, the new maps inspired Europeans to start exploring for water routes to Asia.
European monarchs had powerful motives to finance the search for new lands and trading routes: they needed money to maintain their growing armies and administrative bureaucracies. By the mid-1400s, Europe's gold and silver mines were running low. So the monarchs of Portugal, Spain, France, and England began looking overseas for wealth.
Beginning in the 1300s, monarchs invested some of their tax revenues in new weapons—such as longbows and cannons—which they used to limit the power of the independent nobles. These new weapons, along with the hand-held firearms that were developed in the 1400s, also gave them military advantages over the Africans and Native Americans whom they later encountered.
SAILING TECHNOLOGY IMPROVES
European ship captains in the 1400s experimented with new sailing vessels such as the car- avel and navigating tools such as the compass and the astrolabe, Sailed the seas . . / which helped sailors plot direction at sea. They also took advan- alvise da cadamosto, of the caravel tage of sailing innovations, like those that allowed caravels to sail against the wind.
One leader in developing and employing these innovations was Prince Henry the Navigator of Portugal, who gathered mariners, geographers, and navigators to his court. According to a contemporary chronicler, Gomes Eanes de Zurara, the prince's driving motivation was the need to know.
For almost 40 years, Prince Henry sent his captains sailing south along the west coast of Africa. Exploration continued after the prince's death. In 1488,
Portuguese sailor Bartolomeu Dias rounded the southern tip of Africa; fellow Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama reached India ten years later. By sailing around Africa to eastern Asia via the Indian Ocean, Portuguese traders were able to cut their costs and increase their profits.
As cartographers redrew their maps to show this eastern route to Asia, an Italian sea captain named Christopher Columbus believed there was an even shorter route—one that headed west across the Atlantic.
(Yj/ assessment
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•	nomadic	•	Pueblo	• Kongo
•	Aztec	•	Iroquois	• Islam
•Anasazi	•	Benin	•Christianity
•	Reformation
•	Renaissance
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
For each region and time period shown, write two or three sentences to describe how it was affected by trade and commerce.
CRITICAL THINKING
MAKING INFERENCES
Why do you think other European nations lagged behind Portugal in overseas exploration? Support your reasons with details from the text.
Think About:
•	the geography of Portugal
•	the power of monarchs in the 1400s
•	the economic and political situation of European nations during this time
ANALYZING CAUSES
What factors do you think contributed to the thriving trade system that flourished in West Africa? Use evidence from the text to support your response.
ANALYZING EFFECTS
What effects did Portuguese trade have on West Africa?
Review Unit 13
Spanish North America
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
Beginning with the voyage of Christopher Columbus, the Spanish built a vast colonial empire in the Americas.
The Spanish left an impact on the cultures of North and South America that helped to shape present-day America.
•Christopher
Columbus
•Taino •Treaty of Tordesillas •Columbian Exchange
•conquistador •Hernando Cortes •Montezuma •mestizo • encomlenda •New Spain •New Mexico
One. European’s Stor
hmhsocialstudies.com!
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on significant dates of Columbus's voyages and the Spanish exploration of the New World.
On August 3, 1492, the Genoese mariner Christopher Columbus set out on a bold expedition: to find a route to Asia by sailing west across the Atlantic Ocean. It was a journey destined to change the course of world history. A seeker of fame and fortune, Columbus began his travel journal by restating the deal he had struck with the Spanish rulers financing his voyage.
A
Personal Voice Christopher columbus “ Based on the information that I had given Your Highnesses about the land of India and about a Prince who is called the Great Khan [of China] . . . Your Highnesses decided to send me ... to the regions of India, to see . . . the peoples and the lands, and to learn of. . . the measures which could be taken for their conversion to our Holy Faith. ... I was to go by way of the west, whence until today we do not know with certainty that anyone has gone. . . . —The Log of Christopher Columbus
Columbus never reached Asia. He landed on an island he thought was off the Christopher coast of Asia but was actually in the Caribbean Sea. Instead of finding the Great columbus from Khan, Columbus set in motion a process that brought together the American, a painting done European, and African worlds.	in 1519.
Columbus Crosses the Atlantic
In October 1492, roughly two months after leaving Spain, Columbus's small fleet of ships, the Nina, the Pinta, and the Santa Maria, reached land. Columbus went ashore, where he encountered a group of people who would become known as the Taino (tfno), from their word for "noble ones." He planted Spanish banners and renamed their island San Salvador ("Holy Savior"), claiming it for Spain. Columbus spent 96 days exploring four coral islands in the Bahamas and the coastlines of two larger Caribbean islands, known today as Cuba and Hispaniola.
Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
Vocabulary colonize: to
establish
settlements under the control of a parent country
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Events
What did Spain and Portugal agree to do in the Treaty of Tordesillas?
Convinced that he had landed on islands off Asia, known to Europeans as the Indies, Columbus called the people he met los indios. Thus the name Indian came to be mistakenly applied to all the diverse peoples of the Americas. The Spanish monarchs were thrilled with Columbus's discoveries and funded three more of his voyages—this time to colonize the lands he had claimed.
THE IMPACT ON NATIVE AMERICANS
By the time Columbus set sail for his return to Hispaniola in 1493, Europeans had already developed a pattern for colonization. They had glimpsed the profitability of the plantation system, realized the economic benefits of using native or local peoples for forced labor, and learned to use European weapons to dominate native peoples. These tactics would be used in the Americas. The arrival of the Europeans devastated Native Americans by another means: disease. The Taino, for example, had not developed any natural immunity to measles, mumps, chickenpox, smallpox, typhus, or other diseases Europeans had unknowingly brought with them. Consequently, the Taino died by the thousands once they were exposed.
THE IMPACT ON AFRICANS
With the decline of the native work force the European settlers of the Americas eventually turned to Africa for slaves. The Atlantic slave trade devastated many African societies, particularly in West Africa. Starting in the 1500s, African cultures lost many of their young and more able members. Before the Atlantic slave trade ended in the 1800s, it had drained Africa of at least 12 million people. THE IMPACT ON EUROPEANS
Columbus's voyages had profound effects on Europeans as well. In search of new lives, Europeans began to cross the Atlantic by the thousands in what would become one of the biggest voluntary migrations in world history. Overseas expansion inflamed national rivalries in Europe. In 1494, Spain and Portugal signed the Treaty of Tordesillas (tor'de-se'es), in which they agreed to divide the Western Hemisphere between them. £ THE COLUMBIAN EXCHANGE
The voyages of Columbus and those after him led to the discovery of plants and animals in the Americas that were new to Europeans and Africans. Ships took items such as corn, potatoes, and tobacco from the Americas to Europe and to Africa. From these countries, they brought back livestock, grains, fruit, and coffee. This global transfer of living things, called the Columbian Exchange, began with Columbus's first voyage and continues today. HISTORY
VIDEO
Christopher
Columbus: Explorer
of the New World	I
’/I hmhsocialstudies.com^
i
i
I * J
Sweet Vcorn Avocado C0SSaVa PeanUt
K-^t0	-	“ -	-
.^ericAS
A-
WhgSPPle Peppers rkey	ATLANTIC OCEAN
< Coffee	■
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
OnionCitrus ^nai Human-environment	AFK,CA AND ASIA TO
interaction How do you think
tho r^l. r-.,„i_■ - . 
The Columbian Exchange
>rn Avocaao vaooava reanut ^R^otato
ff&ttOPE, A™™, AM> ASIA
^nilla ^Beans
-..uvcMvuint nuw uu yuu 1111 J the Columbian Exchange has
enriched each hemisphere?

Review Unit 15
The Spanish Claim a New Empire _______________________
In the wake of Columbus's voyages, Spanish explorers took to the seas to claim new colonies for Spain. These explorers were lured by the prospect of vast lands filled with gold and silver. Known as conquistadors (kong-ke sta-dorz ) (conquerors), they conquered much of the Americas.
CORTES SUBDUES THE AZTEC
Soon after landing in Mexico in 1519, Hernando Cortes learned of the vast and wealthy Aztec empire in the region's interior. With a force of 600 soldiers, 17 horses, 10 cannons, and numerous dogs, the VIDEO
The Arrival of the Spanish
\<V.Y PLAY£fl
HERNANDO CORTES 1485-1547
conquistador marched inland.
The Spaniards marveled at Tenochtitlan, the Aztec capital, with its towering temples and elaborate engineering works—including a system that brought fresh water into the city. "We were amazed," one of Cortes's soldiers said of his first glimpse of Tenochtitlan. "Some of our soldiers even asked whether the things we saw were not a dream." While the Aztec city astonished the Spaniards, the capital's glittering gold stock seemed to hypnotize them. "They picked up the gold and fingered it like monkeys," one native witness recalled. "They hungered like pigs for that gold."
The Aztec emperor, Montezuma, convinced at first that Cortes was an armor-clad god, agreed to give the Spanish explorer a share of the empire's existing gold supply. The conquistador was not satisfied. Cortes eventually forced the Aztec to mine more gold and silver. In the spring of 1520, the Aztec rebelled against the Spaniards' intrusion. Regarding Montezuma as a traitor, the Aztec are believed to have stoned their ruler to death before driving out Cortes's forces.
While they had successfully repelled the Spanish invaders, the Aztec were falling victim to the diseases that the Spanish had brought with them. By the time Cortes launched a counterattack in 1521, the Spanish and their native allies overran an Aztec force that had been greatly reduced by smallpox and measles. After several months of fighting, the invaders sacked and burned Tenochtitlan, and the Aztec surrendered. While flames still flickered in the shattered capital, Cortes laid plans for the colony of New Spain.
THE SPANISH PATTERN OF CONQUEST
In building their American empire, the Spaniards lived among the native people and sought to impose their own culture upon them. The settlers, mostly men, tended to intermarry with native women. This practice eventually created a large mestizo (mestizo)—or mixed Spanish and Native American— population in the Spanish colonies. Nonetheless, the Spanish also oppressed the people among whom they lived. In their effort to exploit the land for its resources, they forced Native American workers to labor in an encomienda (eng-ko-myen'da) system. Under that system, natives farmed, ranched, or mined for Spanish landlords, who received the rights to their labor from Spanish authorities. Cortes made himself the enemy of thousands of Native Americans, but the daring conquistador did not have many friends among Spaniards. Spanish authorities on Cuba, where Cortes owned land, accused the conquistador of murdering his wife, Catalina Juarez. "There were ugly accusations, but none proved," wrote Juarez’s biographer.
In addition, the Cuban governor, Diego Velazquez, who resented Cortes’s arrogance, relieved him of the command of a gold-seeking expedition to the mainland. Cortes left Cuba anyway. As he fought his way through Mexico, Cortes had to battle not only the Native Americans but also the Spanish forces that Velazquez sent to arrest him.
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
Jj) What factors enabled the Spanish to conquer the Aztec?
Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
120°W
European Exploration of the Americas. 1492-1682
Cabeza de Vaca 1528-36
Tenochtitlan (Mexico City)
120<JW
1Q0°W
Columbus
4^ French English Dutch
0 1,000
2,000 miles
PACIFIC dX^S. OCEAN
----Tropic of Cancer-
-20°N-
Nt
&
Juan de la Cosa, pilot-navigator on Columbus’s ship Nina, drew the known world on this oxhide map in 1500.
1,000	2,000 kilometers
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Movement How many voyages to the Americas did Columbus make?
2.	Place In what years did England
■ and France sail to the Americas and } which regions did they explore?
Review Unit 17
I	missions are still standing and some are still in use. They remain as lasting
memorials to the great cultures reflected in their architecture.
RESISTANCE TO THE SPANISH
The impact of the Spanish missions on Native American cultures has been a subject of much historical controversy. Recent his-i| i torians assert that the mission system negatively affected many Native American communities in several ways. The Spanish required Native Americans who converted to Christianity to live inside the missions, separating them from their families and cultures. Native Americans who tried to leave were punished. The Spanish also forced Native Americans to provide labor for farming and construction, give up their self-government, and adopt European dress, diet, and living arrangements. During the 1670s, priests and soldiers around Santa Fe began forcing Native Americans to help support the missions by paying a tribute, an offering of either goods or services. The tribute was usually a bushel of maize or a deer hide, but the Spanish also forced Native Americans to work for them and sometimes abused them physically. Native Americans who practiced their native religion or refused to pay a tribute were beaten.
Spanish priests punished the Pueblo religious leader Pope for his worship practices, which they interpreted as witchcraft. In 1680, the
angered leader led a well-organized uprising against the Spanish that involved some 17,000 warriors from villages all over New Mexico. The triumphant fighters destroyed Catholic churches, executed priests and settlers, and drove the Spaniards back into New Spain. For the next 12 years—until the Spanish regained control of the area—the southwest region of the future United States once again belonged to its original inhabitants.
But Spain would never again have complete control of the Americas. In 1588, England had defeated the Spanish Armada, a naval fleet assembled to invade England, ending Spain's naval dominance in the Atlantic. In time, England began forging colonies along the eastern shore of North America, thus extending its own empire in the New World. But Spain's influence continues in the people and customs of the Southeast and Southwest.
“The heathen have concealed a mortal hatred for our holy faith and enmity for the Spanish nation. ”
SPANISH OFFICER,
WRITING OF POPE’S REBELLION
SB
1.
•Christopher Columbus •Taino
•Treaty of Tordesillas
TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence
•Columbian Exchange •conquistador •Hernando Cortes
explaining its
•Montezuma
•mestizo
•encomienda
significance.
New Spain New Mexico
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a time line of the major events and significant dates of Columbus’s voyages and the Spanish exploration of the New World. Use the dates already plotted on the time line below as a guide.
11492[ 11494 |	11513 |
I -
l1493|	f 1520-211
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING EFFECTS
What do you think were the most important long-term consequences of Columbus’s encounters in the Americas? Think About:
•	conquering and claiming land
•	forced labor of Native Americans and Africans
•	the impact on Africa, Europe, and the Americas
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
State three conclusions about Spanish exploration and settlement north of Mexico and the Spaniards’ interaction with Native Americans there. Why did the Native Americans of New Mexico revolt against the Spanish settlers?
Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
Early British Colonies
MAIN IDEA

WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
Beginning in the early 1600s, the English established colonies along the eastern shore of North America.
The original 13 English colonies in North America formed the foundation of what would become the United States of America.
•John Smith	•John Winthrop
•Jamestown	• King Philip’s War
•joint-stock	•William Penn
companies	• Quaker
• indentured	• mercantilism
servant	• Navigation Acts
•Puritan
One. European's Story
A
John Smith was a self-proclaimed soldier of fortune, sea captain, and poet.
John Smith craved adventure. Smith's father had urged him to be a merchant, but the restless Englishman wanted to see the world. In 1606, he offered his services as a colonist to the Virginia Company, a group of merchants charged with starting an English colony in North America. He later recalled his vision of the opportunities that awaited those who settled the Americas.
A
Personal Voice john smith ‘‘What man who is poor or who has only his merit to advance his fortunes can desire more contentment than to walk over and plant the land he has obtained by risking his life? . . . Here nature and liberty . . . give us freely that which we lack or have to pay dearly for in England. ... What pleasure can be greater than to grow tired from . . . planting vines, fruits, or vegetables? . . . ”
—The General History of Virginia
Smith would need all of his abilities to steer the new colony, Jamestown, through what turned out to be a disastrous beginning. In time, however, the colony survived to become England's first permanent settlement in North America.

BBQ
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the cause-and-effect relationships identified in the section.
The English Settle at Jamestown
In April of 1607, nearly four months after the Virginia Company's three ships had left England, they reached the North American shore. Sailing part way up a broad river leading into Chesapeake Bay, the colonists selected a small, defensible peninsula and built Fort James to protect the settlement of Jamestown, named for their king.
A DISASTROUS START
Unlike Spanish colonies, which were funded by Spanish rulers, the English colonies were originally funded by joint-stock companies. Stock" companies allowed several investors to pool their wealth in support of a colony that would, they hoped, yield a profit. Investors in the Jamestown colony demanded a quick return on their investment, and the colonists hoped to find gold to satisfy them. Consequently, they neglected farming and soon Review Unit 21
n
Rediscovering Fort James
about ten feet from the fort’s walls. Houses measured sixteen by forty feet and several colonists lived In each.
Erosion turned the Jamestown Peninsula into an island and, for many years, the site of the original Fort James was assumed to be under water. However, in 1996, archaeologists from the Association for the Preservation of Virginia Antiquities discovered artifacts on what they concluded was the original site of the fort.
Since then, archaeologists have discovered armor, weapons, even games used by the first colonists. Archaeologists and historians are constantly learning more and more about this long-buried treasure of American history,
This illustration re-creates what historians and archaeologists now believe Fort James looked like early in its history.
Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
Why was the early settlement at Jamestown a near disaster?
suffered the consequences. Disease from contaminated river water struck them first, followed soon by hunger. After several months, one settler described the terrifying predicament: "Thus we lived for the space of five months in this miserable distress, . . . our men night and day groaning in every corner of the fort, most pitiful to hear."
Smith held the colony together by forcing the colonists to farm and by securing food and support from the native Powhatan peoples. Then Smith was injured and returned to England. Without Smith's leadership, the colony eventually deteriorated to the point of famine. The settlement was saved, however, by the arrival of new colonists and by the development of a highly profitable crop, tobacco.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Issues
Why were Virginia’s frontier settlers frustrated with their government?
TOBACCO REQUIRES A SUPPLY OF LABOR
In order to grow tobacco, the Virginia Company needed field laborers. Immigration jumped in 1618, when the company introduced the headright system, offering 50 acres of land to "adventurers" who would pay their own or another's transportation from England. Many of those who arrived in Virginia, however, came as indentured servants. In exchange for passage to North America and food and shelter upon arrival, an indentured servant agreed to a limited term of servitude— usually four to seven years. Indentured servants were main-	__________
ly from the lower classes of English society and therefore had little to lose by leaving for a new world.
The first enslaved Africans arrived in Virginia aboard a Dutch merchant ship in 1619. After a few years, most of them received land and freedom. It would be several decades before the English colonists in North America began the systematic use of enslaved Africans as laborers.
COLONISTS CLASH WITH NATIVE AMERICANS
The colonists' desire for more land—to accommodate their growing population and the demand for more crop space— led to warfare with the original inhabitants of Virginia.
Unlike the Spanish, the English followed a pattern of driving away the people they defeated. Their conquest over the native peoples was total and complete, which is one reason a large mestizo-like population never developed in the United States.
ECONOMIC DIFFERENCES SPLIT VIRGINIA
The English colonists who migrated to North America in increasing numbers battled not only Native Americans but sometimes each other. By the 1670s, one-quarter of the free white men in Virginia were poor former indentured servants who lived mainly on the western frontier of Virginia, where they constantly fought with Native Americans for land. Although Virginia's governor, William Berkeley, proposed building forts to protect the settlers, the settlers refused to pay taxes to maintain these forts. The colonists, under the leadership of a young planter named Nathaniel Bacon, marched on Jamestown in September of 1676.
Bacon confronted colonial leaders with a number of grievances, including the frontier's lack of representation in Virginia's colonial legislature, or law-making body, the House of Burgesses. Although Bacon's Rebellion ultimately failed, it exposed the restlessness of the colony's former indentured servants.
HISTORICAL
SPOTLIGHT
EARLY REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT
As the English settlers colonized North America, they sowed the seeds of the representative style of government that would become the foundation of American democracy.
Virginia’s House of Burgesses served as the first representative body in colonial America. The House first met in Jamestown in 1619 and included two citizens, or burgesses, from each of Virginia’s eleven districts. The body claimed the authority to raise taxes and pass legislation—subject to veto by the English governor.
The Mayflower Compact, which the Pilgrims crafted as they sailed to North America in 1620, created a civil government and pledged loyalty to the king. It stated that the purpose of their government in America would be to frame “just and equal laws ... for the general good of the colony.”
Created in 1639, the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut extended voting rights to a greater number of white males in that colony. It also declared that the colonial legislature could assemble without a call by the governor.
Review Unit 23

Puritans cherished their Bibles, passing them down as family treasures from one generation to the next. This Bible belonged to Governor William Bradford of the Plymouth Colony.
Puritans Create a “New England”
After King Henry VIII (1491-1547) broke with Roman Catholicism in the 1530s, the Church of England was formed. Although the new church was free of Catholic control, one religious group, the Puritans, felt that the church had kept too much Catholic ritual. They wanted to "purify," or reform, the church by eliminating all traces of Catholicism. Some Puritans, called Separatists, wanted to separate from the English Church. They often met in secret to avoid the punishment inflicted upon those who did not follow the Anglican form of worship. Jg/
One congregation of Separatists, known today as the Pilgrims, eventually migrated to America. There, in 1620, this small group of families founded the Plymouth Colony, the second permanent English colony in North America. Their Mayflower Compact, named for the ship on which they sailed to North America, became an important landmark in the development of American democracy.
THE MASSACHUSETTS BAY COLONY
Other Puritans who were not Separatists turned their thoughts toward New England in the 1620s. They felt the burden of increasing religious persecution, political repression, and dismal economic conditions. In 1630, a group of Puritans established the Massachusetts Bay Colony along the upper coast of North America. The port town of Boston soon became the colony's thriving capital. Settlers established other towns nearby and eventually incorporated the Plymouth Colony into the Massachusetts Bay Colony. The Puritans believed they had a special covenant, or agreement, with God. To fulfill their part, they were to create a moral society that would serve as a beacon for others to follow. Puritan leader John Winthrop expressed the sense of mission that bound the Puritans together, in a sermon delivered aboard the flagship Arbella: "We [in New England] shall be as a City upon a Hill; the eyes of all people are on us."
Although Puritans made no effort to create a democracy, the Massachusetts Bay Company extended the right to vote to all adult male members of the Puritan church—40 percent of the colony's men. As their system of self-government evolved, so did the close relationship between the government and the Puritan church. The Puritan view dominated Massachusetts society: taxes supported the Puritan church, and laws required church attendance, jgy
DISSENT IN THE PURITAN COMMUNITY
The Puritans came to America to follow their own form of worship, and they were intolerant of people who had dissenting religious beliefs. One such dissenter was Roger Williams, an extreme Separatist, who expressed two controversial views. First, he declared that the English settlers had no rightful claim to the land unless they purchased it from Native Americans. Second, he argued that every person should be free to worship according to his or her conscience. MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Issues
& Why were the Puritans unhappy with the Church of England?
Vocabulary repression: the
act of putting down by force
MAIN IDEA
Forming
Generalizations
What type of society did the Puritans want to create?
24 Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
main idea
Analyzing
Issues
jy In what principles did the government of Providence differ from that of Massachusetts?
When officials tried to deport Williams back to England, he fled Massachusetts and traveled south. He negotiated with a local Native American group for a plot of land and set up a new colony, which he called Providence. In Providence, later the capital of Rhode Island, Williams guaranteed religious freedom and separation of church and state.
Another dissenter, Anne Hutchinson, taught that worshippers did not need the church or its ministers to interpret the Bible for them. Banished from the colony, Hutchinson, with her family and a band of followers, fled first to Rhode Island and, after her husband died, to New Netherland—which later became part of New York—where she died in a war with Native Americans.
NATIVE AMERICANS RESIST COLONIAL EXPANSION
While Williams and his followers were settling Rhode Island, thousands of other white settlers fanned out to western Massachusetts and to new colonies in New Hampshire and Connecticut. From the beginning, Native Americans had helped the colonists, providing them with land and giving them agricultural advice. Soon, however, disputes between the Puritans and Native Americans arose over land and religion. As Native Americans saw their lands taken over by settlers, they feared an end to their way of life. In addition, Native Americans resented the Puritans' efforts to convert them and bristled under Puritan laws such as the prohibition of hunting and fishing on Sunday. KING PHILIP’S WAR
Great tension continued between Native Americans and settlers for nearly 40 years. Eventually, the Wampanoag chief Metacom, whom the English called King Philip, organized his tribe and several others into an alliance to wipe out the invaders. The eruption of King Philip's War in the spring of 1675 startled the Puritans with its intensity. Native Americans attacked ■n
New England Colonies to 1675
Middle Colonies to 1700

[XA New Netherland ICZJ (ceded to England in 1664) 0	50	100 miles
50 100 kilometers
1. Location wnai was uic oldest English settlement in New England?
Region What major river formed part of the border separating New Netherland from the English middle colonies?
Review Unit 25
yjORLD STXq£
and burned outlying settlements throughout New England. Within months ey were striking the outskirts of Boston. The alarmed and angered colonists responded by killing as many Native Americans as they could, even some from friendly tribes. For over a year, the two sides waged a war of mutual brutality and destruc-tion. Finally, food shortages, disease, and heavy casualties wore down the Native Americans' resistance, and they gradually surrendered or fled.
Settlement of the Middle Colonies
While English Puritans were establishing colonies in New England, the Dutch were founding one to the south. As early as 1609, Henry Hudson—an Englishman employed by the Dutch—had sailed up the river that now bears his name. The Dutch soon established a fur trade with the Iroquois and built trading posts on the Hudson River.
THE DUTCH FOUND NEW NETHERLAND
In 1621, the Dutch government granted the newly formed Dutch West India Company permission to colonize New Netherland and expand the thriving fur trade. New Amsterdam (now New York City), founded in 1625, became the capital of the colony (see map on page 25). In 1655, the Dutch extended their claims by taking over New Sweden, a tiny colony of Swedish and Finnish settlers that had established a rival fur trade along the Delaware River. To encourage settlers to come and stay, the colony opened its doors to a variety of ethnic and religious groups. In 1664, the English took over the colony without a fight. The duke of York, the new proprietor, or owner, of the colony, renamed it New York. The duke later gave a portion of this land to two of his friends, naming this territory New Jersey for the British island of Jersey.
THE QUAKERS SETTLE PENNSYLVANIA
The acquisition of New Netherland was one step in England's quest to extend its American empire after 1660, when the English monarchy was restored after a period of civil war and Puritan rule. The new king, Charles II, owed a debt to the father of a young man named William Penn. As payment, Charles gave the younger Penn a large property that the king insisted be called Pennsylvania, or "Penn's Woods," after the father. Following this, in 1682, Penn acquired more land from the duke of York, the three counties that became Delaware. William Penn belonged to the Society of Friends, or Quakers, a Protestant sect that held services without formal ministers, allowing any person to speak as the spirit moved him or her. They dressed plainly, refused to defer to persons of rank, opposed war, and refused to serve in the military. For their radical views, they were scorned and harassed by Anglicans and Puritans alike.
Penn wanted to establish a good and fair society in keeping with Quaker ideals of equality, cooperation, and religious toleration. Penn guaranteed every adult male settler 50 acres of land and the right to vote. His plan for government called for a representative assembly and freedom of religion. Like Roger Williams before him, Penn believed that the land belonged to the Native Americans, and he saw to it that they were paid for it.
j MAIN IDEA
Predicting
Effects
£ What long-term effects would you predict followed King Philip’s War?
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Events
How did the Dutch create an ethnically diverse colony?
THE ENGLISH CIVIL WAR AND RESTORATION
From 1642 to 1651, England was torn apart by great wars between loyalist supporters of King Charles I, and those who supported Parliament, many of whom were Puritans. The parliamentary armies were victorious, and Charles I was tried for treason and executed in 1649. For a decade, England became a commonwealth, or republic, headed first by Oliver Cromwell, a Puritan, and then by his son Richard.
However, the English grew weary of the rather grim and sober Puritan rule, and in 1660 the monarchy was restored under Charles II. The Restoration would have a profound effect on America, leading to the creation of new colonies and to more direct involvement by the Crown in colonial affairs.
6 Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
History Through
COLONIAL MEETINGHOUSES
The Puritans of the northeast, the Quakers of Pennsylvania, and the Anglicans of the southern colonies held profound but often different convictions about community, social responsibility, and individual freedom. These convictions were often expressed in the religious services of each group as well as the architecture of the places of worship where these services were held.
MEN’S SEATS
WOMEN’S
SEATS
Architecture^)
A
Quaker Meetinghouse
Quaker services, which were called “meetings,” relied on the inspiration of the “inner light.” Meetings reflected a respect for conscience and freedom of speech.
Men and women entered by separate doors and sat on opposite sides, facing each other. In some meetinghouses, women sat in slightly elevated seats.
Both men and women could speak during the meeting.
▲
Puritan Meetinghouse
Puritan services focused on preaching. Sermons,
which sometimes lasted for hours, instructed the individual conscience to be mindful of the common good.
The pulpit was the focal point of the meetinghouse. A plain interior reflected a value for austerity and simplicity. Meetinghouses were also used for town meetings.
Anglican Church
The head of the Anglican church was the British monarch. Anglican services valued ritual. Their churches stressed the importance of authority and status.
Anglican churches emphasized the altar through ornamentation and elaborate windows. A screen separated the altar from the congregation. Elaborate pews were reserved for wealthy church members.
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Visual Sources 1.	In what ways do the Puritan and Quaker meetinghouses resemble each other? In what ways are they different?
2.	How does the interior of the Anglican church show a respect for hierarchy?
Review Unit 27
Penn himself spent only about four years in Pennsylvania. Meanwhile, his idealistic vision had faded but did not disappear. The Quakers became a minority in a colony thickly populated by people from all over western Europe. Slavery was introduced, and, in fact, many prominent Quakers in Pennsylvania owned slaves. However, the principles of equality, cooperation, and religious tolerance on which he had founded his vision would eventually become fundamental values of the new American nation.
England and Its Colonies Prosper
THIRTEEN COLONIES
Throughout the 1600s and 1700s, more British colonies in North America were founded, each for very different reasons. In 1632, King Charles I granted land north of Chesapeake Bay to George Calvert, the first Lord Baltimore. Calvert's son Cecil, the second Lord Baltimore, named the colony Maryland, after Queen Henrietta Maria, Charles's wife. In 1663, King Charles II awarded a group of key supporters the land between Virginia and Spanish Florida, a territory that soon became North and South Carolina. In 1732, an English philanthropist named James Oglethorpe, along with several associates, received a charter for a colony he hoped could be a haven for those imprisoned for debt. Oglethorpe named the colony Georgia, after King George II. Few debtors actually came to Georgia, and the British Crown assumed direct control of the colony in 1752. By that time, the Crown had begun to exercise more and more control over colonial economies and governments.
The thirteen British colonies existed primarily for the benefit of England. The colonies exported to England a rich variety of raw materials, such as lumber and furs, and in return they imported the manufactured goods that England produced. The thirteen colonies that became the original United States were founded over a period of 125 years. Together, the colonies represented a wide variety of people, skills, motives, industries, resources, and agricultural products.
MERCANTILISM AND THE NAVIGATION ACTS
Beginning in the 16th century, the nations of Europe competed for wealth and power through a new economic system called mercantilism (muf ken-te-liz'em), in which the colonies played a critical role. According to the theory of mercantilism, a nation could increase its wealth and power in two ways: by obtaining as much gold and silver as possible, and by establishing a favorable balance of trade, in which it sold more goods than it bought. A nation's ultimate goal was to become self-sufficient so that it did not have to depend on other countries for goods. The key to this process was the establishment of colonies. Colonies provided products, especially raw materials, that could not be found in the home country.
In 1651, England's Parliament, the country's legislative body, moved to tighten control of colonial trade by passing a series of measures known as the Navigation Acts. These acts enforced the following rules:
•	No country could trade with the colonies unless the goods were shipped in either colonial or English ships.
•	All vessels had to be operated by crews that were at least three-quarters English or colonial.
•	The colonies could export certain products, including tobacco and sugar—and later rice, molasses, and furs—only to England.
•	Almost all goods traded between the colonies and Europe first had to pass through an English port.
The system created by the Navigation Acts obviously benefited England. It proved to be good for most colonists as well. By restricting trade to English or colonial
MAIN IDEA
Contrasting
How did Penn’s actions toward Native Americans differ from those of the Puritans in Massachusetts?
Vocabulary charter: A
document issued by a monarch or other authority creating a public or private corporation
Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
85 :W
75°W
The Thirteen Colonies to the 1700s
MASSACHUSETTS (Plymouth, 1620; Mass. Bay, 1630)
Economic Activities	
New England colonies	
Massachusetts . . .	.shipbuilding, shipping, fishing, lumber, rum, meat products
New Hampshire . . .	.ship masts, lumber, fishing, trade, shipping, livestock, foodstuffs
Connecticut		. rum, iron foundries, shipbuilding
Rhode Island		.snuff, livestock
Middle colonies	
New York		. furs, wheat, glass, shoes, livestock, shipping, shipbuilding, rum, beer, snuff
Delaware		.trade, foodstuffs
New Jersey		.trade, foodstuffs, copper
Pennsylvania		.flax, shipbuilding
Southern colonies	
Virginia		.tobacco, wheat, cattle, iron
Maryland		. tobacco, wheat, snuff
North Carolina . . . .	. naval supplies, tobacco, furs
South Carolina. . . .	. rice, indigo, silk
Georgia		. indigo, rice, naval supplies, lumber
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
Region Which colonies are noted for their industrial activity, such as building, rather than agricultural activity?	
|	~~|	New England colonies
■	- j	Middle colonies
|	|	Southern colonies
[ Other British possessions
I
French possessions Spanish possessions
0	100___________200 miles
0	100	200 kilometers
The date provided for each colony indicates the date of the first permanent settlement.
Review Unit 29
ships, the acts spurred a boom in the colonial shipbuilding industry and helped support the development of numerous other colonial industries.
COLONIAL GOVERNMENTS
Whatever their form of charter, by the mid 1700s, most colonies were similar in the structure of their governments. In nearly every colony, a governor appointed by the Crown served as the highest authority. The governor presided over an advisory council, usually appointed by the governor, and a local assembly elected by landowning white males. The governor had the authority to appoint and dismiss judges and oversee colonial trade. In addition to raising money through taxes, the colonial assembly initiated and passed laws. The governor could veto any law but did so at a risk—because in most colonies the colonial assembly, not the Crown, paid the governor's salary. Using this power of the purse liberally, the colonists influenced the governor in a variety of ways, from the approval of laws to the appointment of judges.
GROWING SPIRIT OF SELF-DETERMINATION
The colonies were developing a taste for self-government that would ultimately create the conditions for rebellion. Nehemiah Grew, a British mercantilist, voiced one of the few early concerns when he warned his compatriots about the colonies' growing self-determination in 1707. MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
What effects did the Navigation Acts have on both Britain and its colonies?
A
Personal Voice nehemiah grew “The time may come . . . when the colonies may become populous and with the increase of arts and sciences strong and politic, forgetting their relation to the mother countries, will then confederate and consider nothing further than the means to support their ambition of standing on their [own] legs. ”
—quoted in The Colonial Period of American History
Aside from a desire for more economic and political breathing room, however, the colonies had little in common that would unite them against Britain. In particular, the Northern and Southern colonies were developing distinct societies, based on sharply contrasting economic systems.

ASSESSMENT
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
John Smith Jamestown joint-stock companies
•indentured servant
•Puritan
•John Winthrop
•King Philip's War •William Penn •Quaker
•mercantilism •Navigation Acts
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Identify the effects of each of the causes listed in the chart below.
Cause	Effect
Virginia colonists need labor to grow tobacco	
Puritans are persecuted in England	
William Penn acquires Pennsylvania	
Parliament passes the Navigation Acts	
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	EVALUATING
In your judgment, what were the benefits and drawbacks of using indentured servants for labor in Virginia? Support your judgment with references to the text. Think About:
•	the labor demands of growing tobacco
•	the characteristics and cost of indentured servants
•	the causes and consequences of Bacon’s Rebellion
PREDICTING EFFECTS
Reread Nehemiah Grew’s prediction for the colonies in the Personal Voice above. How do you think the British government would respond to his prediction? What issues do you see arising as potential sources of tension between the colonies and Great Britain?
'Hapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
The Colonies Come of Age
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
j j Terms & Names Even though both Northern and Southern colonies prospered, many colonists began to question British authority.
Regional differences between Northern and Southern colonies have survived in the culture and politics of the modern United States.
•triangular trade •middle passage •Enlightenment •Benjamin Franklin •Great Awakening •Jonathan Edwards
•French and
Indian War
•William Pitt • Pontiac •Proclamation of 1763
--OneAmerican's Storyj^^^H
hmhsocialstudies.coml
■TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on developments in the colonies during the 18th century.
In 1773, Philip Vickers Fithian left his home in Princeton, New Jersey, for the unfamiliar world of Virginia. Fithian, a theology student, had agreed to tutor the children of Robert Carter III and his wife at their magnificent brick manor house. In Fithian's journal of his one-year stay there, he recalled an evening walk along the property.
A
Personal Voice philip vickers fithian “We stroll’d down the Pasture quite to the River, admlr-Ing the Pleasantness of the evening, & the delightsome Prospect of the River, Hills, Huts on the Summits, low Bottoms, Trees of various Kinds, and Sizes, Cattle & Sheep feeding some near us, & others at a great distance on the green sides of the Hills. ” —Journal & Letters of Philip Vickers Fithian
The Shirley plantation house in Virginia is representative of many old Southern mansions. Built in 1723, it was the birthplace of Ann Hili Carter, the mother of Civil War general Robert E. Lee.
Plantations, or large farms, like the Carters' played a dominant role in the South's economy, which had come to rely heavily on agriculture. The development of this plantation economy led to a largely rural society, in which enslaved Africans played an unwilling yet important role.
A
Plantation Economy Arises in the South While there were cities in the South, on the whole the region developed as a rural society of self-sufficient plantations. Plantations sprang up along the rivers, making it possible for planters to ship their goods directly to the Northern colonies and Europe without the need for public dock facilities. Because plantation owners produced much of what they needed on their property, they did not often need shops, bakeries, and markets.
Review Unit 31
Plantations specialized in raising a single cash crop—one grown primarily for sale rather than for livestock feed. In Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina, planters grew tobacco. Planters in South Carolina and Georgia harvested rice and later indigo (for blue dye) as cash crops.
LIFE IN A DIVERSE SOUTHERN SOCIETY
In addition to English settlers, thousands of German immigrants as well as Scots and Scots-Irish settled in the South. Women in Southern society, as in the North, endured second-class citizenship. For the most part they could not vote, preach, or own property. While small farmers made up the majority of the Southern population, prosperous plantation owners controlled much of the South's economy as well as its political and social institutions.
At the bottom of Southern society were enslaved Africans. In the 18th century, Southerners turned increasingly to slavery to fill the labor needs of their agricultural economy. By 1690, about 13,000 slaves were working in the Southern colonies. By 1750, the number of slaves had increased to around 200,000.
THE MIDDLE PASSAGE
During the 17th century, Africans had become part of a transatlantic trading network described as the triangular trade. This term refers to a trading process in which goods and enslaved people were exchanged across the Atlantic Ocean. For example, merchants carrying rum and other goods from the New England colonies exchanged their merchandise for enslaved Africans. Africans were then transported to the West Indies where they were sold for sugar and molasses. These goods were then sold to rum producers in New England and the cycle began again. The voyage that brought Africans to the West Indies and later to North America was known as
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
Describe the social structure of Southern society.
STOWAGE OF THE BRITISH SLAVE SHIP BROOKES UNDER THE REGULATED SLAVE TRADE
Attof uaa.




-r-r-

PLAN OF LOWER
OtCK WITH THE STOWAGE OF 294 SLAVES »F THESE SEIKO STOWED UNDER THE SHELVES AS SHEWN IN FIGURE S AFIOVRC J. 

SB
the middle passage,
after the middle leg of the transatlantic trade triangle. Extreme cruelty characterized this journey. In the ports of West Africa, European traders branded Africans for identification and packed them into the dark holds of large ships. On board a slave ship, Africans were beaten into submission and often fell victim to diseases that spread rapidly. Some committed suicide by jumping overboard. Nearly 13 percent of the Africans aboard each slave ship perished during the
| This plan and section of the British slave ship Brookes was published in London around 1790 by a leading British antislavery advocate named Thomas Clarkson. The image effectively conveys the degradation and inhumanity of the slave trade, which reduced human beings to the level of merchandise.
i* ^, ********^‘Tr**'*
h MtWINO THE aTmASt «FI» AOtHTtMAL SU»(( ROUflO THE WMM OR SIMS OF TMt LOWER OtCK ST MEAH& OF FLATFORME M SHELVE*
HE«AM«OFOALL«RH.,NAOH«RCH)™£OUTttSFOW,B0_«THt,H(WMAHO.K^T»WIHAFEOHLT*H«H>HTXF»«T,ZHT
OtTWCRK TMt .CAIM ANS AAR LU* UNDER THE BEAM* .



Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
brutal trip to the New World. One enslaved African, Olaudah Equiano, recalled the inhumane conditions on his trip from West Africa to the West Indies in 1762 when he was 12 years old.
A
Personal Voice olaudah equiano “ The closeness of the place and the heat of the climate, added to the number in the ship, which was so crowded that each had scarcely room to turn himself, almost suffocated us. This produced copious perspirations, so that the air soon became unfit for respiration from a variety of loathsome smells, and brought on a sickness among the slaves, of which many died. ...” —The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano
AFRICANS COPE IN THEIR NEW WORLD
Africans who survived the ocean voyage entered an extremely difficult life of bondage in North America. Probably 80 to 90 percent worked in the fields. The other 10 to 20 percent worked as domestic slaves or as artisans. Domestic slaves worked in the houses of their masters, MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
If 13 percent of the enslaved Africans died on the journey to America, why did the merchants treat them so badly?
MAIN IDEA
Drawing
Conclusions
Cj How did enslaved Africans maintain their sense of self esteem?
Vocabulary tallow: fat from livestock used to make candles and soap
Olaudah Equiano
cooking, cleaning, and helping to raise the master's children. Artisans developed skills as carpenters, blacksmiths, and bricklayers and were sometimes loaned out to the master's neighbors.
In the midst of the horrors of slavery, Africans developed a way of life based on their cultural heritage. They kept alive their musical, dance, and storytelling traditions. When a slave owner sold a parent to another plantation, other slaves stepped in to raise the children left behind.
Slaves also resisted their position of subservience. Throughout the colonies, planters reported slaves faking illness, breaking tools, and staging work slowdowns. A number of slaves tried to run away, even though escape attempts brought severe punishment.
Some slaves even pushed their resistance to open revolt. One uprising, the Stono Rebellion, began on a September Sunday in 1739. That morning, about 20 slaves gathered at the Stono River just south of Charles Town (later Charleston), South Carolina. Wielding guns and other weapons, they killed several planter families and marched south, beating drums and inviting other slaves to join them in their plan to flee to Spanish-held Florida. Many slaves died in the fighting that followed. Those captured were executed. Despite the rebellion's failure, it sent a chill through many Southern colonists and led to the tightening of harsh slave laws already in place.
Commerce Grows in the North
The development of thriving commercial cities and diverse economic activities gradually made the North radically different from the South. Grinding wheat, harvesting fish, and sawing lumber became thriving industries. By the 1770s, the colonists had built one-third of all British ships and were producing more iron than England did. Many colonists prospered. In particular, the number of merchants grew. By the mid-1700s, merchants were one of the most powerful groups in the North. In contrast to the South, where Charles Town was the only major port, the North boasted Boston, New York, and Philadelphia.
COLONIAL CITIES AND TRADE
The expansion of trade caused port cities to grow. Philadelphia became the second largest port in the British empire, after London. Toward the end of the 1700s, Yankee traders were sailing around Cape Horn at the tip of South America to trade with Spanish missionaries as far away as California. There they exchanged manufactured goods for hides, tallow, wine, olive oil, and grain raised with the help of the Native American labor on the missions. Review Unit 33
Daily Urban Life in Colonial Times
By the mid-18th century, colonial cities were prosperous and growing. Brick rowhouses were replacing the wooden structures of the 17th century, while large mansions and churches, built of brick or stone, were rising everywhere.
English colonists had brought with them a preference for houses (as opposed to apartments, which were the norm in the cities of other European countries). As in Britain, the size of the house indicated the social position of its occupant.
In contemporary Philadelphia, Elfreth’s Alley preserves the scale and appearance of a mid-18th-century city street. Narrow rowhouses like these were occupied by artisans and shopkeepers. A neighborhood like this could have commercial and residential uses. Many people lived above the shops where they worked.
◄ The house known as Cliveden, also in Philadelphia, was completed in 1767. In contrast to the artisan or lower-middle-class housing of Elfreth’s Alley, this large freestanding mansion shows the kind of building that the rich could afford.
The Northern colonies attracted a variety of immigrants. During the 18th century about 463,000 Europeans migrated to America. Before 1700, most immigrants came as indentured servants from England, but by 1755, over one-half of all European immigrants were from other countries. They included large numbers of Germans and Scots-Irish. Other ethnic groups included the Dutch in New York, Scandinavians in Delaware, and Jews in such cities as Newport and Philadelphia.
FARMING IN THE NORTH
Unlike Southern plantations, a farm in New England and the middle colonies typically produced several cash crops rather than a single one. Because growing wheat and corn did not require as much labor as did growing tobacco and rice, Northerners had less need to rely on slave labor. However, slavery did exist in New England and was extensive throughout the middle colonies, as was racial prejudice against blacks—free or enslaved. As in the South, women in the North had extensive work responsibilities but few legal or social rights. The Enlightenment
During the 1700s, the Enlightenment, an intellectual movement that began in Europe, and the Great Awakening, a colonial religious movement, influenced people's thinking throughout the thirteen colonies.
EUROPEAN IDEAS INSPIRE THE COLONISTS
During the Renaissance in Europe, scientists had begun looking beyond religious beliefs and traditional assumptions for answers about how the world worked. Careful observation and reason, or rational thought, led to the discovery of some of the natural laws and principles governing the world and human behavior. The work of Nicolaus Copernicus, Galileo Galilei, and Sir Isaac Newton established that the earth Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
BMAINI IE>EA
Analyzing
Effects
What effects did the Enlightenment have on political thought in the colonies?
Vocabulary revival: a time of reawakened interest in religion
revolved around the sun and not vice versa. This observation, which challenged the traditional assumption that the earth was the center of the universe, was at first fiercely resisted. It was thought to contradict the Bible and other religious teachings. The early scientists also concluded that the world is governed by fixed mathematical laws rather than solely by the will of God. These ideas about nature led to a movement called the Enlightenment, in which philosophers valued reason and scientific methods.
Enlightenment ideas spread from Europe to the colonies, where people such as Benjamin Franklin embraced the notion of obtaining truth through experimentation and reason. For example, Franklin's most famous experiment—flying a kite in a thunderstorm—demonstrated that lightning is a form of electrical power.
Enlightenment ideas spread quickly through the colonies by means of books and pamphlets. Literacy was particularly high in New England because the Puritans had long supported public education, partly to make it possible for everyone to read the Bible. However, Enlightenment views were disturbing to some people. The Enlightenment suggested that people could use science and logic—rather than the pronouncements of church authorities—to arrive at truths. As the English poet John Donne had written, "[The] new philosophy calls all in doubt."
The Enlightenment also had a profound effect on political thought in the colonies. Colonial leaders such as Thomas Jefferson reasoned that human beings are born with natural rights that governments must respect. Enlightenment principles eventually would lead many colonists to question the authority of the British monarchy.
lAK
HISTORY
VIDEO
Did You Know: Ben Franklin
I hmhsocialstudies.com!
The Great Awakening
By the early 1700s, the Puritans had lost some of their influence. Under the new Massachusetts charter of 1691, Puritans were required to practice religious tolerance and could no longer limit voting privileges to members of their own church. Furthermore, as Puritan merchants prospered, they developed a taste for fine houses, stylish clothes, and good food and wine. As a result, their interest in maintaining the strict Puritan code declined. A series of religious revivals aimed at restoring the intensity and dedication of the early Puritan church swept through the colonies. These came to be known collectively as the Great Awakening.
The British minister George Whitefield was a major force behind the Great Awakening. In his seven journeys to the American colonies between 1738 and 1769, Whitefield preached dramatic sermons that brought many listeners to tears.

Review Unit 35
1*
KEY PLAYERS
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN 1706-1790
A true student of the Enlightenment, Benjamin Franklin devised an orderly method to develop moral perfection in himself. In his autobiography, he records how he decided on a list of virtues he thought he should have.
Then, every night, he reviewed whether his behavior lived up to those standards and recorded his faults in a notebook.
Originally, he concentrated on only 12 virtues until a Quaker friend told him he was too proud. Franklin promptly added a 13th virtue to the list—the virtue of humility, which he felt he never quite achieved.
Franklin took great pleasure in seeing his character improve. He wrote: “I was surpris’d to find myself so much fuller of faults than I had imagined; but I had the satisfaction of seeing them diminish.”
JONATHAN EDWARDS 1703-1758
Unlike Benjamin Franklin, Jonathan Edwards did not believe that humans had the power to perfect themselves. Descended from a long line of Puritan ministers, he believed that “however you may have reformed your life in many things,” all were sinners who were destined for hell unless they had a “great change of heart.”
Edwards was a brilliant thinker who entered Yale College when he was only 13. His preaching was one of the driving forces of the Great Awakening. Ironically, when the religious revival died down, Edwards’s own congregation rejected him for being too strict about doctrine. Edwards moved to Stockbridge, Massachusetts, in 1751, where he lived most of his remaining years as a missionary to a Native American settlement.
RELIGIOUS REVIVALS
Among those clergy who sought to revive the fervor of the original Puritan vision was Jonathan Edwards, of Northampton, Massachusetts. One of the most learned religious scholars of his time, Edwards preached that it was not enough for people simply to come to church. In order to be saved, they must feel their sinfulness and feel God's love for them. In his most famous sermon, delivered in 1741, Edwards vividly described God's mercy toward sinners. A
Personal Voice JONATHAN EDWARDS
“The God that holds you over the pit of Hell, much as one holds a spider, or some loathsome insect over the fire, abhors [hates] you, and is dreadfully provoked: His wrath towards you burns like fire;
He looks upon you as worthy of nothing else but to be cast into the fire . . . and yet it is nothing but His hand that holds you from falling into
the fire every moment. ”
—“Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God”
While the Great Awakening, which lasted throughout the 1730s and 1750s, restored many colonists' Christian religious faith, the movement also challenged the authority of established churches. Preachers trav-
eled from village to village, attracting thousands to outdoor revival meetings, giving impassioned sermons, and stirring people to rededicate themselves to God. Some colonists abandoned their old Puritan or Anglican congregations, while independent denominations, such as the Baptists and Methodists, gained new members.
EFFECTS OF THE GREAT AWAKENING AND ENLIGHTENMENT
Although the Great Awakening emphasized emotionalism and the Enlightenment emphasized reason, the two movements had similar consequences. Both caused people to question traditional authority. Moreover, both stressed the importance of the individual: the Enlightenment by emphasizing human reason, and the Great Awakening by de-emphasizing the role of church authority. Because these movements helped lead the colonists to question Britain's authority over their lives, they were important in creating the intellectual and social atmosphere that eventually led to the American Revolution. MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
& What effects did the Great Awakening have on organized religion in the colonies?
iapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
Background
Hats made from beaver skin were popular in Europe beginning in the late 16th century. Because of the demand for beaver, the fur trade was enormously successful.
MAIN IDEA
Contrasting
@ How was the French colony in North America unlike the British colonies?
The french and Indian War
-««^«»««am««sa«w«»«(«aww«wiiBMBwaweaB««ewaMiK9wwssa9SW!®R«!!as!#3BB
As the French empire in North America expanded, it collided with the growing British empire. During the late 17th and first half of the 18th centuries, France and Great Britain had fought three inconclusive wars. Each war had begun in Europe but spread to their overseas colonies. In 1754, after six relatively peaceful years, the French-British conflict reignited. This conflict is known as the French and Indian War.
RIVALS FOR AN EMPIRE
From the start the French colony in North America, called New France, differed from the British colonies. Typical French colonists were young, single men who engaged in the fur trade and Catholic priests who sought to convert Native Americans. The French were more interested in exploiting their territories than in settling them. However, they usually enjoyed better relations with Native Americans, in part because they needed the local people as partners in the fur trade. In fact, several military alliances developed out of the French-Native American trade relationship. JF) WAR ERUPTS
One major area of contention between France and Great Britain was the rich Ohio River valley just west of Pennsylvania and Virginia. In 1754, the French built Fort Duquesne in the region despite the fact that the Virginia government had already granted 200,000 acres of land in the Ohio country to a group of wealthy planters. In response, the Virginia governor sent militia, a group of ordinary citizens who performed military duties, to evict the French. This was the opening of the French and Indian War, the fourth war between Great Britain and France for control of North America. In the first battle of the war, the French delivered a crushing defeat to the outnumbered Virginians and their leader, an ambitious 22-year-old officer named George Washington.
A year after his defeat, Washington again headed into battle, this time as an aide to the British general Edward Braddock. Braddock's first task was to relaunch an attack on Fort Duquesne. As Braddock and nearly 1,500 soldiers neared the fort, French soldiers and their Native American allies ambushed them. The startled British soldiers turned and fled.

In this scene from the French and Indian War, the British general Edward Braddock meets defeat and death on his march to Fort Duquesne in July of 1755.




I
European Claims in North America
mm ■ A 1WVV I IL7VV I I llg)l IL LI l\> Ls/\|UC<I IOIL7i I VI
the British Empire have affected its relationship with the colonies?
The weakness of the British army surprised Washington, who showed great courage. As Washington tried to rally the troops, two horses were shot from under him and four bullets pierced his coat—yet he escaped unharmed. Many other colonists began to question the competence of the British army, which suffered defeat after defeat during 1755 and 1756.
BRITAIN DEFEATS AN OLD ENEMY
Angered by French victories, Britain's King George II selected new leaders to run his government in 1757. One of these was William Pitt the elder, an energetic, self-confident politician. Under Pitt, the British and colonial troops finally began winning battles. These successes earned Britain the support of the powerful Iroquois, giving Britain some Native American allies to counterbalance those of France. In September 1759, the war took a dramatic and decisive turn on the Plains of Abraham just outside Quebec. Under cover of night, British troops scaled the high cliffs that protected the city and defeated the French in a surprise attack. The British triumph at Quebec brought them victory in the war.
The war officially ended in 1763 with the signing of the Treaty of Paris. Great Britain claimed Canada and virtually all of North America east of the Mississippi River. Britain also took Florida from Spain, which had allied itself with France. The treaty permitted Spain to keep possession of its lands west of the Mississippi and the city of New Orleans, which it had gained from France in 1762. France retained control of only a few islands and small colonies near Newfoundland, in the West Indies, and elsewhere.
38 Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era
MAIN IDEA
Making
Inferences
How did Great Britain’s victory over France affect Native Americans?
CHANGES FOR NATIVE AMERICANS
Others who lost ground in the war were the Native Americans, who found the victorious British harder to bargain with than the French had been. Native Americans resented the growing number of British settlers crossing the Appalachian Mountains and feared the settlers would soon drive away the game they depended on for survival. In the spring of 1763, the Ottawa leader Pontiac recognized that the French loss was a loss for Native Americans. A
Personal Voice pontiac “When I go to see the English commander and say to him that some of our comrades are dead, instead of bewailing their death, as our French brothers do, he laughs at me and at you. If I ask for anything for our sick, he refuses with the reply that he has no use for us. For all this you can well see that they are seeking our ruin. Therefore, my brothers, we must all swear their destruction and wait no longer. ”
—quoted in Red and White
Led by Pontiac, Native Americans captured eight British forts in the Ohio Valley and the Great Lakes area and laid siege to another. In response, British officers deliberately presented blankets contaminated with smallpox to two Delaware chiefs during peace negotiations, and the virus spread rapidly among the Native Americans. Weakened by disease and tired of fighting, most Native American groups negotiated treaties with the British by the summer of 1766.
To avoid further costly conflicts with Native Americans, the British government prohibited colonists from settling west of the Appalachian Mountains. The Proclamation of 1763 established a Proclamation Line along the Appalachians, which the colonists were not allowed to cross. However, the colonists, eager to expand westward from the increasingly crowded Atlantic seaboard, ignored the proclamation and continued to stream onto Native American lands.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its signficance. •triangular trade	•Benjamin Franklin	• French and Indian War
•middle passage	• Great Awakening	•William Pitt
• Enlightenment	• Jonathan Edwards
•	Pontiac
•	Proclamation of 1763
i
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Re-create the tree diagram below. Fill in the diagram to show developments that took place in the colonies during the 18th century.
CRITICAL THINKING
ANALYZING CAUSES
Why did the plantation system come to play such an important role in the Southern economy?
4.	SUMMARIZING
How did the Enlightenment affect the colonies?
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
Read the following quotation, written in 1774 by the African-American poet, Phillis Wheatley. How does the quotation express both religious belief and Enlightenment thought?
ANALYZING ISSUES
In what ways was slavery a brutal system? Support your statement with examples from the text. Think About:
•	how people were taken from Africa
•	the working conditions of enslaved people
•	the attitudes toward enslaved people
Which events or developments helped prepare the colonies for independence?
“For in every human breast God has implanted a principle, which we call love of freedom.”
Review Unit 39
DAILY LIFE
(1630-1763) Colonial Courtship
The concept of dating among teenagers was nonexistent in colonial times. Young people were considered either children or adults, and as important as marriage was in the colonies, sweethearts were older than one might suspect. The practices of courtship and marriage varied among the different communities.




FRONTIER OR BACKCOUNTRY PEOPLE
Andrew Jackson, depicted with his wife in the painting below, “stole” his wife (she was willing) from her family. Jackson was following a custom of the backcountry people, who lived along the western edge of the colonies.
These colonists, mostly Scots-Irish, based their marriages on the old custom of “abduction”—stealing the bride—often with her consent. Even regular marriages began with the groom and his friends coming to “steal” the bride. Much drinking and dancing accompanied these wild and hilarious weddings.
QUAKERS
Quaker couples intent on marrying needed the consent not only of the parents but also of the whole Quaker community. Quakers who wanted to marry had to go through a 16-step courtship phase before they could wed. Quaker women, however, were known to reject men at the last minute.








is®
PURITANS
For Puritans, marriage was a civil contract, not a religious or sacred union. Although adults strictly supervised a couple’s courting, parents allowed two unusual practices. One was the use of a courting stick, a long tube into which the couple could whisper while the family was in another room. The other was the practice of “bundling”: a young man spent the night in the same bed as his sweetheart, with a large bundling board (shown above) between them.
Before marrying, the couple had to allow for Puritan leaders to voice any objections to the marriage at the meeting house. Passing that, the couple would marry in a very simple civil ceremony and share a quiet dinner.
Chapter 1
DATA
FILE
WHO MARRIED?
Puritans:
•	98% of males and 94% of females married
•	Grooms were usually a few years older than brides
•	Discouraged marriages between first cousins
Virginians:
•	25% of males never married; most females married
•	Grooms nearly 10 years older than brides
•	Allowed first-cousin marriages
Quakers:
•	16% of women single at age 50
•	forbade first-cousin marriages
THE SOUTH
Many African slaves married in a “jumping the broomstick” ceremony, in which the bride and groom jumped over a broomstick to seal their union. Although there is disagreement among African-American scholars, some suggest that the above painting depicts a slave wedding on a South Carolina plantation in the late 1700s.
Frontier People:
•	Almost all women and most men married
•	Ages of bride and groom about the same
•	Youngest group to marry

VIRGINIA
In Virginia, marriage was a sacred union. Since the marriage often involved a union of properties, and love was not necessary, parents were heavily involved in the negotiations. In this illustration from a dance manual (above), a young upper-class couple work to improve their social graces by practicing an elaborate dance step.
Average Age at Marriage
Group	Males	Females
Puritan	26	23
Virginians	26	19
Quakers in Delaware	31	29
in Penn. & N.J.	26	22
Philadelphians	26	23
Frontier People	21	19
Modern Americans	27	25
i
Review Unit 41
REVIEW
CHAPTER
TERMS & NAMES
For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its connection to exploration and the colonial era.
1.	nomadic
2.	Reformation
3.	Christopher Columbus
4.	Columbian Exchange
5.	indentured servant
6.	Puritan
7.	Navigation Acts
8.	triangular trade
9.	Enlightenment 10. French and
Indian War
MAIN IDEAS
Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
The Americas, West Africa, and Europe
(pages 4-13)
1.	What effects did Portuguese trade routes have on West Africa?
2.	In what ways did Renaissance ideas and attitudes inspire and motivate European explorers?
Spanish North America (pages 14-20)
3.	What impact did the Columbian Exchange have on people’s lives throughout the world?
4.	Why did the Spanish want to colonize the Americas?
Early British Colonies (pages 21-30)
5.	How did the goals of the Jamestown colonists differ from those of the Puritan colonists in Massachusetts?
6.	Why did the English Parliament pass the Navigation Acts? What effects did they have?
The Colonies Come of Age (pages 31-39)
7.	How did immigration contribute to the ethnic diversity of the American colonies after 1700?
8.	How did the differences between the Northern and Southern economies lead to the development of two distinct cultural regions?
CRITICAL THINKING
USING YOUR NOTES
In a chart like the one shown, compare and contrast Spanish and British colonial policies toward Native Americans. Colonial Policies Toward Native Americans	
Spanish	British
	
DEVELOPING HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
What were some of the cultural characteristics of the ancient civilizations that flourished in the Americas? INTERPRETING MAPS
Look at the map on page 29. Compare the economic activities of the three regions of British colonies in the Americas—New England, Middle, and Southern. 42 Chapter 1 Exploration and the Colonial Era

TEXAS TEST PRACTICE
Use the cartoon below and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 1.
Benjamin Franklin drew and published this cartoon in 1754, soon after the start of the French and Indian War. The cartoon depicts a snake divided into eight parts representing the eight colonies at the time. What message did Franklin intend?
A
The colonies have been broken apart by the war. B
The colonies should unite to protect themselves from the French and the Native Americans. C
The colonies should join with the French to protect themselves from the Native Americans. D
The colonies should unite to declare independence from Britain. 2.	Anne Hutchinson was banished from
Massachusetts because she taught that —
F colonists should remain loyal to the English king.
G individuals could interpret the Bible for themselves.
H the colonists should not trade with local Native Americans.
J the Puritans should break away from the Church of England.
3,	In the 1700s an intellectual movement known as the Enlightenment developed in Europe and spread to the colonies. Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson were among those colonists heavily influenced by Enlightenment ideas. In which of the following ways did the Enlightenment affect the colonists?
A
Enlightenment ideas led people to expand the trade in enslaved persons. B
Enlightenment ideas stirred people to rededicate themselves to God. C
Enlightenment ideas persuaded people to establish colonies in order to generate a favorable balance of trade. D
Enlightenment ideas convinced people of the importance of civil rights. 71 hmhsocialstudies.com
TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests •Tutorials
INTERACT WITH HISTORY
"^WriteSmart COLLABORATIVE LEARNI

Think about the issues you recorded in myNotebook as you read the chapter. Now that you know how Native Americans’ way of life was changed by the arrival of the Europeans, form small groups and discuss the following question: Would you have resisted or helped the Europeans if you had been a Native American during the days of European colonization? Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write a paragraph summarizing your group’s discussion.
Working in small groups, do library or
Internet research to learn more about the history of one of the 13 colonies. Create an exhibit documenting the first 100 years of the colony’s development. Find images and write text to highlight key events and important people in the early history of the colony.
mvWriteSmart
You have been living in the Massachusetts Bay Colony for nearly a year. You have been asked by leaders of the colony to write an advertisement that will persuade new settlers to come to Massachusetts. Focus your advertisement on the advantages of living in the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your advertisement.
Review Unit 43

End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Using Academic and
Social Studies Vocabulary
DEFINING THE SKILL
Within this textbook, there are two main types of words. The first, academic words, includes words that are important in all classes, not just in social studies. These are words that your teacher may use during classroom instruction, such as interpret or distribute.
A second type, social studies words, include words and phrases you will see as you read social studies materials. Words like civilization, century, and democracy are considered social studies words and are used primarily to describe social studies content.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: IDENTIFY AND USE SOCIAL STUDIES TERMS
To identify the social studies terms, locate boldface terms and other key terms that explain the historical content. This excerpt is about life in the early American colonies. Read the strategies to learn how to identify and use social studies terms in a historical context. Life in the Early American Colonies
Slavery existed in all the colonies, but it became a vital source of labor in the South.© During the 1600s, enslaved Africans were brought to North America through a network of transatlantic trade ©also known as the©triangular trade. ©Through this ©trading network, goods and enslaved Africans were exchanged between three points—England, its colonies, and Africa.
By contrast, the New England and middle colonies did not rely on slave labor or the production of a single© commodity, also© called a single staple crop, such as tobacco or rice. Most people were farmers, but they grew a wide variety of crops.The New England colonies traded actively with the islands of the West Indies. In addition to foods, they ©ex ported all kinds of other items, ranging from barrels to horses. In return, they©imported sugar and molasses. All this trade resulted in the growth of small towns and larger port cities.
© Identify academic and social studies words. Look for terms that are in boldface print or are defined in the margin. Sometimes, specialized academic or social studies words are highlighted.
© Ask questions to understand what each term means. Reread text to understand the meaning of each term. Look for words that indicate a definition or key term is approaching. Often terms such as called and known as indicate that a definition is coming up. In this case, single staple crop is a definition of single commodity.
© Read the surrounding text to further clarify meaning. Why was the transatlantic trade called the triangular trade?
© Think about what you know about the time frame or ideas being discussed. Use your prior knowledge to put the idea into context. What do you already know about slavery in the colonies in the 1600s and 1700s?
© Consider the topic at hand. What words help convey the topic? This alerts you to their relevance to the topic and helps you better understand the historical concept being discussed. What is a trading network?
43 SKI
STRATEGY: MAKE A DIAGRAM
Making a diagram can help you to understand the vocabulary terms that you will encounter throughout the text. Sometimes, your own background knowledge or the use of context clues may not be enough to determine what a word means. In that case, ask a teacher or classmate to help you develop your background knowledge so that you can understand the definition of the word. You may also look the word up in a dictionary to find the actual definition. APPLYING THE SKILL
Turn to page 28 in your book and read the section titled "Mercantilism and the Navigation Acts." Choose one of the unfamiliar vocabulary terms that you encounter in this section and use a diagram to help you understand it.
1.	Identify academic and social studies words.
What social studies terms can you find in the text and in the margin?
You may recognize a term from seeing it in the section opener. What is mercantilism?
2.	Ask questions to understand what each term means.
What does mercantalism mean? What terms and grammatical marks help you know what it means? Why did colonies play a critical role in mercantilism?
3.	Read the surrounding text to help further clarify meaning.
Which sentence helps you better understand what the theory of mercantilism entails? How does reading this help your understanding of the term?
4.	Think about what you know about the time frame or ideas being discussed.
Use your prior knowledge to help put the term or idea into context. What do you already know about how and when the colonies in North America were established?
5.	Consider the topic at hand.
What words help convey the concept of economic growth and expansion. How does knowing the topic of economics help your understanding of this section?
43 SK2
HISTORY
The Maya developed one of the most advanced civilizations in the Americas, but their story is shrouded in mystery.
Around a.d. 250, the Maya began to build great cities in southern Mexico and Central America. They developed a writing system, practiced astronomy, and built magnificent palaces and pyramids with little more than stone tools. Around a.d. 900, however, the Maya abandoned their cities, leaving their monuments to be reclaimed by the jungle and, for a time, forgotten.
Explore some of the incredible monuments and cultural achievements of the ancient Maya online. You can find a wealth of information, video clips, primary sources, and more at

Watch the video to learn how the actions of one Spanish missionary nearly destroyed the written record of the Maya world.
"Thus let it he done! Let the emptiness he filled! Let the water recede and make a void, let the earth appear and become solid; let it he done ... "Earth!" they said, and instantly it was made."
Finding the City of Palenque
Watch the video to learn about the great Maya city of Palenque and the European discovery of the site in the eighteenth century.
'VST, •'


Essential Question
myNotebook
What were the causes and major events of the American Revolution, and how did the new American republic develop?
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
A, 1C, 21B, 23A, 23C, 26E, 26F, 29C
SECTION 1: Colonial Resistance and Rebellion
Main Idea Conflicts between Great Britain and the American colonies escalated, until the colonists finally declared their independence.
SECTION 2: The War for Independence
Main Idea Key American victories reversed British advances during the American Revolutionary War.
SECTION 3: Confederation and the Constitution
Main Idea American leaders created the Constitution as a blueprint of government for the United States.
SECTION 4: Launching the New Nation
Main Idea With George Washington as its first president, the United States began creating a working government for its new nation.

The Sons of Liberty pull down a statue of George III on the Bowling Green, New York, July 9,1776.
USA
WORLD
1760 George 111 becomes king of Great Britain.
[17651 British Parliament passes the Stamp Act.
1765
1773 Colonists stage the Boston Tea Party.
• 1774 Parliament : passes the Intolerable : Acts. First Continental : Congress convenes.
1774 Reign of Louis XVI begins in France.
1775
Second
Continental
Congress
convenes.
1776 Colonies declare independence.
1775
1776 Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations Is published.

