Chapter 10 
Imperialism and America
MAIN IDEA
Beginning in 1867 and continuing through the century, global competition caused the United States to expand.
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
During this time period, the United States acquired Hawaii and Alaska, both of which became states in 1959.
Terms & Names
»Queen Llliuokalanl
•	imperialism
•	Alfred T. Mahan
•William Seward • Pearl Harbor •Sanford B. Dole
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on events and concepts that illustrate the roots of imperialism.
One American's Story
In 1893 Queen Liliuokalani (b-le'a-o-ka-la'ne) realized that her reign in Hawaii had come to an end. More than 160 U.S. sailors and marines stood ready to aid the haoles (white foreigners) who planned to overthrow the Hawaiian monarchy. In an eloquent statement of protest, the proud monarch surrendered to the superior force of the United States.
A
Personal Voice queen liliuokalani 661, Liliuokalani,... do hereby solemnly protest against any and all acts done against myself and the constitutional government of the Hawaiian Kingdom... . Now, to avoid any collision of armed forces and perhaps the loss of life, I do under this protest. . . yield my authority until such time as the Government of the United States shall... undo the action of its representatives and reinstate me In the authority which I claim as the constitutional sovereign of the Hawaiian Islands. ” —quoted in Those Kings and Queens of Old Hawaii
U.S. ambassador to Hawaii John L. Stevens informed the State Department, "The Hawaiian pear is now fully ripe, and this is the golden hour for the United States to pluck it." The annexation of Hawaii was only one of the goals of America's empire builders in the late 19th century.
Hawaii’s “Queen LSI” announced that if restored to power, she would behead those who had conspired to depose her.
American Expansionism
Americans had always sought to expand the size of their nation, and throughout the 19th century they extended their control toward the Pacific Ocean. However, by the 1880s, many American leaders had become convinced that the United States should join the imperialist powers of Europe and establish colonies overseas. Imperialism—the policy in which stronger nations extend their economic, political, or military control over weaker territories—was already a trend around the world.
142 Chapter 10
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
How did European imperialism affect Africa?
Background
In the late 1800s, new farm
machinery greatly improved grain production. For example, plows, harrows, threshing machines, and reapers increased corn production by 264 percent and the wheat harvest by 252 percent.
PLAYER
In the early 1900s, the Navy’s Great White Fleet, so named because its ships were painted white, was a sign of America’s growing military power. ►
GLOBAL COMPETITION
European nations had been establishing colonies for centuries. In the late 19th century Africa had emerged as a prime target of European expansionism. By the early 20th century, only two countries in all of Africa—Ethiopia and Liberia—remained independent. Imperialists also competed for territory in Asia, especially in China. In its late-19th-century reform era, Japan replaced its old feudal order with a strong central government. Hoping that military strength would bolster industrialization, Japan joined European nations in competition for China in the 1890s.
Most Americans gradually warmed to the idea of expansion overseas. With a belief in manifest destiny, they already had pushed the U.S. border to the Pacific Ocean. Three factors fueled the new American imperialism:
•	desire for military strength
•	thirst for new markets
•	belief in cultural superiority
DESIRE FOR MILITARY STRENGTH
Seeing that other nations were establishing a global military presence, American leaders advised that the United States build up its own military strength. One such leader was Admiral Alfred T. Mahan of the U.S. Navy. Mahan urged government officials to build up American naval power in order to compete with other powerful nations. As a result of the urging of Mahan and others, the United States built nine steel-hulled cruisers between 1883 and 1890. The construction of modern battleships such as the Maine and the Oregon transformed the country into the world's third largest naval power. THIRST FOR NEW MARKETS
In the late 19th century, advances in technology enabled American farms and factories to produce far more than American citizens could consume. Now the United States needed raw materials for its factories and new markets for its agricultural and manufactured goods. Imperialists viewed foreign trade as the solution to American overproduction and the related problems of unemployment / and economic depression.
ADMIRAL ALFRED T. MAHAN 1840-1914

BELIEF IN CULTURAL SUPERIORITY
Cultural factors also were used to justify imperialism. Some Americans combined the philosophy of Social Darwinism—a belief that free-market competition would lead to the survival of the fittest—wit a belief in the racial superiority of Anglo-Saxons. Some people therefore considered it a social responsibility to "civilize" the inhabitants of less developed countries and spread the benefits of Western society. In addition, Protestant Christian missionaries felt they had a moral duty to convert others to their beliefs. The United States Acquires Alaska
An early supporter of American expansion was William Seward, Secretary of State under presidents Abraham Lincoln and Andrew Johnson. In 1867, Seward arranged for the U.S. to buy Alaska from the Russians for $7.2 million. Seward had some trouble persuading the House of Representatives to approve funding for the purchase. Some people thought it was silly to buy what they called "Seward's Icebox" or "Seward's folly." Time showed how wrong they were. In 1959, Alaska became a state. For about two cents an acre, the United States had acquired a land rich in timber, minerals, and, as it turned out, oil. JBj
The United States Takes Hawaii

MAIN IDEA
Developing
Historical
Perspective
How did time prove that the purchase of Alaska was not an act of folly?
Hawaii’s Changing Population 1853-1920
■	Native Hawaiian
■	Caucasian
■	Other (mostly Asian)
Source: Robert C. Schmitt,
Demographic Statistics of Hawaii, 1778-1965
SKILLBUILDER
Interpreting Graphs 1.	What were the most dramatic changes in Hawaiian population between 1853 and 1920?
2.	How might these changes have affected the political climate there?
In 1867, the same year in which Alaska was purchased, the United States took over the Midway Islands, which lie in the Pacific Ocean about 1300 miles north of Hawaii. No one lived on the islands, so the event did not attract much attention.
Hawaii was another question. The Hawaiian Islands
____________________ had been economically important to the United States
for nearly a century. Since the 1790s, American merchants had stopped there on their way to China and East India. In the 1820s, Yankee missionaries founded Christian schools and churches on the islands. Their children and grandchildren became sugar planters who sold most of their crop to the United States.
THE CRY FOR ANNEXATION
In the mid-19th century, American-owned sugar plantations accounted for about three-quarters of the islands' wealth. Plantation owners imported thousands of laborers from Japan, Portugal, and China. By 1900, foreigners and immigrant laborers outnumbered native Hawaiians about three to one. White planters profited from close ties with the United States. In 1875, the United States agreed to import Hawaiian sugar duty-free. Over the next 15 years, Hawaiian sugar production increased nine times. Then the McKinley Tariff of 1890 provoked a crisis by eliminating the duty-free status of Hawaiian sugar. As a result, Hawaiian sugar growers faced competition in the American market. American planters in Hawaii called for the United States to annex the islands so they wouldn't have to pay the duty.
U.S. military and economic leaders already understood the value of the islands. In 1887, they pressured Hawaii to allow the United States to build a naval base at Pearl Harbor, the kingdom's best port. The base became a refueling station for American ships.
Vocabulary annex: to
incorporate territory into an existing country or state
144 Chapter 10
180°
160°W
140°W
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Events
$ What factors led to the annexation of Hawaii in 1898?
THE END OF A MONARCHY
Also in that year, Hawaii's King Kalakaua had been strong-armed by white business leaders. They forced him to amend Hawaii's constitution, effectively limiting voting rights to only wealthy land-owners. But when Kalakaua died in 1891, his sister Queen Liliuokalani came to power with a "Hawaii for Hawaiians" agenda. She proposed removing the property-owning qualifications for voting. To prevent this from happening, business groups—encouraged by Ambassador John L. Stevens—organized a revolution. With the help of marines, they overthrew the queen and set up a government headed by Sanford B. Dole.
President Cleveland directed that the queen be restored to her throne.
When Dole refused to surrender power,
Cleveland formally recognized the Republic of Hawaii. But he refused to consider annexation unless a majority of Hawaiians favored it.
In 1897, William McKinley, who favored annexation, succeeded Cleveland as president. On August 12, 1898, Congress
proclaimed Hawaii an American territory, although Hawaiians had never had the chance to vote. In 1959, Hawaii became the 50th state of the United States.
i L
Si
Alaska, 1867, and Hawaii, 1898
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1. Location Where do the Hawaiian Islands lie in relation to the United States? Human-Environment Interaction Given their geographic location, why were Hawaii and Alaska of value to the United States?
-0°—
□
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•Queen Liliuokalani	• Alfred T. Mahan	• Pearl Harbor
•Imperialism	•William Seward	*Sanford B. Dole
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Copy this web on your paper and fill it in with events and concepts that illustrate the roots
of imperialism.
<^Roots of U.S. Imperialism^
Choose one event to explain further in a paragraph.
CRITICAL THINKING
DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
Manifest destiny greatly influenced American policy during the first half of the 19th century. How do you think manifest destiny set the stage for American imperialism at the end of the century?
4.	SUMMARIZING
Explain the efforts of significant people to move the United States into the position of a world power. Think About:
•	Alfred T. Mahan
•	Sanford B. Dole
•	Christian missionaries
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
In the following passage, how does Indiana Senator Albert J. Beveridge explain the need for the U.S. to acquire new territories?
44 Fate has written our policy for us; the trade of the world must and shall be ours. ... We will establish trading posts throughout the world as distributing points for American products. .. Great colonies governing themselves, flying our flag and trading with us, will grow about our posts of trade.99
—quoted in Beveridge and the Progressive Era
America Claims an Empire 345
TEKS2D,4A,15D
The Spanish-American War
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
In 1898, the United States went to war to help Cuba win its independence from Spain.
U.S. involvement in Latin America and Asia increased greatly as a result of the war and continues today.
•	Jose Marti	• George Dewey
•	Valerlano Weyler • Rough Riders
•	yellow Journalism • San Juan Hill
U.S.S.
Maine • Treaty of Paris 
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the pros and cons of annexing the Philippines.
Early in 1896, James Creelman traveled to Cuba as a New York World reporter, covering the second Cuban war for independence from Spain. While in Havana, he wrote columns about his observations of the war. His descriptions of Spanish atrocities aroused American sympathy for Cubans.
A
Personal Voice james creelman “No man’s life, no man’s property is safe [in Cuba]. American citizens are imprisoned or slain without cause. American property is destroyed on all sides. . . . Wounded soldiers can be found begging in the streets of Havana. . . . The horrors of a barbarous struggle for the extermination of the native population are witnessed in all parts of the country. Blood on the roadsides, blood in the fields, blood on the doorsteps, blood, blood, blood! ... Is there no nation wise enough, brave enough to aid this blood-smitten land?” —New York World, May 17, 1896
Newspapers during that period often exaggerated stories like Creelman's to boost their sales as well as to provoke American intervention in Cuba.
▲
Cuban rebels bum the town of WWW in March 189®'
Cubans Rebel Against Spain
By the end of the 19th century, Spain—once the most powerful colonial nation on earth—had lost most of its colonies. It retained only the Philippines and the island of Guam in the Pacific, a few outposts in Africa, and the Caribbean islands of Cuba and Puerto Rico in the Americas.
AMERICAN INTEREST IN CUBA
.	ine Unitecl States had long held an interest i
Cuba which lies only 90 miles south of Florida. In 1854, diplomats recommen,
ed to President Franklin Pierce that the United States buy Cuba from Spain. T1
Spanish responded by saying that they would rather see Cuba sunk in the ocea
346 Chapter 10
Vocabulary guerrilla: a
member of a military force that harasses the enemy
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Motives
H
Why did Jos6 Martf encourage Cuban rebels to destroy sugar mills and plantations? But American interest in Cuba continued. When the Cubans rebelled against Spain between 1868 and 1878,
American sympathies went out to the Cuban people.
The Cuban revolt against Spain was not successful, but in 1886 the Cuban people did force Spain to abolish slavery.
After the emancipation of Cuba's slaves, American capitalists began investing millions of dollars in large sugar cane plantations on the island.
THE SECOND WAR FOR INDEPENDENCE
Anti-Spanish sentiment in Cuba soon erupted into a second war for independence. Jose Marti, a Cuban poet and journalist in exile in New York, launched a revolution in 1895. Marti organized Cuban resistance against Spain, using an active guerrilla campaign and deliberately destroying property, especially American-owned sugar mills and plantations. Marti counted on provoking U.S. intervention to help the rebels achieve Cuba Libre!—a free Cuba.
Public opinion in the United States was split. Many business people wanted the government to support Spain in order to protect their investments. Other Americans, however, were enthusiastic about the rebel cause. The cry "Cuba Libre!" was, after all, similar in sentiment to Patrick Henry's "Give me liberty or give me death!"
War Fever Escalates
In 1896, Spain responded to the Cuban revolt by sending General Valeriano Weyler to Cuba to restore order.
Weyler tried to crush the rebellion by herding the entire rural population of central and western Cuba into barbed-wire concentration camps. Here civilians could not give aid to rebels. An estimated 300,000 Cubans filled these camps, where thousands died from hunger and disease.
HEADLINE WARS
Weyler's actions fueled a war over newspaper circulation that had developed between the American newspaper tycoons William Randolph Hearst and Joseph Pulitzer. To lure readers, Hearst's New York Journal and Pulitzer's New York World printed exaggerated accounts—by reporters such as James Creelman____of "Butcher" Weyler's brutality. Stories of poisoned wells and of
children being thrown to the sharks deepened American sympathy for the rebels. This sensational style of writing, which exaggerates the news to lure and enrage readers, became known as yellow journalism.
Hearst and Pulitzer fanned war fever. When Hearst sent the gifted artist Frederic Remington to Cuba to draw sketches of reporters' stories, Remington informed the publisher that a war between the United States and Spain seemed very unlikely. Hearst reportedly replied, "You furnish the pictures and I'll furnish the war."
THE DE LOME LETTER
American sympathy for "Cuba Libre!" grew with each day's headlines When President William McKinley took office in 1897, demands for American intervention in Cuba were on the rise. Preferring to avoid war with Spain McKinley tried diplomatic means to resolve the crisis. At first, his efforts appeared to succeed. Spain recalled General Weyler, modified the policy regarding concentration camps, and offered Cuba limited self-government. JOSE MARTI 1853-1895
The Cuban political activist Jos6 Martf dedicated his life to achieving independence for Cuba. Expelled from Cuba at the age of 16 because of his revolutionary activities, Marti earned a master’s degree and a law degree.
He eventually settled in the United States.
Wary of the U.S. role in the Cuban struggle against the Spanish, Martf warned, “I know the Monster, because I have lived in its lair.” His fears of U.S. imperialism turned out to have been well-founded. U.S. troops occupied Cuba on and off from 1906 until 1922.
Martf died fighting for Cuban independence in 1895. He is revered today in Cuba as a hero and martyr.
America Claims an Empire 347
In February 1898, however, the New York Journal published a private letter written by Enrique Dupuy de Lome, the Spanish minister to the United States. A Cuban rebel had stolen the letter from a Havana post office and leaked it to the newspaper, which was thirsty for scandal. The de Lome letter criticized President McKinley, calling him "weak" and "a bidder for the admiration of the crowd." The embarrassed Spanish government apologized, and the minister resigned. Still, Americans were angry over the insult to their president.
THE U.S.S. MAINE EXPLODES
Only a few days after the publication of the de Lome letter, American resentment toward Spain turned to outrage. Early in 1898, President McKinley had ordered the U.S.S. Maine to Cuba to bring home American citizens in danger from the fighting and to protect American property. On February 15, 1898, the ship blew up in the harbor of Havana. More than 260 men were killed. At the time, no one really knew why the ship exploded; however, American newspapers claimed that the Spanish had blown up the ship. The Journal's headline read "The warship Maine was split in two by an enemy's secret infernal machine." Hearst's paper offered a reward of $50,000 for the capture of the Spaniards who supposedly had committed the outrage.
MAIN IDEA
Summarizing
What events increased the tension between the United States and Spain?
War with Spain Erupts
Now there was no holding back the forces that wanted war. "Remember the Maine!" became the rallying cry for U.S. intervention in Cuba. It made no difference that the Spanish government agreed, on April 9, to almost everything the United States demanded, including a six-month cease-fire.
When the L/.S.S. Maine exploded in the harbor of Havana, newspapers like the New vnru Journal were quick to place the blame on Spain.	K
348 Chapter 10
J

The Spanish-American War, 1898
! i
h-;»
War in the Caribbean
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Philippine > Islands
War in the Philippines
300 miles
100 300 kilometers
GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Location Where does Cuba lie in relation to the United States?
2.	Location Look at the location of the Philippines. How does the map help explain why Spain was surprised by the American attack in the Philippines?
U.S.
Forces Battle 0	100	200 miles
0 100 200 kilometers
*1 u
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Events
How did the Spanish try to avoid war with the United States?
Despite the Spanish concessions, public opinion favored war. On April 11, McKinley asked Congress for authority to use force against Spain. After a week of debate, Congress agreed, and on April 20 the United States declared war.
THE WAR IN THE PHILIPPINES
The Spanish thought the Americans would invade Cuba. But the first battle of the war took place in a Spanish colony on the other side of the world—the Philippine Islands. On April 30, the American fleet in the Pacific steamed to the Philippines. The next morning, Commodore George Dewey gave the command to open fire on the Spanish fleet at Manila, the Philippine capital. Within hours, Dewey's men had destroyed every Spanish ship there. Dewey's victory allowed U.S. troops to land in the Philippines.
Dewey had the support of the Filipinos who, like the Cubans, also wanted freedom from Spain. Over the next two months, 11,000 Americans joined forces with Filipino rebels led by Emilio Aguinaldo. In August, Spanish troops in Manila surrendered to the United States.
THE WAR IN THE CARIBBEAN
In the Caribbean, hostilities began with a naval blockade of Cuba. Admiral William T. Sampson effectively sealed up the Spanish fleet in the harbor of Santiago de Cuba.
Dewey's victory at Manila had demonstrated the superiority of United States naval forces. In contrast, the army maintained only a small professional force, supplemented by a larger inexperienced and ill-prepared volunteer force. About
America Claims an Empire 349
125,000 Americans had volunteered to fight. The new soldiers were sent to training camps that lacked adequate supplies and effective leaders. Moreover there were not enough modern guns to go around, and the troops were out itte wit heavy woolen uniforms unsuitable for Cuba's tropical climate. In addition, t e officers—most of whom were Civil War veterans—had a tendency to spend their time recalling their war experiences rather than training the volunteers.
ROUGH RIDERS
Despite these handicaps, American forces landed in Cuba in June 1898 and began to converge on the port city of Santiago. The army of 17,000 included four African-American regiments of the regular army and the Rough Riders, a volunteer cavalry under the command of Leonard Wood and Theodore Roosevelt. Roosevelt, a New Yorker, had given up his job as Assistant Secretary of the Navy to lead the group of volunteers. He would later become president of the United States. The most famous land battle in Cuba took place near Santiago on July 1. The first part of the battle, on nearby Kettle Hill, featured a dramatic uphill charge by the Rough Riders and two African-American regiments, the Ninth and Tenth
____	Cavalries. Their victory cleared
the way for an infantry attack on the strategically important San Juan Hill. Although Roosevelt and his units played only a minor role in the second victory, U.S. newspapers declared him the hero of San Juan Hill.
Two days later, the Spanish fleet tried to escape the American blockade of the harbor at Santiago. The naval battle that followed, along the Cuban coast, ended in the destruction of the Spanish fleet. On the heels of this victory, American troops invaded Puerto Rico on July 25.
TREATY OF PARIS
The United States and Spain signed an armistice, or cease-fire agreement, on August 12. It ended what Secretary of State John Hay called "a splendid little war." The actual fighting in the war had lasted only 15 weeks. On December 10, 1898, the United States and Spain met in Paris to agree on a treaty. The
terms of the peace treaty proved costly for Spain. The Spanish had to give up all claims to Cuba and cede Puerto Rico in the West Indies and the Pacific island of Guam to the United States. Spain also turned control of the Philippines over to the United States in exchange for a $20 million payment.
On the whole, the American victory in the Spanish-American War was sweet. Still, the United States paid a heavy toll for the war. The monetary costs amounted to roughly $250 million. In addition, some 2,000 soldiers died, not from battle wounds but from yellow fever.
Despite the lives lost and the dollars spent, the Spanish-American War had a
not8eedPthya°t alth ^bVb^	HeMy Cabot Lodge °f Massachusetts
noted that although the war was very brief, “its results were many, startling and
of world-wide meaning."	7 <uuuig,<uiu
Background
The Rough Riders trained as cavalry but fought on foot because their horses didn’t reach Cuba in time.
These African-American troops prepare for battle during the Spanish-American War.
Summarizing
to What were the
terms of the Treaty
of Paris?
The United States now moved into the ranks of imperialist nations. Its new overseas territories gave it more bases for trade and for resupplying its navy. Within a year, it would capitalize on its new economic and military strength to acquire the Pacific island of Samoa. Expansionists expressed delight over the country's growing power, but the quest for empire troubled many Americans.
DEBATE OVER THE TREATY
The Treaty of Paris touched off a great debate in the United States. Some people who favored annexation believed that the United States had a duty to spread its values overseas. President McKinley told a group of Methodist ministers that he had prayed for guidance on Philippine annexation and had concluded "that there was nothing left for us to do but to take them all [the Philippine Islands], and to educate the Filipinos, and uplift and Christianize them." In fact, most Filipinos had been Christian for centuries. Strengthening the position of the United States as a world power was a key issue in the debate. Many Americans wanted the Philippines for their economic and strategic value. Located on the route to China, the Philippines would be useful as a place to refuel and resupply ships. As a result, many expansionists wanted to annex the Philippines before they fell into the hands of Germany, Japan, or another nation.
Other prominent Americans presented a variety of arguments—political, moral, and economic—against annexation. Some felt that the treaty violated the Declaration of Independence by denying self-government to the newly acquired territories. The African-American educator Booker T. Washington argued that the United States should settle race-related issues at home before taking on social problems elsewhere. The labor leader Samuel Gompers feared that Filipino immigrants would compete for American jobs.
On February 6, 1899, the annexation question was settled with the Senate's approval of the Treaty of Paris. The United States now had an empire that included Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines. The next question Americans faced was how and when the United States would add to its dominion.
Jose Marti Valeriano Weyler
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
yellow Journalism U.S.S. Maine
San Juan Hill Treaty of Paris
George Dewey Rough Riders
MAIN IDEA 2. USING YOUR NOTES
CRITICAL THINKING 3. MAKING INFERENCES
ANALYZING EFFECTS
In 1898, a debate raged in the United States over whether the U.S. had the right to annex the
What do you think were the unstated
editorial policies of yellow journalism? Support your answer with evidence from the text.
Think About:
Many anti-imperialists worried that imperialism might threaten the
American democratic system. How might this happen?
EXPLAINING IMPACT
Philippines. Use a graphic organizer like the one below to summarize the
pros and cons of this debate.
• Hearst’s remark to Remington
• the Journal headline about the explosion of the battleship Maine
Which side do you support? Why?
• James Creelman’s account of Spanish atrocities against Cubans (page 346)
Why did significant events move the United States into the position of a world power? How did the Spanish-American War factor into this shift?
America Claims an Empire 351
Acquiring New Lands
MAIN IDEA
j WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
In the early 1900s, the United States engaged in conflicts in Puerto Rico, Cuba, and the Philippines.
Today, the United States maintains a strong military and political presence in strategic worldwide locations.
•	Foraker Act	• John Hay
•	Platt Amendment ’Open Door notes
•	protectorate	• Boxer Rebellion
•	Emilio Agulnaldo

MBSSSSSBK
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on key events relating to U.S. relations with Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines.
When Puerto Rico became part of the United States after the Spanish-American War, many Puerto Ricans feared that the United States would not give them the measure of self-rule that they had gained under the Spanish. Puerto Rican statesman and publisher Luis Munoz Rivera was one of the most vocal advocates of Puerto Rican self-rule. Between 1900 and 1916, he lived primarily in the United States and continually worked for the independence of his homeland. Finally, in 1916, the U.S. Congress, facing possible war in Europe and wishing to settle the issue of Puerto Rico, invited Mufioz Rivera to speak. On May 5, 1916, Munoz Rivera stood before the U.S. House of Representatives to discuss the future of Puerto Rico.
A
Personal Voice luis munoz rivera a “You, citizens of a free fatherland, with its own laws, Its own Institutions, and its LU> own flag, can appreciate the unhappiness of the small and solitary people that must await its laws from your authority. .. . when you acquire the certainty that you can found in Puerto Rico a republic like that founded in Cuba and Panama . . . give us our independence and you will stand before humanity as ... a great creator of new nationalities and a great liberator of oppressed peoples. ”
—quoted in The Puerto Ricans
Munoz Rivera returned to Puerto Rico where he died in November 1916. Three months later, the United States made Puerto Ricans U.S. citizens.
Ruling Puerto Rico
Not all Puerto Ricans wanted independence, as Munoz Rivera did. Some wanted
statehood, while still others hoped for some measure of local self-government as
an American territory. As a result, the United States gave Puerto Ricans no prom-
ises regarding independence after the Spanish-American War.
PUERTO RICO
Ever since their transfer under the Treaty of Paris from Spain to the United States, Puerto Ricans have debated their status, as shown above. In 1967, 1993, and 1998, Puerto Ricans rejected both statehood and independence in favor of commonwealth, a status given the island in 1952.
As members of a commonwealth, Puerto Ricans are U.S. citizens. They can move freely between the island and the mainland and are subjected to the military draft but cannot vote in U.S. presidential elections. A majority of Puerto Ricans have rejected statehood because they fear it would mean giving up their Latino culture.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Issues
Why was Puerto Rico important to the United States?
Background
Yellow fever damages many body parts, especially the liver. Dr. Carlos Finlay discovered that the disease is carried by mosquitoes.
Clearing out the mosquitos’ breeding places helped eliminate the disease in Cuba.
MILITARY RULE
During the Spanish-American War, United States forces, under General Nelson A. Miles, occupied the island. As his soldiers took control, General Miles issued a statement assuring Puerto Ricans that the Americans were there to "bring you protection, not only to yourselves but to your property, to promote your prosperity, and to bestow upon you the immunities and blessings of the liberal institutions of our government." For the time being, Puerto Rico would be controlled by the military until Congress decided otherwise.
RETURN TO CIVIL GOVERNMENT
Although many Puerto Ricans had dreams of independence or statehood, the United States had different plans for the island's future. Puerto Rico was strategically important to the United States, both for maintaining a U.S. presence in the Caribbean and for protecting a future canal that American leaders wanted to build across the Isthmus of Panama. In 1900, Congress passed the Foraker Act, which ended military rule and set up a civil government. The act gave the president of the United States the power to appoint Puerto Rico's governor and members of the upper house of its legislature. Puerto Ricans could elect only the members of the legislature's lower house.
In 1901, in the Insular Cases, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the Constitution did not automatically apply to people in acquired territories. Congress, however, retained the right to extend U.S. citizenship, and it granted that right to Puerto Ricans in 1917. It also gave them the right to elect both houses of their legislature.
Cuba and the United States
When the United States declared war against Spain in 1898, it recognized Cuba's independence from Spain. It also passed the Teller Amendment, which stated that the United States had no intention of taking over any part of Cuba. The Treaty of Paris, which ended the war, further guaranteed Cuba the independence that its nationalist leaders had been demanding for years.
AMERICAN SOLDIERS
Though officially independent, Cuba was occupied by American troops when the war ended. Jose Martf, the Cuban patriot who had led the movement for independence from Spain, had feared that the United States would merely replace Spain and dominate Cuban politics. In some ways, Marti's prediction came true. Under American occupation, the same officials who had served Spain remained in office. Cubans who protested this policy were imprisoned or exiled. On the other hand, the American military government provided food and clothing for thousands of families, helped farmers put land back into cultivation, and organized elementary schools. Through improvement of sanitation and medical research, the military government helped eliminate yellow fever, a disease that had killed hundreds of Cubans each year.
America Claims an Empire 353
PLATT AMENDMENT
In 1900 the newly formed Cuban government wrote a constitution for an independent Cuba. The constitution, however, did not specify the relationship between Cuba and the United States. Consequently, in 1901, the United States insisted that Cuba add to its constitution several provisions, known as the Platt Amendment, stating that •	Cuba could not make treaties that might limit its independence or permit a foreign power to control any part of its territory
•	the United States reserved the right to intervene in Cuba
•	Cuba was not to go into debt that its government could not repay
•	the United States could buy or lease land on the island for naval stations and refueling stations
The United States made it clear that its army would not withdraw until Cuba adopted the Platt Amendment. In response, a torchlight procession marched on the residence of Governor-General Leonard Wood in protest. Some protestors even called for a return to arms to defend their national honor against this American insult. The U.S. government stood firm, though, and Cubans reluctantly ratified the new constitution. In 1903, the Platt Amendment became part of a treaty between the two nations, and it remained in effect for 31 years. Under the terms of the treaty, Cuba became a U.S. protectorate, a country whose affairs are partially controlled by a stronger power.
PROTECTING AMERICAN BUSINESS INTERESTS
The most important reason for the United States to maintain a strong political presence in Cuba was to protect American businesses that had invested in the island's sugar, tobacco, and mining industries, as well as in its railroads and public utilities. Analyzing
Political Cartoons)-
Vocabulary
ratify: to make valid by approving
I HARDLY KNOW WHICH TO TAKE FIRST!”
Throughout the early 1900s, the United States intervened in the affairs of its Latin American neighbors several times. American troops withdrew from Cuba in 1902 but later returned three times to quell popular uprisings against conservative leaders. The U.S. also intervened in Nicaragua and Haiti. Not surprisingly, few Latin Americans welcomed United States intervention. As the cartoon shows, the United States had a different point of view.
SKILLBUILDER
Analyzing Political Cartoons
1.	What is on the bill of fare, or menu, in this restaurant?
2.	Which president does the waiter portray?
3.	What seems to be Uncle Sam’s attitude toward the offerings on the menu?
54 Chapter 10
Although many businesspeople were convinced that annexing and imposing colonial rule on new territories was necessary to protect American business interests, some were concerned about colonial entanglements. The industrialist Andrew Carnegie argued against the taking of nations as colonies.
A
Personal Voice Andrew carnegie The exports of the United States this year [1898] are greater than those of any other nation in the world. Even Britain’s exports are less, yet Britain ‘possesses’ ... a hundred ‘colonies’ . . . scattered all over the world. The fact that the United States has none does not prevent her products and manufactures from Invading ... all parts of the world in competition with those of Britain. ’’
—quoted in Distant Possessions
Despite such concerns, the U.S. state department continued to push for control of its Latin American neighbors. In the years to come, the United States would intervene time and again in the affairs of other nations in the Western Hemisphere.
U.S. military action in the Philippines resulted in suffering for Filipino civilians. About 200,000 people died as a result of malnutrition, disease, and such guerrilla tactics as the burning of villages.
Filipinos Rebel
In the Philippines, Filipinos reacted with outrage to the Treaty of Paris, which called for American annexation of the Philippines. The rebel leader Emilio Aguinaldo (e-meUyo a'ge-nal'dlo) believed that the United States had promised independence.
When he and his followers learned the terms of the treaty, they vowed to fight for freedom.
PHILIPPINE-AMERICAN WAR
In February 1899, the Filipinos, led by Aguinaldo, rose in revolt. The United States assumed almost the same role that Spain had played, imposing its authority on a colony that was fighting for freedom. When Aguinaldo turned to guerrilla tactics, the United States forced Filipinos to live in designated zones, where poor sanitation, starvation, and disease killed thousands. This was the very same practice that Americans had condemned Spain for using in Cuba. During the occupation, white American soldiers
looked on the Filipinos as inferiors. However, many of the 70,000 U.S. troops sent to the Philippines were African Americans. When African-American newspapers questioned why blacks were helping to spread racial prejudice to the Philippines, some African-American soldiers deserted to the Filipino side and developed bonds of friendship with the Filipinos.
It took the Americans nearly three years to put down the rebellion. About 20,000 Filipino rebels died fighting for independence. The war claimed 4,000 American lives and cost $400 million—20 times the price the United States had paid to purchase the islands.
MAIN IDEA
Contrasting
4^ What were the aims of the Filipinos? of the Americans?
AFTERMATH OF THE WAR
After suppressing the rebellion, the United States set up a government similar to the one it had established for Puerto Rico. The U.S. president would appoint a governor, who would then appoint the upper house of the legislature. Filipinos would elect the lower house. Under American rule, the Philippines moved gradually toward independence and finally became an independent republic on July 4, 1946. America Claims an Empire 355
6°
U.S.
Imperialism, 1867-1906 Bering Sea, 1893 International tribunal denies U.S. claims to exclusive rights to waters of Bering Sea.
^Waki Island 1899
PACIFIC OCEAN
150°W
\ Alaska
120°W
Alaskan Boundary Crisis, 1902-1903
After gold is discovered in Klondike, Canadians want to redraw boundary to Alaskan Panhandle. A tribunal settles in , favor of U.S.	_________
Pearl Harbor, 1887 Hawaii gives U.S. exclusive rights to build a naval base. ^Midway Island
Tn—
^IfCRlCA
> Hawaiian Islands 1838
- Equator -
TyiVESSH
' Big Stick Diplomacy, 1904
Roosevelt sends warships to Morocco when local authorities detain a Greek citizen with dis-& puted U.S. citizenship.
Panama Canal Zone 1903
Samoa, 1889-1899 Hurricane destroys U.S., British, and German ships, preventing armed clash over control of Samoa. Ten years later, the U.S. splits islands with Germany.
Congo Conference, 1885
U.S. persuades European powers to agree to freedom of trade and abolition of slave trade in central Africa.
STATES
	t MO	r6cco\J
		
J	jerto Rico 198	Bi
	s	ATLANTIC	
OCEAN


GEOGRAPHY SKILLBUILDER
1.	Location On what islands does Pearl Harbor lie?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction What events show the United States acting as a mediator in international disputes? What does this role indicate about the status of the U.S. in the world?
Foreign Influence in China
U.S. imperialists saw the Philippines as a gateway to the rest of Asia, particularly to China. China was seen as a vast potential market for American products. It also presented American investors with new opportunities for large-scale railroad construction.
Weakened by war and foreign intervention, China had become known as the "sick man of Asia." France, Germany, Britain, Japan, and Russia had established prosperous settlements along the coast of China. They also had carved out spheres of influence, areas where each nation claimed special rights and economic privileges.
JOHN HAY’S OPEN DOOR NOTES
The United States began to fear that China would be carved into colonies and American traders would be shut out. To protect American interests, U.S. Secretary of State John Hay issued, in 1899, a series of policy statements called the Open Door notes. The notes were letters addressed to the leaders of imperialist nations proposing that the nations share their trading rights with the United States, thus creating an open door. This meant that no single nation would have a monopoly on trade with any part of China. The other imperialist powers reluctantly accepted this policy. > MAIN IDEA
Analyzing Causes
Ci Why did Secretary of State John Hay issue the policy statements known
~	_ nnnr

Vocabulary martial arts:
combat or self-defense arts that originated in East Asia, such as judo or karate
During the Boxer Rebellion, shown here in this Chinese print, Chinese patriots demanded that all foreigners be expelled from the country. The Boxers surrounded the European section of Beijing and kept it under siege for several months.
THE BOXER REBELLION IN CHINA
Although China kept its freedom, Europeans dominated most of China's large cities. Resentment simmered beneath the surface as some Chinese formed secret societies pledged to rid the country of "foreign devils." The most famous of these secret groups were the Boxers, so named by Westerners because members practiced martial arts. The Boxers killed hundreds of missionaries and other foreigners, as well as Chinese converts to Christianity. In August 1900, troops from Britain, France, Germany, and Japan joined about 2,500 American soldiers and marched on the Chinese capital. Within two months, the international forces put down the Boxer Rebellion. Thousands of Chinese people died during the fighting.
PROTECTING AMERICAN RIGHTS
After the Boxer Rebellion, the United States feared that European nations would use their victory to take even greater control of China. To prevent this, John Hay issued a second series of Open Door notes, announcing that the United States would "safeguard for the world the principle of equal and impartial trade with all parts of the Chinese Empire." This policy paved the way for greater American influence in Asia. The Open Door policy reflected three deeply held American beliefs about the United States industrial capitalist economy. First, Americans believed that the growth of the U.S. economy depended on exports. Second, they felt the United States had a right to intervene abroad to keep foreign markets open. Third, they feared that the closing of an area to American products, citizens, or ideas threatened U.S. survival. These beliefs became the bedrock of American foreign policy.
HISTORY
VIDEO
China:
Boxer Uprising
VJORLD
STAqj? THE BOXER PROTOCOL
On September 7,1901, China and 11 other nations signed the Boxer Protocol—a final settlement of the Boxer Rebellion.
The Qing government agreed to execute some Chinese officials, to punish others, and to pay about $332 million in damages. The United States was awarded a settlement of $24.5 million.
It used about $4 million to pay American citizens for actual losses incurred during the rebellion. In 1908, the U.S. government returned the rest of the money to China to be used for the purpose of educating Chinese students in their own country and in the United States.
America Claims an Empire 357
The Impact of U.S. Territorial Gains __
In 1900, Republican William McKinley, a reluctant but confirmed imperialist, was elected to a second term against Democrat William Jennings Bryan, who staunchly opposed imperialism. McKinley's reelection confirmed that a majority of Americans favored his policies. Under McKinley, the United States had gained an empire that boosted its economy and marked its debut on the world stage.
Yet even before McKinley was reelected, an Anti-Imperialist League had sprung into being. The league included some of the most prominent people in America, such as former president Grover Cleveland, industrial leader Andrew Carnegie, the social worker Jane Addams, and many leading writers. Anti-imperialists had different and sometimes conflicting reasons for their opposition, but all agreed that it was wrong for the United States to rule other people without their consent. The novelist Mark Twain questioned the motives for imperialism in a satirical piece written in 1901.
A
Personal Voice mark twain “Shall we go on conferring our Civilization upon the peoples that sit in darkness, or shall we give those poor things a rest? . . . Extending the Blessings of Civilization to our Brother who Sits in Darkness has been a good trade and has paid well, on the whole; and there is money in it yet.. . but not enough, in my judgment, to make any considerable risk advisable. ”
—quoted in To the Person Sitting in Darkness
As a novelist, Twain had great influence on American culture but little influence on foreign policy. In the early 20th century, the United States under President Theodore Roosevelt and President Woodrow Wilson would continue to exert its power around the globe
Mark Twain
ASSESSMENT
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name, write a sentence explaining its significance.
•	Foraker Act
•	Platt Amendment
MAIN IDEA
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a time line of key events relating to U.S. relations with Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines.
Use the dates already plotted on the time line below as a guide.
Which event do you think was most significant? Why?
• protectorate •Emilio Aguinaldo
•John Hay •Open Door notes
CRITICAL THINKING
3.	EVALUATING
How did American rule of Puerto Rico harm Puerto Ricans? How did it help Puerto Ricans? Do you think the benefits outweighed the harmful effects? Why or why not?
4.	COMPARING
How was U.S. policy toward China different from U.S. policy toward the Philippines? To what can you attribute the difference?
• Boxer Rebellion
ANALYZING ISSUES
Explain how U.S. foreign policy at the turn of the century affected economic issues. Think About:
•	why the United States wanted access to China's markets
•	the purpose of the Open Door notes
•	the U.S. response to the Boxer Rebellion
358 Chapter 10
TEKS 4A,12A,15C
America as a World Power
MAIN IDEA
WHY IT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
The Russo-Japanese War, the Panama Canal, and the Mexican Revolution added to America’s military and economic power.
American involvement in conflicts around 1900 led to involvement in World War I and later to a peacekeeper role in today’s world.
•	Panama Canal
•	Roosevelt Corollary
•dollar diplomacy
•	Francisco “Pancho” Villa
•	Emiliano Zapata •John J. Pershing
r One American's Story 1
hmhsocialstudies.coml
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on how Teddy Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson used American power around the world.
Joseph Bucklin Bishop, a policy adviser to the canal's chief engineer, played an important role in the building of the Panama Canal. As editor of the Canal Record, a weekly newspaper that provided Americans with updates on the project, Bishop described a frustrating problem that the workers encountered.
A
Personal Voice Joseph bucklin bishop “ The Canal Zone was a land of the fantastic and the unexpected. No one could say when the sun went down what the condition of the Cut would be when [the sun] rose. For the work of months or even years might be blotted out by an avalanche of earth or the toppling over of a mountain of rock. It was a task to try men’s souls; but it was also one to kindle in them a joy of combat. . . and a faith in ultimate victory which no disaster could shake. ” Workers digging the Panama Canal faced hazardous landslides and death from disease.
—quoted in The Impossible Dream: The Building of the Panama Canal
The building of the Panama Canal reflected America's new role as a world power. As a technological accomplishment, the canal represented a confident nation's refusal to let any physical obstacle stand in its way.
Teddy Roosevelt and the World
The assassination of William McKinley in 1901 thrust Vice-President Theodore Roosevelt into the role of a world leader. Roosevelt was unwilling to allow the imperial powers of Europe to control the world's political and economic destiny. In 1905, building on the Open Door notes to increase American influence in East Asia, Roosevelt mediated a settlement in a war between Russia and Japan.
America Claims an Empire 359
Ky.y PLAYER
THEODORE ROOSEVELT 1858-1919
Rimless glasses, a bushy mustache, and prominent teeth made Roosevelt easy for cartoonists to caricature. His great enthusiasm for physical activity—boxing, tennis, swimming, horseback riding, and hunting—provided cartoonists with additional material.
Some cartoons portrayed Roosevelt with the toy teddy bear that he inspired.
Roosevelt had six children, who became notorious for their rowdy antics. Their father once sent a message through the War Department, ordering them to call off their “attack” on the White House. Roosevelt thrived on the challenges of the presidency. He wrote, “I do not believe that anyone else has ever enjoyed the White House as much as I have.”
ROOSEVELT THE PEACEMAKER
In 1904, Russia and Japan, Russia's neighbor in East Asia, were both imperialist powers, and they were competing for contro of Korea. The Japanese took the first action in what would become the Russo-Japanese War with a sudden attack on the Russian Pacific fleet. To everyone s surprise, Japan destroyed it. Japan then proceeded to destroy a second fleet sent as reinforcement. Japan also won a series of land battles, securing Korea and Manchuria. As a result of these battles, Japan began to run out of men and money, a fact that it did not want to reveal to Russia. Instead, Japanese officials approached President Roosevelt in secret and asked him to mediate peace negotiations. Roosevelt agreed, and in 1905, Russian and Japanese delegates convened in Portsmouth, New Hampshire.
The first meeting took place on the presidential yacht. Roosevelt had a charming way of greeting people with a grasp of the hand, a broad grin, and a hearty "Dee-lighted. Soon the opposing delegates began to relax and cordially shook hands.
The Japanese wanted Sakhalin Island, off the coast of Siberia, and a large sum of money from Russia. Russia refused. Roosevelt persuaded Japan to accept half the island and forgo the cash payment. In exchange, Russia agreed to let Japan take over Russian interests in Manchuria and Korea. The successful efforts in negotiating the Treaty of Portsmouth won Roosevelt the 1906 Nobel Peace Prize.
As U.S. and Japanese interests expanded in East Asia, the two nations continued diplomatic talks. In later agreements, they pledged to respect each other's possessions and interests in East Asia and the Pacific. &
PANAMA CANAL
By the time Roosevelt became president, many Americans, including Roosevelt, felt that the United States needed a canal cutting across Central America. Such a canal would greatly reduce travel time for commercial and military ships by providing a shortcut between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. As early as 1850, the United States and Britain had agreed to share the rights to such a canal. In the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty of 1901, however, Britain gave the United States exclusive rights to build and control a canal through Central America. Engineers identified two possible routes for the proposed canal. One, through Nicaragua, posed fewer obstacles because much of it crossed a large lake. The other route crossed through Panama (then a province of Colombia) and was shorter and filled with mountains and swamps. Site selection was influenced as much by human geographic factors as physical. In the late 1800s, a French company had tried to build a canal in Panama. After ten years, the company gave up. It sent an agent, Philippe Bunau-Varilla, to Washington to convince the United States to buy its claim. In 1903, the president and Congress decided to use the Panama route and agreed to buy the French company's route for $40 million.	7
Before beginning work on the Panama Canal, the United States had to get
permission from Colombia, which then ruled Panama. When these negotiations
broke down, Bunau-Varilla helped organize a Panamanian rebellion against
Colombra. On November 3, 1903, nearly a dozen U.S. warships were present as
Panama declared ,ts independence. Fifteen days later, Panama and the United
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
What were the results of Roosevelt’s negotiations with the Japanese and Russians?
360 Chapter 10
TeHchnatagig
When the water has risen, the upper gates are opened, and the ship passes through the lock to the next level.
This photo shows a ship that has entered the canal from the Pacific Ocean side and is heading north through the Miraflores Locks. Ships and boats can also enter the canal through the Atlantic Ocean side and head south through the Gatun Locks.
THE PANAMA CANAL
Locks are used to raise and lower ships a total of 170 feet during the 51-mile trip through the Panama Canal. For example, ships from the Atlantic Ocean are lifted by the Gatun Locks to the level of Gatun Lake. The ships cross the human-made lake, then move through another waterway, the Gaillard Cut. The Pedro Miguel and Miraflores locks then lower the ships to the level of the Pacific Ocean.
Gold Hill
MAIN IDEA
Identifying
Problems
Si What Problems did canal workers encounter in constructing the canal?
States signed a treaty in which the United States agreed to pay Panama $10 million plus an annual rent of $250,000 for an area of land across Panama, called the Canal Zone. The payments were to begin in 1913.
CONSTRUCTING THE CANAL
Due to the challenging physical geography its builders faced, construction of the Panama Canal ranks as one of the world's greatest engineering feats. Builders fought diseases, such as yellow fever and malaria, and soft volcanic soil that proved difficult to remove. Work clearing brush and draining swamps began in 1904. By 1913, the height of construction, more than 43,400 workers were employed. Some had come from Italy and Spain; three-quarters were blacks from the British West Indies. More than 5,600 workers died from accidents or disease. The total cost to the United States was about $380 million. 5/ On August 15 1914/ the canal opened for business, and more than 1,000 merchant ships passed through during its first year. U.S.-Latin American relations, however, had been damaged by American support of the rebellion in Panama. The resulting ill will lasted for decades, despite Congress's paying Colombia $25 million in 1921 to compensate the country for its lost territory.
HISTORY
VIDEO
Panama Canal: Locks
io
America Claims an Empire 361
Analyzing
Political Cartoons J
WORLD’S CONSTABLE”
This cartoon, drawn by Louis Dalrymple in 1905, shows Teddy Roosevelt implementing his new world diplomacy. The cartoon implies that Roosevelt has the right to execute police power to keep the countries of Europe (shown on the right) out of the affairs of Latin American countries (shown on the left).
SKILLBUILDER
Analyzing Political Cartoons
1.	How does the cartoonist portray President Roosevelt?
2.	Why is “The World’s Constable” a good title for this cartoon?
“Speak softly and carry a big stick; you will go far. ”
THEODORE ROOSEVELT
THE ROOSEVELT COROLLARY
Financial factors drew the United States further into Latin American affairs. In the late 19th century, many Latin American nations had borrowed huge sums from European banks to build railroads and develop industries. Roosevelt feared that if these nations defaulted on their loans, Europeans might intervene. He was determined to make the United States the predominant power in the Caribbean and Central America.
Roosevelt reminded European powers of the Monroe Doctrine, which had been issued in 1823 by President James Monroe. The Monroe Doctrine demanded that European countries stay out of the affairs of Latin American nations. Roosevelt based his Latin America policy on a West African proverb that said, "Speak softly and carry a big stick." In his December 1904 message to Congress, Roosevelt added the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine. He warned that disorder in Latin Vocabulary America might "force the United States ... to the exer- actional cise of an international police power.” In effect, the statement that corollary said that the United States would now use follows logically force to protect its economic interests in Latin America. from the f,rst
DOLLAR DIPLOMACY
During the next decade, the United States exercised its police power on several occasions. For example, when a 1911 rebellion in Nicaragua left the nation near bankruptcy, President William H. Taft, Roosevelt's successor, arranged for American bankers to loan Nicaragua enough money to pay its debts.
In return, the bankers were given the right to recover their money by collecting
Nicaragua's customs duties. The U.S. bankers also gained control of Nicaragua's
state-owned railroad system and its national bank. When Nicaraguan citizens
heard about this deal, they revolted against President Adolfo Diaz. To prop up
162 Chapter 10
Diaz s government, some 2,000 marines were sent to Nicaragua. The revolt was put down, but some marine detachments remained in the country until 1933.
The Taft administration followed the policy of using the U.S. government to guarantee loans made to foreign countries by American businesspeople. This policy was called dollar diplomacy by its critics and was often used to justify keeping European powers out of the Caribbean.
Woodrow Wilson’s Missionary Diplomacy
The Monroe Doctrine, issued by President James Monroe in 1823, had warned other nations against expanding their influence in Latin America. The Roosevelt Corollary asserted, in 1904, that the United States had a right to exercise international police power in the Western Hemisphere. In 1913, President Woodrow Wilson gave the Monroe Doctrine a moral tone.
According to Wilson's "missionary diplomacy," the United States had a moral responsibility to deny recognition to any Latin American government it viewed as oppressive, undemocratic, or hostile to U.S. interests. Prior to this policy, the United States recognized any government that controlled a nation, regardless of that nation's policies or how it had come to power. Wilson's policy pressured nations in the Western Hemisphere to establish democratic governments. Almost immediately, the Mexican Revolution put Wilson's policy to the test.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Motives
$ Why did President Wilson refuse to
recognize Huerta’s government?
THE MEXICAN REVOLUTION
Mexico had been ruled for more than three decades by a military dictator, Porfirio Diaz. A friend of the United States, Diaz had long encouraged foreign investments in his country. As a result, foreigners, mostly Americans, owned a large share of Mexican oil wells, mines, railroads, and ranches. While foreign investors and some Mexican landowners and politicians had grown rich, the common people of the country were desperately poor. In 1911, Mexican peasants and workers led by Francisco Madero overthrew Diaz. Madero promised democratic reforms, but he proved unable to satisfy the conflicting demands of landowners, peasants, factory workers, and the urban middle class. After two years, General Victoriano Huerta took over the government. Within days Madero was murdered. Wilson refused to recognize the government that Huerta formed. He called it "a government of butchers.''
! J
K K
HISTORY
VIDEO
The Peasant Revolution
/F hmhsocialstudies.coml
:!
INTERVENTION IN MEXICO
Wilson adopted a plan of "watchful waiting," looking for an opportunity to act against Huerta. The opportunity came in April 1914, when one of Huerta's officers arrested a small group of American sailors in Tampico, on Mexico's eastern shore. The Mexicans quickly released them and apologized, but Wilson used the incident as an excuse to intervene in Mexico and ordered U.S. Marines to occupy Veracruz, an important Mexican port. Eighteen Americans and at least 200 Mexicans died during the invasion. The incident brought the United States and Mexico close to war. Argentina, Brazil, and Chile stepped in to mediate the conflict. They proposed that Huerta step down and that U S. troops withdraw without paying Mexico for damages. Mexico rejected the plan, and Wilson refused to recognize a government that had come to power as a result of violence. The Huerta regime soon collapsed, however, and Venustiano Carranza, a nationalist leader, became president in 1915. Wilson withdrew the troops and formally recognized the Carranza government.
Vt.RSPECTfV/.
INTERVENTION IN MEXICO
Most U.S. citizens supported American intervention in Mexico. Edith O’Shaughnessy, wife of an American diplomat in Mexico City, had another perspective. After touring Veracruz, O’Shaughnessy wrote to her mother:
“I think we have done a great wrong to these people; instead of cutting out the sores with a clean, strong knife of war. . . and occupation,... we have only put our fingers in each festering wound and inflamed it further.”
America Claims an Empire 363
History Through

I
I
I
i
ZAPATISTAS (1931)
Jose Orozco, one of Mexico’s foremost artists, painted these Zapatistas (followers of Zapata), to honor the peasant men and women who fought in the Mexican revolution. Orozco did many paintings in support of the revolution. What aspects of the image does the artist use to convey strength and unity?
REBELLION IN MEXICO
Carranza was in charge, but like others before him, he did not have the support of all Mexicans. Rebels under the leadership of Francisco "Pancho" Villa (ve's) andEmiliano Zapata (e-mel-va'no za-pa'ta) opposed Carranza's provisional government. Zapata—son of a mestizo paasant— was dedicated to land reform. "It is better to die on your feet than live on your knees,” Zapata told the peasants who joined him. Villa, a fierce nationalist, had frequently courted the support and aid of the United States. A
Personal Voice pancho villa “ [A]s long as I have anything to do with the affairs In Mexico there will be no further friction between my country and my friends of the North ... To President Wilson, the greatest American, I stand pledged to do what I can to keep the faith he has In my people, and if there is anything he may wish I will gladly do it, for I know It will be for the good of my country. ”
—New York Times, January 11, 1915
Despite Villa's talk of friendship, when President Wilson recognized Carranza's government, Villa threatened reprisals against the United States. In January 1916, Carranza invited American engineers to operate mines in northern Mexico. Before they reached the mines, however, Villa's men took the Americans off a train and shot them. Two months later, some of Villa's followers raided Columbus, New Mexico, and killed 17 Americans. Americans held Villa responsible.
I
CHASING VILLA
With the American public demanding revenge, President Wilson ordered Brigadier General John J. Pershing and an expeditionary force of about 15,000 soldiers into Mexico to capture Villa dead or alive. For almost a year, Villa eluded Pershing's forces. Wilson then called out 150,000 National Guardsmen and stationed them along the Mexican border. In the meantime, 164 Chapter 10
Mexicans grew angrier over the U.S. invasion of their land. In June 1916, U.S. troops clashed with Carranza's army, resulting in deaths on both sides.
Carranza demanded the withdrawal of U.S. troops, but Wilson refused. War seemed imminent. However, in the end, both sides backed down. The United States, facing war in Europe, needed peace on its southern border. In February 1917, Wilson ordered Pershing to return home. Later that year,
Mexico adopted a constitution that gave the government control of the nation's oil and mineral
resources and placed strict regulations on foreign investors.
Although Carranza had called for the constitution of 1917, he failed to carry out its measures. Instead, he ruled oppressively until 1920 when a moderate named Alvaro Obregon came to power. Obregon's presidency marked the end of civil war and the beginning of reform.
U.S. intervention in Mexican affairs provided a clear model of American imperialist attitudes in the early years of the 20th century. Americans believed in the superiority of free-enterprise democracy, and the American government attempted to extend the reach of this economic and political system, even through armed intervention.
The United States pursued and achieved several foreign policy goals in the early 20th century. First, it expanded its access to foreign markets in order to ensure the continued growth of the domestic economy. Second, the United States built a modern navy to protect its interests abroad. Third, the United States exercised its international police power to ensure dominance in Latin America.
▲
Pancho Villa directs a column of his troops through northern Mexico in 1914.
1. TERMS & NAMES For each term or name below, write a sentence explaining its significance. •Panama Canal	• dollar diplomacy	•Emlliano Zapata
•Roosevelt Corollary	• Francisco “Pancho” Villa *John J. Pershing
SUMMARIZING
USING YOUR NOTES
In a two-column chart, list ways Teddy Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson used American power around the world during their presidencies.
Using American Power	
Roosevelt	Wilson
	
Choose one example and discuss its impact with your classmates.
CRITICAL THINKING
COMPARING AND CONTRASTING
What do you think were the similarities and differences between Roosevelt’s Big Stick policy and Wilson’s missionary diplomacy? Use evidence from the text to support your response. Think About:
•	the goal of each of these foreign policies
•	how the policies defined the role of U.S. intervention in international affairs
•	how the policies were applied
EVALUATING DECISIONS
In your opinion, should the United States have become involved in the affairs of Colombia, Nicaragua, and Mexico during the early 1900s? Support your answer with details. Think About:
•	the effect of the Roosevelt Corollary
•	the results of dollar diplomacy
•	the implication of Wilson’s missionary diplomacy
America Claims an Empire 365
GEOGRAPHY SPOTLIGHT
The Panama Canal: Funnel for Trade
By the late 19th century the U.S. position in global trade was firmly established. A glance at a world map during that time revealed the trade advantages of cutting through the world's great landmasses at two strategic points. The first cut, through the Isthmus of Suez in Egypt, was completed in 1869 and was a spectacular success. A second cut, this one through Panama, in Central America, would be especially advantageous to the United States. Such a cut, or canal, would substantially reduce the sailing time between the nation's Atlantic and Pacific ports.
It took the United States ten years, from 1904 to 1914, to build the Panama Canal. By 1999, more than 700,000 vessels, flying the flags of about 70 nations, had passed through its locks. On December 31, 1999, Panama assumed full control of the canal.
INTERCOASTAL TRADE
The first boat through the canal heralded the arrival of increased trade between the Atlantic and Pacific ports of the United States.
San Francisco r/	** ‘,j r ‘f 'V?
NewP Orleans
San
Francisco
1 13,000 mi. ■ 5,200 ini.



X


Panama Canal

NUMBERS TELL THE STORY
A ship sailing from New York to San Francisco by going around South America^ travels 13,000 miles; the canal shortens ' the journey to 5,200 miles.
Panama is a narrow stretch of land—-or isthmus —that connects North and South
, America. In building the canal, | engineers took advantage of natural waterways. Moving ships through the mountains
of the Continental Divide required the use of massive locks. Locks allow a section of the canal to be closed off so that the water level can be raised or lowered.
Chapter 10
OCEANGOING VESSELS
Ships, like this one, must be of a certain dimension in order to fit through the canal's locks. These container ships must be no more than 106 feet across and 965 feet in length, with a draft (the depth of the vessel below the water line when fully loaded) of no more than 39.5 feet. Each ship pays a toil based on its size, its cargo, and the number of passengers it carries.
Hi
1
NEW YORK CITY
New York City and other U.S. Atlantic ports accounted for about 60 percent of the traffic using the Panama Canal in the early decades of its existence.

St
NEW ORLEANS
Since its founding in 1718, New Orleans has served as a major port for the products of the areas along the Mississippi River. In 1914, the Panama Canal brought Pacific markets into its orbit.
America Claims an Empire 367
CHAPTER
TERMS & NAMES
For each term or name below, write a sentence explaining its significance to U.S. foreign policy between 1890 and 1920.
1.	Queen Liliuokalani
2.	imperialism
3.	Jose Martf
4.	yellow journalism
U.S.S.
Maine 6.	protectorate
7.	Open Door notes
8.	Boxer Rebellion
9.	Panama Canal 10. Roosevelt Corollary
American Imperialism
The U.S. purchased Alaska in 1867. The U.S. annexed Hawaii in 1898.
In 1898, the U.S. helped Cuba win independence from Spain.
In the Treaty of Paris, the U.S. gained Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippine Islands.
MAIN IDEAS
Use your notes and the information in the chapter to answer the following questions.
Imperialism and America (pages 342-345)
1.	What three factors spurred American imperialism?
2.	How did Queen Liliuokalani’s main goal conflict with American imperialists’ goals?
The Spanish-American War (pages 346-351)
3.	Why was American opinion about Cuban independence divided?
4.	How did the Spanish-American War affect the U.S. economy?
Acquiring New Lands (pages 352-358)
5.	Why was the U.S. interested in events in Puerto Rico?
6.	What led to the Boxer Rebellion and how did it end?
7.	What three key beliefs about America’s industrial capitalist economy were reflected in the Open Door policy?
America as a World Power (pages 359-365)
8.	What conflict triggered the war between Russia and Japan?
9.	Analyze the impact of human and physical geographic factors on the Panama Canal.
CRITICAL THINKING
USING YOUR NOTES
Create a Venn diagram like the one below to show the similarities and differences between Jose Martf of Cuba and Emilio Aguinaldo of the Philippines. Following the Spanish-American War, the U.S.
-reorganized the government of Puerto Rico -established a protectorate over Cuba -crushed a revolt in Philippines In 1899, the Open Door policy established U.S. trading rights in China.
In the early 1900s, President Roosevelt initiated plans for the Panama Canal and asserted the right of the U.S. to exercise police power in the Western Hemisphere. President Wilson pressured Mexico and other countries in the Western Hemisphere to establish democratic governments.
HYPOTHESIZING
Would Cuba have won its independence in the late 19th century if the United States had not intervened there? Support your opinion with details from the text. INTERPRETING MAPS
Look carefully at the Caribbean map® page 349 and the world map on page 356. Why do you thinK American naval bases in the Caribbean and the Pacific were beneficial to the United States? EXPLAINING TURNING POINTS
What is the significance -year 1898 as a turning point in American history? Explain oftt
18 Chapter 10

TEXAS TEST PRACTICE
Use the cartoon and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 1.
1. What is the cartoonist’s point of view concerning the relationship between the United States and Cuba?
A
The United States wishes to be friends with Cuba. B
The United States will devour Cuba. C
The United States is wasting its time fighting over such a small area.
D
The United States has no interest in Cuba. Use the map and your knowledge of U.S. history to answer question 2.
2. How did the building of the Panama Canal support United States efforts to become a world power?
F
It gave the United States a colony in Central America. G
It prevented Japan and China from attacking Hawaii. H
It opened up a new avenue for trade with China. J By providing a shortcut between the Atlantic Ocean and Pacific Ocean, it opened up new trading opportunities.
71 hmhsocialstudies.com
TEST PRACTICE
For additional test practice, go online for:
• Diagnostic tests • Tutorials
INTERACT WITH HISTORY
^WriteSmart MULTIMEDIA ACTIVITY 
Recall the issues that you recorded in myNotebook as you read the chapter. Suppose you are a journalist at the end of the Spanish-American War. You work for William Randolph Hearst’s New York Journal. Write a newspaper editorial that presents your point of view about whether or not the Senate should ratify the Treaty of Paris, thus annexing the Philippines. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your editorial.

I;-';?'1-” >
mv WriteSmart
Imagine you are a worker on the Panama Canal.
Write a diary entry giving details about the work you are doing, the hardships you face, and why you think the project is worthwhile. Use myWriteSmart in your eBook to write your diary entry.
In the late 1800s and early 1900s, a policy of expansionism led the United States to acquire new territories. How did these acquisitions affect the United States? How did this policy move the United States into the position of a world power? Do you think the United States was right to pursue such a policy? Use Internet resources to research opinions on expansionism between 1895 and 1920. Choose a document that reflects your point of view. Then use the document to help you write a speech that specifies and explains that point of view. Provide details to make your arguments clear and convincing while also addressing opposing concerns. Present your speech to the class.
71 hmhsocialstudies.com
America Claims an Empire 369
End-of-Chapter Skill Activity
Using Primary and Secondary Sources
DEFINING THE SKILL
Primary sources are accounts written or created by people who were present at historical events, either as participants or as observers. Primary sources include letters, diaries, journals, speeches, some news articles, eyewitness accounts, government data, statutes, court opinions, and autobiographies.
Secondary sources are based on primary sources and are produced by people who were not present at the original events. They are written after the event occurred. They often combine information from a number of different accounts and contain an interpretation of the event. The interpretation is the historian’s understanding of what actually happened and why. Secondary sources include history books, historical essays, some news articles, and biographies.
UNDERSTANDING THE SKILL
STRATEGY: EVALUATE THE INFORMATION IN EACH TYPE OF SOURCE
Examine a source and identify the author to determine if he or she was at the event or not. If the author was at the event, evaluate his or her credentials. How is the speaker connected to the events? What opinions, biases, assumptions, and points of view can you identify in the source? If it is a secondary source, analyze the information to see if there are details and information missing from primary sources. The following passage describes views of American expansionism in regards to the annexation of Hawaii. It is mainly a secondary source, but it quotes eyewitness accounts that are primary sources. ©Views on American Expansionism
During the late 1800s, Hawaii was swept up in American expansionism.©On one side, native f Hawaiians were shocked by the manipulation and eventual overthrow of their monarchy. On the other side, leaders in the United States wanted more control of the economic benefits and strategic location of Hawaii. By 1893, cries of annexation led to differing attitudes about the situation.
©After Queen Liliuokalani was overthrown, her niece, Princess Kaiulani, made a plea to President | Cleveland in 1893 to restore the Hawaiian monarchy. In her plea, she wrote:	I
"Seventy years ago, Christian America sent over Christian men and women to give religion and | civilization to Hawaii... Today, I a poor weak girl, with not one of my people near me, and all these j Hawaiian statesmen against me, have strength to stand up for the rights of my people. Even now I can hear the wail in my heart, and it gives me strength and courage ... the strength that the seventy	j
millions of people who are in this free land will hear my cry, and will refuse to let their flag cover	!
dishonor to mine."	j
©At the time, John L. Stevens was U.S. minister to Hawaii. In his brief "A Plea for Annexation" within an article called "The Hawaiian Situation," Stevens described the Hawaiian monarchy as extinct and argued that it was imperative that the United States annex Hawaii. He explained his reasoning:
"A paramount reason why annexation should not be long postponed is that, if it soon takes place, the crown and government lands will be cut up and sold to American and Christian Caucasian people, thus preventing the Islands from being submerged and overrun by Asiatics, putting an end to Japanese ambitions stimulated by our strong European rival."
President Cleveland tried in vain to restore the monarchy unable to secure annexation at the time but managed to keep Only five years later, Hawaii was named a U.S. territory.
in Hawaii. ©Business leaders were control of the Hawaiian government.

0 Locate sources. The catalog in your school library or local public library lists resources alphabetically by subject, title, and author. Most of these are secondary sources but may contain copies or excerpts of primary sources. Articles in a general print or online encyclopedia such as Encyclopedia Britannica or World Book can give you an overview of a topic and usually provide references to additional sources.
0 Secondary Source: Look for information collected from several sources. This information can help provide a context for the primary source.
© Primary Source: Identify the title and author and evaluate his or her credentials. What assumptions and biases does the author reveal? What qualifies the writer to report on the event? Here Princess Kaiulani is part of the Hawaiian monarchy and Stevens serves as minister to Hawaii.
0 Secondary source: Look for information collected after the event. A secondary source provides perspective that is typically missing in a primary source.
STRATEGY: MAKE A CHART
Summarize information from primary and secondary sources in a chart. Primary Source	Primary Source	Secondary Source
Author. Princess Kaiulani	Author: John L. Stevens	Author, history textbook
Qualifications: main figure	Qualifications: main figure in	Qualifications: had access
in the events described	the events described	to multiple accounts of event
Information: describes	Information: detailed	Information: describes a
how she feels about the situation, sensory observations, feeling of strength and certainty	consequences of inaction	range of points of view and information available only after event; puts events into historical perspective
APPLYING THE SKILL
Make your own chart. Read Chapter 10, Section 3, "One American's Story" to learn more about Luis Munoz Rivera and Puerto Rican self-rule. Use a chart like the one above to summarize the information from the primary and secondary sources.
1.	Locating sources	.
What is the primary source you can use in this passage? What is the secondary source?
2.	Secondary source	, „	.	.
What information do you think has been collected from several sources.
Who is the author of this quote? What are his or her credentials? What qualifies this individual to report on this event?
4' XdnformSn was collected after the event? What Coes this help you learn about the historical perspective of the quotation.
369 SK2
The First World War
Essential Question
myNotebook
How did World War I affect the United States and Europe?
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
2D, 4C, 4D, 4E,4F,4G, 12B, 13A, 15D, 19B,
A, 25A, 27B, 29B
USA
WORLD
11914; Hollywood,
: California, becomes • the center of movie : production in the U.S.
1914
: [1914] Archduke Franz : Ferdinand and his wife : are assassinated.
[£g£5j German U-boats
:sink the Lusitania, and : 1,198 people die.
: [1915] Alexander Graham : Bell makes first transcon-• tinental telephone call.
1916 Woodrow Wilson is reelected president.
|1914j Germany declares war on Russia and France. Great Britain declares war on Germany and Austria-Hungary.
•	Albert Einstein
: proposes his general : theory of relativity.
1916 The battles of Verdun and the Somme claim millions of lives.
1917 Russia withdraws from the war.
119181 The Bolsheviks establish
a Communist regime in Russia.
[1918] The First World War ends.
INFLUENZA
nttawimy wdowns with
PNEUMONIA
K PS0WW M
ia£ [MMHtlT MKIIItt ISJ THEME B &MHM6 ’« BtPttTMEMF «F KO. YOU MUST DO THE SAME
"tlSaw"» ™ w!«‘“ S'wutK
119191A worldwide influenza epidemic kills over 30 million.
The First World War 371
HELp US TO BEEP CHICAGO THE HEALTHIEST CITY M TSE WORLD
World War I Begins
MAIN IDEA
WHY ITT MATTERS NOW
Terms & Names
As World War I intensified, the United States was forced to abandon its neutrality.
The United States remains involved in European and world affairs.
•	nationalism »militarism
•	Allies
•	Central Powers •Archduke Franz
Ferdinand
•	no man’s land
•	trench warfare
•	Lusitania
•	Zimmermann note

Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the causes of World War I.
It was about 1:00 e .Q.on April 6, 1917, and the members of the U.S. House of Representatives were tired. For the past 15 hours they had been debating President Wilson's request for a declaration of war against Germany. There was a breathless hush as Jeannette Rankin of Montana, the first woman elected to Congress, stood up. Rankin declared, "I want to stand by my country but I cannot vote for war. I vote no." Later she reflected on her action.
A
Personal Voice jeannette rankin “ I believe that the first vote I cast was the most significant vote and a most significant act on the part of women, because women are going to have to stop war. I felt at the time that the first woman [in Congress] should take the first stand, that the first time the first woman had a chance to say no to war she should say it.” —quoted in Jeannette Rankin: First Lady in Congress
After much debate as to whether the United States should join the fight, Congress voted in favor of U.S. entry into World War I. With this decision, the government abandoned the neutrality that America had maintained for three years. What made the United States change its policy in 1917?
Jeannette Rankin was the only member of the House to vote against the U.S. entering both World War I and World War II.
Causes of World War I
Although many Americans wanted to stay out of the war, several factors made American neutrality difficult to maintain. As an industrial and imperial power, the United States felt many of the same pressures that had led the nations of Europe into devastating warfare. Historians generally cite four long-term causes of the First World War: nationalism, imperialism, militarism, and the formation of a system of alliances.
-HAPTER 11
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Causes
How did
nationalism and imperialism lead to conflict in Europe?
Vocabulary alliance: a formal agreement or union between nations
NATIONALISM
Throughout the 19th century, politics in the Western world were deeply influenced by the concept of nationalism—a devotion to the interests and culture of one's nation. Often, nationalism led to competitive and antagonistic rivalries among nations. In this atmosphere of competition, many feared Germany's growing power in Europe. In addition, various ethnic groups resented domination by others and longed for their nations to become independent. Many ethnic groups looked to larger nations for protection. Russia regarded itself as the protector of Europe's Slavic peoples, no matter which government they lived under. Among these Slavic peoples were the Serbs. Serbia, located in the Balkans, was an independent nation, but millions of ethnic Serbs lived under the rule of Austria-Hungary. As a result, Russia and Austria-Hungary were rivals for influence over Serbia.
IMPERIALISM
For many centuries, European nations had been building empires, slowly extending their economic and political control over various peoples of the world. Colonies supplied the European imperial powers with raw materials and provided markets for manufactured goods. As Germany industrialized, it competed with France and Britain in the contest for colonies. MILITARISM
Empires were expensive to build and to defend. The growth of nationalism and imperialism led to increased military spending. Because each nation wanted stronger armed forces than those of any potential enemy, the imperial powers followed a policy of militarism—the development of armed forces and their use as a tool of diplomacy. By 1890 the strongest nation on the European continent was Germany, which had set up an army reserve system that drafted and trained young men. Britain was not initially alarmed by Germany's military expansion. As an island nation, Britain had always relied on its navy for defense and protection of its shipping routes— and the British navy was the strongest in the world. However, in 1897, Wilhelm II, Germany's kaiser, or emperor, decided that his nation should also become a major sea power in order to compete more successfully against the British. Soon British and German shipyards competed to build the largest battleships and destroyers. France, Italy, Japan, and the United States quickly joined the naval arms race.
ALLIANCE SYSTEM
By 1907 there were two major defense alliances in Europe. The Triple Entente, later known as the Allies, consisted of France, Britain, and Russia. The Triple Alliance consisted of Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy. German Emperor Wilhelm II (center) marches with two of his generals, Hindenburg (left) and Ludendorff, during World War I.
373
Germany and Austria-Hungary, together with the Ottoman Empire—an empire o mostly Middle Eastern lands controlled by the Turks—were later known as e Central Powers. The alliances provided a measure of international security because nations were reluctant to disturb the balance of power. As it turned out, a spark set off a major conflict.
An Assassination Leads to War
That spark flared in the Balkan Peninsula, which was known as the powder keg of Europe.” In addition to the ethnic rivalries among the Balkan peoples, Europe s leading powers had interests there. Russia wanted access to the Mediterranean Sea. Germany wanted a rail link to the Ottoman Empire. Austria-Hungary, which had taken control of Bosnia in 1878, accused Serbia of subverting its rule over Bosnia. The "powder keg” was ready to explode.
In June 1914, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the Austrian throne, visited the Bosnian capital Sarajevo. As the royal entourage drove through the city, Serbian nationalist Gavrilo Princip stepped from the crowd and shot the Archduke and his wife Sophie. Princip was a member of the Black Hand, an organization promoting Serbian nationalism. The assassinations touched off a diplomatic crisis. On July 28, Austria-Hungary declared what was expected to be a short war against Serbia.
The alliance system pulled one nation after another into the conflict. On August 1, Germany, obligated by treaty to support Austria-Hungary, declared war on Russia. On August 3, Germany declared war on Russia's ally France. After Germany invaded Belgium, Britain declared war on Germany and Austria-Hungary. The Great War had begun.
CRISIS IN THE BALKANS
After World War I, Bosnia became part of a country that eventually became known as Yugoslavia. Although Yugoslavia included various religious and ethnic groups, the government was dominated by Serbs.
In 1991, Yugoslavia broke apart, and Bosnia declared independence in 1992. However, Serbs wanted Bosnia to remain part of Serbian-controlled Yugoslavia.
A bloody civil war broke out.
This war became notorious for the mass murder and deportation of Bosnian Muslims, a process known as “ethnic cleansing.” In 1995, the United States helped negotiate a cease-fire.
But peace in the Balkans did not last. In the late 1990s, Albanians in the province of Kosovo also tried to break away from Serbia. Serbia’s violent response, which included the “ethnic cleansing” of Albanians, prompted NATO to intervene. Kosovo declared its independence in 2008, despite Serbia’s opposition.
MAIN IDEA
Analyzing
Effects
Why were so many European nations pulled into the conflict?
The Fighting Starts
On August 3, 1914, Germany invaded Belgium, following a strategy known as the Schlieffen Plan. This plan called for a holding action against Russia, combined with a quick drive through Belgium to Paris; after France had fallen, the two German armies would defeat Russia. As German troops swept across Belgium, thousands of civilians fled in terror. In Brussels, the Belgian capital, an American war correspondent described the first major refugee crisis of the 20th century.
A
Personal Voice richard harding davis “[We] found the side streets blocked with their carts. Into these they had thrown mattresses, or bundles of grain, and heaped upon them were families of three generations. Old men in blue smocks, white-haired and bent, old women in caps, the daughters dressed in their one best frock and hat, and clasping in their hands all that was left to them, all that they could stuff into a pillow-case or flour-sack. . . . Heart-broken, weary, hungry, they passed in an unending caravan. ”
—from Hooray for Peace, Hurrah for War
Vocabulary refugee: a person who flees in search of protection or shelter, as in times of war or religious persecution
