 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 9

Workers, Farmers,
 and Slaves The Transformation of the American Economy, 1815–1848 The United States experienced extraordinary economic growth and change in the first half of the nineteenth century. But the economies of the Northern and Southern regions of the nation evolved along different paths. The North developed a free labor economy marked by industrialization, urbanization, and immigration. Economic growth was spurred by new technologies that made agriculture more productive and factories more efficient, as well as by improvements in transportation and communication that spurred consumer demand for the latest goods. By contrast, while the South experienced some industrialization and urban growth, most of its expansion and development focused on raising cash crops with slave labor. The huge profits generated by cotton cultivation prompted the expansion of plantations into the so-called Black Belt that stretched from Alabama west to east Texas. By mid-century Northerners and Southerners became increasingly self-conscious about the distinctiveness of the labor system in their own region and more critical of that employed in the other half of the nation. This image, The Tree of Liberty (1846), illustrates the radical differences between the vision of liberty defended by Northern proponents of free labor and that of Southern defenders of slavery. On the right side of the tree, a slaveholder reclining in a chair while fanned by a slave announces, “Surrounded by slaves & basking at ease by their labor we can have a clearer conception of the value of liberty.” On the other side of the tree, the artist has placed two industrious farmers conversing, and young mill women in front of their factory. A group of gentlemen chat, and one praises the North’s expanding population, composed of industrious immigrants from “almost every nation.” Although North and South had developed different labor systems, each was tied to the expanding market economy that Henry Clay praised in 1824. The expansion of the market economy transformed the countryside in both the North and South and fueled urban growth.

 “The greatest want of civilized society is a market for the sale and exchange of the surplus of the produce of the labor of its members . . . . If we cannot sell, we cannot buy.” HENRY CLAY, 1824





 CHAPTER 9

WORKERS, FARMERS, AND SLAVES: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY, 1815–1848

The Market Revolution
 In 1800, most rural households produced only a small surplus that was traded locally, often through a system of barter that did not require cash transactions. Most manufactured goods were produced by artisans whose workshops were usually in their homes. During the nineteenth century, the American economy became more commercially oriented. Farmers began producing cash crops for sale in distant markets, and a wider range of consumer goods, many of them made in factories, became available. The market revolution, the term used by historians to describe this transformation, encompassed interrelated developments that revolutionized agriculture, industry, technology, transportation, and communications. This market revolution would radically change both North and South in the antebellum period. Improved technology such as iron plows and steam-powered cotton gins enabled farmers to produce more crops, while cheaper, more efficient forms of transportation including the railroad allowed them to deliver these goods to markets. New communication technology, notably the telegraph and steam-powered printing press, increased the speed and volume of news and information available to Americans.

Agricultural Changes
 and Consequences Before 1815 most farmers in the South and the North labored to achieve a “competence,” which meant enough food to feed their family and a small surplus to trade locally or barter for goods, such as tools, that could not be produced at home. But in the early nineteenth century, American farmers began raising crops for an expanding commercial market to earn profits and accumulate wealth. Periodicals geared to farmers promoted this new emphasis on commercial farming, touted the latest agricultural theories, and advertised the most up-to-date labor-saving devices. Publications such as The New England Farmer warned that “the cultivator who does not keep pace with his neighbors as regards agricultural improvements and information will soon find himself the poorer consequence of the prosperity that surrounds him.” In 1819 Jethro Wood introduced one of the earliest and most important of these “improvements”— an iron plow that could double a farmer’s efficiency. Within a decade John Deere had improved Wood’s design, creating a plow that seemed to move through soil so easily that it was dubbed the “singing plow.” In the wheat-growing Midwest, farmers adapted horse-driven machines to tasks such as threshing and raking. Crank-powered churns transformed arduous women’s tasks, such as making butter

 by hand. The cotton gin (see Chapter 7) transformed Southern agriculture. In 1839, the Farmer’s Almanac proclaimed that “scarcely a tool . . . has not been altered for the better in some way or other.” The new scientific methods of agriculture helped increase the productivity of the soil. The creation of a market economy encouraged farmers to concentrate on crops that they could sell for cash in the marketplace, a trend that caused changes in farming patterns that varied by region. The South concentrated on staples for export such as cotton, while farmers in the Midwest produced grain, particularly wheat. Eastern farmers shifted their efforts to livestock production, dairy goods, fruits, and vegetables. Market-oriented farming, with its emphasis on efficiency and profit, also transformed social values and communal patterns of life. The new, more commercial approach to farming challenged traditional ideas of neighborliness and community that had been central to rural life. Increasingly farmers began to see harvest parties, husking bees (communal celebrations in which corn was husked), dances, and other ritual communal occasions in which work and leisure were combined as inefficient and wasteful. The Farmer’s Almanac in 1833 advised that “if you love fun, frolic, and waste and slovenliness, more than economy and profit, then make a husking.” In this humorous image of a corn husking (9.1), a man finds a lucky ear of red corn that entitles him to a kiss, but his advance is met by a girl holding a corn

 How did technology change agriculture in the era of the market revolution?

Watch the Video Coming of Age in 1833


THE MARKET REVOLUTION

 “smut,” a weathered ear of corn that gave her the right to refuse her suitor. Upcountry Southern farmers continued to concentrate on producing food for personal consumption and devoted a relatively small percentage of their land to commercial crops. While other regions of the country sought to improve every parcel of land for commercial agriculture, parts of the South remained committed to practices that encouraged a more self-sufficient style of agriculture, geared to personal use. Unlike in the North, for example, where extensive land was enclosed behind fences, many Southern states enacted laws against fencing in lands not used for agricultural production, so that livestock could roam freely.

A
Nation on the Move: Roads, Canals, Steamboats,
 and Trains Central to the development of commercial, market-oriented farming were improvements in transportation. These changes allowed those previously unable to deliver farm products to the

 growing cities of the Northeast and Midwest to enter the market. For those already in the market, the costs of business were dramatically lowered. These changes also spread information, including almanacs, books describing the latest agricultural techniques, and advertisements for the latest goods. The first major development in transportation was the building of a network of roads and turnpikes that by the 1820s helped knit together the major urban areas along the eastern seaboard. New York state embarked on the most ambitious program of road building, adding 4,000 miles of improved road and turnpikes by 1820. The National Road, the first federally funded road in U.S. history, stretched from Cumberland, Maryland, to Wheeling in what is now West Virginia. By the 1830s, this road would take travelers as far west as Columbus, Ohio. Pennsylvania built the Lancaster turnpike, which eventually was extended to connect Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, making transportation cheaper and more reliable. By the 1820s, 30,000 tons of freight moved by wagon across this route annually.

View the Closer Look Impact of the Transportation Revolution on Traveling Time




9.1 Corn
Husking Frolic
 Alvan Fischer’s 1828 painting captures the festive communal atmosphere of a corn husking. [Source: William Summers/Alvan Fisher, “Corn Husking Frolic”. 1828. Oil on Panel, 70.8 x 62.23 cm Museum of Fine Arts, Boston Assc. #62.27 Photograph © 2010 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.]

Why did the Farmers Almanac
 frown on huskings and frolics?



 CHAPTER 9

9.2 Trade and
Commerce Quilt
 In this quilt Hannah Stockton Stiles created images of maritime trade on Philadelphia’s thriving waterfront.

WORKERS, FARMERS, AND SLAVES: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY, 1815–1848

 The new road network dramatically cut travel times: A coach journey from New York to Boston that had taken four days in 1800 took half that time in 1824. Even more dramatic was the invention of the steamboat. Navigable rivers such as the Mississippi, Ohio, Missouri, and Hudson had long served as vital arteries for moving agricultural products from the interior to market. This water highway system moved almost exclusively in one direction. Traveling upriver from New Orleans to Louisville in Kentucky, for example, was expensive and slow (as long as three to four months). As a result few manufactured goods reached the interior of the nation. The arrival of the steamboat would revolutionize upriver travel, reducing the same New Orleans to Louisville journey to just over a week by 1826. The steamboat proved an economic boon to river cities such as St. Louis, New Orleans, Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, and Louisville. Hannah Stockton Stiles, the daughter of a prosperous merchant, stitched this elaborate needlework quilt, capturing the hustle and bustle of Philadelphia’s waterfront. Stiles included a steam boat, with smoke billowing from its smoke stack (9.2). Canals provided another means of moving goods more cheaply and faster than by road. Since

 What impact did the Erie Canal have on New York’s economy?

 the 1780s, private companies had built small canals, usually less than 20 miles long. In 1817, America had about 100 miles of canals, with no single canal longer than 30 miles. In that same year, however, New York’s Governor De Witt Clinton persuaded the legislature to fund a canal linking Buffalo on Lake Erie to Albany on the Hudson River. The Erie Canal, as it was called, was over 300 miles long and was an unprecedented undertaking, both in terms of engineering and state investment The New York legislature approved the huge sum of $7 million in bonds to fund the project, roughly a quarter of all the money spent by all the states on internal improvements in the 1820s. Although opponents mocked it as “Clinton’s ditch,” the Erie Canal was a stupendous success. Before the canal opened, wheat from western New York state took 20 days to reach Albany by wagon and cost almost $100 per ton to transport. After the canal was built, the same ton of wheat could be transported all the way to New York City in ten days at a cost of $5. Much as the steamboat fueled the growth of river towns, the Erie Canal fueled the development of new cities such as Rochester, Buffalo, and Syracuse. The canal’s success sparked “canal fever” across the country, and more than 3,300 miles of canals were completed by 1840 at a cost of about $125 million. In 1825, the same year that the Erie Canal was completed, the first commercial railway began operating in England. In 1830 the Baltimore and Ohio railroad successfully tested a steam-powered train. Americans soon developed their own railroads, and by 1840 railroad mileage surpassed canals. Railroads further increased the speed at which goods and people moved from one part of the country to another. By 1840, the trip between Boston and New York by rail took a mere half-day. Americans greeted with amazement each innovation of the transportation revolution, but the railroad evoked the most powerful responses. “What an object of wonder!” wrote one American in response to his first sight of a railroad in 1835. Charles Caldwell, the founder of the University of Louisville, praised the railroad as an agent of civilization that would help spread morality and education by linking people together more effectively. Not everyone shared this view of railroads. Critics of the railroad raised concerns about safety, noise, and some expressed fears about the destruction of the landscape. Images as History: Nature, Technology, and the Railroad: George Inness’s Lackawanna Valley (1855) explores how artists struggled to represent this marvel.

Hear the Audio File Erie Canal


THE MARKET REVOLUTION



Images as History
NATURE, TECHNOLOGY, AND THE RAILROAD: GEORGE INNESS’S THE LACKAWANNA VALLEY
(1855) The president of the Delaware, Lackawanna, and Western Railroad commissioned George Inness to paint the company’s new roundhouse, a facility to house and repair trains. But Inness soon found that his artistic vision conflicted with that of the railroad. For the railroad, artistic considerations were less important than advertising its achievements. The main disagreement between Inness and his patrons was over the representation of the roundhouse. The artist wished to render the facility accurately, which would have diminished its importance in the painting. Ultimately Inness agreed to make the roundhouse appear larger than it would have had he rendered the scene in actual perspective. He sacrificed artistic truth to the necessities of the marketplace. 
 Inness’s painting applies many of the conventions used to represent nature to a scene in which nature and technology coexist in a complex relationship. Thus he includes a reclining youth, a figure often used in landscape paintings. Here, the boy calmly gazes toward the oncoming train. Rather than disrupting the serenity of nature, the train appears to blend harmoniously into it. Although Inness portrays the railroad in a positive light, he also suggests the cost of technological progress: A field of tree stumps reminds viewers that economic development has taken a toll on the landscape. Which aspects of the painting present a positive view of progress? Which aspects suggest a negative view?

George Inness, The Lackawanna Valley
 The figure of the boy reclining in the field evokes serenity and harmony with nature.

 Although the distant roundhouse should have appeared much smaller, Inness increased its size to please his patrons.

 The prominence of so many tree stumps suggests that the artist was aware that technological progress came at a cost: the defilement of nature.

•


•


View the Closer Look Images as History: Nature,
Technology, and the Railroad


•


 How did George Inness view technological progress in his painting of the Lackawanna Valley?



 CHAPTER 9

WORKERS, FARMERS, AND SLAVES: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY, 1815–1848

14.1


 ke La

Er


 ie

 PA

 n 15.0

 PA

NJ DE

 IN

VA KY

 MO

 10 days

 NC 14.0

R.


 TN 10 days 10 days

 GA

 AR

ATL ANTIC 10
days 
13.0


 pi

R.


 pi Mississip

11.0


RI
New York 
 ie

 5 days

 SC

10.2


Er


MA CT

 NY

 MD

 IL

 NC

 AL

 ke La

 10 days 19.0

 5 days

 10 days

11.3


23.0


 e Lak

 rio

 OH

 MD

 TN

 MS

 MI

 ta On

10.5


 IA

 KY

 MO

VT NH

 ke

 DE

IN VA

 AR

CT RI
New York NJ 
OH IL

 WI

 10 days

43.0


 IA

La


 MN

Mississip


Lake Michiga


 MA

 NY

 MI

 5 days

 on

 on

 e Lak

 NH

 ur

On


 io ta r

 SC

17.0


MS AL 13.0

 5 days

 GA

ATL ANTI C

10.2


OCEAN LA

 ME

 5 days

H


 ur

 WI

 VT ke

H


 n

La


 CANADA

 e Superior Lak

 ME

Lake Michiga


 CANADA

 e Superior Lak

 MN

 5 days 10 days

OCEAN LA

30.0


 10 days 10.5

11.3


28.0
10.6


27.5


 FL

 FL

G ul f of Mexi co


G u lf o f Mex ic o


 Time lag for public information from New York City, 1817

 Time lag for public information from New York City, 1841

 Chief points for reception and dissemination of news

 Chief points for reception and dissemination of news

9.3 Time Lag for
News 1800–1841
Improvements in
 communication technology and transportation dramatically reduced the time it took for news to travel from the coastal cities to the interior cities.

Spreading the News
 Improvements in roads, canals, and railroads facilitated the spread of communication. The near doubling of the number of post offices and miles of improved postal roads between 1810 and 1820 increased the number of letters delivered annually from not quite four million to nearly nine million. It had taken ten days for news to travel from Richmond, Virginia, to New York City in Jefferson’s day. By the 1810s, it only took five days. The advent of the railroad, as the figure (9.3) shows, accelerated this trend, dramatically cutting the time for news to travel. For example, in 1817, it took 19 days for news to travel from New York to Cincinnati; by 1841, it only took seven days. The telegraph, which used electricity to send coded messages over wires, revolutionized communication. In 1844, Samuel Morse, a painter turned inventor who had patented the device in 1837, transmitted a message taken from a Bible verse— “What hath God Wrought?”—along a telegraph line from Washington, D.C., to Baltimore. The message was in code—the Morse code—that he also developed. Observers predicted correctly that the

 How did the telegraph transform communication?

 nearly instantaneous communication of telegraphy would usher in a new age of communications. By the mid-1850s, companies such the Western Union Telegraph Company had offices across the nation, improving communication between cities as far apart as Boston and New Orleans. Improvements in print technology sharply reduced the cost of publishing, leading to an enormous increase in the number of newspapers, magazines, and books. In 1801, there were only 200 newspapers in America; by 1835, there were 1,200. The number of magazines also rose dramatically, giving Americans a far greater range of printed materials. While most eighteenth-century magazines and newspapers were directed at the general public, many of these new publications were aimed at specific audiences. The Farmer’s Almanac, for example, dispensed advice about agriculture, while magazines such as Godey’s Lady’s Book informed a large and growing group of middle-class women readers about the latest ideas in fashion, literature, and family matters. Also on the rise by the 1830s, American book publishing, with an output of at least 1,000 titles a year, nearly rivaled that of Britain. Between 1825 and 1840, the value of the American book business doubled to $5.5 million.

Watch the Video Mastering Time and Space


THE MARKET REVOLUTION

 Technological improvements in printing also made better and cheaper images possible. In 1834, Nathaniel Currier began producing colored lithographic images using a new process that was cheaper than traditional engraving techniques. Rather than aspire to provide high art, Currier set out to provide “cheap and popular pictures” of contemporary events, historical figures, and scenes of everyday life. Touted as “Printmakers to the People,” his firm, eventually renamed Currier and Ives, produced images costing as little as fifteen cents. These were sold on city street corners, and peddlers carried them to country stores across the nation. Currier and Ives prints often featured patriotic themes, displaying the nation’s wealth, ingenuity, and economic

 achievements. Technological progress was a favorite theme. Consumers could choose from an assortment of steamboats and trains. Although the firm often celebrated technological triumph they also exploited disaster. Currier’s first great success was this dramatic print of a fire aboard the steamboat Lexington published in 1840 (9.4). Beyond making it easier and faster to send messages and news, the communications revolution also contributed to economic expansion of the market revolution by fueling the desire for new consumer goods and fashions. Newspapers were filled with advertisements for the latest goods. Lavishly illustrated magazines inspired readers to buy the latest fashions.



9.4 Nathaniel
 Currier’s Conflagration of the Steamboat Lexington The sensational image of the burning of the steamboat Lexington helped launch the career of Nathaniel Currier who later joined with James Ives to form one of the most successful publishing firms of the nineteenth century, Currier and Ives.

 Why was the firm of Currier and Ives so successful?



 CHAPTER 9

WORKERS, FARMERS, AND SLAVES: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY, 1815–1848

The Spread of Industrialization
 In the early nineteenth century, the United States began a transition from a predominantly agricultural economy to an industrial one. This process unfolded unevenly across different sectors of the American economy and followed different models depending on the industry and region. Driven by new manufacturing technology and techniques, industrialization led to a vast increase in the number of goods—everything from clothing and shoes to tools and toys—available to the American consumer. But for many workers, especially skilled artisans, the new industrial economy led to a devaluation of their skills and loss of social status. For less-skilled workers industrialization often meant exploitation, long hours, and low pay. For others, however, the new manufacturing economy opened up opportunities for advancement.

From Artisan to Worker
 The group of workers most dramatically affected by the onset of industrialization was artisans, or workers who used specialized skills to produce consumer goods, from shoes to bread to candles. In the colonial period skilled artisans worked in small shops attached to their homes, using hand tools to produce goods for local consumption. They also used an apprenticeship system, training boys in their skills (until about age 20) in exchange for their labor. The relationship between artisan and apprentice was close. Typically an apprentice lived in his master’s house, receiving food, clothing, and education. In the new factory system first pioneered by Samuel Slater in Rhode Island (see Chapter 7), the artisan system of small-scale production was replaced with a new set of roles: owners, managers, and wage workers. The owner provided the money for the enterprise, the manager supervised the workers, and the laborers did the actual work, which was usually less skilled than the traditional crafts practiced by skilled artisans. Some industries, such as textiles, shifted relatively rapidly to the use of power-driven machinery. Shoe production, by contrast, continued to employ many manual laborers into the 1860s. In both cases manufacturers undermined the old craft traditions of artisans by breaking down the productive process into simple steps that could be performed by workers with minimal training. Factory work forced laborers to give up many aspects of working-class culture. The work rhythm of artisans before the rise of the factory included periods of intense activity followed by slack periods

 How did the factory change work?

 in which artisans might socialize with one another, perhaps meeting in a tavern to drink and discuss politics. Under industrialization the clock ruled. Factory workers were required to follow a strict schedule and perform at a steady pace day in and day out. Beyond the rigid regulations of the workers’ day, the factory robbed them of the pride of craft associated with handmade goods. In contrast to artisan production, where a skilled craftsman might create one-of-a-kind pieces, factory goods were designed to be identical. In addition to creating a labor force of less skilled workers, the new system also led to a sharp separation between home and workplace. Before 1800, most artisans in New York had workshops attached to their homes, but by 1840, two-thirds of them lived in one place and worked in another. The factory system separated home and workplace. The apprenticeship system also suffered. By 1827, less than a quarter of apprentices lived with their employers. If the factory system diminished the control that working people had over their time and work, it increased the goods they could buy. Because factorymade goods cost less to produce, families of modest means could now afford items once available only to the wealthy. Ordinary Americans could now purchase furniture, clocks, dishes, silverware, and the latest fabrics.

Women and Work
 The factory system had a tremendous impact on the lifestyle and status of American women. While men’s work increasingly shifted to sites outside the home, women’s economic activity remained

THE SPREAD OF INDUSTRIALIZATION

 primarily within. Nevertheless, some women participated more directly in the new manufacturing economy through “outwork.” In this system skilled processes were broken down into simpler tasks that could be farmed out to women to perform in their homes. Manufacturers provided the materials to women with a specified completion date. They saved money because they did not have to provide a workshop or factory, and they paid women a fraction of the wages a skilled male artisan earned. In New England during the 1830s, 33,000 women took part in outwork production of palm leaf hats. They also produced paper boxes, hoopskirts, artificial flowers, and cloaks. In urban areas many women depended on the meager earnings of outwork for their survival. In rural areas, such as parts of New England, women might rely on outwork for supplemental income while continuing to do traditional agricultural work, such as producing milk, butter, and cheese. Rural New England women would eventually provide the labor force for one of the most ambitious industrial experiments of the day: the Lowell mills.

The Lowell Experiment
 In 1814, a group of Boston merchants decided to expand on Samuel Slater’s mill village model (see Chapter 7) and create a large planned industrial town. They built a textile factory in Waltham, Massachusetts, and developed the Waltham System, a mill town model that relied on centralized factories, each one of which united all the distinctive steps of cloth production under one roof. The system also came to depend on a large labor force housed in company-owned dormitories. In 1823, the same group of merchants, led by Francis Lowell, opened an even larger factory on a site in Massachusetts adjacent to the Merrimack River. The Lowell mill consolidated all aspects of cloth production. Cotton from the South arrived at the mills, where it was cleaned, carded, spun, and woven into a finished fabric. Within a decade the new mill town of Lowell boasted 22 mills, and grew to over 50 mills by 1850. Not surprisingly many competing mill towns cropped up all over New England and upstate New York. The mill owners recruited young, single women from rural New England to work at the factory towns. To accommodate this workforce and appease concerned parents, they built dormitories and libraries and provided boardinghouse matrons to supervise the morality of the workers. Each

Read the Document A Second Peep at Factory Life


 boardinghouse, with up to ten bedrooms per building, housed between 20 and 40 women. Two women sometimes had to share a single bed. The boardinghouses also contained a kitchen, a dining room, a parlor, and separate quarters for the housekeepers, who were generally older women. Compared to the remote New England villages from which most of the women came, Lowell offered many amenities. Lowell allowed women to earn significantly more money than did farm labor and domestic service, the two most common occupations for single women. The women operatives in the mills also made friends with their coworkers and enjoyed free time away from the factories to socialize and pursue cultural and educational opportunities not available in their small home towns. As Josephine L. Baker, a mill worker, noted, “there are lectures, evening schools, and libraries, to which all may have access.” The mill women even produced their own literary magazine, the Lowell Offering (9.5). The magazine, nominally independent of the mills, echoed this rosy portrait. Indeed, the cover of this 1845 issue shows a mill girl holding a book and adopting a contemplative pose. She stands in a lush natural setting of flowers, trees, and vines. In its early years the Lowell experiment was touted as an example of American ingenuity, a popular destination for European visitors eager to see the wonders of the new world. British novelist Charles Dickens visited and later wrote with wonder that the mill women were not degraded by factory life, but rather retained “the manners and deportment of young women.” Despite the upbeat image portrayed on the cover of the Lowell Offering, life in the mills was hard. The women worked 13-hour days, six days a week. Furthermore, the noise of the machines, the dust and lint generated by the manufacturing processes, and the long hours demanded by the mill owners often



9.5 Lowell
Offering
 The Lowell mill women produced this title page of the final issue of the magazine Lowell Offering, presenting an image of industrial harmony. The young mill woman, holding a book, stands amid symbols of natural abundance.

 What was the Lowell system?



 CHAPTER 9

WORKERS, FARMERS, AND SLAVES: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY, 1815–1848

 overwhelmed women accustomed to working out of their homes. As one young Vermont mill woman noted in a letter to her family, “It is very hard indeed and sometimes I think I shall not be able to endure it. I never worked so hard in my life.” For a decade the Lowell mill owners enjoyed high profits and peaceful labor relations. But increased competition with other textile producers led them in 1834 to announce a wage cut. Furious, the Lowell mill women went on strike, or “turned out.” Critics of the strike saw it as a radical assault on the rights of the mill owners’ economic freedom and a display of unseemly behavior for women. The mill women defended their actions as an assertion of their rights as American citizens and an example of the ideals of independence and liberty that had inspired the American Revolution (see Competing Visions: The Lowell Strike of 1834). The strike failed to block the wage cut, but it was a milestone in the history of both women’s rights and labor organization. In the 1840s, a new organization, the “Lowell Female Labor Reform Association,” would join a national struggle for a ten-hour working day for all workers.

Urban Industrialization
 Metropolitan industrialization was far more diverse than in industrialization in mill towns. In New York and Philadelphia, factories turned out products by

Average Height of American Men
Serving in the Military, 1800–1860
Year


Inches




68.1




68.1




68.1




68.3




67.8




67.4




67.2


9.6 Average Height of Native-Born American Men by Year
 of Birth As the nation’s wealth grew during the first half of the nineteenth century, it became more concentrated in fewer hands. The rich controlled an even larger percentage of the nation’s wealth by mid-century. [Source: Adapted from Steckel, Richard. “A History of the Standard of Living in the United States”. EH.Net Encyclopedia, edited by Robert Whaples. http://eh.net/ encyclopedia/article/steckel.standard.living.us]

 How did urban industrialization differ from other models of industrialization such as the Waltham (Lowell) model?

 using everything from skilled handwork, similar to artisan production, to steam-powered machinery run by low-skilled factory operatives. The factories produced an enormous range of goods under this system, including chemicals, paints and varnishes, musical instruments, clothing and hats, tools, machines, furniture, and books. New York emerged as the nation’s leading fashion and clothing center during this period. Initially the city led in the production of cheap “Negro cottons,” coarse garments assembled for sale in the South to clothe its slaves. By the 1830s, elegant tailoring houses such as the venerable firm of Brooks Brothers were offering well-tailored clothes to the upper classes and the more prosperous members of the middle class, who sought to emulate them. The industrial economy that emerged in antebellum America created jobs and opportunity for many workers and a vast array of consumer products. But not everyone benefited equally. To protect themselves, skilled workers built a large labor movement; twenty labor newspapers emerged in this period to champion the workers’ cause. In 1835, 20,000 Philadelphia workers from a dozen trades walked off their jobs to protest working conditions and demand a ten-hour workday. The strike was the most successful labor action in the nation’s short history and made the ten-hour workday the new standard. By 1836, labor councils or federations, a precursor of modern labor unions, had been founded in 13 manufacturing centers across the nation, from Boston to Cincinnati. In the largest cities, such as New York and Philadelphia, more than 50 separate trades joined to form the general councils. The movement collapsed during a severe economic depression that began in 1837. Hard times produced high unemployment and intense competition, undermining labor’s ability to bargain for higher pay and better working conditions. Worker unrest stemmed in part from the awareness that a small group of Americans were benefiting more than others from the new economic order. The distribution of wealth became less equal. Although the wealth of the average citizen grew, the proportion of wealth concentrated in the hands of the nation’s wealthiest citizens also increased. One of the most revealing measures of changes in the standard of living of Americans is provided by statistics about the average height of men serving in the military (9.6). In the period between 1800 and 1860, the average height of Americans decreased by almost an inch. Given that the overall wealth of the nation increased during this period, this evidence suggests that not all Americans shared in this growing prosperity.

THE SPREAD OF INDUSTRIALIZATION



Competing Visions
THE LOWELL STRIKE OF 1834
In protesting a proposal to cut their wages, the Lowell mill women looked to the language of the American Revolution. They cast the mill owners as tyrants who sought to reduce the workers to economic slavery. For those sympathetic to the mill owners, the strikers were un-American, radical followers of the British feminist thinker Mary Wollstonecraft, the champion of women’s equality (see Chapters 5 and 6). Why did the protestors at Lowell seek to wrap their cause in the banner of the American Revolution and its ideals? The Lowell mill women cast themselves as the heirs to the Patriots who fought the American Revolution. Their appeal for public support focused on issues of rights and independence, themes that echoed the language of the American Revolution. UNION IS POWER Our present object is to have union and exertion, and we remain in possession of our unquestionable rights. We circulate this paper wishing to obtain the names of all who imbibe the spirit of our Patriotic Ancestors, who preferred privation [poverty] to bondage, and parted with all that renders life desirable—and even life itself—to procure independence for their children. The oppressing hand of avarice [greed] would enslave us, and to gain their object, they gravely tell us of the pressure of the time, this we are already sensible of, and deplore it. If any are in want of assistance, the Ladies will be compassionate and assist them; but we prefer to have the disposing of our charities in our own hands; and as we are free, we would remain in possession of what kind Providence has bestowed upon us; and remain daughters of freemen still. “Union Is Power,” petition of the striking Lowell women, 1834 
 In this contemporary report of the Lowell protest, a Boston newspaper highlighted the radical and unladylike behavior of the strikers. We learn that extraordinary excitement was occasioned at Lowell, last week, by an announcement that the wages paid in some of the departments would be reduced 15 percent on the 1st of March. The reduction principally affected the female operatives, and they held several meetings, or caucuses, at which a young woman presided, who took an active part in persuading her associates to give notice that they should quit the mills…. The number soon increased to nearly 800. A procession was formed, and they marched about the town, to the amusement of a mob of idlers and boys, and we are sorry to add, not altogether to the credit of Yankee girls…. We are told that one of the leaders mounted a stump and made a flaming Mary Wollstonecraft speech on the rights of women and the iniquities of the “monied aristocracy.” Salem Gazette, February 18, 1834

 Label showing women at work in the mill [Source: Merrimack Manufacturing Co. 1822 cloth label. American Textile History Museum, Lowell, MA]

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: The Lowell
Strike of 1834


 How did ideas about gender shape the response of critics of the Lowell strike?



 CHAPTER 9

WORKERS, FARMERS, AND SLAVES: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY, 1815–1848

The Changing Urban Landscape
 Industrialization accelerated the growth and changed the nature of American cities. While before 1820 less than ten percent of the nation’s population resided in cities (areas of more than 2,500 people), by 1860, that number had grown to 20 percent. Older cities such as New York, Philadelphia, Boston, and Baltimore grew, and new cities in the West such as Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, St. Louis, and Chicago emerged. The population growth in these cities was fueled by migration from the American countryside and foreign immigration, especially from Ireland and Germany. Immigration fostered cultural diversity in cities, but it also led to tensions and violence along ethnic, racial, and religious lines. Hostility between Protestants and Catholics and between whites and blacks increased urban violence. Policing became a far more complex problem in these growing cities.

Old Ports and the New Cities
 of the Interior 9.7 Five Points This image reflects the elite’s view of the Five Points neighborhood. The artist has depicted a robbery in progress in the lower left.

 With nineteenth-century industrialization and population growth, major changes occurred in American cities. New kinds of neighborhoods developed that reflected the class and ethnicity of their inhabitants. Distinctive

 working-class neighborhoods, including the first urban slums, formed. This trend reflected the drop in the number of artisans who owned their homes and the rise of multiple-family dwellings, as well as the number of boardinghouses taking in lodgers. New York’s Five Points neighborhood illustrates the profound changes in the urban landscape caused by rapid economic development. To its working-class inhabitants, Five Points was a poor but thriving multiethnic and racially mixed community. To

 What was the Five Points neighborhood and why did it become so well known?

THE CHANGING URBAN LANDSCAPE

 outsiders, however, its shabby housing and reputation for crime, especially prostitution, made it a symbol of urban decline. Thus while its inhabitants saw the neighborhood as a vibrant and diverse community, New York’s elite viewed it as a notorious slum to be avoided. This contemporary image (9.7) captures the multiracial character of the neighborhood, but it also reflects the fears of many New Yorkers that Five Points was crime-ridden and dangerous. Middle- and upper-class families eager to escape contact with working people, immigrants, and free blacks segregated themselves in new, more exclusive neighborhoods. New York’s Gramercy Park, for example, was created in 1831 as a private park surrounded by elegant houses. Ringed by a tall gated fence, the park was (and still is) accessible only to the adjacent homeowners who received special keys. This image of a similar exclusive enclave (9.8), St. Johns Park in New York, shows a park with a fence that segregates the rich residents from individuals such as the African Americans lampooned in this image for attempting to dress and act above their station in life. The African-American figures are caricatures whose physical features are exaggerated to conform to the racist stereotypes of the day. In 1800, even America’s largest urban centers were “walking cities.” A person could easily walk around all of New York, Philadelphia, or Boston in a few hours. By 1820, however, these cities had grown to contain more than half the urban population of the new nation, and by mid-century these once compact walking cities had become sprawling metropolises. Some of this growth came from annexation. Philadelphia in 1854 annexed several of its suburbs, increasing its size from two square miles to 129. Much of the growth was driven by advances in mass transportation that allowed city dwellers to live farther and farther away from where they worked, shopped, and went for entertainment. The first of these modes of transportation, which arrived in 1827, was the “omnibus,” an urban stagecoach that carried up to 12 passengers over fixed routes for a flat fee. Expensive, slow, and uncomfortable, it gave way by the 1850s to the horse car, a 20-passenger coach pulled on rails by horses. Faster, cheaper, and more comfortable than the omnibus, horse cars, or street-railway lines, spread to virtually every large city by 1860. Philadelphia alone boasted 155 miles of track. Steam-powered locomotives had also begun to carry commuters—or people who traveled over a significant distance from home to work—to and from outlying areas. Issues of sanitation and the problem of providing fresh drinking water for these expanding cities led cities such as New York and Philadelphia to undertake

View the Closer Look Images as History: Fairmont
Waterworks Sculptures


 ambitious construction projects such as Philadelphia’s Fairmount Waterworks. By 1810, New York had surpassed Philadelphia to become the nation’s largest city. Central to this development was New York harbor, the largest on the East Coast and one ideally suited to become a major port. The Erie Canal ensured New York’s economic supremacy by connecting the city to the Midwest. It increased dramatically the flow of finished goods from Europe and the rest of the United States into the American heartland and the flow of foodstuffs produced by Midwestern farmers into domestic and foreign markets. Inland cities such as Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, St. Louis, and Chicago were among the fastest-growing urban areas in the nation. Situated on rivers or lakes and soon connected by railroads, inland cities became manufacturing centers and transportation hubs. Between 1800 and 1840, these new cities saw their populations quadruple. If any city in America fit the modern stereotype of a soot-covered industrial town, it was Pittsburgh. The French traveler Michel Chevalier remarked that “a dense black smoke which, bursting forth in volumes from the foundries, forges, glass-houses, and the chimneys of all the factories and houses, falls in flakes of soot upon the dwellings and persons of the inhabitants. It is, therefore, the dirtiest town in the United States.” Cincinnati, a small settlement on the Ohio River in 1800, became a major industrial center by 1840, producing a wide range of manufactured products, including furniture, tools, candles,



9.8 St. Johns Park
 St. Johns Park, also known as Hudson Square, was one of the gated parks created to separate the poor and working classes from wealthy New Yorkers Access to St. John’s Park was limited to residents. [Source: The Library Company of Philadelphia]

 What does the creation of gated parks such as Gramercy Park tell us about urban life in this period?



 CHAPTER 9

WORKERS, FARMERS, AND SLAVES: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY, 1815–1848

 paper, leather, and soap. The soap industry grew out of the city’s many pig-slaughtering houses (Cincinnati’s nickname was “Porkopolis”) that produced fat renderings that provided an essential ingredient for making soap. The firm of Procter & Gamble was founded in the city in 1837.

Immigrants and the City
 The sharp rise in urban populations in the nineteenth century stemmed from two sources: the migration of Americans from rural areas and immigration from Europe. The latter soared from 23,000 in 1830 to 428,000 in 1854. Immigrants left their homelands for the United States for many reasons, including poverty, poor harvests, warfare, and political and religious persecution. The most dramatic exodus in this period was triggered in 1845 when Ireland’s potato crop failed. The disaster killed more than one million people and spurred more than a million others, mostly poor peasants, to cross the Atlantic to America. Poor harvests and political turmoil boosted German immigration to the United States. Besides the Irish and Germans, the other large groups of immigrants came from other parts of Britain, notably Scotland and Wales, and from Scandinavia (9.9). The Irish and German immigrants changed America’s ethnic composition. For the first time many non-Protestants entered American society. Irish immigrants were almost entirely Catholic, whereas Germans included both Catholics and Protestants. Ethnic enclaves with names like Kleindeutchland (Little Germany) and Little Ireland, with their own churches, mutual aid societies, theaters, newspapers, restaurants, and social clubs, developed in many cities. Irish immigrants generally came from the poorest segments of society; they arrived with English 18%

Northern Europe
11%
Other
1%


German
27%
Irish
43%


9.9 Sources of European Immigration
 Immigrants from Germany and Ireland changed the population mix in much of the nation. The influx of Catholics in particular resulted in tensions with Protestants.

 How did immigration patterns change in the early nineteenth century?

 little money and few skills needed in an urban economy. They often ended up in slum neighborhoods like Five Points and came to dominate low-skilled jobs such as laborer and domestic servant. Nonetheless, many Irish immigrants entered the skilled trades and became successful entrepreneurs. German immigrants were more diverse. As with the Irish, many German immigrants were poor peasants forced off the land, but many others were skilled artisans. Liberal intellectuals also fled Germany after the political upheavals of 1848 that swept over much of continental Europe. Germans were more likely than the Irish to become farmers, shopkeepers, or skilled tradesmen. They also ventured further inland, settling places such as Cincinnati and St. Louis. More skilled on average than their Irish counterparts, Germans transformed a number of fields. Adolph Busch, a skilled brewmaster, brought German-style beer to America, and musical instrument makers helped launch such venerable firms as Steinway and Sons, piano makers.

Free Black Communities
 in the North Urban centers in the North and Midwest were home to some of the largest free African-American communities in the nation. Free blacks in enclaves such as Boston’s “New Guinea” or Cincinnati’s “Little Africa” were probably the most urbanized subgroup in America. Racial segregation was more pronounced in the urban North than in the cities of the South, where urban slaves were likely to live in their masters’ homes. Thus an African American in Boston was almost twice as likely to live in a segregated neighborhood as an African American in New Orleans. African-American communities developed thriving institutions, such as churches, schools, and self-help societies. Still, life for free African Americans was hindered by racial prejudice and discrimination. In the North and parts of the Midwest, exclusion from many of the skilled trades often forced African Americans into the most menial types of labor. This situation worsened in the 1840s and 1850s as immigrants, especially the Irish, took over occupations traditionally dominated by African Americans, such as barbers and cart men. In the cities of the North and West, hostility to African Americans competing for jobs with

Read the Document Petition of the Catholics of New York (1840)


THE CHANGING URBAN LANDSCAPE

 whites intensified. A drawing from the period (9.10) exploits white fears of African-American laborers. The racist message of the image is clear: Free blacks will steal the jobs of white workingmen. Through persistence, talent, and good fortune, some African Americans could still surmount the obstacles they faced in the labor market and achieve financial security or even prosper. Henry Boyd of Cincinnati is an example of one such life. Trained as a carpenter while still a slave, Boyd managed to obtain his freedom and began to ply his trade in Cincinnati. Although Boyd found some work, many employers refused to hire him. Yet in 1836, he accumulated enough money to establish his own furniture-making business, and by 1842, his downtown factory was using the latest steam-powered equipment to make furniture. By the 1850s, Boyd was employing a mixedrace workforce of some 50 people. Nine years later, however, fire destroyed Boyd’s factory. Without insurance he could not rebuild his factory, leaving him as he had begun—a struggling artisan.

Riot, Unrest, and Crime
 Urbanization in the first half of the nineteenth century was accompanied by a rise in crime and disorder. During the 1830s, there were 115 incidents of mob violence, a steep rise from previous decades. One newspaper reported that “a spirit of riot” had taken over the nation’s cities. Violence increased as growing cities became more divided racially, economically, and ethnically. Anti-Catholic sentiment spurred much of the intensified violence. In 1834, a mob attacked and burned a Catholic convent just outside Boston. Ten years later in Philadelphia, the “Bible riots”



9.10 The Results
 of Abolitionism This poster warns white laborers that their jobs might be taken by free African Americans. [Courtesy Library Company of Philadelphia]

 left 20 dead and two Catholic churches in ashes. Philadelphia’s growing Catholic community opposed the city’s policy of using the Protestant version of the Bible for instruction in public schools. After appeals from the city’s Catholic community were rejected, protestors took to the streets. Crowds of Catholics and Protestants attacked one another in the streets of the “City of Brotherly Love.” The city was plunged in to three days of rioting and mayhem. Racial animosity also inspired urban unrest. Cincinnati’s African-American community faced the ire of white mobs in 1829, 1836, and 1841. A three-day riot in Providence, Rhode Island, in 1831 destroyed most of the African-American part of the city. A riot in New York in 1834 destroyed an African-American church, school, and a dozen houses. Adding to the tensions and occasionally

 Why did urban violence increase in the early nineteenth century?



 CHAPTER 9

WORKERS, FARMERS, AND SLAVES: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY, 1815–1848

 sparking violence were political battles between Democrats and Whigs, antagonisms between supporters and opponents of slavery, and conflicts over regulating or eliminating behaviors such as gambling and drinking. Contributing to the rise in urban violence was the steady increase in the number of single men living outside traditional family units, a trend that arose from industrialization and immigration. In the 1840s and 1850s, at least 30 percent of male urban dwellers lived outside family units, usually in boardinghouses. Free from the traditional guidance and restraint of adults and relatives, young men developed a masculine subculture in which alcohol and fighting played a central role. Many young women also streamed into the city looking to improve their economic conditions. The combination of an aggressive masculine sub-culture and a large pool of poor young women led to a significant rise in prostitution, a situation that alarmed many officials. The Reverend Lyman Beecher decried the fact that so many young people were “thrown out upon the open bosom of our city” where they were easily “corrupted by sensuality.” Beecher’s fears were well founded. At mid-century prostitution ranked as the second biggest industry in New York City! (See Envisioning Evidence, The Economics and Geography of Vice in Mid-Nineteenth-Century New York.) Theaters encouraged prostitutes to attend their performances to boost ticket sales, a practice so common that the cheap seats they occupied were dubbed the “guilty third tier.”

 The expanding news media found salacious tales about the city’s seamier side of life a great way to raise circulation. Tales of crime, including the sensational murder of the prostitute Helen Jewett in New York City in 1836, fueled the growth of the press. Rival newspapers competed to be the first to publish the latest revelation about the case, and the story dominated headlines for months. The crime even produced colorful images such as this showing the alleged murderer skulking away (9.11). Reflecting the low regard in which prostitutes were held, the lowly clerk accused of killing Jewett was acquitted despite considerable evidence suggesting his guilt. Most urban crime did not involve sensational tales of murder, but rather petty crimes against property or person. The informal policing mechanisms that cities had relied on in the eighteenth century, including the use of night watchmen and sheriffs who had to rely on community support to quell unrest, proved woefully inadequate to policing a major metropolitan area in the nineteenth century. In 1839, the mayor of New York pushed to create a professional police force, fearing that without strong intervention New York would attain “the character of a riotous city.” In 1845, New York created the first modern professional police force in America, modeled on London’s Metropolitan Police Force. New York employed 800 men organized in a military structure; they carried clubs (but not firearms) and were deployed to keep the peace and apprehend criminals.

9.11 Murder of
Helen Jewett
 Currier and Ives’s lurid depiction of the murder of the prostitute Helen Jewett was part of the media frenzy surrounding this sensational crime.

 What does the murder of Helen Jewett reveal about nineteenth-century city life?

THE CHANGING URBAN LANDSCAPE



Envisioning Evidence
THE ECONOMICS AND GEOGRAPHY OF VICE IN MID-NINETEENTH CENTURY NEW YORK
The influx of young men and young women into New York City in the early nineteenth century fueled both the supply of and the demand for prostitutes. Indeed, by mid-century, prostitution was the second largest industry in the city, exceeded only by tailoring. If one maps the geography of vice, a fascinating pattern emerges. The greatest concentration of brothels was clustered around New York’s Broadway theater district, the notorious Five Points neighborhood (one of the city’s poorest), and the docks. “The police do not meddle,” an observer of New York life wrote, “unless they [the prostitutes and brothels] are noisy, disturb the peace, or become a public nuisance.” 
Furnaces


$2,146,950


Hat and Cap Manufacture


$2,082,502


Gold and Silver Manufacture


$1,966,000


Boot and Shoe Manufacture


$1,839,100


Lard Oil


$1,839,000


Butcher Shops


$1,763,860


Fish and Whale Oil


$1,729,900


Bakeries


$1,727,153


Gas Manufacture


$1,625,500


Printing


$1,545,500


Breweries


$1,377,292


Marble Manufacture


$1,154,500


Sawmills


$1,145,000


 t

$2,218,200


 ree

Distilleries


St


$2,230,927
Broadway


 Harry Hall’s Dance Hall

The
“Tombs”


Mozart
Hall


 Niblo’s Garden

Five
Points


 ry

Bowe


Ea


 st

R


 t

Chandleries and Soap


 e re St

$2,497,719


 on

$2,593,761


Gristmills


 si

$3,292,800


Shipbuilding


 on

 vi

$3,809,331


Steam Engine and Boiler Manufacture


 ds

Di


Silver Wire


Hu


 r

Street


$6,350,760 *


 ve

 ton

Prostitution


 RI

 us

$7,592,696


Ho


Tailor Shops


 Blocks with prostitution continuously, 1820 –1859

Canal


COMPARISON OF THE CASH VALUE OF PROSTITUTION AND MANUFACTURED ARTICLES IN NEW YORK CITY, 1855

 iv

 e

 r

 * Money spent on prostitution (includes housing and entertainment).

 Does the historical evidence support the concerns expressed by moral reformers about the prevalence of commercial sex in New York?



 CHAPTER 9

WORKERS, FARMERS, AND SLAVES: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY, 1815–1848

Southern Society
 Even as Northern society changed dramatically between 1815 and 1860 due to immigration, urbanization, and industrialization, Southern society remained committed to slavery and a cash crop economy. The rise of cotton cultivation and the expansion of plantations into the band of fertile land from Georgia to Texas transformed slavery. Although most Southerners did not own slaves, slavery suffused Southern culture and society. A few planters dominated the political and economic life of the whole South. One leader reminded a Southern audience in 1850 that slavery was bound up with all of the South’s institutions and affected “the personal interests of every white man.”

 “I could easily prove that almost all the differences which may be noticed between the characters of the Americans in the Southern and in the Northern states have originated in slavery.”





ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE,
Democracy in America (1838) 
3 4


Brick Wall


The Planter Class
 Few planters lived in the grand luxury many people today associate with the world of nineteenth-century slavery. For example, at Nottoway, in Louisiana, John Hampden Randolph built a magnificent mansion that contained 64 rooms, 200 windows, and 165 doors. But the typical planter lived far more modestly in a simple two-story wood-framed house. His home, generally described as “the big house” because it was always the largest domestic dwelling on a plantation, was at the center of smaller outbuildings, including a kitchen, well, dairy, ice house, smokehouse, and laundry. More substantial plantations included many other types of buildings, such as barns, stables, sheds, and storehouses. Georgia rice planter Henry McAlpin’s Hermitage plantation (9.12) resembled a small town, with multiple residences, a hospital, and other buildings. Indeed, the slave quarters constituted an even smaller village within this self-contained community. Most

 What do plantation architecture and the arrangement of buildings tell us about slavery?









 LEGEND

MANSION KITCHEN SMOKE HOUSE STABLES COACH HOUSE

6 LOT
SUNKEN GARDEN 8 OVERSEER’S HOUSE 9 HOSPITAL 10 SLAVE HUTS

9.12 Schematic Map of Hermitage Plantation
 Large plantations were like small towns. This plantation included a separate overseer’s house, hospital, and slave huts.

SOUTHERN SOCIETY

 plantations were far more modest. Most slave owners owned between one and nine slaves. Less than one percent owned 100 or more slaves. The typical slaveholder worked a small family farm of about 100 acres with fewer than ten slaves. Planters created something akin to Englishstyle landed aristocracy. Thomas Dabney, who had migrated to Mississippi from Virginia in 1835 to establish a large cotton plantation, aspired to this aristocratic lifestyle. He emulated the life of an English country gentleman, taking tea in the afternoon and treating his less affluent neighbors as social inferiors. While industrialization in the North created a sharp divide between work and home, physically separating the two realms, Southern plantations fused them together. A large body of advice literature geared toward plantation management that appeared in Southern magazines urged planters to act so that “the Negro should feel that his master is his lawgiver and judge; and yet his protector and friend.” An 1842 book reminded planters that because slaves were “placed under our control” masters had to care for and instruct them, so that they could “receive moral and religious uplift.” In theory masters sought to “govern absolutely.” “Plantation government,” a Georgia planter wrote, “should be eminently patriarchal.” The planter was not only “the head of the family” but also “should, in one sense, be the father of the whole concern, negroes and all.” Planters’ wives or widows or the eldest daughters in families without a matriarch often helped manage plantation life. The plantation mistress, as she was called, supervised slaves who might work in the kitchen, nursery, laundry, stable, or garden. Whereas husbands often relied on overseers to assist them and frequently left the plantation to attend to business or public affairs, the planter’s wife was often left to her own devices to run a home that was more like a small village. Southern men claimed that slavery had helped elevate the status of the white woman and liberated her from the drudgery of domestic life, making her “no longer the slave, but the equal and idol of man.” Hospitality was a central part of Southern plantation culture, and the plantation mistress played a key role in the rituals associated with it. Although lavish entertainment was one part of this reality, the evidence found in the surviving diaries and letters of many mistresses suggest that the typical plantation mistress was more apt to feel isolated than the center of a vivacious social life. Mary Kendall, for example, wrote in her diary about her loneliness: “for about three weeks I did not



 have the pleasure of seeing one white female face.” Kendall’s sense of isolation lent her description of plantation life a melancholy quality.

Yeomen and Tenant Farmers
 Most Southern whites were not planters but yeoman farmers, independent landowners who worked their own small farms. In 1860, more than three-quarters of Southerners owned no slaves. As a result yeomen farmers depended on neighborliness and communal cooperation to complete tasks such as planting, harvesting, or building. Lacking the urban centers and cheap transportation that allowed many small farmers in the North to enter fully into the market economy, many Southern yeomen did not produce large surpluses for market. Instead they devoted most of their resources to producing food for their own families and generally allocated only a small portion of their lands for cash crops that could be sold to purchase seeds, sugar, and the occasional manufactured good. Since they could not afford the cost of transporting their surpluses to market, yeoman farmers depended on planters to market their small surpluses. They also depended on planters for the use of the plantation mill to grind corn into meal. In much of the South where planters and yeomen resided side by side, a complex web of economic, political, and social ties bound these two classes together. But many yeomen in the upcountry regions of the South were fiercely independent and resented the more affluent planters who dominated their state’s militia, legislatures, and courts. Indeed, most Southern state legislators, judges, and militia officers were drawn from the planter class. But the yeomanry formed the core of the militia system that tried to catch runaway slaves and guard against slave insurrection. In this antislavery woodcut, the slave patrol is terrorizing a slave (9.13) traveling without the pass needed to leave the plantation. Passes were written by owners, and traveling slaves had to have them. Many Southerners owned no land and worked as tenant farmers. In parts of the South, estimates by historians vary, but between 30–50 percent of the white population fell into this category. Although some landless Southerners were young men waiting to inherit land from their fathers, many others rarely entered the ranks of the solid yeomanry. In parts of the Deep South with many African-American slaves, poor whites fraternized with slaves: smuggling liquor into the slave quarters, helping runaways, or forming sexual liaisons and permanent relationships with slaves. More often, however, a white supremacist ideology overcame class solidarity across racial lines.

 What values defined the planter class?



 CHAPTER 9

A
Slave Caught Without
 a Pass In this woodcut from an abolitionist almanac, a slave patrol harasses a slave traveling from one plantation to another.

WORKERS, FARMERS, AND SLAVES: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY, 1815–1848

Free Black Communities
 Although most African Americans in the South were enslaved, by 1860, six percent of black Southerners lived as free people of color. Most free blacks resided in the upper South, with large communities in border states such as Delaware and Maryland. A third of the free blacks resided in Southern cities; Baltimore, Richmond, New Orleans, Charleston, Memphis, Mobile, and Natchez had the biggest communities. The South’s Slave Codes were even more restrictive than the Black Codes enacted in the North (see Chapter 8). Free Southern blacks had to carry identification to prove that they were not slaves. They could not hold office and in some areas even testify in court against whites. Although life for free blacks in the South was difficult, the shortage of skilled artisans in many Southern cities enabled them to enter trades such

 How did the experience of free blacks in the South compare with those in the North?

 as cabinet making. Southern cities were also less spatially segregated than Northern cities, and Southern African Americans played a prominent role as domestics and in some fields and trades such as tailoring and hair cutting. The free black community in New Orleans was one of the most affluent in the South. It published its own newspapers, and its elite members held lavish balls each year. Religious institutions were also important for the free African-American community. In addition to tending to the spiritual needs of their congregations, ministers were often community leaders. Southern black churches had much larger memberships than similar institutions in the North. Thus the largest African-American congregation in the North, New York’s Abyssinian Baptist Church, had a membership of 440 at mid-century, whereas the First African Church of Richmond, counted 3,160 members.

View the Image Free Black Church


SOUTHERN SOCIETY

White Southern Culture
 Wealthy white Southerners in the antebellum years entertained on a lavish scale, hosting parties, balls, fox hunts, and horse races. Aristocratic affectations even led some to sponsor medieval tournaments that included jousting. Southerners took pride in their resorts along the Gulf Coast, gracious vacation spots characterized by a “quiet ease.” New Orleans gradually replaced New York as the horse racing capital of the nation. Blood sports such as cock fighting also remained popular, particularly among less affluent Southerners. Reputation and honor were central values in the male-oriented Southern culture. An “unsullied reputation,” one observer noted, was all that a man required to be “on a social level with his fellows.” A Scottish traveler remarked that Southern men “consider themselves men of honor” and “more frequently resent any indignity shown them even at the expense of their life, or that of those who venture to insult them.” When a social inferior insulted a gentleman, the appropriate response was to cane or horsewhip

 the offender. Dueling was reserved for settling matters of honor among gentlemen. In 1838, John Wilson, a former Governor of South Carolina, published The Code of Honor; or the Rules for the Government of Principals and Seconds in Duelling, which explained such things as the role of seconds and the choice of weapons. The centrality of honor to Southern culture was the chief reason dueling endured in this region long after it had been outlawed in the North. Many of the South’s leading politicians, including Andrew Jackson and Henry Clay, had fought duels during their careers. This contemporary drawing by a Northern opponent of slavery (9.14) portrays the South as a culture dominated by dueling, brawling, and mobbing. For some Northerners, especially those opposed to slavery, the dueling and other violence they associated with the South were a result of the brutality inherent in slavery. The connection between slavery and Southern violence figures prominently in the image, which shows a cruel master whipping a helpless slave child.



9.14 Southern
Violence
This Northern
 drawing links the brawling and dueling of Southerners with the brutal labor regime of slavery. Abolitionist attacks on Southern culture often mentioned the pistol and the lash.

 What role did honor play in Southern culture?



 CHAPTER 9

WORKERS, FARMERS, AND SLAVES: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY, 1815–1848

Life and Labor Under Slavery
 Slavery was a complex institution that took many forms in the South. Some slaves lived on large plantations and worked in gangs under an overseer, whereas others toiled beside their master on small farms. Still others lived in cities where, if they possessed skills, they were often hired out. But the law treated all slaves as property, leaving them entirely at the mercy of their master who had the power to impose punishment and sell slaves away from their families. To protect themselves, slaves developed various traditions and strategies. Many turned to religion to provide spiritual comfort and cultural resources to resist the domination of their masters. Slaves also developed subtle forms of resistance such as feigned illness, work slow downs, and destruction of tools and other property. Occasionally slaves took more overt measures like running away, either to seek a temporary respite from the harsh labor regime or to escape North to freedom. The most radical and the rarest form of resistance was insurrection, rising up against the established authorities.

Varied Systems
 of Slave Labor Slave labor produced a variety of agricultural products—tobacco, hemp, sugar, and rice. But the leading product was cotton, an enterprise in which more than half of all slaves toiled. By 1840, cotton accounted for more than half the nation’s exports with most of it heading for European (especially British) textile mills. The remainder was sent north to mills in places like Lowell, Massachusetts. Yet even in those regions of the South in which cotton was not the primary crop, the cotton economy influenced economic life. Many farmers who did not produce cotton produced foodstuffs and supplies for consumption on cotton plantations. For instance, hemp was turned into rope to bind cotton bales for shipment. The antebellum South was divided economically into the lower South and the upper South. The warm climate of the lower South was ideal for cotton cultivation, as was the dark rich soil of the region stretching from Alabama to Texas known as the Black Belt. After 1820, cotton cultivation spread rapidly westward, propelled by two factors. First, the great wealth produced by cotton provided huge economic incentives for bringing new lands under cultivation. Second, because cotton exhausted soil of its nutrients, growers constantly sought new lands to bring under cultivation. To grow and harvest this cotton, planters relied on a labor force that was 90 percent enslaved.

Where was the Black Belt?


 The upper South included eight slave states, but it lacked the fertile land and long growing season necessary for cotton agriculture. As a result it embraced agricultural diversification, including grain and livestock. Of the agricultural staples produced in this region, corn, rye, and hemp were particularly important. With each passing decade, slavery became less and less viable in this region, and many masters sold their slaves to the lower South where demand for their labor was high. Although the Constitution had outlawed the international slave trade, a vibrant internal slave trade existed. Sales from the upper South to the lower South were central to this trade. Most slaves worked as field hands, toiling from sun up to sun down most of the year. On most large plantations slaves worked in the fields in gangs, which gave their masters more control over their labor. Men and women generally worked together, often supervised by a hired white overseer. Masters sometimes employed slaves to act as drivers, or supervisors, a role that required them to discipline other slaves or face punishment themselves. But a clever driver might find a way to protect other slaves from more severe punishment by an overseer. Larger plantations also employed many slave craftsmen as carpenters, blacksmiths, weavers, coopers (people who repaired wooden casks), and other occupations. Household slaves worked as cooks, coachmen, nannies, or maids. Planters used a system of rewards and punishments to enforce slave discipline. As rewards some

LIFE AND LABOR UNDER SLAVERY

 planters allowed slaves to maintain a small garden or even sell produce at market. Ultimately, however, labor discipline was enforced by violence. A popular management book that many planters consulted argued that “after reason and persuasion have been exhausted without producing the desired effect, punishment of some sort must be resorted to.” As an English observer noted, “Absence from work, or neglect of duty, was punished with stinted allowances, imprisonment, and flogging.” Northern abolitionist literature made the image of the whip one of their most prominent metaphors of life in the South as this broadside from an antislavery almanac reveals (9.15). Southern masters also controlled their slaves by threatening to sell them. Slaves in the upper South feared being sold “down river” to a cotton or sugar plantation because it meant separation from family and probably a harsher existence. Sales tore slave families apart. Sales may have dissolved as many as one-third of all slave marriages and separated almost half of the children living in the older parts of the South from a parent. The British artist Eyre Crowe painted a scene in a Richmond slave market, in which men, women, and children wait their turn on the auction block (9.16). Scenes such as this were common throughout Virginia and the Carolinas. In 1859, the Georgia



 9.15 Broadside with Image of Slave Whipping To portray the horror of slavery, abolitionists used the image of slave owners whipping their slaves.

 planter Pierce Butler sold 450 slaves in a single auction lasting days. A reporter from the New York Tribune described the misery of the slaves whose “brothers and sisters” were to be “scattered through the cotton fields of Alabama.” The “expressions of heavy grief,” the reporter noted, reflected their horror at being “torn from their homes” and separated from their loved ones.

Read the Document A Slave Tells of His Sale at Auction


9.16 The Slave
Market, Richmond,
Virginia
 An English artist who accompanied the novelist William Makepeace Thackeray on a tour of America captured the dehumanizing realities of a slave auction.

 What role did violence play in slave society?



 CHAPTER 9

WORKERS, FARMERS, AND SLAVES: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY, 1815–1848

 Although most of the South’s slaves toiled as agricultural laborers, many others worked in some type of industrial enterprise, primarily in the upper South. While the South lagged far behind the North in industrial development, it still exceeded all but the top five or six industrial nations in production of textiles and iron, flour and timber milling, sugar refining, and leather tanning. Most of these upper South industries relied on slave labor, and by 1850, at least five percent of the South’s slaves (between 150,000 and 200,000 persons) worked in industry. Employers owned 80 percent of the slaves who worked in industry with the rest hired out on yearly or short-term leases. Enslaved blacks and free whites sometimes worked side by side. Richmond’s Tredegar Iron Works employed such a mixed labor force until 1847, when a strike by whites prompted the owners to rely exclusively on enslaved black labor apart from a few white supervisors. Slaves also worked in nonagricultural enterprises in cities such as Richmond, Mobile, Charleston, and New Orleans. Slaves worked as domestics, artisans, carriage drivers, gardeners, couriers, and nurses. Southern cities also employed slaves for public works projects, including sanitation, road building, and bridge maintenance. Savannah and Charleston even used slaves as firefighters.

Life in the Slave Quarters
 Compared to Brazil, where living conditions for slaves were among the worst in the Americas, conditions for American slaves were less harsh. This contributed to a significant natural increase in the slave population in the United States; the population increased nearly fivefold between 1790 and 1850. Still American slave owners often treated their slaves brutally and provided inadequate food, shelter, clothing, and medical care. As a result infant mortality rates for slave children were twice those of white children. Life expectancy for whites in the South was between 40 and 43 years, which was lower than that in other parts of the country, but the average slave lived ten years less even than that. Fanny Kemble, the wife of planter Pierce Butler, described the slave quarters on her husband’s plantation in stark terms: “These cabins consist of one room, about twelve feet by thirteen. Two families (together numbering sometimes eight or ten) reside in one of these huts which are mere wooden frames.” Wealthier planters sometimes built sturdier framed houses with wooden floors or even brick houses for their slaves. The oppressive nature of slavery also shaped family life. Although Southern law did not recognize the legality of slave marriages, many slave men and

 Why did so many slaves marry slaves living on other plantations?

 women sought to form stable family relationships. Slaves developed their own marriage rituals to seal their unions. The most common was “jumping the broom,” which derived from traditional African marriage practices. Relatives or close friends of the bride and groom held opposite ends of a broom about a foot off the ground, and the couple would jump together over it as a symbol of their union. Planters encouraged slaves to marry because married slaves were less likely to run away. The offspring of slave marriages also provided planters with additional laborers. On larger plantations a slave family might reside together. On smaller plantations and farms, husbands and wives might reside on neighboring plantations. Such “abroad” marriages were common. Visiting a spouse under these circumstances required permission, and husbands might see their families only once a week. The slave family included extended kin, such as uncles, aunts, and, most important, grandparents, all of whom helped rear children.

Slave Religion and Music
 During the 1830s, Southern churches launched a major effort to convert slaves to Christianity. In proselytizing slaves white ministers stressed the conservative elements of Christian theology, often forbidding slaves from dancing during religious services and reminding them of the passages in the Bible that demanded slaves obey their masters. A popular Catechism for Colored Persons, for example, instructed slaves to “count their Masters ‘worthy of all honour,’ as those whom God has placed over them in the world.” But efforts to use religion to instill docility in slaves largely failed. Rather than accept their masters’ vision of Christianity, African Americans recast it to suit their own needs as slaves and articulate their hopes. The biblical story of the Exodus, which told of the flight of the Israelites from slavery in Egypt, was particularly popular. “God was working for their deliverance,” a Georgia slave commented, and “would deliver them from bondage as sure as the children of Israel were delivered from Egyptian bondage.” African Americans created covert churches called “brush arbors” or “hush arbors” to practice their version of the faith. Slaves also borrowed elements from African religions, creating a distinctive African-American religious culture. White observers were perplexed by the “ring shout,” an ecstatic form of worship that mixed African religious practice with Christian beliefs, describing its chanting as “weird” or “droning” and its dance as “wild” and “barbaric.” Yet to the enslaved the ring

Hear the Audio File “Go Down Moses”


LIFE AND LABOR UNDER SLAVERY

 shout’s rhythmic circle dance involving joined hands, counterclockwise movement to a steady beat, hand clapping, and free-form upper-body movements became an important religious ritual. Funeral practices also reflected this fusion of African and Christian rituals. Slaves often scattered broken ceramics over a grave, a practice carried over from African burial practices. A Maryland observer of a funeral noted that the body was interred with a miniature canoe and paddle. The slaves explained that this would allow the spirit to cross the ocean and return to Africa. Because slaves toiled in the fields during the day, their funerals typically took place at night. Torchlight processions to gravesites, accompanied by drumming and other African-inflected music and chants, unsettled white observers. Still some whites, as this painting of a slave preacher leading a funeral service (9.17) shows, overcame their cultural bias and appreciated the beauty of slave burials. Barely discernible between the two trees in the bottom corner of the painting are the plantation master and mistress. They are a visual reminder that slaves were never completely free from the watchful eye of their masters. Spirituals, a distinctive musical art form created by slaves, drew heavily on biblical themes. The figure of Moses and the plight of the ancient Hebrews who were delivered from slavery were two common themes. Slave spirituals also featured images of crossing over the River Jordan to freedom in this life or redemption in the next. Music was also important in other aspects of slave culture. Slaves used song to preserve African traditions, help relieve the monotony of work, entertain, or even communicate cryptic messages to other slaves. When slaves “went around singing ‘Steal Away to Jesus,’” a former slave recalled, it not only affirmed the hope of redemption but often signaled others that there would “be a religious meeting that night.” Virtually every major form of modern popular music: jazz, gospel, blues, rock and roll, and hiphop derive in part from musical traditions rooted in the experience of American or New World slavery.

Resistance and Revolt
 Slaves developed a complex range of behaviors to resist the harsh discipline forced on them. Many used subtle tactics to thwart their owners because they minimized

 the chances for punishment. Slaves feigned illness, broke tools, and slowed their pace of work to fight back against their economic exploitation. Another means of resistance was flight. Typically runaways left only for short periods, seeking a respite from servitude, or to visit kin and spouses on neighboring plantations. Less frequently slaves sought to gain their freedom by fleeing to free territory in the North or in Canada. In the Deep South, some slaves fled to Indian Territory or to swamps to escape detection. In a few celebrated cases, slaves devised daring methods of escape. The most extreme form of resistance was insurrection. In 1831, Nat Turner led the largest slave uprising in American history. A lay preacher, Turner had a vision of a battle between “white spirits and blacks spirits” that would commence when the “sun was darkened.” He believed that the solar eclipse in 1831 was a divine sign that the time for insurrection was ripe. Nat Turner’s Rebellion lasted two days and attracted between 60 and 80 slaves before authorities subdued the rebels. Before the carnage ended 55 whites were killed and as many African Americans. This woodcut from a contemporary account of the rebellion written by a supporter of slavery depicts the rebels unsympathetically, about to attack defenseless women and children, and the efforts of whites to defend their loved ones as



9.17 Plantation
Burial
 While a slave preacher leads a funeral service, the plantation master and mistress are visible in the woods between the two trees in the lower right corner of the painting.

 Why did biblical themes from the story of the Exodus figure so prominently in slave spirituals?



 CHAPTER 9

WORKERS, FARMERS, AND SLAVES: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY, 1815–1848

9.18 Woodcut
Image of Nat
 Turner’s Rebellion This image reflects the views of Southerners who were horrified by Turner’s uprising.

Slavery and the Law
 “Steal away to Jesus! Steal away, steal Southern state passed its own set of laws, or slave away home. I ain’t got long to stay here. Each codes, governing slavery. These laws described the My Lord calls me, He calls me by the property rights of masters (slaves were categorized between property and people), the duties thunder; The trumpet sounds within my somewhere slaves owed to their masters, and the punishments for soul, I ain’t got long to stay here.” various crimes. Although laws varied from state to Spiritual, “Steal Away to Jesus” heroic (9.18). The bottom of the image shows the militia riding to rescue these helpless victims. Many Northerners, however, viewed Nat Turner as a righteous and heroic warrior against the evil of slavery. After the Rebellion, Southern states enacted more repressive laws to prevent another revolt. These laws prevented African Americans from preaching and limited the access of free blacks to firearms. States also strengthened their militias and made assaults by slaves against whites capital offenses. On the other hand, the Virginia legislature debated abolishing slavery before voting 73 to 58 against a proposal to end it.

 state, slave codes generally accorded slaves minimal rights. These laws curtailed the movements of slaves, forbidding them to travel without written permission from their masters. Laws also proscribed teaching slaves to read or write. Slaves had no right to testify in court, and planters served as both judge and jury on their plantations, meting out punishment. On rare occasions a slave did obtain a day in court, as when a South Carolina court ruled that a slave could not be tried for the same crime twice, an application of the constitutional prohibition on double jeopardy that was a bedrock of American law. Despite such modest protections, however, slaves still enjoyed only the slimmest legal protection and remained at the mercy of their masters (see Choices and Consequences: Conscience or Duty? Justice Ruffin’s Quandary).

 “No one can read this decision, [State v. Mann] so fine and clear in expression, so dignified and solemn in its earnestness, and so dreadful in its results, without feeling at once deep respect for the man and horror for the system.” Abolitionist HARRIET BEECHER STOWE, The Key to Uncle Tom’s Cabin, (1853) Who was Nat Turner?

LIFE AND LABOR UNDER SLAVERY



Choices and Consequences
CONSCIENCE OR DUTY? JUSTICE RUFFIN’S QUANDARY
In 1829, Chief Justice Thomas Ruffin of the North Carolina Supreme Court issued his opinion in State v. Mann, a case involving an assault on a slave named Lydia by John Mann. Lydia’s owner, Elizabeth Jones, instigated the case against Mann (slaves had no legal standing to bring charges) for wounding her slave. Mann had rented Lydia from Jones, and the law recognized that as a temporary owner, he did not have the same long term interests in protecting his property. Thus, although Mann was legally entitled to discipline Lydia, his power over her was more limited than that of her legal owner. When Mann tried to discipline Lydia, she ran off. Mann then shot and wounded her. Rather than try to recover monetary damages in a civil trial, an option precluded because Mann was too poor to pay damages, Lydia’s owner pursued criminal charges. A lower court convicted Mann of an assault and battery on Lydia, and Mann then appealed the case to the state Supreme Court. State v. Mann explored legal questions at the heart of slavery. In deciding how to handle the case, Justice Ruffin faced difficult choices. 
Choices




 Uphold Mann’s conviction and affirm that the doctrine that a temporary master’s power to discipline was limited



 Overrule the lower court and assert that Mann had the same legal authority as Lydia’s owner, including the right to punish disobedience, and affirm that a master’s power over slaves was unlimited



 Decide the case on the narrowest grounds possible. Affirm the lower court ruling and avoid sweeping statements about the nature of the master’s powers by focusing squarely on the facts: the excessive use of force by a disreputable person with a history of violence.

Decision
 Ruffin chose to overrule the lower court. Although tempted to sympathize with the plight of slaves and offer them legal protections, he argued that the law denied them such protections: “The power of the master must be absolute to render the submission of the slave perfect.” To bestow on slaves basic rights would undermine slavery itself.

Consequences


 Woodcut image of master shooting slave

 Within five years, in State v. Will, Ruffin’s fellow justices partially repudiated his decision. The case did not dispute Ruffin’s major premise that a slave must be totally submissive, but it rejected his claim that the only means to accomplish this goal was to give the master total power. The court accepted that the master’s power was limited and the use of excessive or lethal force to discipline a slave was not protected by the law of slavery.

Continuing Controversies
 What role did ideas of justice play in Justice Ruffin’s understanding of the rule of law? Most modern scholars agree that the decision in State v. Mann reflects the fundamental immorality of slavery. But the controversy over the decision focuses on a more basic question about law itself. Does law simply reflect the dominant power relations of society? Or, can the law embody ideals of justice or fairness that are not simply a mask to disguise the naked exercise of power? Ruffin’s decision reinforced the power of the planter class, and many view it as vindicating those who believe that the law is a tool that enables the powerful (the masters) to dominate the weak (the slaves). However, Ruffin’s anguish and the later ruling in State v. Will might be seen as proof that the rule of law does impose constraints on the powerful.

 Does the law of slavery support the claim that the law is a tool of the powerful or a constraint on them?



 CHAPTER 9

WORKERS, FARMERS, AND SLAVES: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY, 1815–1848

1823–1825






 Lowell Mill opens

State v. Mann


Waltham System at Lowell,
 Massachusetts, becomes showcase for the new model of industrial production

 Decision affirms the idea that the master’s control over the slave is absolute

 Steam-powered train makes first trip First successful steam-powered train tested by the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad

 Nat Turner’s Rebellion Virginia slave leads the bloodiest slave uprising in U.S. history

 Erie Canal opens

CHAPTER REVIEW

 One of the great public works projects of the early nineteenth century reduces dramatically the cost of transportation

Review Questions
 1. What role did technological change play in the market revolution? How did such changes affect values? 2. How did ideas about gender roles change in response to the market revolution?

 4. How did slaves modify Christianity to articulate their distinctive religious vision? 5. Why did Judge Ruffin argue masters must have absolute power over slaves?

 3. How did slavery shape Southern society and the lives of non-slaveholders?

Key Terms
 Market revolution A set of interrelated developments in agriculture, technology, and industry that led to the creation of a more integrated national economy. Impersonal market forces impelled the maximization of production of agricultural products and manufactured goods.

 Waltham System Also known as the mill town model, a system that relied on factories housing all the distinctive steps of cloth production under a single roof.

 Telegraph Invention patented by Samuel Morse in 1837 that used electricity to send coded messages over wires, making communication nearly instantaneous.

 Nat Turner’s Rebellion The 1831 Virginia slave uprising led by Nat Turner shocked many in the South and led to a host of new repressive measures against slaves.

 Artisan production A system of manufacturing goods, built around apprenticeship that defined the pre-industrial economy. The apprentice learned a trade under the guidance of an artisan who often housed, clothed, and fed the apprentice.

State v. Mann The 1829 North Carolina Supreme Court
 case that involved a white man’s assault on a slave. The case asserted that the domination of the master over the slave was complete.

 Spirituals Religious songs created by slaves. Spirituals’ symbolism drew heavily on biblical themes.

CHAPTER REVIEW











 First strike at the Lowell Mill

 Helen Jewett murdered

 Lexington steam boat disaster

 Mill women’s strike at Lowell signals the beginning of a new phase of conflict between labor and capital

 The sensational murder of Helen Jewett shocks the nation and helps spur a huge increase in newspaper circulation

 The Code of Honor published in South Carolina Etiquette book describes the rules of dueling

 On January 13, 1840, the steamboat Lexington caught fire on route from Boston to New York. The disaster became one of the first great financial successes of printer and publisher Nathaniel Currier and helped launch the company that eventually became the venerable firm of Currier and Ives

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Workers, Farmers, and Slaves.

Questions for Analysis
 1. How did the Transportation Revolution transform the American economy and society? View the Closer Look Impact of the Transportation Revolution on Traveling Time, p. 255

 2. What were some of the negative consequences of rapid economic change for American society? View the Closer Look Images as History: Nature, Technology, and the Railroad, p. 257

 Other Resources from This Chapter Hear the Audio File Erie Canal, p. 256 Read the Document • A Second Peep at Factory Life, p. 261 • A Slave Tells of His Sale at Auction, p. 275

View the Closer Look Images as History: Fairmont Waterworks
Sculptures, p. 265


View the Image Free Black Church, p. 272
Watch the Video


 3. What does the Lowell Strike reveal about the changing nature of work during the early phase of industrialization? View the Closer Look Competing Visions: The Lowell Strike of 1834, p. 263

 4. How did changing patterns of immigration impact American society during the era of the market revolution? Read the Document Petition of the Catholics of New York (1840), p. 266

 5. What role did religion play in the lives of slaves? Hear the Audio File “Go Down Moses”, p. 276

• Coming of Age in 1833, p. 254
• Mastering Time and Space, p. 258


 How did religion influence reform movements?

Abolitionism and
 the Proslavery Response p. 290

 How did changes in abolitionism affect the pro-slavery argument?

The Cult of True
Womanhood,
 Reform, and Women’s Rights p. 295

 What values were associated with the new domestic ideal?

Religious and Secular
Utopianism p. 298


 How did the market revolution influence utopian ideals?

Literature and Popular
Culture p. 304


 How did literature and popular culture respond to the changes in American society?

 Nature’s Nation p. 308

 How did architecture, parks, and cemeteries reflect the larger changes occurring in American society?

 CHAPTER

Revivalism and
Reform p. 284




