 eliminate wasteful practices, a Justice Department that largely stopped enforcing anti-trust laws, and a high protective tariff that made imported goods more expensive than American industrial products. The Progressive Era effort to improve industrial efficiency, however, remained popular. Envisioning Evidence: Scientific Management in Action shows how industrialists tried to standardize hiring practices by relying on the “scientific” insights of Social Darwinism. Innovative industrialists also tried to put aside the prevailing idea that the interests of capitalists and workers inevitably clashed. Rather than driving their workers relentlessly to secure a profit, advocates of welfare capitalism suggested that industrialists offer a wide range of benefits such as medical insurance, pensions, and stock ownership plans to create a loyal workforce. As the vogue for welfare capitalism spread, many industrialists began to change their management practices. To develop a stable, well-trained workforce, industrialists introduced fringe benefits (including paid vacations and sick pay), created industrial committees where workers could air grievances, and offered bonuses for workers who exceeded production quotas. A worker usually needed at least 25 years with one company to qualify for a pension, so this policy alone could potentially keep workers from leaving to pursue other job opportunities. Industrialists also experimented with offering employees stock options, hoping to dilute class antagonism by making each worker an investor who would share in the company’s profits. Despite workers’ enthusiasm for welfare capitalism, the reality rarely matched the rhetoric. Seasonal layoffs continued, wage rates fluctuated constantly, and long hours in unhealthy factories persisted. As one worker complained, “we had to wait five years for one week’s vacation. And I’ve seen men work four and one-half years and then get laid off.” Industrialists’ promises ended up simply whetting workers’ appetites for stable well-paid jobs with benefits. During the Great Depression in the 1930s (see Chapter 22), the labor movement would demand that the government fulfill the hopes that industrialists had raised in the twenties. Increased industrial productivity and efficiency created an unprecedented abundance of affordable goods in the twenties. Blue-collar workers toiling in dead-end jobs in factories staffed with salaried whitecollar employees performing unsatisfying clerical tasks produced these items. Frustrated at work, many working- and middle-class Americans used their growing leisure time and access to material goods to create more fulfilling lives. A modern consumer culture arose

CARS AND PLANES: THE PROMISE OF THE TWENTIES



Envisioning Evidence
SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT IN ACTION

P
 ic k a C on nd cr sh W e he te ove l el ba H od rr o Ta ca w nk rri e Tr cl r uc ea ni k C ar er ( ng ba ry Tr ing rr el ac k ma s, c re te R a oa pa ria se s, ir ls S dr s ho (lu et e c. ve pa m ir C be ) le ling s r, an st m e B ee at ui rs e l) l a C din nd rial oa g in c l p de ar b S til as mo eta ulk se ls lit ke r a r io R n s ig nd an ge fu d f B i r r re n ’s oi le he ace ma r n s M l ac ma pe ke r hi B la nis r’s c t’ h C ksm s h elp ar e i pe th lp er er ’s nt P ip he er e fit ’s h lpe E ng te r el r i p M ne ’s h er er is ce ’s elp lla he er ne lp ou er s he lp er

 Scientific management, the effort to use scientific knowledge to maximize output and profit, took many forms in the 1920s. Mirroring how army psychologists had used intelligence tests to rank the aptitudes of different racial and ethnic groups in World War I (see Chapter 20), the Central Tube Company in Pittsburgh devised a chart to assess the abilities of various nationalities to perform skilled and unskilled jobs. The new profession of psychology accepted pseudoscientific social Darwinian ideas that “race” determined aptitude and the factory owner devised his own “scientific” chart to organize and run his business more efficiently. Rather than assessing the experience or capabilities of an individual, an employment agent only had to consult this chart to match the right man with the right job.

 Unsurprisingly, given the prevailing racial climate, white Americans topped the list as good in nearly all tasks.

Americans, White
Irish
Lithuanians
Hungarians


 In the mid-nineteenth century anti-Irish sentiment prevented many Irish from getting factory jobs, but by the 1920s this Pittsburgh employer saw them as valuable skilled workers.

Slovaks
Finns
Austrians
Canadians, Fr.
Italians
Canadians, Br.
Ukranians
English
Russians
Poles


 American blacks were considered only suited for unskilled jobs.

Scandinavians
Americans, Black
Germans


 While social Darwinists usually viewed northern Europeans as superior to southern and eastern Europeans, in the factory’s ethnic hierarchy Italians and Poles actually outscored Germans and French as desirable skilled workers.

Chinese
French
Japanese
Filipinos
Greeks
Spaniards
Portuguese
Belgians


 The chart portrayed Jews as bad at every job.

Mexicans
Jews


Good


Fair


Poor


Racial Adaptability to Various Types of Plant Work


View the Closer Look Envisioning Evidence: Scientific
Management in Action


 What kind of job could you have gotten in this factory?



 CHAPTER 21

21.3 The End of
Silent Films
By the end of the
 decade, Hollywood began advertising “all talking-singing” movies like “Cocoanuts.”

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

 that deemphasized traditional Victorian values of thrift and restraint. Americans instead increasingly relied on credit to buy cars, radios, and household appliances. Radio played a key role in forging a national mass culture. Over 60 percent of American homes acquired radios in the twenties, which until 1924 required headphones. Americans from all walks of life now simultaneously gathered around their radios to learn election results. Baseball fans throughout the nation listened to the play-by-play of the World Series, radio broadcasts that made New York Yankee player Babe Ruth a national hero. Farmers closely followed weather reports, and bankers digested the day’s financial news. “There is radio music in the air, every night, everywhere,” one

 newspaper observed. Big companies like Walgreen Drugs and Palmolive Soap started sponsoring nationally syndicated radio shows to boost sales of their products. These weekly comedies and dramas, filled with plugs for the sponsor’s merchandise, cultivated shared tastes in entertainment and products. Americans increasingly bought the same brand-name toothpaste at a chain store like Woolworths. Big business was not alone in recognizing the power of radio, however. Local radio shows designed specifically for union members, religious groups, immigrant communities, or African Americans helped strengthen bonds within these subcultures as well. Movie stars and athletes enjoyed nationwide adulation in the twenties. Silent-film actors like the comedian Charlie Chaplin, the sex symbol Rudolph Valentino, and “America’s Sweetheart” Mary Pickford became household names among a movie-going public that avidly purchased fan magazines filled with glossy photos of their favorite stars. By the end of the decade, Hollywood was producing films with sound, a novelty highlighted in this 1929 poster (21.3) for the Marx Brothers’ first film. The verbal repartee of the comedy trio delighted audiences. As silent films disappeared, so did the careers of many silent-film stars whose artistic talents lay in physical, not vocal, expression. Meanwhile professional sports gave rise to a slew of national sports heroes, such as the boxer Jack Dempsey. In an era dominated by cultural heroes, none rose to greater prominence than the pilot Charles A. Lindbergh.

The Age of Flight:
Charles A. Lindbergh
 The feats of pilot Charles A. Lindbergh ushered the nation into the age of flight. Commentators called the sky the new frontier, a label loaded with potent historical significance for Americans. By the late twenties, a time when machines seemed to matter more than people, the image of the lone pilot against the vast blue sky recalled the pioneer spirit of the nineteenth century. Lindbergh piloted his plane, the Spirit of St. Louis, on the first-ever nonstop solo flight from New York to Paris on May 21, 1927. Flying without the radio or radar that help modern pilots navigate, Lindbergh relied on a few navigational instruments and looking out the window to locate his position on a paper map as he flew. Sitting in a wicker chair with sandwiches and water under it, Lindbergh had a rubber raft on board in case he was forced to land in the cold Atlantic and a flashlight to examine his wings for ice.

 How did a mass popular culture emerge in the twenties?

 Watch the Video Video Lecture: 1920s Media

CARS AND PLANES: THE PROMISE OF THE TWENTIES



 “The Spirit of St. Louis is a wonderful plane. It’s like a living creature, gliding along smoothly, happily, as though a successful flight means as much to it as to me.” CHARLES A. LINDBERGH, evoking the perfect symmetry between man and machine Lindbergh’s flight lasted 33.5 hours, enough time to make him the hero of the decade. This photomontage (a composite photo made by pasting together separate images) of the Spirit of St. Louis passing the Eiffel Tower combined the symbol of Paris with the image of Lindbergh’s iconic plane (21.4). “Had we searched all America we could not have found a better type than young Lindbergh to represent the spirit and high purpose of our people,” the jubilant American ambassador wired President Coolidge amid the celebrations that followed Lindbergh’s landing in Paris. Lindbergh’s triumph assured Americans that individual initiative still mattered and that technological advancement benefited humankind at a time when the recent industrialized slaughter on the Western Front (see Chapter 20) suggested otherwise. The vision of planes serving a peaceful purpose by transporting mail and tourists replaced wartime images of aerial dogfights. Lindbergh toured the nation tirelessly to promote commercial air travel, and in 1931 also flew flood relief missions in China with his wife, the author Anne Morrow Lindbergh, to demonstrate the humanitarian good that planes made possible. In exalting Lindbergh’s achievement Americans channeled their own conflicting visions of the modern age. Some praised Lindbergh for exhibiting the same adventurous spirit that had propelled American pioneers across the West in the nineteenth century, values that seemed increasingly at risk in a machine-dominated age. “Charles Lindbergh is the heir of all that we like to think is best in America,” opined Outlook magazine. Others, including Lindbergh, rejected the idea that his flight epitomized a return to the past. Lindbergh asserted that his flight illustrated the nation’s industrial march forward, “the culmination,” he said, “… of all that was practicable and best in American aviation.” Although differing on whether the flight represented the revival of traditional values or the modern ethos of industrial might, Americans agreed that his flight renewed faith in the benefits of technology. Lindbergh suffered, however, in the public spotlight. The 1933 kidnapping and murder of his firstborn son became the most reported tabloid story

 of the day. Later in the decade Lindbergh tarnished his image by expressing anti-Semitism and admiration for Nazi Germany and joining with those who argued against American intervention in World War II. After Japan’s bombing of Pearl Harbor in 1941, Lindbergh changed his position. He flew combat missions against the Japanese, and his reputation recovered among many, when he took a strong anticommunist stand during the Cold War in the 1950s.

View the Image Charles Lindbergh and Spirit of St. Louis


21.4 Photo
Montage of the
Spirit of St. Louis
Flying Near the
Eiffel Tower
 In this imagined scene an unnamed photographer celebrated the moment that pilot Charles Lindbergh arrived in Paris by pasting an image of his famous plane flying past Paris’s most recognized monument.

 Why did Americans celebrate Lindbergh’s solo flight to Paris?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

Cultural Unrest
 Celebrating Lindbergh’s achievement was a unique moment of national unity in a decade dominated by cultural turbulence and strife. During the 1920s, societal-wide debates reflected competing visions over what values the nation should embrace as it entered the modern age. Cultural conflict turned political in the twenties as Americans debated the need for legislation to protect the nation’s morals, ethnic purity, and capitalist economy.

The Lost Generation
 “I’ve kissed dozens of men. I suppose I’ll kiss dozens more,” declared the flapper heroine of F. Scott Fitzgerald’s novel This Side of Paradise (1920), announcing a new attitude of living for the moment that defined the era’s youth culture. With his wife Zelda by his side, Fitzgerald put this philosophy into practice, moving from party to party in his fast-paced life as an expatriate in Europe. The Parisbased American writer Gertrude Stein coined the term “the Lost Generation” to describe white intellectuals and artists like Fitzgerald who rebelled against Victorian values in the twenties and lived primarily overseas. Lost Generation writers used Austrian psychologist Sigmund Freud’s theories to justify their revolt against “repressive” codes of conduct. Freud believed that subconscious sexual impulses drove human behavior and that repressed desires sometimes found expression in dreams. Fitzgerald was one of a host of writers including Ernest Hemingway, e. e. cummings, and John Dos Passos who championed sexual liberation as one way to escape the sterile and deadly confines of modern life. Men and women “spend their lives going in and out of doors and factories … they live their lives and find themselves at last facing death and the end of life without having lived at all,” asserts a character in Sherwood Anderson’s Many Marriages (1923) who, in the throes of a passionate extramarital affair, is preparing to end his marriage and leave his job. The hedonistic lifestyles depicted in many Lost Generation novels, while rarely bestowing lasting happiness on the protagonists, still rankled more traditionally minded Americans. Agreeing that modern culture was flawed, these Americans wanted to bolster, rather than reject, traditional values. These clashing cultural visions had strong political overtones. Alcohol remained central to

 What critique did the Lost Generation offer of American society?

 the Lost Generation ethos of pleasure-seeking, an indulgence that became illegal in the twenties, thanks to temperance reformers who felt that drinking threatened the moral fabric of American society.

Prohibition
 Temperance, one of the nation’s longest lasting reform movements (see Chapters 17 and 18), took on a new life during World War I. Wartime temperance propaganda claimed that “German brewers in this country have rendered thousands of men inefficient.” Organized “wet” opposition to the “dry” campaign materialized slowly, partly because critics of the temperance movement could not easily counter its emphasis on health, thrift, and morals. Some wets focused on personal freedom. Senator James Wadsworth contended that it seemed unfair to tell exhausted workers at the end of the day “you shall not have a glass of beer.” Other critics felt uneasy about increasing the power of the federal government so it could enforce prohibition. They argued that a proposed constitutional amendment prohibiting alcohol would violate states’ rights. The middle-class AntiSaloon League’s highly structured propaganda and lobbying campaign, however, easily overpowered this disjointed wet response on the local, state, and national level. Evangelical preacher Billy Sunday converted many churchgoers to the temperance cause, delivering impassioned sermons on the evils of alcohol. Sunday, a former professional baseball player, littered his sermons with slang, winning a large following among the rural poor and urban working class, who flocked to his revival meetings throughout the Midwest. The political elite also embraced the preacher. Sunday often dined at the White House and considered the oil tycoon John D. Rockefeller a friend. In his most famous

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Post-War
 Disillusionment in the 1920s

CULTURAL UNREST

 temperance speech, Sunday urged his listeners in 1908 to “get on the water wagon; get on for the sake of your wife and babies, and hit the booze a blow.” On December 18, 1917, Congress approved the Eighteenth Amendment, which banned the sale, manufacture, and transportation of intoxicating liquors. By January 16, 1919, the required 36 states had ratified it. By the time every state had voted, only Rhode Island and Connecticut had rejected it. When prohibition went into effect in 1920, Congress clarified what constituted an intoxicating beverage in the Volstead Act (1919), which defined any beverage with more than 0.5 percent alcohol as intoxicating liquor and established criminal penalties for manufacturing, transporting, or possessing alcohol. Congress never appropriated enough money for wide-scale enforcement, hampering Justice Department efforts to curb illegal drinking. The police raided working-class neighborhoods to shut down illegal distilleries, but the well-to-do drank their bathtub gin or homebrewed beer without interference. Many reform goals of the temperance movement remained unmet. Belying the expectation that it would create a more virtuous, law-abiding society, prohibition gave birth to a much more insidious form of crime. Organized crime syndicates ran profitable bootlegging operations that financed beer breweries and liquor distilleries, bribed cops, and stocked the shelves of illegal bars throughout major metropolitan areas. Trafficking in forbidden alcohol, the publicity-crazed gangster Al Capone became a powerful figure in the Chicago underworld, a position he maintained with unprecedented violence. In the 1929 St. Valentine’s Day Massacre, Capone’s men, posing as cops, pretended to arrest rival gang members and then lined them up against a wall and mowed them down with machine guns. Tabloid papers vividly recounted every detail of Capone’s “new technique of wholesale murder” to a shocked public. Suffering from syphilis that he contracted from a prostitute in one of his own brothels, Capone became increasingly unstable and violent before he went to prison for tax evasion in 1931. Secret bars called speakeasies proliferated. To demonstrate Americans’ widespread disrespect for prohibition, federal agent Izzy Einstein timed how long it took him to find alcohol in most major cities. It took him 21 minutes in Chicago, and only 31 seconds in New Orleans, when he asked a taxi driver where he could get a drink and the man replied, “right here,” as he pulled out a bottle. Einstein

Hear the Audio Prohibition is a Failure


 personally shut down over 4,000 speak easies nationwide, prompting bartenders to post his picture with the caption “watch for this man.” Illicit drinking became fashionable among the young urban elite, whose escapades Lost Generation writers helped glamorize. This image of a welldressed woman barhopping with her male companions (21.5) revealed new social acceptance for public drinking by respectable middle- and upper-class women. Americans had previously viewed saloons as male establishments that only women of low moral character, like prostitutes, dared to enter. The competing visions of whether illegal drinking was harmless fun or a vice that destroyed families kept the political debate over prohibition alive throughout the 1920s. Drys credited prohibition for the prosperous economy. By putting alcohol aside, they claimed, workers had become more productive, could afford to buy cars and furniture, and had more savings. Wets argued that the amendment generated



21.5 Well-Dressed
Trio Entering a
Speakeasy
 Frequenting speakeasies, which patrons entered by giving a secret password to the doorman, became fashionable for women during prohibition. Gone was the stigma that had stopped respectable women from drinking in public.

 Why did Americans eventually conclude that national prohibition was a failed experiment?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

 disrespect for the law as it became socially acceptable for Americans to commit a crime by purchasing alcohol. States’ rights advocates increasingly resented the arrival of federal officials trying to track down bootleggers. Picking up the Anti-Saloon League’s longstanding emphasis on protecting women and children, the wet lobby emphasized the dangers of teenagers drinking contaminated “moonshine” (a slang term for illicitly manufactured alcohol) in speakeasies run by the mob. Better to have them drink safely in public cafes, they argued. The beginning of the Great Depression in 1929, which thrust the nation into an unprecedented financial crisis, undermined the dry claim that prohibition brought prosperity. Wets made headway with the argument that enforcing the law drained the federal treasury. When Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt entered the White House in 1933, he immediately asked Congress to repeal prohibition. With lightening speed the states ratified the Twenty-First Amendment (1933), which repealed the Eighteenth Amendment. The temperance vision remained regionally popular, however, especially in the rural South and Midwest which continued to enforce local prohibition statutes. A few states also passed minimum-age drinking laws in the 1930s, but most states did not enact such laws until the 1980s.

The First Red Scare and
Immigration Restrictions
 The vision of America as the land of opportunity for peoples worldwide came under attack in the 1920s. Debates over immigration were not new, but for the first time the nativist vision prevailed. In the early twenties the United States underwent a historic shift, changing from a nation that admitted over one million immigrants a year in the decade leading up to World War I to one that grudgingly allowed fewer than 200,000 to enter the country annually. World War I was the catalyst that turned longstanding nativist attacks against immigrants into a mandate for dramatic change. Alarm over German Americans’ continued ties to Germany linked concerns about assimilation to the more potent political question of national security. The 1921 Emergency Immigration Act temporarily allowed 350,000 European immigrants to enter the country each year and set limits on how many immigrants could come from each European nation. Three years

 Why did the nation enact strict immigration restrictions in the twenties?

 later Congress made these quotas permanent. The Immigration Act of 1924 allowed unrestricted immigration from the Western Hemisphere, curtailed all Asian immigration, and used quotas to control how many immigrants emigrated from individual European nations. The law authorized a total of 165,000 immigrants from Europe, a figure that Congress reduced to 150,000 in 1929 at the start of the Great Depression. Assumptions about the racial superiority of northern Europeans strongly influenced the new national quotas portrayed in the “Immigration Act of 1924” chart (21.6). In this new quota system, Germany received the highest quota. If Americans no longer feared German immigrants, then why did the country feel compelled to adopt immigration restrictions? The answer: the communist-inspired Russian Revolution of 1917, a critical event that some Americans envisioned immigrants from Russia and Eastern Europe recreating in the United States. To meet this threat, the Justice Department arrested and deported alien anarchists and Communists suspected of trying to destroy American democracy and capitalism during the First Red Scare (1919–1920). Like Communists, anarchists believed that capitalist exploitation of the working class created widespread social suffering. While Communists wanted to create a workers’ government that controlled property, anarchists viewed all governments as corrupt. The anarchist movement’s most famous spokesperson was Emma Goldman, an eloquent speaker who had emigrated from Russia as a young girl. Anarchism, she wrote, “stands for the liberation of the human mind from the dominion of religion; the liberation of the human body from the dominion of property; liberation from the shackles and restraint of government.” Some anarchists felt justified using violence to advance their cause (one had assassinated President William McKinley in 1901). Goldman, however, disavowed armed conflict and instead tried to popularize the anarchist philosophy through lectures and the magazine that she founded, Mother Earth. In 1919, post office clerk Charles Kaplan helped avert disaster. Reading a newspaper account, as he rode the subway home, of two anarchist mailbomb attacks, one against the mayor of Seattle and another against a senator from Georgia. Kaplan realized that the description of the booby-trapped

Read the Document A. Mitchell Palmer on the
Menace of Communism


CULTURAL UNREST



 packages matched that of 16 parcels he had Northwest Europe and Eastern and Other Countries Scandinavia Southern Europe recently set aside for insufficient postage, including one addressed to oil tycoon John Quota Quota Country Country Quota Country D. Rockefeller. Kaplan’s discovery triggered a 5,982 1,100 Africa (other Poland 51,227 Germany than Egypt) nationwide investigation that netted 18 more Great Britain and 3,845 34,007 Italy Northem Ireland Czechoslovakia 3,073 Armenia mail bombs. Australia Irish Free State (Ireland) 28,567 2,248 Russia As anxiety mounted, terrorists exploded Yugoslavia Sweden Palestine 9,561 dynamite outside the home of Attorney GenNorway Syria 6,453 Romania eral A. Mitchell Palmer, the man heading the Portugal France Turkey 3,954 Justice Department’s hunt for Bolshevik and Egypt 2,789 Denmark Hungary Switzerland New Zealand & 100 anarchist terrorists. Palmer warned that “on Lithuania 2,081 Pacific Islands Netherlands Latvia 1,648 a certain day which we have been advised of,” 1,900 All others Austria Spain radicals were planning “to rise up and destroy Belgium Estonia the Government at one fell swoop.” To head Finland Albania off this revolutionary uprising, Palmer raided Free City of Danzig Bulgaria Iceland Greece the homes and offices of suspected radicals Luxembourg and deported hundreds of immigrants with ties to radical organizations, including Emma Total (Number) 142,483 Total 3,745 Total 18,439 (Number) (Number) Goldman. 2.3 Total (%) 11.2 Total (%) Total (%) 86.5 While the government focused on the need to ensure public safety, radicals asserted their rights to freedom of speech and peace21.6 Immigration Recent findings suggest that Sacco and Vanzetti ful assembly. Without concrete evidence of their of 1924 participation in any criminal activity, they argued, were indeed dedicated anarchists with close con- Act The United States nections to those who planned the spate of 1919 the government was prosecuting them merely for enacted a quota system in the 1920s bombings, but no conclusive evidence ties them their beliefs. Coming on the heels of wartime arthat allotted most to the 1920 murder. rests under the Espionage and Sedition acts, the slots to immigrants The First Red Scare ended quickly. As the angovernment’s harassment of radical activists durfrom northern archist attacks ceased, the press began to poke fun Europe. ing 1919–1920 made it practically impossible for at Palmer’s “hallucinations” of a mass uprising radical groups to organize, distribute literature, or and accused him of exaggerating the “revolutiongive public speeches championing their political ary menace” as part of a failed campaign to win ideals. the Democratic presidential nomination in 1920. Radicals tried to fight back by taking up the Although the arrests and deportations stopped, cause of anarchists Nicola Sacco and Bartolothe First Red Scare gave credence to the antimeo Vanzetti, two Italian immigrants arrested immigration argument that the country needed in Massachusetts for the robbery and murder protection from foreigners who might import of a payroll guard in 1920. Poor Italian immidangerous radical political theories. grants and left-leaning union members made Other arguments also helped tip the balance in numerous small donations to the Sacco-Vanzetti favor of immigration restriction. Urban elites and Defense Committee, which sponsored picnics rural folk worried about protecting the “racial puand wrestling matches to raise funds for their rity” of American stock, while unions and African defense. Many intellectuals also supported the Americans feared competition from immigrant pair, including Roger Baldwin, who had recently laborers. By the early twenties industrialists had founded the American Civil Liberties Union dropped their complaint that immigration restric(ACLU), to protect constitutional liberties. The tions would deprive business of a traditionally portrait that prosecutors painted of Sacco and inexpensive labor source. Many now believed that Vanzetti—foreign-born, openly radical, and machines would increasingly replace unskilled in possession of guns and anarchist pamphlets immigrant workers in factories and felt confident when arrested—epitomized the terrorist threat that there were enough African American many Americans feared. Sacco and Vanzetti’s or Mexican workers to alleviate any labor shortradical and liberal supporters embraced a comage. With the consensus moving toward immigrapeting vision, blaming growing xenophobia for tion restrictions, immigrant associations sought to the pair’s conviction and 1927 electrocution.

View the Closer Look Immigration to the United States,
1870–1915


 What competing visions over radicalism emerged during the Sacco-Vanzetti trial?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

 ensure that their nationality received the highest quota possible. Official quotas, however, do not reveal the exact numbers of immigrants who entered the country. If denied entry under the quota system, which remained intact from 1924 through 1965, determined immigrants exploited loopholes. The 1924 law contained two key provisions that have remained staples of American immigration legislation: the principle of family reunification, which let resident immigrants bring in members of their immediate families, and the desirability of certain skills. The law, for example, established exemptions for trades facing worker shortages in the United States, such as domestic service. Other savvy European immigrants simply entered the country illegally, often by way of Mexico or Canada, two nations that still enjoyed unrestricted immigration to the United States.

Fundamentalism
 The cultural debates surrounding prohibition and immigration restrictions assumed a decidedly political edge in the 1920s. Christian Fundamentalists added to the decade’s cultural turbulence when they initiated a campaign to stop the teaching of biologist Charles Darwin’s views on evolution. Religious conservatives felt that Darwin’s theories contradicted the Bible’s depiction of God creating the world and humankind in seven days. They instead subscribed to the tenets of fundamentalism, an evangelical Christian theology that viewed the Bible as an authentic, literal recounting of historical events and the absolute moral word of God. By critiquing Darwin, Fundamentalists offered a conservative alternative to modernism, a liberal Christian theology embraced in many urban areas that emphasized the ongoing revelation of divine truth. Offering competing religious visions Fundamentalists accepted the Bible as errorless, while Modernists reinterpreted the Bible when confronted with new scientific knowledge (such as fossil evidence of evolution). Believing that “monkey men mean monkey morals,” the World Christian Fundamentals Association lobbied for state laws that prohibited teaching evolution in public schools. In 1925, Tennessee made it a crime to teach “any theory that denies the story of the Divine Creation as taught in the Bible, and to teach instead that man has descended from a lower order of animals.” Passed

 Why did Fundamentalists object to teaching evolution in public schools?

 mostly to make sweeping school reforms more palatable to Fundamentalist voters, the state made no effort to enforce the law and even adopted a biology textbook that included an extended discussion of Darwin’s ideas. The ACLU viewed the law as a violation of the First Amendment’s guarantee of free speech. Hoping to test its constitutionality, the ACLU offered to help any teacher in Tennessee who wanted to challenge the law in court. Civic boosters in Dayton, Tennessee, responded to the offer. A trial highlighting the clash between science and religion was bound to attract huge crowds, they reasoned, and by hosting this national extravaganza, Dayton expected to draw an influx of visitors with cash to spend. John Scopes, a 24-year-old science teacher and part-time football coach, agreed to step forward, so officials in Dayton could arrest him. The infamous Scopes trial was underway. Interest in Scopes, the ACLU, and Dayton faded once William Jennings Bryan agreed to prosecute the case and Clarence Darrow arrived to defend Scopes. Bryan was the former leader of the Democratic Party, who had unsuccessfully run for president three times and resigned as secretary of state when President Woodrow Wilson abandoned complete neutrality during World War I. The devout Bryan blamed Germany’s embrace of evolutionary notions like “survival of the fittest” for causing the brutal global war. Darrow was an agnostic, famous for defending both radical labor leaders, such as the socialist Eugene Debs, and wealthy murderers. Hundreds of journalists descended on the town to observe the courtroom confrontation between Bryan and Darrow. Their dispatches helped build publicity for the “monkey trial,” a reference to evolutionists’ claim that humans had descended from apes. Urban-based reporters billed the case as a conclusive struggle between modern America and the ignorant rural masses (few of whom shared in the general prosperity of the 1920s) whose alleged backward thinking threatened to impede the country’s progress. In his widely read reports, nationally syndicated columnist H. L. Mencken regularly referred to Fundamentalists as hillbillies and yokels. Fundamentalists fought back. The carnival-like atmosphere outside the courtroom soon included Fundamentalist revival meetings and performances by trained chimpanzees that mocked evolutionists. Vendors did a brisk business selling

View the Closer Look Immigration Quotas


CULTURAL UNREST



 Dueling newspaper headlines during the Scopes Trial: “‘They Call Us Bigots When We Refuse to Throw Away Our Bibles,’ Bryan says.” “We say ‘Keep Your Bible,’ but keep it where it belongs, in the world of your conscience.” monkey dolls, like the one held by Lena Ruffner (21.7), who announced her support of Bryan by pinning a sign “they can’t make a monkey out of me” to her dress. Both Bryan and Darrow argued that they were protecting American democratic institutions. Bryan maintained that the Tennessee legislature had the right to pass any law that the majority wanted; Darrow contended the state had violated the constitution by establishing Christianity as an official religion and limiting freedom of expression. The mainstream press viewed the trial as a showdown between science and religion, with science winning a decisive victory. In their account, the climatic moment came when Darrow called Bryan to the witness stand and trapped him into confessing he did not accept the entire Bible as the literal truth. “We have the purpose of preventing bigots and ignoramuses from controlling the education of the United States,” Darrow declared in court, expressing Modernists’ view of fundamentalism. The national press labeled Bryan a broken man when he died in his sleep five days after Scopes was found guilty and fined. The courtroom, however, had burst into applause when during his crossexamination Bryan had thundered, “I am simply trying to protect the word of God against the greatest atheist or agnostic in the United States.” Southern folk songs popularized this competing heroic image of Bryan as someone who “fought for what was righteous and the battle it was won / Then the Lord called him to heaven for his work on earth was done.” After Scopes’s conviction the ACLU appealed to the Tennessee Supreme Court, which upheld the law’s constitutionality and then overturned the verdict because the judge rather than the jury had imposed the fine. Scopes’s acquittal meant that the ACLU had to find a new case to take before the U.S. Supreme Court. After the ridicule heaped

 on Dayton, however, no town or teacher was willing to help the ACLU try again. Tennessee did not repeal the law until 1967. A year later the U.S. Supreme Court declared anti-evolution laws unconstitutional. Although soon forgotten by mainstream America, throughout the twentieth century Fundamentalists created a thriving minority subculture of churches, schools, universities, publishers, radio ministries, and missionary societies. Fundamentalists rejoined the cultural and political mainstream in the 1970s and are generating headlines again with their challenges to teaching evolution in public schools. In one striking break from the past, Fundamentalists now use Darrow’s line of reasoning to argue that keeping the biblical theory of creation out of high school biology classes violates the constitutional guarantee to freedom of expression.

21.7 Young
Woman Holds
 Monkey Doll during the Scopes Trial A supporter of prosecutor William Jennings Bryan wears a sign ridiculing the theory of evolution and displays the monkey doll she bought from a vender outside the courthouse.

 What cultural and religious tensions were exposed during the Scopes trial?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

Racial Violence and Civil Rights
 Advocates of prohibition, immigration restrictions, and fundamentalism had varying degrees of success reshaping American society after the war. African Americans were also active, employing new strategies to advance racial equality. A new generation of black political activists emerged, determined to fight back when whites attacked. The Harlem Renaissance, an outpouring of African American artistic expression in the 1920s and 1930s, also stirred debate within the African American community over the best way to improve the lives of African Americans.

21.8 Souvenir
Postcard, Thomas
Shipp and Abram
Smith Lynching,
Marion, Indiana
 After witnessing the lynching of two black men, smiling men and women had their pictures taken as a memento. The two girls to the left clutch pieces of the victims’ hair. The photographer sold thousands of copies for 50 cents each.

Lynching, Racial Rioting,
 and the Ku Klux Klan Lynch mobs tortured and killed nearly 5,000 victims between 1880 and 1930, roughly two per week. The souvenir postcard (21.8) by studio photographer Lawrence Beitler depicted the lynching of Thomas Shipp and Abram Smith, a disturbing relic from this grisly past. Professional photographers often attended lynchings and sold hundreds of picture postcards

 What does this souvenir postcard reveal about the ritual of lynching?

 to perpetrators and witnesses, who put them in family scrapbooks or sent them to friends and relatives. Besides buying souvenir postcards, whites sometimes took other relics from the victim, including hair, clothing, fingers, and ears. Both the existence of this postcard and the scene it depicts raise chilling questions about the ritual of lynching. Rather than viewing their murderous act as shameful or believing that they needed to conceal their identities to avoid prosecution, these participants smile openly for the camera. Police rarely arrested anyone for a lynching, preferring to claim that the victims died “at the hands of persons unknown.” Trumped-up accusations that the victim had raped or murdered a white person usually fueled a lynching frenzy. Police had arrested Shipp and Abram for robbery, murder, and rape. The purpose of lynching, however, went beyond administering extralegal justice. Lynching also created a climate of terror that helped whites maintain social control over all blacks, not just thosee killed. James Weldon Johnson, a well-regarded poet who served as director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in the twenties,

RACIAL VIOLENCE AND CIVIL RIGHTS

 coined the term “The Red Summer of 1919” to describe the wave of vicious assaults against black communities that left at least 43 African Americans dead. Some whites also used organized violence to prevent blacks from competing with whites economically. Mobs attacked thriving black business centers and middle-class homes in Tulsa, Oklahoma, in 1921, and in Rosewood, Florida, in 1923. A headline in a Tulsa newspaper even helped mobilize whites by issuing the call “To Lynch A Negro Tonight.” In both the Tulsa and Rosewood race riots, African Americans fought back, but enraged white crowds still burned both communities to the ground. Officials in Tulsa declared martial law and imprisoned one-half of the city’s black population in internment camps. After gaining their freedom a few weeks later, 1,000 families spent the winter in tents before beginning the huge task of rebuilding their community. In 1994, Florida awarded survivors of the Rosewood race riot $150,000 each in reparations. For the first time African Americans received compensation for past racial injustices, raising the question of whether victims of other racially motivated attacks deserved financial settlements. With the states unwilling to prosecute the members of lynch mobs, the NAACP lobbied to make lynching a federal crime. Hoping to shock the nation into supporting an anti-lynching law, the NAACP used graphic images of lynchings in their pamphlets, parades, and posters. Southern congressmen, however, blocked passage of a federal anti-lynching bill by claiming that it violated the constitutional right of states to police themselves. This photograph of Shipp and Smith “haunted me for days,” recalled Abel Meeropol, a Jewish schoolteacher from New York active in leftist politics. It inspired him to compose “Strange Fruit,” a song denouncing lynching that Billie Holiday recorded in 1939. Meeropol’s stanzas painted a gruesome picture: “Southern trees bear strange fruit/Blood on the leaves and blood at the root/Black body swinging in the Southern breeze/Strange fruit hanging from the poplar trees.” The lyrics also partly misinterpreted the image. Although most lynchings took place in the South, the attack pictured here occurred in Marion, Indiana. Indiana was home to the largest chapter of the Ku Klux Klan in the 1920s, enrolling nearly one-half of the

Read the Document The “Creed of Klanswomen” (1924)


 state’s white male population even though only three percent of the state’s population was black. The federal government had suppressed the original Ku Klux Klan during Reconstruction (see Chapter 15). The Klan revived in the 1910s and became a national organization that drew members from all parts of the country with membership fluctuating between three and six million throughout the twenties. The new Klan organized their call for white Protestant supremacy under the banner of 100 percent Americanism, and their list of enemies included any group that threatened the traditional order. Anxieties aroused by blacks’ wartime migration to northern and midwestern industrial centers, the Red Scare, women’s suffrage, mass immigration, prohibition, and postwar strikes caused many conservative whites to listen sympathetically to Klan outbursts against blacks, Jews, Catholics, immigrants, radicals, feminists, and bootleggers. The 1925 Klan march in Washington, D.C. (21.9), exposed the group’s national appeal. City officials required the 40,000 assembled Klan members to march from the White House to the Capitol without their masks. Like lynch mobs these Klan members were unafraid to reveal their identities as they proudly unfurled an American flag that championed the Klan’s “patriotic” slogan of “Native, white, Protestant supremacy.” The march represented the high tide of Klan power in the twenties. As fears of social upheaval diminished, Klan membership also decreased.



21.9 Ku Klux Klan
 in Washington, D.C., 1925 Klan members unfurl a giant American flag on the steps of the Capitol, equating patriotism with white supremacy.

 Why did membership in the Ku Klux Klan surge in the twenties?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

Marcus Garvey


21.10 Marcus
Garvey
 The leader of the UNIA often appeared in full military dress to project an image of strength and racial pride. He challenged prevailing racial stereotypes of black subservience by adopting regalia usually worn by kings.

 The African American community had long debated how to end racial attacks and segregation. In the 1890s, Booker T. Washington squared off against W. E. B. Du Bois over whether blacks should focus first on improving their economic position or demanding political rights (see Chapter 18). Washington died in 1915, and in the 1920s, Jamaican immigrant Marcus Garvey took up his idea of empowering blacks economically. Garvey founded the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) to encourage economic self-sufficiency by creating black-owned businesses. The UNIA organized the Black Star Line, a short-lived capitalist venture that sold $5 stock certificates to finance the world’s only black-owned and staffed fleet of steamships. Garvey’s working-class followers, native-born African Americans and recently arrived immigrants from the West Indies, purchased stock enthusiastically. Poor management, however, forced the Black Star Line to dissolve in 1922. Despite their shared message of economic empowerment, the black nationalist Garvey was much more militant than Washington. There was nothing shameful in being black, Garvey told

 his audiences, criticizing African Americans who used skin lighteners and hair straighteners to make themselves appear more white. “God,” Garvey said, “made no mistake when he made us black with kinky hair. We have outgrown slavery, but our minds are still enslaved to the thinking of the Master Race. Now take these kinks out of your mind, instead of out of your hair.” Like Washington, Garvey rejected the political goal of dismantling Jim Crow that dominated other civil rights organizations. But unlike Washington, who wanted to improve life for blacks within the United States, Garvey spoke often of acquiring enough economic power to establish an independent African nation that could reunite the world’s dispersed black peoples. Pageantry was a hallmark of the UNIA. Its meetings often included a uniformed male African Legion dressed in blue, and female Black Cross Nurses in white. To give these gatherings an official air, participants waved tri-color flags that Garvey described as,“Black for our race, red for our blood, and green for our hope.” Black middleclass detractors ridiculed Garvey’s tendency to appear, as pictured here (21.10), wearing a plumed hat and military regalia. These critics called him “a clown” in a “gaudy uniform” who led “big parades of ignorant people down the street selling pie in the sky.” Garvey, however, believed that seeing a black man dressed as an aristocrat inspired confidence among his followers and challenged the stereotype of black subservience perpetuated by white America. The Justice Department took note of Garvey’s theatrics. Worried that his movement was sowing the seeds of a violent black rebellion, government spies monitored his activities. Competing Visions: Debating Garveyism explores Garvey’s vision for black America and the criticism of W. E. B. Du Bois, a leader in the NAACP who supported immediate integration. Some of Garvey’s black critics organized a “Garvey Must Go” campaign and helped the government convict him of fraudulent use of the mails in 1923. He served four years in prison and was then deported. Without Garvey the UNIA collapsed. Garveyism, however, offered African Americans an alternative to the integrationist vision of the NAACP and introduced separatist ideas that Black Power advocates would resurrect in the 1960s (see Chapter 27).

 Why did Garvey elicit such strong emotions among both followers and critics?

RACIAL VIOLENCE AND CIVIL RIGHTS



Competing Visions
DEBATING GARVEYISM
Many of the traditional civil rights elite despised Marcus Garvey, whom they accused of swindling the poor of their hard-earned money and stirring up racial animosity within the United States. Garvey in turn accused lightskinned African American leaders of racial prejudice, arguing that they could not accept the dark-skinned Garvey as their equal. In the following excerpts Garvey lays out his reasons for urging black Americans to go “Back to Africa,” while W. E. B. Du Bois, one of the light-skinned elites Garvey attacked, criticizes Garvey’s vision. How does Garvey propose to stop “crimes against the race”? What portrait does Du Bois offer of Garvey? In “The True Solution of the Negro Problem” (1922) Marcus Garvey argued that creating a homeland in Africa could solve the problem of racial violence in the United States. 
 In this 1923 biographical sketch, “Marcus Garvey,” W. E. B. Du Bois views Garvey as misguided and inept.

 Garvey soon developed in America a definite and in many respects original and alluring program. He proposed to establish the “Black Star Line” of steamships under We cannot allow a continuation of these crimes [lynching Negro ownership and with Negro money, to trade between and disenfranchisement] against our race. As four hundred the United States, the West Indies, and Africa. He proposed million men, women and children, worthy of the existence to establish a factories corporation which was going to given us by the Divine Creator, we are determined to solve build factories and manufacture goods both for local our own problem, by redeeming our Motherland Africa consumption of Negroes and for export.… When from the hands of alien exploiters and found there Mr. Garvey brought his cohorts to Madison a government, a nation of our own, strong Square Garden, and when, ducking his dark enough to lend protection to the members of head at the audience, he yelled, “We are our race scattered all over the world, and going to Africa to tell England, France and to compel the respect of the nations and Belgium to get out of there,” America sat races of the earth. up, listened, laughed, and said here at Do they lynch Englishmen, Frenchmen, least is something new.… Thus the Germans or Japanese? No. And Why? Black Star Line arose and disappeared, Because these people are represented and with it went some $800,000 of the by great governments, mighty nations savings of West Indians and a few and empires … ever ready to shed the American Negroes.… last drop of blood and spend the last penny His African program was made impossible by in the national treasury to protect the honor his own pigheadedness. He proposed to make a and integrity of a citizen outraged anywhere. Button won by Marcus start in Liberia with industrial enterprises. From Garvey supporters Until the Negro reaches this point of national this center he would penetrate all Africa and independence, all he does as a race will count for gradually subdue it. Instead of keeping this plan hidden naught, because the prejudice that will stand out against and working cautiously and intelligently toward it, he yelled him even with his ballot in his hand, with his industrial and shouted and telegraphed it all over the world. Without progress to show, will be of such an overwhelming nature consulting the Liberians, he apparently was ready to assume as to perpetuate mob violence and mob rule.… partial charge of their state.… [H]is talk about conquest and If the Negro were to live in this Western Hemisphere for “driving Europe out,” aroused European governments.… another five hundred years he would still be outnumbered The present generation of Negroes has survived two by other races who are prejudiced against him. He cannot grave temptations, the greater one, fathered by Booker T. resort to the government for protection for government Washington, which said, “Let politics alone, keep in your will be in the hands of the majority of the people who are place, work hard, and do not complain,” and which meant prejudiced against him, hence for the Negro to depend on perpetual color caste for colored folk by their own cooperation the ballot and his industrial progress alone, will be hopeless and consent … and the lesser, fathered by Marcus Garvey, as it does not help him when he is lynched, burned, jimwhich said, “Give up! Surrender! The struggle is useless; back crowed and segregated. The future of the Negro therefore, to Africa and fight the white world.” outside of Africa, spells ruin and disaster.

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Debating Garveyism


 How did Garvey and Du Bois link the U.S. Civil Rights Movement to international politics?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

The Harlem Renaissance
 Claude McKay

“If We Must Die”
(1919)


 If we must die, let it not be like hogs Hunted and penned in an inglorious spot, While round us bark the mad and hungry dogs, Making their mock at our accursed lot. If we must die, O let us nobly die, So that our precious blood may not be shed In vain; then even the monsters we defy Shall be constrained to honor us though dead! O kinsmen we must meet the common foe! Though far outnumbered let us show us brave, And for their thousand blows deal one deathblow! What though before us lies the open grave? Like men we’ll face the murderous, cowardly pack, Pressed to the wall, dying, but fighting back!

Countee Cullen


“Incident”
(1924)


 Once riding in old Baltimore, Heart-filled, head-filled with glee, I saw a Baltimorean Keep looking straight at me. Now I was eight and very small, And he was no whit bigger, And so I smiled, but he poked out His tongue, and called me, “Nigger.” I saw the whole of Baltimore From May until December; Of all the things that happened there That’s all that I remember.

 In these poems how do responses to racism vary?

 Garvey based the UNIA in Harlem, a thriving African American neighborhood in New York City that became the hub of black politics and culture in the 1920s. African American artists, photographers, musicians, and writers celebrated the distinctiveness of black culture. Many writers published their works in black magazines such as The Crisis and The Messenger. White literary figures like Carl Van Vechten also helped black writers publish their works with commercial presses, exposing white America to black artistic endeavors. The African American philosopher Alain Locke captured the creative impulse of the Harlem Renaissance in 1925, when he published The New Negro, an anthology of essays and poems by emerging literary voices. According to Locke the New Negro embodied a spirit of black racial pride and militancy that set a younger generation of African American artists and civil rights leaders apart from their predecessors, who had emphasized assimilating into white culture. Harlem Renaissance writers took up themes previously absent from serious works of literature. Poet Langston Hughes discussed black Americans’ aspirations; Jean Toomer’s novel Cane explored the rhythms of working-class life in the countryside and city; Zora Neale Huston exposed the power of female sexuality in her novel Their Eyes Were Watching God; poet Countee Cullen confronted the psychological impact of racism; and Claude McKay celebrated manly violence in his poems and novels. The poems displayed here show how McKay, Cullen, and Hughes protested racial discrimination. The Harlem Renaissance also included the jazz music innovations of trumpeter Louis Armstrong, pianist and arranger Fletcher Henderson, and pianist and composer Ferdinand “Jelly Roll” Morton. Jazz was an original American musical style that melded African American and European musical traditions. White and black patrons flocked to Harlem to listen to black bands at venues like the Cotton Club and the Savoy, while white musicians nationwide formed jazz bands of their own. Thanks to new commercial radio stations and the growing record industry, jazz became so popular that Americans began calling the twenties “The Jazz Age.” Jazz music, the white conductor Leopold Stokowski rejoiced, was “an expression of the times, of the breathless, energetic, superactive times in which we are living.” James Weldon Johnson’s poem “The Prodigal Son” highlighted the dangers awaiting recent southern migrants, unschooled in big-city ways,

 Hear the Audio “If We Must Die,” poem and reading by Claude McKay

RACIAL VIOLENCE AND CIVIL RIGHTS

 who flocked to Harlem’s jazz clubs. In the twodimensional drawing by African American artist Aaron Douglas that accompanied the poem (21.11), female dancers surround a young man and gyrate to the music provided by a hovering jazz trombone. The fragments of a dollar, playing card, and gin label evoke the temptations confronting this young man. Johnson’s poem echoed the rhythms of sermons that folk preachers delivered to their rural southern congregations about the evils of city life: “With the sweet-sinning women of Babylon / And they stripped him of his money / And they stripped him of his clothes / And they left him broke and ragged / In the streets of Babylon.” As Johnson’s poem suggested, African Americans expressed conflicting views about jazz. Many artists celebrated the music’s originality and exuberance. Like Southern preachers, however, the urban black middle class viewed jazz as “the devil’s music,” believing that its syncopated rhythms aroused sexual impulses and encouraged lewd behavior. Jazz clubs often served illegal alcohol purchased from organized crime rings, linking jazz music to the immoral lifestyle that many black middle-class prohibition



 I, too, sing America.

Langston Hughes


“I, Too, Sing
America”
(1925)


 I am the darker brother. They send me to eat in the kitchen When company comes, But I laugh, And eat well, And grow strong. Tomorrow, I’ll be at the table When company comes. Nobody’ll dare Say to me, “Eat in the kitchen,” Then. Besides, They’ll see how beautiful I am And be ashamed— I, too, am America.

 advocates wanted to eradicate. The middle class preferred religious spirituals, a distinctive African American musical tradition that they felt projected a more respectable image of black culture to mainstream America. The literature of the Harlem Renaissance also drew fire. Du Bois criticized Claude McKay for depicting black working-class culture as a collection of pimps, criminals, drunks, and whores in his 1928 novel Home to Harlem. Du Bois lambasted McKay for reinforcing the negative stereotypes that white America held of African American culture, thereby undermining the possibility of using art to challenge the racial status quo. Defending New Negro aesthetics and the principle of artistic freedom, Langston Hughes countered, “We younger Negro artists who create now intend to express our dark-skinned selves without fear or shame. If white people are pleased we are glad. If they are not, it doesn’t matter. We know we are beautiful.”

21.11 Prodigal Son, 1927
 Aaron Douglas’s innovative angular style evoked the fast pace of modern life in an illustration that both portrayed and epitomized the artistic innovations of the Harlem Renaissance.

 Hear the Audio “I Too,” poem and reading by Langston Hughes

 What competing views arose over the purpose of art during the Harlem Renaissance?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

The New Woman
 Women began the decade with a significant political victory when the Nineteenth Amendment gave them to right to vote in 1920. Female reformers expected newly enfranchised women to care deeply about issues affecting their gender, but the much-anticipated “women’s vote” never materialized. Throughout the twenties Americans offered competing visions of women’s proper place in American society. Former suffragists envisioned modern women playing an active role in politics. Popular culture, however, consistently defined the “new woman” as someone who kept herself thin, pretty, and lively for her husband.

Women in the Twenties
 When women got the right to vote nationwide, an aging generation of feminists tried immediately to organize the female vote behind causes that particularly affected women. Black women had supported suffrage as a step toward politically empowering the African American community. Southern authorities, however, used poll taxes, literacy tests, and intimidation to stop black women from registering to vote. The League of Women Voters, created by the National American Women Suffrage Association in 1920, drew up a list of issues that it expected to resonate among female voters including child labor, protective legislation for female workers, and cleaning up city politics. This list did not include demanding that the Nineteenth Amendment be enforced for black and white women alike. Responding to studies that revealed high rates of infant and mother mortality in childbirth, the League of Women Voters lobbied Congress for the nation’s first major social welfare measure to help impoverished women and children. The SheppardTowner Act (1921) offered eight years of matching funds to states for classes that taught poor mothers about nutrition, hygiene, and prenatal care. It also provided visiting nurses for low-income pregnant women and new mothers. By 1929, however, it became clear that women did not vote as a bloc. Therefore despite the law’s success, Congress did not renew the program. Rather than rallying to gender-specific causes, the best predictor of how a woman would vote was how her husband voted. Feminists also failed to amend the constitution by adding an Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), which stated that “equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex.” The radical

 What strategies did women develop to improve their lives in the twenties?

 National Women’s Party, chaired by Alice Paul, argued that such an amendment would eradicate in one fell swoop all the legal barriers that a dizzying array of archaic state legislation created for women. These laws, Elsie Hill noted, denied a woman “control of her children equal to the father’s; they deny her, if married, the right to control her earnings; they punish her for offenses for which men go unpunished,” such as adultery. Moderate Progressive reformers, who dominated the League of Women Voters, like future first lady Eleanor Roosevelt, worried that the ERA might endanger the protective legislation for women that they had so carefully crafted in recent years, such as the maximum hour laws designed to shield mothers from overwork (see Chapter 18). They opposed the amendment, arguing that it was better to remove troubling laws individually, like those that prevented women from serving on juries or inheriting property. In the twenties, younger women displayed little interest in the social movements championed by their elders. Instead many women in their twenties and thirties focused on their economic prospects. Women made up 23.6 percent of the work-force by 1920, although they remained restricted to professions considered appropriate for their gender. During the decade women were primarily employed as secretaries and telephone operators. Rapid expansion of corporate bureaucracies created a new need for office workers, a demand that the growing numbers of white female high school graduates filled. Women earned less than men, but companies were certain that married women made most of the purchasing decisions in American households. Product advertising in the 1920s, therefore, targeted female consumers. Images as History: Advertising the New Woman explores how advertisements in the popular media also helped define the feminine ideal in the twenties.

 View the Image Feminine Tippler’s Ankle Flask (1922)

THE NEW WOMAN



Images as History
ADVERTISING THE NEW WOMAN
Popular advertising characterized the “new woman” as an efficient homemaker, devoted mother, high fashion sophisticate, and engaging spouse with the time and energy for a dizzying circle of friends and club activities. Manufacturing discontent about a woman’s lifestyle and insecurity about her looks was another advertising strategy designed to get women to purchase products. Advertisements that featured attractive women to entice potential customers, as in the Fisher car ad pictured here, reflected changing ideas about 
 The slim Fisher girl appeared liberated from the confines of the home and the physical incapacity caused by too much weight. She seemed to be a modern woman on the move.

 the ideal female body type. In the nineteenth century upper-class women proudly displayed their corpulence as evidence of their wealth and health. In the twenties, the popular media depicted the vigorous, alert modern woman as thin and tall. But according to a 1928 study, only 17 percent of American women were both slender and over 5 feet 3 inches tall. How does this Fisher car ad both celebrate the new freedoms that women enjoyed in the twenties and perpetuate traditional stereotypes about women? These tall, elongated figurines depicted an ideal female body that was slim and youthful with legs that formed a straight line from toe to thigh, pointed toes, and a giraffe-like neck. These proportions suggested the women were nearly 9 feet tall!

•


•


•


•


•


 This female silhouette more closely resembled the body of an adolescent girl than a mature woman, encouraging a female preoccupation with dieting and self-denial that continues today.

 Most ads of the time displayed men with both feet firmly on the ground. This woman’s offbalance pose with one knee bent suggested tentativeness and instability, putting limits on her independence and strength.

 The presence of the maid behind the Fisher girl indicates that she is rich as well as thin—an enviable combination to many women.

•


•


 Her sleek body, like that of the car being advertised, served mostly as a commodity or decorative object suitable for a modern man.

“Body by Fisher”


View the Closer Look Images as History: Advertising
 the New Woman

 How did the popular media define “the new woman”?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

Margaret Sanger and the
Fight for Birth Control
 Advertisers promised that modern electrical appliances would give women more time to spend with their children, and women’s popular magazines offered a plethora of articles on how to use this

 “No woman can call herself free who does not own and control her own body.” Birth control advocate MARGARET SANGER 21.12 Margaret Sanger Protests When officials in Boston refused to let Sanger speak publicly about birth control, she appeared before a crowd with her mouth bandaged to protest their censorship. Her ploy garnered headlines across the nation, giving the birth control cause a boost.

 additional time to raise children properly. Birth control advocate and trained nurse Margaret Sanger viewed the mother’s plight differently. Too many children, Sanger argued, ruined women’s health and relegated them to the ranks of the poor. In her view providing women with information on safe and reliable contraception was more important than dispensing advice on how to raise children. In 1916, Sanger opened the nation’s first birth control clinic in Brooklyn, New York, where she passed out flyers to advertise the benefits of contraception over illegal and dangerous back-alley abortions. For nine days Sanger dispensed information on diaphragms, condoms, douches, and withdrawal to women who waited in long lines to enter the clinic. The police then shut the clinic down and arrested Sanger for distributing information about birth control. Since 1873, the Comstock Act had prohibited sending information about contraception, abortion, or pornography through the mails, and by 1878, every state except New Mexico banned all means of circulating material about contraception. Sanger served 30 days in jail, one of many unsuccessful attempts to silence her. In 1929, after she spoke on birth control before the Harvard Liberal Club in Boston, the mayor threatened to revoke the license of any hall that allowed her

 What arguments did Sanger make to support her campaign for legal contraception?

 to speak again. In response Sanger appeared with her mouth bandaged before an audience in Boston’s Ford Hall Forum (21.12). Her silent protest won headlines across the nation, helping Sanger publicize her cause even more widely. By openly discussing birth control, Sanger made public the private contraception practices of middle-class couples. Poor mothers, she said, pleaded for her to share “the secret the rich have.” Studies suggested that at least twice in their lifetimes, women living in poverty pulled their shawls over their heads to visit the five-dollar abortionist down the street. Sanger often told the story of Sadie Sachs (whose authenticity was never verified), a woman whom Sanger, as a young nurse, met when she accompanied a physician into the tenements to care for Sadie after she fell ill from a botched self-induced abortion. When Sadie begged the middle-class doctor to give her the information she needed to avoid another pregnancy, he replied, “Tell Jake to sleep on the roof.” The next time Sanger saw Sadie, she lay in a coma dying from another abortion. Sanger used the story to personalize the extent of the abortion problem (nearly one million abortions that resulted in 50,000 female deaths each year) and to dispel the misguided belief that no “decent” woman needed information about contraception. Rather than counseling women to avoid sex, Sanger asserted that women had as much right as men to enjoy sexual intercourse without fearing for their lives. Contraception would not make women more promiscuous, she predicted. Once freed from the constant strain of childbearing, women would become more interesting spouses by developing their intellectual, political, and cultural interests much as popular advertising encouraged them to do. Through her arrests, clinics, and public lectures, Sanger gradually helped change attitudes toward birth control. Although laws censoring information about birth control remained part of the legal code until the 1970s, enforcement became rarer and rarer. By the late 1920s, 30 birth control clinics operated nationwide. Eugenicists, who wanted to improve the human race by controlling its hereditary qualities, also developed an interest in birth control. For eugenicists, contraception could prevent those they viewed as “unfit” from reproducing. Under their influence many states authorized compulsory sterilization of the institutionalized mentally handicapped, criminals, and epileptics until the 1960s.

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Marriage and Birth Control


ENSURING PEACE: DIPLOMACY IN THE TWENTIES



Ensuring Peace:
Diplomacy in the Twenties
 Leaders in the birth control movement developed close ties with women’s right groups in other countries, just one example of the global presence that Americans maintained throughout the twenties. Although the nation focused mostly on domestic concerns, international issues sometimes dominated the headlines. In 1920, the Senate refused to ratify the Versailles Treaty, which officially ended the war with Germany, or to join the League of Nations, which President Woodrow Wilson had championed to protect world peace. Rejection of Wilson’s vision of collective security through the league did not signal a withdrawal from world affairs. Presidents Warren Harding and Calvin Coolidge tried instead to use disarmament and dollars to prevent armed conflict.

Disarmament
 The high point of the disarmament movement came when Republican President Warren Harding convened the Washington Conference (1921–1922) in Washington, D.C., to negotiate agreements that would limit warships. The conference also reaffirmed America’s Open Door Policy (see Chapter 19) that kept Chinese trade open to all and secured pledges of cooperation among the world’s leading military powers, including Britain, Japan, Italy and France. The White House and press referred to the meetings in Washington as a “peace conference”” to cultivate the image that the negotiations would d correct Wilson’s blundering in Paris during the Versailles Treaty proceedings. The opening ceremonies underscored the symbolic comparisons that the Harding administration wanted to draw between the two international conferences by inviting delegates to the solemn burial of an unidentified American soldier who had fallen on the he battlefields of France. The Tomb of the Unknown Soldier (21.13) memorialized all deceased soldiers who went missss-ing or unidentified during the war. On the morning ing of November 11, 1921 (the third anniversary of the th he Armistice that ended the war), thousands of Americans lined the streets as a horse-drawn carriage carried a flag-draped coffin from the U.S. S. Capitol to Arlington National Cemetery. Harding, ng,, the entire Congress and Supreme Court, along with witth

 foreign dignitaries, followed the procession. After the Unknown Soldier was laid to rest, millions of Americans across the nation observed two minutes of silence to honor the fallen warrior and pray for a peaceful future. The nation subsequently buried unknown soldiers in the same tomb after World War II, and the Korean and Vietnam Wars. In 1999, DNA genetic testing determined the identity of the Vietnam serviceman, and it is unlikely that the nation will ever have another “unknown” soldier.

21.13 The Tomb
 of the Unknown Soldier The allegorical figures of Peace, Valor, and Victory on the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier encapsulated the Harding and Coolidge administration’s diplomatic goals in the early 1920s.

 How did Harding’s foreign policy vision differ from Wilson’s?



 CHAPTER 21

21.14 Looking
 into the Black Hole of Ruin This 1927 political cartoon forecast disaster if the world powers failed to reach a second naval disarmament agreement. In the cartoon the world is in disarray after a naval gun had showered it with gun powder.

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

Through the
Washington Conference, Harding
 reshaped the political vision of his Democratic predecessor, Woodrow Wilson. Harding rejected Wilson’s idea of using an open-ended commitment to the League of Nations to ensure world peace. He agreed with other Republicans who felt membership in this world body would restrict America’s ability to set its own foreign policy. Harding instead sought to prevent another war by convincing all major powers to disarm and agree to mediation when disputes arose. Harding knew that Congress’s pennypinching mood meant certain rejection of any administration proposal to maintain a large military or embark on a major shipbuilding campaign. What better way to balance this domestic reality with the need to protect American shores from heavily armed naval competitors than by negotiating multinational disarmament treaties? To contain Japan in the Pacific and Britain, which still controlled the world’s largest navy, Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes proposed scrapping 30 American, 23 British, and 17 Japanese battleships. One thrilled observer noted that Hughes had single-handedly sunk more British battleships “than all the admirals of the world had destroyed in a cycle of centuries.” Japan’s 1905 victory in the Russo-Japanese War had signaled its emergence as the premier military power in East Asia. The Japanese, who unlike the British and Americans had only one ocean to patrol, accepted a naval tonnage ratio of 5:5:3 among the United States, Britain, and Japan. This meant that for every five tons of naval shipping that America and Britain maintained, Japan retained three. Besides arms limitation, negotiations focused on settling potentially explosive issues in the Pacific.

 What benefits and drawbacks did the Washington Conference agreements offer the United States?

 There American objectives included curtailing Japanese expansion in East Asia and preserving the Open Door in China. The American delegation met these goals, but at some cost. Japan accepted a smaller navy in return for a pledge that the others would refrain from improving their naval bases or fortifications in the western Pacific. Experts warned that this concession would leave American Pacific possessions vulnerable to a Japanese attack. Hughes, who doubted that Congress would approve funds to improve naval defenses, accepted the deal. The resulting Five Power Treaty (which included smaller tonnage limits for France and Italy) set a ten-year moratorium on battleship construction and limited the guns that ships could carry. The treaty, however, did not set limits for submarines, light cruisers, aircraft, or land forces. In an accompanying Four Power Treaty, France, the United States, Britain, and Japan agreed to respect one another’s Pacific possessions and consult if any dispute arose. The Nine Power Treaty was the conference’s final achievement. In this agreement the above five nations and Portugal, the Netherlands, Belgium, and China all agreed to respect the Open Door in China, a policy advocated by the United States since the turn of the century (see Chapter 19). The resulting agreements essentially protected the United States, Britain, and Japan from an aggressive naval attack. They left Britain in control of the European seas, gave the United States charge of the Americas, and recognized Japanese predominance in East Asia. For the time being, avoiding an arms race and maintaining the status quo served the interests of the world’s major powers. Calvin Coolidge, Harding’s successor in the White House, continued the Republican effort to find alternative ways to maintain world peace. Leading powers met again in Geneva in 1927 to broker another disarmament pact. This 1927 political cartoon (21.14) offered support for the proceedings by showing a disheveled world covered with gunpowder from a naval gun. This time, however, the leading powers failed to reach an agreement. Secretary of State Frank Kellogg had more success negotiating the Kellogg-Briand Pact (1928), whose signatories renounced aggressive war as an instrument of national policy and agreed to resolve their disagreements through peaceful means. Choices and Consequences: Preventing War

ENSURING PEACE: DIPLOMACY IN THE TWENTIES



F IN LAN D
$8


AT L A N T I C OCEAN
a 
 ESTONIA $14

Se


Nor t h
Sea


 ic

 lt B R I TAI N $ 4 ,2 7 7

B


 a

RU SSIA
$187 
 LATVIA $5

 LITHUANIA $5

POLAN D
$160 
 BELGIUM $349

 CZECHOSLOVAKIA $62 AUSTRIA $24 HUNGARY $1 ROM AN IA $25

FR ANCE $ 2
,9 9 7 
 p

 i

 n

Se


Black Sea


 a

YU GOSLAVIA
$25 
 as

 a

 ITALY $1,640

C


 ARMENIA $12

Med


 ite

 n

 a

 Principal loans by US, 1914-1918 US loans for relief and reconstruction, 1919–1925

GREEC E
$15 
 rr

 ea

 Note: dollar amounts in millions

 n S ea

21.15 American Loans to Europe, 1914–1925
 The United States demanded that Europe repay loans given to help nations defeat Germany and rebuild after World War I.

 in Europe (page 650) examines why Coolidge chose to support a multinational treaty that outlawed war.

Wartime Debts
 World War I revealed the importance of European trade to American prosperity, but in the twenties the politically sensitive question of securing repayment from Allied nations for American wartime loans threatened to undermine Europe’s economic recovery. From 1914 to 1925, the United

 States had loaned the Allies nearly $10 billion to finance war-time purchases of American goods and rebuild war-torn Europe (21.15). In the 1920s, the Allied governments urged the United States to cancel the loans. How, they asked, could America insist on repayment when the Allies had sacrificed a whole generation of men to the joint cause of defeating Germany? Americans had supplied money while the Allies gave their blood, they argued. The United States, the Allies claimed, could easily afford to cancel the loans as the country had profited enormously from the war.

 Which nations received the greatest financial aid from the United States during and after World War I?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

Choices and Consequences
PREVENTING WAR IN EUROPE
In 1928, France invited the United States to sign a treaty renouncing war between the two nations, hoping to coax the American government into playing a more active peacekeeping role in Europe. President Coolidge faced four choices on how to respond. Americans had conflicting visions of the best way to avoid another war, and vocal supporters backed each option. 
Choices




 Adopt a noninterventionist policy that kept the United States out of European affairs.



 Sign a nonaggression pact with France as the first step toward creating a formal defensive alliance that would recreate the pre-World War I balance of power system in Europe.



 Reject bilateral agreements and join the League of Nations.



Negotiate a
 multinational nonaggression pact.

Decision
 Coolidge refused to join the League of Nations but knew that outlawing war had strong appeal at home. Consequently he agreed to let Secretary of State Frank Kellogg meet with French Foreign Minister Aristide Briand to fashion a multinational nonaggression pact. By opening the treaty up to other nations, Coolidge avoided the impression that the United States was allying itself with France. The resulting KelloggBriand Pact was eventually signed by 62 nations, including Germany and Japan.

Consequences
 The Kellogg-Briand Pact proved popular with Americans because its vagueness allowed it to be all things to all people. Non-interventionists saw the pact as insulating the country from ever fighting another war overseas. They liked the U.S. resolution to stay peaceful yet make no binding commitments to defend other nations. Internationalists, who wanted the United States to play a more active role in maintaining world peace, saw the treaty as the first step toward creating an American presence in international arbitration bodies like the World Court and the League of Nations.

“A Christmas Carol: Peace on Earth,
Good Will Towards Man”


Continuing Controversies
 What value did the Kellogg-Briand Pact have? Critics dismissed the treaty as a “letter to Santa Claus,” and “not worth a postage stamp,” pointing out that the major powers signed the agreement but continued to arm for war. The Kellogg-Briand agreement allowed for wars of “self-defense,” a slippery term that nations could easily manipulate. As if to prove the point, when the Senate

 Did the Kellogg-Briand Pact represent a new path in American foreign policy?

 ratified the treaty with only one dissenting vote, it added a reservation stating that preserving the Monroe Doctrine constituted self-defense. Others acknowledge that the treaty did not prevent World War II but point out that it allowed the victors to convict Nazi officials of violating the Kellogg-Briand Pact in postwar war crimes trials.

ENSURING PEACE: DIPLOMACY IN THE TWENTIES

 Americans vehemently opposed canceling reparations. In 1924, Secretary of State Hughes the debt. “They hired the money, didn’t they,” sent Chicago banker General Charles G. Dawes retorted President Coolidge in the mid-twenties, and General Electric Company head Owen D. expressing a common American view that Europe Young to Europe. The resulting Dawes Plan (1924) had a moral obligation to repay its debts. loaned Germany $200 million in gold to Coolidge did, however, agree to lower pay a reduced reparation bill and gave the interest rate on the loans, it more time to meet its debt. GREAT BRITAIN which reduced the total Certain that a German reAllied War Debt amount due by 43 percovery was imminent, Payments cent. Further compliAmerican bankers WALL STREET cating the debate, eagerly provided Reparations BANKERS the high American half the funds for Debt Payments tariff enacted in the Dawes Plan 1922 made it difficult and made private U.S. TREASURY GERMANY for Allied nations to U.S. INVESTORS loans and investsell manufactured goods ments that helped Allied War Debt FRANCE Payments in the United States, deprivGermany even more. Dawes ing them of revenue that they became Coolidge’s vice president Reparations needed to repay their war loans. in 1925 and won the Nobel Peace Prize. Using a high tariff to protect American In 1929, the Young Plan further reduced Gerindustries from foreign competition had tremen- many’s final bill to $8 billion and restructured the dous domestic appeal, and the United States repayment schedule. fused to lower it. American money kept the whole system afloat. The Allies consequently relied on reparation Between 1923 and 1930, American banks loaned payments from Germany (authorized in the Ver$2.6 billion to Germany; Germany made $2 billion sailles Treaty) to repay their U.S. war loans. This in reparation payments; and the Allies repaid $2.6 punitive aspect of the Versailles Treaty troubled billion of their American war loans (one-fifth of the many Americans, who viewed the $33 billion repaamount owed). The “Global Flow of Reparation ration bill imposed on Germany as excessive. The Payments” (21.16) details the journey that AmeriUnited States denied any connection between war can money took through Germany, France, and loans and reparation payments, seeing the first as Britain until it landed back in American coffers. an honest debt and the latter as blood money. The When the stock market crashed in 1929, American Allies, however, refused to reduce the reparation bill bankers drastically reduced their overseas loans, as long as the United States insisted on collecting and the whole arrangement collapsed. First GerAllied war loans. many, then the Allied governments defaulted on In 1923, skyrocketing inflation caused Gertheir payments. In 1931, President Herbert Hoover many to miss a reparation payment, and in resuccessfully called for a one-year moratorium on all taliation France and Belgium occupied the Ruhr international debts. With the connection between Valley, a German industrial center. This crisis reparation payments and war loans now formally threatened to undermine American economic inacknowledged by the United States, the Allied govterests by thrusting Europe into recession. Having ernments canceled most of Germany’s remaining ruled out lowering the tariff or canceling Allied reparation payments. By 1934, all governments war loans to foster Europe’s economic recovery, except Finland had defaulted on their wartime the United States resolved to help Germany make American loans. Finland was the only nation that its reparation payments. Twice in the decade finally repaid its entire debt of $8 million to the international committees of experts discussed United States by 1969.



21.16 The Global
Flow of Reparation
Payments
 American capital kept the reparation system created by the Versailles Treaty afloat in the twenties.

 “I do not approve in any remote sense of the cancellation of the debts to us.” President HERBERT HOOVER, 1931

 How did lingering financial issues from World War I shape relations between the United States and Europe?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

 Margaret Sanger opens first birth control clinic

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Sanger champions birth control to improve female health and eliminate poverty





1921–1922


First Red Scare


F.
Scott Fitzgerald publishes This Side of Paradise 
 Washington Conference held

 Anti-communist campaign destroys radical political organizations

 Eighteenth Amendment ratified

 Popularizes flapper revolt against traditional codes of conduct

 Initiates era of national Prohibition

 Disarmament becomes a major goal of American foreign policy

UNIA
Black Star Line founded Short-lived black-run steamship operation line embodies Marcus Garvey’s ideal of economic self-help 
Review Questions
 1. What features and controversies characterized America’s transformation into a car culture in the 1920s? How did lifestyles and labor relations also change during the decade? 2. Compare the various manifestations of cultural conflict in the twenties. What similar impulses motivated Americans to enact prohibition, immigration restrictions, and laws prohibiting the teaching of Darwin’s theory of evolution? How did these various reforms affect American society?

 3. Why were the Harlem Renaissance and Marcus Garvey controversial? 4. Were the 1920s a time of political, economic, and social liberation for women? What traditional concerns or ideas remained intact? 5. How did the United States fashion a new role for itself in world affairs in the twenties?

Key Terms
 Eighteenth Amendment (1919) Constitutional amendment that banned the sale, manufacture, and transportation of intoxicating liquors. Twenty-First Amendment (1933) Constitutional amendment that repealed the Eighteenth Amendment. Immigration Act of 1924 Law that allowed unrestricted immigration from the Western Hemisphere, curtailed all Asian immigration, and used quotas to control how many immigrants emigrated from individual European nations. First Red Scare (1919–1920) Period when the Justice Department arrested and deported alien anarchists and Communists suspected of trying to destroy American democracy and capitalism. Fundamentalism An evangelical Christian theology that viewed the Bible as an authentic, literal recounting of historical events and the absolute moral word of God.

 Modernism A liberal Christian theology embraced in many urban areas that emphasized the ongoing revelation of divine truth. Harlem Renaissance An outpouring of African American artistic expression in the 1920s and 1930s. Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) Organization founded by Marcus Garvey to spread his message of racial pride, economic self-sufficiency, and returning to Africa. Washington Conference (1921–1922) Meeting of world powers that resulted in agreements that limited naval arms, reaffirmed America’s Open Door policy that kept Chinese trade open to all, and secured pledges of cooperation among the world’s leading military powers. Kellogg-Briand Pact (1928) Treaty that renounced aggressive war as an instrument of national policy.

CHAPTER REVIEW



GREAT BRITAIN
Allied War Debt Payments 
ALL STREET BANKERS

Reparations


Debt Payments
 INVESTORS

U.S. TREASU

 GERMANY

 FRANCE

Allied War Debt
Payments










Immigration Act of 1924


Scopes Trial


Kellogg-Briand Pact


 Severely reduces immigration and establishes nationality-based quota-system

 Highlights cultural conflict between religion and science

 Charles A. Lindbergh flies nonstop from New York to Paris

Dawes Plan


 Ku Klux Klan marches in Washington, D.C.

 Reassures Americans that man and machine can coexist harmoniously

 United States uses financial aid to stabilize postwar European economies

 White-instigated racial violence surges as the Klan becomes a national organization

 First feature film with sound

 America uses world influence to secure global pledges of peace

 Hastens the creation of mass, celebrity culture

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan to build your knowledge of A Turbulent Decade.

Questions for Analysis
 1. What economic and cultural impact did the auto industry have? Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Rise and Fall

 Other Resources from This Chapter Hear the Audio • Prohibition is a Failure, p. 633 • “If We Must Die,” poem and reading by Claude McKay, p. 642 • “I Too,” poem and reading by Langston Hughes, p. 643

 of the Automotive Industry, p. 626

Read the Document A. Mitchell Palmer on the Menace of


 2. What did it mean to be part of the “lost generation”? Watch the Video Video Lecture: Post-War Disillusionment

Communism, p. 634


View the Closer Look


 in the 1920s, p. 632

 3. How did the Klan define “Americanism”? Read the Document The “Creed of Klanswomen”

• Envisioning Evidence: Scientific Management in Action, p. 629
• Immigration to the United States 1870–1915, p. 635
• Immigration Quotas, p. 636
• Competing Visions: Debating Garveyism, p. 641
• Images as History: Advertising the New Woman, p. 645


(1924), p. 639


View the Image Charles Lindbergh and Spirit of St. Louis, p. 631


 4. What attributes of the “New Woman” are portrayed in this image? View the Image Feminine Tippler’s Ankle Flask (1922), p. 644

 5. What disagreements arose over the compatibility of birth control and marriage? View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Marriage and Birth Control, p. 646

 Watch the Video Video Lecture: 1920s Media, p. 630

 What caused the Great Depression?

A
New President and  a New Deal p. 662

 CHAPTER

The Early Days of the
Depression p. 656




 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 22

A
New Deal  for America The Great Depression, 1929–1940

 Why did FDR arouse strong feelings among his supporters and critics?

 Recovering from the Depression p. 666

 What recovery measures did the New Deal undertake?

A
New Deal for Farmers p. 670


 What were the challenges to ending rural poverty?

Reforms to Ensure
Social Justice p. 674


 How did the aged, unions, and African Americans fare in the 1930s?

 When Franklin D. Roosevelt (FDR) accepted the Democratic nomination for president in 1932, he promised to remember “the forgotten man at the bottom of the economic pyramid.” FDR won the election and took office in the throes of the Great Depression, the most devastating and longest economic crisis in American history. Four years later the photographer Walker Evans traveled to Alabama to document the hardships of three struggling sharecropping families. While there he photographed Floyd Burroughs, who spent his days toiling in the cotton fields alongside his wife and children. For seven years, through the worst of the Depression crisis, Burroughs had struggled to provide the minimal basic needs for his family without government help. To gain public support for new government programs designed to help sharecroppers, the Farm Security Administration had commissioned this and photos like it to show Americans the faces of poverty-stricken farmers. Evans’s portrait of the “forgotten man” aroused more than sympathy, however. Americans had different visions of how the government should respond to the crisis, and throughout the 1930s, political debate centered on whether and how much the government should intervene. Presidents Herbert Hoover and Franklin D. Roosevelt both championed initiative, freedom, and opportunity. They disagreed, however, over what government action preserved or destroyed these values. In the early thirties Hoover, who preferred minimal government intervention in the economy, took a few historic steps by lending money to banks and businesses and helping farmers. More attuned to the public mood, Roosevelt initiated a broad array of public works programs and social reforms to satisfy the demand for direct government intervention in the economy. Taken together, policy initiatives by Hoover and Roosevelt paved the way for a complete transformation of the federal government’s role in American society. The New Deal did not end the Depression; that honor belonged to World War II. It was, however, one of the most important periods of legislative activity in American history. Farmers, migrants, and industrial workers did not just passively wait for help during these hard times. They demanded a “new deal” from the federal government that alleviated the sufferings of common people. Organized labor and charismatic populist politicians on the left helped create a groundswell of support for active government intervention in the economy. The Great Depression, therefore, was not just the story of unrelenting hardship. The era also had moments of triumph for ordinary Americans, like Burroughs, who found their political voice.

 “I pledge you, I pledge myself, to a new deal for the American people” FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT, 1932





 CHAPTER 22

A NEW DEAL FOR AMERICA: THE GREAT DEPRESSION, 1929–1940

The Early Days of the Depression
 In 1928, the future looked rosy to most Americans, and even President Herbert Hoover believed that permanent prosperity was at hand. Americans venerated Hoover as the “Great Humanitarian” when he began his term. He left four years later amid bitter denunciations that he cared more for banks than for people, earning him the new nickname of the “Great Scrooge.” The causes of the Depression were complex, giving rise to competing visions over what action, if any, the government should take and how far it should go to engineer an economic recovery. Hoover went further than any other president to date in offering federal assistance to businesses and farmers, but by 1932 his awkward manner along with his refusal to approve direct governmental relief made him appear uncaring to most Americans.

 stepped in too often to manage the economy, individuals and businesses lost their initiative. For Herbert Hoover’s personal story was a classic ragsHoover individualism meant more than individuals to-riches tale that reaffirmed faith in the American selfishly pursuing their own well-being. He felt that Dream. Orphaned at the age of nine, he later reAmericans and American business also had a recalled that “my boyhood ambition was to be able to sponsibility to serve the community; like Progressive earn my own living, without the help of anybody, reformers he believed that self-interest often caused anywhere.” This personal ethos shaped his lifelong great harm to others (see Chapter 18). Hoover, political views. however, did not share the Progressive desire to use Starting as a mine laborer working for $2.50 government regulation to solve economic problems. a day, by the age of 40 Hoover was a respected He envisioned a more cooperative, voluntary apengineer with millions in the proach. Instead of passing bank. During World War I he more laws, Hoover wanted became the country’s most the government to organize famous humanitarian, when meetings, so industrialists, he served as food adminlabor, and farmers could istrator and organized relief craft their own agreements HERBERT HOOVER, explaining missions to help feed hungry to address issues such as his decision to leave a lucrative Belgians under German ocengineering career for public service overproduction, price wars, cupation during the war and low wages, and strikes. The more starving Europeans afbeginning of the Depression ter it. Hoover’s organizational gave the country a chance to talents and dedication to good works inspired such see if Hoover’s voluntary and cooperative approach awe that the first time his name ever appeared on to economic problems could stem the crisis. a ballot in 1928, he won by a landslide, becoming president of the United States. Hoover was a poor public speaker, lacked charisma, and closely guarded his private life. But when he became president, he enjoyed immense popularity. After all, Hoover was a success in business, he had fed starving people, he The economic downturn in 1929 took the country had been a dynamic secretary of commerce under by surprise. However, a hard look at the twenties represidents Harding and Coolidge, and he believed veals that problems in the nation’s economy existed that people would do the right thing once the goveven during the boom years, both in large-scale inernment showed them the way. dustries and on family farms. Like most Americans, Hoover believed that ableSome industries, especially textiles and minbodied individuals should make their own way in ing, suffered throughout the twenties from overthe world. He maintained that if the government production and falling demand. By 1929, even the

Herbert Hoover


 “Just making money isn’t enough.”

Economic Weaknesses in
 a Time of Prosperity

 What qualities made Hoover a popular president when he was first elected?

 Watch the Video Prosperity of the 1920s and the Great Depression

THE EARLY DAYS OF THE DEPRESSION

 automobile, construction, and appliance industries found it difficult to turn a profit. Cooling demand for automobiles soon rippled outward to industries such as steel and rubber. Some of the reasons for the slump lay in the unequal distribution of income in American society. From 1923 to 1929, corporate profits rose 62 percent, while workers’ hourly wages increased by only eight percent. With economic growth now linked to consumer spending, the limited purchasing power of working-class Americans contributed to the growing financial crisis. High tariffs (taxes levied against imported products) kept foreign-made goods expensive, protecting American companies from overseas competition. Foreign countries responded by levying high tariffs against American goods, reducing overseas markets for U.S. companies. When demand for Americanmade goods declined at home, American companies were slow to lower prices. By the time they did, demand had fallen so dramatically that massive layoffs were inevitable. As the chances for making money in manufacturing lessened, investors stopped buying industrial stocks. This loss of capital further dampened manufacturers’ efforts to recover their earlier momentum. Together, these problems revealed an ailing industrial sector. More evident problems existed in agriculture. Farmers’ boom times had come during World War I, when high demand, generous prices, and easy access to credit induced many to expand their crop production. When the war ended and demand fell, farmers were left with debts, larger farms, and falling crop prices. The long-term trend toward mechanized farming also contributed to the country’s looming agricultural crisis. With tractors, farmers could plow and harvest more land on a daily basis. The ability to grow more crops, more easily, paradoxically hurt farmers because overproduction drove prices down even further. Even before the Depression officially began, Hoover had devised a plan to help farmers escape the vicious cycle of over-production and low prices that kept them from sharing in the prosperity of the twenties. The Agricultural Marketing Act (1929) created a Farm Board with the power to buy and store crops to reduce the harvest-time market glut, which lowered crop prices. In keeping with his ethos of self-help, Hoover expected farmers to do their part to keep agricultural prices high by growing less. These measures, however, were too little, too late. Unsure about what his neighbors would do, no farmer wanted to be the only one to reduce his crop and then suffer both low prices and a small harvest. The nation’s farmers continued to plant crops in record numbers.



 “In the 93 years of my life, depressions have come and gone. Prosperity has always returned and will again.” Oil Magnate J. D. ROCKEFELLER, doubting the need for government action

The Stock Market
Crash of 1929
 These underlying problems all laid the foundation for an economic downturn, but by themselves did not predict a worldwide depression. Any chances for a mild recession disappeared in the stock market crash of 1929, a ten-day period beginning on October 20, 1929, when the value of stocks plummeted as panicked investors sold off their stock in droves. This is usually considered the official start of the Depression. Before the crash the stock market promised investors easy profits. When investors buy stock, they own pieces of the company and receive dividends (their share of the profits). Normally the price of a share fluctuates in relation to the expected profitability of the company. By the late 1920s, however, speculators, who did not care about holding on to their share purchases to earn dividends, had taken over the stock market. Instead, they sold their shares as soon as the share price rose. The epidemic of speculation created three key financial problems: 1. The influx of money into the stock market inflated share prices to such an extent that a stock’s price soon bore little relation to the actual worth of a company. 2. Many speculators bought on margin, the name given to the short-term loans used to purchase stock, and planned to cover these loans by quickly reselling their shares at a higher price. When stock prices began to fall, too many investors could not pay these debts. 3. Many investors were speculating with other people’s money, funds from ordinary Americans’ savings accounts that banks used to finance speculative stock market purchases. That explains why, although only 10 percent of Americans actually owned stock, the life savings of millions disappeared in October 1929.

 Why did farmers not prosper in the 1920s?



 CHAPTER 22

A NEW DEAL FOR AMERICA: THE GREAT DEPRESSION, 1929–1940

 On Monday, October 20, 1929, the downward spiral began. Stock prices plummeted three days later on Black Thursday when a record 12.9 million shares changed hands. On Black Tuesday the following week, October 29, 1929, 16 million shares were traded and losses totaled $14 billion. That evening James Rosenberg, a Wall Street bankruptcy lawyer who was also an artist, etched an expressionist portrait of the chaotic scenes he had witnessed.

 Rosenberg’s Oct. 29 Dies Irae (Day of Wrath) 1929 (22.1) captured the panic that swept Wall Street as investors raced to the New York Stock Exchange. In the lithograph the nation’s financial institutions teeter on the verge of collapse, frightened crowds gather in the streets, and dark clouds hover over a sky filled with stockbrokers jumping to their deaths. Throughout the crisis rumors circulated about ruined investors committing suicide by leaping from the city’s skyscrapers, and ambulance sirens wailed continually as crews responded to false alarms.

22.1 Oct. 29 Dies Irae (Day of Wrath) 1929
 To convey the panic that swept Wall Street after the stock market crashed, James Rosenberg employed apocalyptic biblical imagery traditionally used to depict God’s wrath as the world comes to an end. The photo shows investors racing to the New York Stock Exchange.

 What factors led to the stock market crash in 1929?

THE EARLY DAYS OF THE DEPRESSION

 Hoover’s Response to the Depression When the stock market crashed, no one knew that this was the beginning of a ten-year ordeal. The Great Depression lasted from 1929 to 1939, the most devastating and longest economic crisis in American history. In the 1920s, the federal government played a relatively minor role in the economy, and conservative businessmen urged Hoover to keep it that way. Do nothing, the laissez-faire capitalists told the president, setting in motion a political debate over government intervention that would dominate the Depression era. Rejecting the laissez-faire suggestion, Hoover envisioned the government fostering a spirit of teamwork that encouraged Americans to work together as the nation weathered the



 economic downturn. In keeping with his ideas of service-minded individualism, he brought the leaders of banking, industry, and labor to the White House and urged them to do their bit to keep the economy afloat. Responding to Hoover’s plea, industry agreed not to lay off workers or cut wages, and labor leaders accepted a shorter workday to create more jobs. Hoover asked state governments to accelerate their road and public building projects to add jobs in their communities. Hoover also stepped up hiring for long-planned federal construction projects including the Hoover Dam in the West and asked Congress to extend the tariff on manufactured goods to agricultural imports. Congress complied in 1930, raising tariffs to their highest level ever. When other nations retaliated with their own high tariffs, American companies and farmers lost overseas markets. As a result the world and the United States plunged deeper into economic depression. In orchestrating this unprecedented federal response to an economic depression, Hoover stayed within limits acceptable to conservatives. Most fiscal conservatives wanted government-built roads and a high protective tariff and preferred non-governmental solutions to economic problems. When it came to helping needy citizens directly, Hoover went no further than asking local governments and charities to assume their traditional role of distributing food and clothing to the poor. This stance surprised Hoover’s Progressive supporters, given his previous triumph organizing massive international relief efforts to feed hungry Europeans during and after World War I. It was not a question of helping people, Hoover asserted. “It is solely a question of the best method by which hunger and cold shall be prevented,” he explained. To Hoover the American tradition of self-help made relief the responsibility of local governments and charities. When the crisis entered its second year, U.S. Steel announced a ten percent wage cut. Other companies followed suit, and within ten days American business had slashed millions of workers’ wages and begun massive layoffs. The nation’s deepening financial woes convinced Hoover to lend federal money to businesses and states. This decision was a dramatic break from past practice. In previous financial panics and depressions, private bankers had put up the money needed for recovery, and presidents had cut federal spending to ensure a balanced budget. In 1932, by proposing a direct economic role for the government in ending the Depression, Herbert Hoover—the man who wanted to decrease

 How did Hoover respond to the initial economic crisis?



 CHAPTER 22

A NEW DEAL FOR AMERICA: THE GREAT DEPRESSION, 1929–1940

22.2 Bread
Line—No One Has
Starved (1932)
 Breadlines became an iconic symbol of Depression-era suffering when private charities began providing free meals to the unemployed. Rather than forming bonds with one another over their shared plight, the men in this drawing remain isolated islands of desperation.

 Americans’ reliance on the government to solve their problems—went further than any previous peacetime president in similar circumstances. By providing money to banks, insurance companies, farm mortgage associations, and railroads through the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) Act of 1932, Hoover helped institutions that were vital to the prosperity of any community. In its first year the government loaned more than $1.5 billion to these businesses, but little relief trickled down to workers. When critics pressured the president to provide direct help to those without work or food, Hoover responded with the Emergency Relief Act (1932), which lent money to the states for public works programs. Although his farm program, the RFC, and state loans failed to bring about recovery, Hoover had unknowingly set a precedent for direct governmental management of the economy that Franklin D. Roosevelt would expand. “We didn’t admit it at the time, but practically the whole New Deal was extrapolated from programs that Hoover started,” Rexford Tugwell, a key advisor to FDR, later acknowledged. Reginald Marsh’s Bread Line—No One Has Starved (22.2) depicts a group of downtrodden men waiting for a free meal, visual evidence of the growing crisis. The hunched posture of these former wage-earners symbolizes the shame associated with accepting charity. The men stand close together to keep their place in line, but do not converse or even look at each other. Keeping their hands in their pockets, they have been paralyzed by poverty. Marsh based his title on Hoover’s remark that “no one is

 What innovative solutions did Hoover propose as the economic crisis continued?

 actually starving.” The president had hoped to boost morale, but Marsh’s satire portrayed Hoover as out of touch with reality. With unemployment hovering around 20 percent in 1932, Hoover’s popularity declined steadily. Shantytowns constructed by the homeless became known as “Hoovervilles,” and people waved “Hooverflags” (empty pockets turned inside out) in street protests. A well-circulated joke began with Hoover asking an aide for a nickel to call a friend from a public telephone. “Here,” said the man, tossing him a dime, “call them both.” In the 1932 presidential campaign, Hoover faced off against FDR, a fifth cousin of Theodore Roosevelt. In sharp contrast to how he would govern, Franklin D. Roosevelt ran a fairly conservative campaign and let Hoover’s missteps win him the election. One of those mistakes was the violent eviction of war veterans from the nation’s capital. Throughout the summer of 1932, the Bonus March, a two-month-long demonstration by 40,000 impoverished World War I veterans and their families in Washington, D.C. transfixed the nation. The veterans demanded early payment of a bonus promised them by Congress. The Bonus March ended violently when the army expelled the protesters using tanks, cavalry, and troops with fixed bayonets, further damaging Hoover’s popularity at a key moment during the presidential campaign. Choices and Consequences: Evicting the Bonus Marchers explores how Hoover lost control of the decision to evict the Bonus Marchers from the city and paid the consequences.

 View the Image Children with “Hoover’s Poor Farm” Sign

THE EARLY DAYS OF THE DEPRESSION



Choices and Consequences
EVICTING THE BONUS MARCHERS
In 1924, World War I veterans had received a federal bond certificate (worth an average of $1,500) set to mature in 1945. In May, 1932, veterans and their families arrived en masse in the nation’s capital to demand immediate payment of this bonus. They set up a huge “Hooverville” of makeshift shacks and tents and staged continuous demonstrations on the Capitol steps. Hoover faced three choices about how to deal with the demonstration, depending on what interpretation of the protest he embraced. 
Choices




 Accept the veterans’ argument that the government should pay the bonus immediately to alleviate their Depressioncaused suffering.



 Accept his advisers’ view that the Bonus March was a communist-inspired plot to incite revolution, and use force to suppress it.



 Reject their claim but treat the veterans as essentially harmless, if misguided, citizens in desperate financial straits.

Decision
 While many in the general public and press viewed the Bonus Marchers as down-on-their-luck citizens, Hoover grew convinced that they were a

 dangerous, radical force. After a skirmish between veterans and the police in August, Hoover opted to send in troops with instructions to restore order.

Consequences
 Once the troops were deployed, Chief of Staff General Douglas MacArthur exceeded Hoover’s orders and decided to drive the veterans out of the city using tear gas, tanks, and bayonets. Hoover

 never publicly revealed MacArthur’s insubordination. When Franklin D. Roosevelt heard of the violent eviction, he reportedly told an adviser, “Well, Felix, this will elect me.”

Continuing Controversies
 Was the government right to use force to evict the Bonus Marchers? To justify the eviction, the White House mounted a furious public relations campaign that included false accusations of discovering dynamite in the main veterans’ encampment. Some upper-class Americans applauded the government’s actions, hoping to dampen any revolutionary impulse among the poor. But many working- and middle-class Americans saw their own destroyed lives in the smoldering ruins of the veterans’ shantytown and turned against Hoover for refusing to aid men who had served the nation loyally. The Ruins of a Bonus Army Encampment (1932)

 Why was Hoover’s choice to evict the bonus marchers significant?



 CHAPTER 22

A NEW DEAL FOR AMERICA: THE GREAT DEPRESSION, 1929–1940

A
New President and a New Deal  FDR became president in 1933 during the lowest moment of the Depression with 25 percent of the workforce unemployed. Half of those with home mortgages had defaulted on their loans, and the entire banking system appeared ready to collapse. Empathy for the common people encouraged FDR to act, but so did fear that a social revolution might result if Washington did nothing for them. “I pledge you, I pledge myself, to a new deal for the American people,” FDR had proclaimed during his campaign. He entered office dedicated to protecting America as a capitalist society, and his vision of government activism came under severe scrutiny from both sides of the political spectrum.

FDR:
The Politician “Only a foolish optimist can deny the dark realities of the moment,” noted FDR upon taking office in 1933. If Roosevelt had a mandate for anything, it was for bold action. He met that expectation with 22.3 Key New Deal Legislation 


Reconstruction Finance Corporation
 Businesses and banks receive federal loans



National Industrial Recovery Act
 Allows business to set price, wage, and production codes



Agricultural Adjustment Act
 Pays farmers to plant less to raise crop prices



Civilian Conservation Corps
 Employs young men in reforestation and construction



Public Works Administration
 Construction projects provide work relief to poor



Glass-Steagall Act of 1933
 Insures bank deposits; separates commercial and investment banking



Tennessee Valley Authority
 Brings electricity to rural areas; stops devastating floods



Social Security Act
 Guarantees eligible workers a pension and unemployment insurance; aid to disabled and married women with dependent children



Wagner Act
 Offers government protection to unions



Works Progress Administration
 Extensive public works program employs 8 million ranging from artists to construction workers



Fair Labor Standards Act
 Establishes federal minimum wage and maximum working hours per week

 How did the competing social philosophies of Hoover and FDR differ?

 the New Deal, an avalanche of legislation from 1933 to 1938 intended to promote economic recovery, reform American capitalism, and offer security to ordinary Americans. The chart “Key New Deal Legislation” (22.3) shows the most significant laws passed under Roosevelt’s watch. Having campaigned as a fiscal conservative who would balance the budget, FDR did not have a blueprint for ending the Depression when he came into office. He did, however, have a fairly well-shaped social philosophy. “He had a profound feeling for the underdog, …a very keen awareness that political democracy could not exist side by side with economic plutocracy,” according to a key adviser. “We are going to make a country,” the president told a Cabinet member, “in which no one is left out.” FDR sought advice for specific programs and regulations from the Brain Trust, leading academics who served as presidential advisers in the early years of the New Deal. The Brain Trust wanted to revive the Progressive-era practice of using government regulation to solve economic problems and protect the common good (see Chapter 18). Brain Trust members Raymond Moley, Rexford Tugwell, and Adolf Berle diagnosed under-consumption as the main cause of the Depression, blaming the unequal distribution of income, the farm crisis, rigid prices, and low wages as the key culprits. This cartoon (22.4) depicts the conservative complaint that the Brain Trust hurt the country with New Deal programs intended to correct these economic problems. Posing as doctors, these professors have anesthetized the country with propaganda. Now the patient lies on an operating table oblivious to the knives and drills about to destroy his body. Besides attacking the New Deal as a set of unwise experiments, the cartoon touches on conservatives’ concern that too much government involvement in the economy

View the Image John Baer, “We Demand a New Deal!” (1931)


A NEW PRESIDENT AND A NEW DEAL



 “If it fails, admit it frankly and try another. But above all, try something.” FDR’s approach to shaping the New Deal

22.4 Conservatives Attack the New Deal
 This 1934 cartoon mocks the Brain Trust for experimenting with the nation’s well-being, implying that New Deal policy initiatives did more harm than good.

 (like too many pointless operations) would do more harm than good. In formulating his policies FDR leaned on another critical adviser: his wife. Eleanor Roosevelt served as the president’s “eyes and ears” by traveling around the country and reporting to him what she observed. In 1933 First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt traveled 30,000 miles visiting Americans where they worked and lived. Two years later, the Washington Star felt it newsworthy to print the headline “Mrs. Roosevelt Spends the Night at the White House.” Over time Eleanor Roosevelt became more outspoken in advancing causes dear to her heart concerning racial injustice and poverty. She invited prominent African Americans to the White House to talk directly to the president about civil rights. Eleanor Roosevelt’s visible participation in political affairs set her apart from former First Ladies, who had mainly served as official hostesses at White House functions. Her activism opened up political opportunities for other women. There were many firsts for women in the thirties: first ambassador, first judge on the Court of Appeals, and first cabinet secretary, Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins. Hear the Audio File FDR’s First Inaugural Address

 Americans differed in their reactions to Eleanor Roosevelt’s left-leaning political activities. Conservative detractors advised her to “stay at home and make a home for your husband.” Her civil rights activism particularly upset southern Democrats in Congress. She had equally ardent supporters and consistently won a two-thirds approval rating in Gallup polls—often bettering her husband. Thousands of Americans wrote to her each week, to ask for financial help, or to praise her work. Like his wife, FDR connected well with the public. Throughout his presidency FDR used weekly radio addresses that he called “fireside chats” to speak directly to the nation. After the president’s death in 1945, people stopped Eleanor on the street to tell her how much “they missed the way the President used to talk to them. They’d say, ‘He used to talk to me about my government,’” she recalled. FDR was often photographed smiling and smoking from an elegant-looking cigarette holder (22.5), and the public found his visible cheerfulness refreshing. FDR infused hope into a time of trouble and confusion. Yet little in his background suggested that he would understand the plight of common people. The only son of doting, wealthy parents who imbued him with tremendous self-confidence, the athletic, charming, and brilliant FDR attended Harvard and passed the New York State bar exam after just one year at Columbia Law School. In 1929, he became governor of New York. A personal tragedy in his life, however, convinced the public that FDR understood what it meant to overcome adversity. In 1921, at the age of 39, polio left him partially paralyzed for the rest of his life, and in pain much of the time. His disability “made it possible for the common people to trust him to understand what it is to be handicapped by poverty and ignorance, as well as by physical misfortune,” Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins noted.

 22.5 FDR’s Trademark Cigarette Holder and Smile Most Americans found FDR’s cheerfulness reassuring, and he inspired confidence in America’s security and future prosperity.

 What role did Eleanor Roosevelt play during her husband’s administrations?



 CHAPTER 22

A NEW DEAL FOR AMERICA: THE GREAT DEPRESSION, 1929–1940

Managing Appearances


FDR
Walking Shunning his
 wheelchair, candidate FDR holds onto his son’s arm as the two greet supporters during his first presidential campaign in 1932.

 Although FDR benefited from people knowing that he had overcome a misfortune, he also believed that visual images of his handicap would convey the impression that he was weak and physically unfit for his responsibilities. He made a personal and political decision to conceal his paralysis. To hide his heavy leg braces, FDR wore extra long pants and had the visible portion of the braces painted black to blend with his shoes. He learned to stand upright by holding onto a cane with one hand and the arm of an aide, usually his son, with the other (22.6). He would then use his hips to swing his legs forward in a semi-arch to give the illusion of walking. All of this required tremendous physical exertion. James Roosevelt later noted that he often had bruises on his arms from the force of his father’s grip. Father and son disguised their physical effort by smiling and joking as they “walked” together before audiences. Away from the crowds, aides carried FDR up stairs or from the car to a wheelchair. In public he often used his automobile as a prop to hide his disability, and by holding a bar installed in the backseat of an open touring car, he could pull himself up to address crowds. At one stadium rally a ramp was constructed so that the president’s car could be driven onto the stage in the center of the field. FDR gave his speech without leaving the car. The press obeyed White House rules that prohibited taking photos of the president in a wheelchair or being carried. As a result there are only two known photographs of FDR in a wheelchair. This

FDR
Running  Political cartoons never showed the president’s physical disabilities.

 self-censorship even extended to political cartoons, which never once depicted the president as incapacitated. Instead, these caricatures usually portrayed an energetic FDR running or jumping like this 1936 caricature from the Kansas City Star (22.7), in which a sprinting FDR replicates Benjamin Franklin’s kite-flying experiment to bring electricity to the rural poor.

The Temper of the Poor:
Passivity and Anger
 Hoover kept his distance from common people and paid the price. FDR was a more astute politician. But what was the temper of the people he needed

 “There is something about the first anniversary of your layoff which makes you feel more hopeless.” A worker during the Great Depression

 How and why did FDR manage his political image?

A NEW PRESIDENT AND A NEW DEAL

 to help? Two competing images of the poor soon emerged. One emphasized their helplessness and suffering; the other saw them as teetering on the brink of revolt. Countless government investigators detailed the plight of hardworking family men suddenly without jobs. “I find them all in the same shape—fear, fear driving them into a state of semi-collapse; cracking nerves; and an overpowering terror of the future,” reported one social worker. Many Americans chose to suffer silently, making their own decisions about how to cope, sometimes blaming themselves rather than the Depression for their troubles. This portrait by Dorothea Lange (22.8) conveys this “quiet desperation” of the poor. In Lange’s image an unemployed man grasps his empty tin cup and leans over the rail as if he is kneeling at a church altar praying for salvation. The man’s plight is moving, but his passivity is also vaguely reassuring to those who feared angry demonstrations or social revolution. As the Bonus March revealed, however, not all Americans were waiting patiently for conditions to improve. Federal investigator Lorena Hickok feared that a social revolution was brewing: “I still feel that vast numbers of unemployed in Pennsylvania are ‘right on the edge,’ so to speak—that it wouldn’t take much to make Communists out of them.” The Communist Party hoped that she was right. Unlike Roosevelt and his conservative critics, Communists had no interest in saving capitalism. They hoped that the crisis would provoke a social revolt that abolished private property. The 1930s were the “heyday of American Communism,” as the party grew from 7,000 members in 1930 to 100,000 in 1939. Across the country Communists organized unemployed councils that blocked evictions from city apartments, mounted hunger marches, and reconnected gas and electricity lines for workers who could not pay their bills. Grocery store robberies were also common, although newspapers rarely reported these crimes. When the manager of a grocery store in Detroit denied a group of men credit, they ransacked his store. Witnessing the food riot, the novelist John Dos Passos wondered why the manager did not call the police. “If more people heard about affairs like this, there would be more trouble,” the manager replied. While the urban poor stole food, farmers demonstrated to demand higher prices for their

 crops. Across the Midwest farmers disrupted food shipments by blocking highways with logs and pouring milk onto roads. When banks seized land, cattle, or farm machinery from farmers who defaulted on their loans, they needed help from the police to ensure that public sales of the confiscated property went smoothly. At some farm auctions farmers devised an effective strategy to help their neighbors by offering only a penny for the property on sale. Nooses hung on barn doors at penny auctions warned prospective buyers that bidding on a farm family’s possessions would not be wise. “If anyone in the farmyard might be so ignorant of what was going on as to put in a serious bid, a suitably burly man would be likely to step up and put a hand on his shoulder with the words, ‘That bid’s a little high, ain’t it?’” one farmer recalled.



22.8 “Breadline”
San Francisco,
 The man’s empty cup symbolized his pervasive hunger. His unthreatening pose created sympathy for his plight, while the militant poor provoked fears of social revolution.

 What competing responses did the poor offer to the ongoing Depression?



 CHAPTER 22

A NEW DEAL FOR AMERICA: THE GREAT DEPRESSION, 1929–1940

 Recovering from the Depression “First of all,” FDR stated in his first inaugural address, “let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself.” These courageous words inspired confidence in the country’s new leader at a time when financial institutions were on the brink of collapse. Jump-starting the economy involved restoring confidence in the banking system, putting people to work, and keeping businesses afloat. Following Hoover’s lead, FDR established a cooperative relationship between the government and business and provided federal money for banks and businesses. But unlike Hoover, he was willing to provide jobs through extensive public works programs and to fund temporary direct relief for average citizens.

Revamping Banking and
Financial Institutions
 By the time FDR took office, Americans had lost nearly $2.5 billion in 9,000 bank failures. The new president declared an immediate bank holiday on March 6, 1933, that closed the nation’s banks for a week. An obedient Congress quickly passed emergency banking legislation that allowed only banks with the Federal Reserve’s stamp of approval to reopen. “I can assure you that it is safer to keep your money in a reopened bank than under the mattress,” FDR told the public in his first fireside address. When the “holiday” ended, millions of Americans demonstrated their faith in the president by depositing more money than they withdrew in the weeks that followed. “Capitalism,” a FDR adviser said later, “was saved in [those] eight days.” “It was the Government’s job to straighten out this situation,” FDR told radio listeners. His administration soon proposed more reform measures to inspire public confidence in the nation’s banks. The Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 created the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), insuring the accounts of small depositors in member banks. The FDIC still exists. The same legislation protected the deposits of ordinary Americans by separating investment and commercial banking, so bank officials could no longer make speculative loans or stock purchases with depositors’ money. This provision was repealed in 1999. Finally, the New Deal tackled the problems caused by an unregulated stock market that had contributed to the crash of 1929. Laws established the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and reformed the practices of buying and selling stock. The SEC required companies to disclose financial

 How did FDR reform the nation’s banking and financial institutions?

 details to potential investors, so they could make an informed stock purchase. The SEC also regulated the practice of buying stocks on margin. Reforms in home mortgage lending practices probably had a more immediate impact on the lives of ordinary Americans than stock market reform. In 1933, 40 percent of homeowners were on the brink of losing their homes to bank foreclosures. In response FDR created a program that refinanced one out of every ten home mortgages and spread the payments over 20 years instead of the usual five. Designed to encourage Americans to purchase homes (and thereby boost the construction industry), the Federal Housing Authority (FHA), founded in 1934, offered insurance to private lenders who financed home mortgages for new homes. FHA backing allowed creditors to reduce the down payment required, lower interest rates, and lengthen the life of the loan. These government-supported initiatives helped form the modern mortgage-lending practices that enabled the percentage of Americans who owned their own homes to increase by one-third over the next 40 years.

Father Charles Coughlin
 Many businessmen and bankers supported these reforms because they renewed public faith in the basic structures of capitalism. With internal squabbles dividing its members, the Communist Party never effectively challenged the New Deal. Instead, the most influential challenger on the left to New Deal banking reforms was Father Charles Coughlin. A popular “radio priest” from Detroit who spoke with an Irish brogue, Father Coughlin gave sermons on a weekly radio program that drew audiences of 30 to 40 million. In 1934, he received more mail

Read the Document Franklin D. Roosevelt—Radio Address (1933)


RECOVERING FROM THE DEPRESSION

Helping Industry and People
 Besides shoring up banks, FDR also immediately sought to get people back to work. As the graph (22.9) reveals, FDR faced the most severe jobs crisis in American history. At first he followed in Hoover’s footsteps. The Reconstruction Finance Corporation continued to make loans and began buying bank stocks to help banks acquire the liquid capital

Unemployed Persons as a Percentage of the Civilian Labor Force


25%


Great
Depression
20%


15%


10%


5%


2000 = 4.1%
Vietnam War
%
0% 1900 = 5%








World War II
















World War I




 than anyone in the United States, including Roosevelt, most of it from adoring fans making donations to Coughlin’s cause. Coughlin singled out financiers and international bankers as the culprits who caused the Depression. The popularity of his relentless attacks on the elite helped push FDR increasingly to the left during his first administration. Following the lead of the Populists of the nineteenth century (see Chapter 17), Coughlin focused on how existing currency and banking arrangements helped bankers but hurt the common people. With currency in short supply, average citizens had to work harder to pay off their debts. Putting more money into circulation made sense in the midst of a depression. Bankers, however, held firm to their orthodoxy that all sound economies were based on the gold standard, which required that money be redeemable in gold, thereby limiting the amount of money that the government could print or coin. Coughlin proposed a revaluation of the price of gold and the monetization of silver (letting people also redeem paper money in silver, which was cheaper and more plentiful than gold) to allow the government to put more dollars into circulation. Finally he wanted to nationalize the banks to take money lending out of the hands of private bankers. Coughlin initially supported the New Deal in sermons like “The New Deal Is Christ’s Deal” and praised the president when he took the country off the gold standard in 1933. FDR welcomed Coughlin’s support at first but eventually grew tired of the priest’s impromptu visits to the White House. As their relationship soured, Coughlin began criticizing the administration for doing too little to rein in powerful banking and capitalist interests. Many of his followers begged him to reconsider his break with FDR, before they withdrew from the short-lived third party that he headed. By 1938, Coughlin’s star was in decline. His broadcasts became increasingly strident, filled for the first time with anti-Semitic diatribes against an imagined international Jewish banking conspiracy. He stayed on the air until 1942, when his bishop ordered him to cease all political activities.



 needed to stay open. The National Recovery Administration (NRA), established by the 1933 National Industrial Recovery Act, was the cornerstone of FDR’s efforts to devise a Hoover-like cooperative solution to the crisis. Suspending antitrust laws, the NRA established industrial boards for each sector of the economy that brought competitors together to set prices, production quotas, and wages. Architects of the NRA believed these industrial codes would stop manufacturers from cutting wages to subsidize lower prices, a practice that reduced the purchasing power of workers, contributing to overproduction and under-consumption. When prices rose without a corresponding increase in wages, however, many Americans became unhappy with the NRA. Even the larger corporations that benefited from the price codes remained leery of it, fearful that the agency might force them to negotiate with labor unions. To everyone’s relief the Supreme Court declared the NRA unconstitutional in 1935, ruling that it delegated too much

Read the Document Father Charles E. Coughlin, “A Third Party” (1936)


22.9 Soaring
Unemployment
 This graph reveals the historically high unemployment rate during the Great Depression. In the 2008–2011 recession, unemployment figures also climbed dramatically amid fears of another depression.

 Why did New Deal banking reforms and relief programs generate criticism?



 CHAPTER 22

A NEW DEAL FOR AMERICA: THE GREAT DEPRESSION, 1929–1940

 power from the legislative to the executive branch and regulated more than interstate commerce. FDR’s reading of the public mood encouraged him to depart from Hoover’s policies and offer direct financial relief to individuals out of work. FDR encouraged Americans to write to him, and in their correspondence destitute Americans bared painful details of their poverty and often asked for specific items, such as a coat or shoes. Attuned to the widespread misery, FDR created the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA), which worked with state governments to distribute direct relief to the unemployed. Although many Americans were grateful for this help, applying for relief or a “dole” was humiliating for previously self-sufficient working people. Even at the height of the Depression, accepting relief carried the stigma of personal failure. Although they envisioned the roots of poverty differently, both conservatives and Progressives viewed relief with suspicion. Conservatives felt that laziness, alcoholism, lack of ambition, and a poor work ethic created a class of indigent poor undeserving of help. Progressives thought that dismal living and working conditions caused the poor to turn to drink or succumb to apathy, but believed that handouts would further discourage workers from trying to support themselves. One could feel sympathy for the poor, therefore, and still worry about the negative consequences of distributing charity or relief. Like many of his contemporaries, FDR disliked using federal monies to fund direct relief. He always preferred federal programs that employed the poor to those that simply handed out food or money. In 1935, he decided to stop providing direct cash grants to the needy. “To dole out relief in this way is to administer a narcotic, a subtle destroyer of the human spirit,” FDR told Congress. From this point on the

 states handled relief, while the federal government tackled the problem of putting “employable” persons to work.

Putting People to Work
 To the dismay of conservatives and the gratitude of the unemployed, the New Deal created a variety of programs, each administered by a different agency, that provided 15 million jobs during the Depression. The Civil Works Administration (CWA), Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), and Public Works Administration (PWA) were all founded in 1933. During its four-month existence, the CWA provided jobs that helped more than four million workers survive the winter of 1933–1934 and stemmed growing unrest among the unemployed. The CCC (which lasted until World War II) focused on giving economically disadvantaged young men a chance to gain work experience. It undertook major reforestation projects, constructed campgrounds, restored historic battlefields, and stocked rivers and lakes with fish. The PWA, run by Harold Ickes, funded public works projects, especially roads and buildings, to help revive the construction industry. After deciding in 1935 to fund only work relief programs, Roosevelt created the Works Progress Administration. The WPA, managed by Harry Hopkins, was a major public works program that from 1935 to 1943 employed more than eight million workers, one-fifth of the workforce. During its existence, the WPA constructed 200,000 buildings and bridges along with 600,000 miles of roads. It also funded the arts, subsidizing painters and writers. Thanks to massive New Deal government spending on work-relief, and the subsequent strengthening of consumer spending power, the economy began gradually recovering in the mid-thirties.

 “I gave the best part of my life to the American country, and I spent every cent I made here. They owe it to me to take care of me.”

 “I wouldn’t plow nobody’s mule from sunrise to sunset for 50 cents per day when I could get $1.30 for pretending to work on a DITCH.”

 A worker, happily accepting a WPA job

A
Georgia farmer, criticizing the WPA work ethic 
 Who benefited from the wide range of New Deal work-relief programs?

 View the Image CCC worker (1938)

RECOVERING FROM THE DEPRESSION



22.10 Turning a Corner
 Like most Depression-era post office murals, this one celebrated workers as the backbone of the nation. “My interest,” artist Joe Jones noted, “was in portraying man at work—his job before him—and how he goes about it with his tools—man creating.”

 Even permanent government agencies put Americans to work during the Depression. The Treasury Department, for instance, hired artists to decorate post offices throughout the nation. Edward Bruce, who directed the program, wanted to “enrich the lives of all our people” by making “beauty part of their daily lives” when they visited the post office. Post office murals celebrated working Americans and their communities, but eschewed controversial themes like class conflict. In rural areas these murals projected images of prosperous farmers running family farms. Joe Jones painted Turning a Corner (22.10) for the Anthony, Kansas, post office, a mural that showed a farmer using a tractor to harvest a field of golden wheat before an approaching storm damaged his crops. The mural made no reference to the drought or dust storms that ravaged farms during the thirties, nor criticized farmers for overproducing and causing crop prices to fall. Instead, Jones celebrated farmers for growing the food that fed the nation and romanticized their relationship with the land. Americans disagreed over whether work relief was ruining or saving the country. For critics of work relief, the sight of WPA construction crew workers standing around talking instead of working led to jokes that WPA stood for “We Piddle

 Around.” Farmers looking for day laborers also complained bitterly that federal work relief often paid more than working in the fields. Many WPA employees, however, saw government-provided jobs as a right that they had earned. In a 1935 Fortune magazine survey, nearly 90 percent of lower-middle-class and working-class respondents answered yes when asked, “Do you believe that the government should see to it that every man who wants to work has a job?” Roosevelt agreed to a point. He consistently tried to terminate these programs at the slightest sign of recovery to rein in deficit spending, remaining true to his conservative fiscal values. The government reduced funds to the WPA when unemployment dropped in 1937 to 7.7 million from a high of 12.8 million in 1933. However, the sharp reduction in government spending, combined with new taxes and higher interest rates, caused the fledgling recovery to grind to a halt. During the subsequent 1937 recession, automobile production declined by 50 percent, steel by 70 percent, rubber by 40 percent, and the unemployment rate rose to 9.5 million (17 percent of the working population). With no federal funds for new relief projects available, New Jersey issued licenses to beg on the streets. The next year FDR restored public works funding.

View the Closer Look Images as History: Post Office Murals


 What competing visions arose over New Deal work relief programs?



 CHAPTER 22

A NEW DEAL FOR AMERICA: THE GREAT DEPRESSION, 1929–1940

A
New Deal for Farmers  New Deal public works programs dotted the American landscape with new roads, bridges, murals, and dams, a lasting legacy of Depression-era recovery efforts. Reforms in the agricultural sector also outlived the immediate crisis, part of FDR’s commitment to save American capitalism and create “greater security for the average man than he has ever known before in the history of America.” Americans from all walks of life, however, questioned the government’s desire to help displaced farm workers.

Handling the Farm Crisis


22.11 “Approaching Dust Storm”
 Ominous clouds of dirt descend on a small town in Colorado during one of the dust storms that plagued the plains states and the southwest in the thirties. The storms killed livestock and kept people inside for days.

 Assisting farmers protected an American way of life that had strong mythic connections to the nation’s beginnings as a land of opportunity. Farmers received more direct aid than any other group during the Depression. The Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) of 1933 tried to ensure that farmers earned an adequate income by paying them to take land out of cultivation, which the administration hoped would cause crop prices to rise. When reducing acreage failed to sufficiently lower output, FDR approved laws that established marketing quotas for each commodity. If farmers tried to sell more than their allotted quota, they were hit with a heavy fine. The administration departed temporarily from this approach when the Supreme Court ruled the AAA unconstitutional in 1936. The Court decided that the tax on food-processing plants used to

 How did FDR tackle the problems of rural America?

 finance the acreage-reduction program violated the Tenth Amendment by usurping regulatory rights reserved for the states. Congress passed a second AAA in 1938, but by the mid-1930s the problems facing farmers in parts of the country had changed. In the Dust Bowl drought and soil erosion caused massive dust storms across southern and plains states throughout the thirties. During one storm in May 1934, experts estimated that the winds transported 350 million tons of soil from the West to the East. Dust fell like snow on Chicago, the sun was obscured in Washington, D.C., and ships 300 miles out to sea reported dirt settling on their decks. This photo (22.11) captures an approaching dust storm carrying deadly amounts of dirt. Each storm left piles of dead cattle and wildlife

View the Map Interactive Map: The Great Depression


A NEW DEAL FOR FARMERS

 in its wake as residents barricaded themselves inside their houses with damp towels over their mouths to avoid suffocation or wore Red Cross-provided gas masks. But even these precautions did not completely prevent deaths from occurring when a duster hit. To encourage better farming practices, the government began paying farmers in the Dust Bowl to plant soil-improving crops like legumes instead of traditional cash crops such as wheat, cotton, and tobacco that exhausted the soil. In one innovative program the government planted 220 million trees in a 100-mile-wide swath from Childress, Texas, to the Canadian border. These trees stopped western dust from traveling east by cooling the air and reducing the wind velocity of dust storms. Bringing electricity to rural areas was another way the New Deal improved daily life for the rural poor. Most of the urban population had electricity to ease the daily tasks of pumping water and washing clothes, advantages available to only one in ten rural families in 1930. Begun in 1933, the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) was a government-owned utility company that provided thousands of jobs as it built dams that generated power, provided flood relief, and created recreational lakes throughout the seven states (Tennessee, Alabama, Mississippi, Kentucky, Virginia, North Carolina, and Georgia) serviced by the Tennessee River. These areas soon enjoyed good fishing, cheap electricity, and relief from debilitating floods. Government-sponsored low-interest loans enabled rural cooperatives to string electrical lines and manufacture power. “The women went around turning the switches on and off,” noted an observer after one home received its hookup. “The light and wonder in their eyes was brighter than that from the lamps.” By 1941, almost half of all American farms had access to electricity, a figure that rose to 90 percent by 1950. Native Americans were another rural population aided by New Deal policies. Commissioner for Indian Affairs John Collier pressed successfully for passage of the 1934 Indian Reorganization Act that ended the land allotment policies sanctioned under the 1887 Dawes Act (see Chapter 15) and returned some self-government to Indian reservations. The stage was set for a gradual rebirth of Native American cultures in the twentieth century. Overall, New Deal subsidies improved farm owners’ lives. Farm income doubled from $2 billion in 1929 to $4.6 billion in 1939. Although farmers



 still made only 37.5 percent of what nonfarm workers earned, farming had become a much more profitable business. These agricultural policies created unexpected problems, however, by helping landowners at the expense of tenant farmers and farm laborers whose services were no longer needed once the government began paying farm owners to take land out of cultivation. The Farm Security Administration helped a few tenants purchase land, offering share–croppers a way to break out of the traditional cycle of debt that bound them to landowners. But millions of tenant farmers and farm laborers, white and black, had to find their own way out of the crisis.

Hitting the Road
 Over 2.5 million farmers hit the road in search of work in the thirties. Besides families traveling together in cars, nearly 250,000 teenagers, usually young men, “rode the rails” by hopping into empty freight cars. Constantly on the move, these youths found companionship in “hobo jungles” (homeless encampments) as they looked for jobs, lived off handouts, and sometimes stole to get by. Nearly 400,000 Americans left farming areas in the middle of the country and headed to California. Old trucks piled high with personal belongings flooded western highways, demonstrating how completely the United States had become a car culture. The United States was “the only Nation in the history of the world that ever went to the poorhouse in an automobile,” quipped the cowboy humorist Will Rogers. California state officials tried to discourage migrants. Near Tulsa, Oklahoma a billboard on Route 66, the main highway that migrants took west, proclaimed: “NO JOBS in California, If YOU are looking for work—KEEP OUT, 6 men for Every Job, No State Relief Available for Non-Residents.” The signs did little to discourage families from heading to California. Most new California arrivals settled into the nomadic life of the migrant worker, traveling an average of 516 miles during the six-month harvest season. Despite their dependence on migrant workers to pick the crops, native Californians did not welcome “Okies,” the pejorative term for Dust Bowl refugees, with open arms. “Okies” were now subject to the same kinds of discrimination that migrant workers of Mexican, Chinese, Japanese, and Filipino descent had suffered for years in California. Migrant workers often lived in makeshift roadside camps

 Read the Document Carey McWilliams, Okies in California (1939)

 How did displaced farmers act to improve their own lives?



 CHAPTER 22

A NEW DEAL FOR AMERICA: THE GREAT DEPRESSION, 1929–1940

 children followed the crops in Oklahoma and Texas. “We’ll be in California yet,” he proclaimed. Lange was renowned for her ability to take photographs that revealed her subjects’ true feelings. Left lame by polio, she believed that her own disability made strangers trust her. Her photographs, discussed more fully in Images as History: “Migrant Mother”— An American Icon, had a distinct political purpose: to cement public support for migrant worker aid programs.

Repatriating Mexican
Immigrants


22.12 Migrants
Hit the Road
 Rickety trucks piled high with possessions and children filled western highways as families fled the Dust Bowl in search of employment elsewhere.

 near disease-ridden water ditches. When the government tried to create camps that offered migrants better and cleaner facilities, some Californians objected. Growers worried that concentrating migrant workers in government-run camps would make it easier for them to organize unions and strikes. Other Californians believed that improving living conditions would draw even more displaced farmers to their state. In 1935, California-based photographer Dorothea Lange began taking photographs for the Resettlement Administration to document migrant workers’ suffering and arouse the public’s sympathy. This photo (22.12) shows a father from Arkansas changing the tire on his truck as he and his seven

 Reducing competition from immigrants seeking work was another way the government tried to help native-born farm workers. In 1929, the government effectively ended legal immigration from Mexico for the duration of the Depression to protect jobs for American citizens. Foreshadowing today’s debate over the benefits and drawbacks of immigration, California officials argued that alien workers held jobs that should go to native-born Americans. Owners of large farms disagreed, predicting that they would face a serious labor shortage if they lost their traditional workforce since few Americans wanted these jobs. Anti-immigration forces prevailed. Faced with the offer of a free trip back to their original homes (financed by the United States and Mexico) or the option of staying in a country where employment options had dwindled, thousands of Mexican workers accepted repatriation. Local and federal officials arrested and then deported others who had entered the country illegally. With the advent of the New Deal, immigrants’ interest in voluntary repatriation dwindled. New Deal regulations made legal aliens eligible for food relief, although most public works programs gave jobs only to citizens. Overall approximately 415,000 Mexicans left the United States during the 1930s, both voluntarily and involuntarily.

 “Social change is a difficult thing in our civilization unless you have sentiment.” President FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT

 What happened to Mexican immigrants during the Depression?

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Dorothea Lange and Migrant Mother


A NEW DEAL FOR FARMERS



Images as History
MOTHER”—AN AMERICAN ICON
In March 1936, the photographer Dorothea Lange entered a makeshift migrants’ camp and saw a 32-year-old woman sitting with four of her seven children and all the family’s possessions. Taking six quick pictures, Lange jotted down notes about the family: “Destitute in pea pickers’ camp, Nipomo, California, because of the failure of the early pea crop. These people had just sold their tires in order to buy food. Of the 2,500 people in this camp most of them were destitute.” Lange’s final portrait, “Migrant Mother,” was a masterpiece. The viewer has the sense of intruding on an intensely personal moment, but Lange made no apologies for invading this woman’s privacy. “She asked me no questions,” the photographer later recalled. Instead, the woman “seemed to know that my pictures might help her, and so she helped me.” When these photographs appeared in the San Francisco News, relief authorities immediately sent food to the entire camp of starving pea pickers. “Migrant Mother” and her family, however, had already left the camp. In later years, Florence Thompson, the subject of “Migrant Mother,” tried to suppress the diffusion of this photograph because she felt that it stigmatized her as poor. As she lay dying of cancer in 1983, however, her children used the image to raise funds for their mother’s medical expenses. 
•


•


•
•


“Migrant Mother
 series, no. 2”

 In her next shots, Lange carefully framed out the open luggage and trash to erase any suggestion that the family lacked discipline.

 The presence of an older daughter raised potentially troublesome questions about when the woman began having children, why she continued to have so many, or why the teenager was not working to help the family.

 Because they wanted their photographs to arouse public sympathy and support for federal aid, government photographers always depicted the migrants as heroic victims. They were never shown smiling, angry, or as responsible for their misery.

•
•


•
 “Migrant Mother series, no. 6”

View the Closer Look Images as History: “Migrant Mother”—
An American Icon


 The father was nowhere in sight, conveying either the comforting possibility that he was out looking for work or the discomforting suggestion that he had abandoned the family.

 This initial photograph did not send the clear message that Lange wanted. In subsequent photos she focused on the despair of the mother and her small children rather than their general poverty.

 As adults Thompson’s daughters believed that this image underscored the importance of individual initiative, not the need for federal aid. To make sure that they “never lived like that again, we all worked hard and we all had good jobs and we all stayed with it,” one explained.

 Lange’s composition suggests “a sort of anti-Madonna and Child,” wrote one critic.

 What was the purpose and impact of Dorothea Lange’s migrant farmer photographs?



 CHAPTER 22

A NEW DEAL FOR AMERICA: THE GREAT DEPRESSION, 1929–1940

Reforms to Ensure Social Justice
 In 1935, the New Deal moved beyond measures intended to help the nation recover from the Depression to policies designed to correct basic inequities in American society and provide security to ordinary Americans. Reforms protected unions, guaranteed many elderly a government pension, established a minimum wage for factory workers, and abolished child labor. The momentum for these New Deal reforms came from the growing strength of left-leaning politicians, unions, and senior citizens who were unafraid to press FDR to adopt their vision of a more just society.

 The Challenge from Huey Long: “Share Our Wealth” Roosevelt’s move to the left toward the end of his first administration was partially a response to the popularity of Father Coughlin and Senator Huey Long of Louisiana. Before he became a senator, Long was an adored, although corrupt, governor of Louisiana who provided free school textbooks, built roads and hospitals, and curbed the power of the state’s oil industry. “They do not merely vote for him,” a reporter wrote of Louisianans in 1935, “they worship the ground he walks on.” Long supported the New Deal at first, but his dissatisfaction with the pace of change and his own political ambitions caused a break with FDR. As an alternative to the New Deal, Long proposed his Share Our Wealth plan to redistribute money from the rich to the poor. Long wanted to limit every person to $1 million in income and $8 million in capital investments each year. The government would confiscate all other personal income and corporate profits and redistribute $2,000 annually to every American family. Besides offering Americans a guaranteed income, Long also championed oldage pensions, expanded veterans’ benefits, a shorter working day, and government support for education. He created a Share Our Wealth Society and claimed a membership of five million, promising to make “every man a King.” Long argued that under his plan the rich would still enjoy a life of luxury, and even published a budget for a family of four on $1 million a year to show that they could easily afford $10,000 of jewelry each season and a new $100 suit a day. Yet even the great fortunes amassed by the richest Americans were too small to support the kind of program Long proposed. Despite the flaws in his plan, Long tapped into public anger

 How did critics from the left shape the social justice programs of FDR’s second administration?

 at the rich, whom many blamed for causing the Depression, and long-standing resentments about the concentration of wealth in the hands of a few. Long never had a chance to challenge FDR as a third-party candidate, however, because a disgruntled man who detested Long assassinated him on the steps of the Louisiana state capitol in the fall of 1935. “I wonder why he shot me,” Long asked before he died, a question the assassin, killed on the spot by Long’s bodyguards, could never answer. Competing Visions: Sharing the Wealth explores the Depression-era debate over redistributing income.

Social Security
 Alongside the larger-than-life personas of Huey Long and Father Coughlin stood Dr. Francis Townsend, an unassuming sixty-six-year-old physician who organized a campaign for old-age pensions in 1933 after seeing three old women outside his house in Long Beach, California, rummaging through the trash. The combined activism of these three men, and the support each enjoyed, convinced FDR in 1935 to create a comprehensive social-welfare system that protected the aged, the unemployed, and those unable to care for themselves. Townsend’s call for government pensions for the elderly set in motion a powerful grassroots

 “It is hard to be old and not have anything.” A woman from North Dakota, writing to Roosevelt

REFORMS TO ENSURE SOCIAL JUSTICE



Competing Visions
SHARING THE WEALTH
Should money be redistributed from the haves to the have-nots? During the Depression, many Americans answered a resounding “yes.” Below are two views, reflecting different visions of how income redistribution might affect American capitalism and democracy. What justification or objection does each give for redistributing wealth throughout the population? In this 1935 radio address, Senator Huey Long outlines his proposal to redistribute wealth from the rich to the poor. We find not only the people going further into debt, but that the United States is going further into debt…. And with it all, there stalks a slimy specter of want, hunger, destitution, and pestilence, all because of the fact that in the land of too much and of too much to wear, our president has failed in his promise to have these necessities of life distributed into the hands of the people who have need of them…. But we have been about our work to correct this situation. That is why the Share Our Wealth societies are forming in every nook and corner of America … Here is what we stand for in a nutshell: Number one, we propose that every family in America should … have a home and the comforts of a home up to a value of not less than around $5,000 or a little more than that. Number two, we propose that no family shall own more than three hundred times the average family wealth, which means that no family shall possess more than a wealth of approximately $5 million—none to own less than $5,000, none to own more than $5 million. Number three,… We propose that no family will have an earning of less than around $2,000 to $2,500 and that none will have more than three hundred times the average less the ordinary income taxes, which means that a million dollars would be the limit on the highest income. We also propose to give the old-age pensions to the old people, not by taxing them or their children, but by levying the taxes upon the excess fortunes to whittle them down, and on the excess incomes and excess inheritances, so that the people who reach the age of sixty can be retired from the active labor of life … We also propose the care for the veterans, including the cash payment of the soldiers’ bonus. We likewise propose that there should be an education for every youth in this land and that no youth would be dependent upon the financial means of his parents in order to have a college education. 
View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Sharing the Wealth


 In the following letter to Eleanor Roosevelt, a woman from Columbus, Indiana, protests that governmentdistributed relief robbed hardworking honest men to help “good-for-nothing loafers.” Dec. 14, 1937 Mrs. Roosevelt: … We have always had a shiftless, never-do-well class of people whose one and only aim in life is to live without work. I have been rubbing elbows with this class for nearly sixty years and have tried to help some of the most promising and have seen others try to help them, but it can’t be done. We cannot help those who will not try to help themselves and if they do try a square deal is all they need and by the way that is all this country needs or ever has needed: a square deal for all and then, let each one paddle their own canoe, or sink …. As for the old people on beggars’ allowances: the taxpayers have provided homes for all the old people who never liked to work, where they will be neither cold nor hungry: much better homes than most of them have ever tried to provide for themselves. They have lived many years through the most prosperous times of our country and had an opportunity to prepare for old age, but they spent their lives in idleness or worse and now they expect those who have worked like slaves, to provide a living for them and all their worthless descendants…. There is many a little child doing without butter on its bread, so that some old sot can have his booze and tobacco: some old sot who spent his working years loafing around pool rooms and saloons, boasting that the world owed him a living….. During the worst of the depression many of the farmers had to deny their families butter, eggs, meat, etc. and sell it to pay their taxes and then had to stand by and see the dead-beats [who qualified for relief] carry it home to their families by the arm load, and they knew their tax money was helping pay for it…. Is it any wonder the taxpayers are discouraged by all this penalizing of thrift and industry to reward shiftlessness, or that the whole country is on the brink of chaos? What competing images of the poor do Long and this Indiana woman offer?



 CHAPTER 22

A NEW DEAL FOR AMERICA: THE GREAT DEPRESSION, 1929–1940

22.13 Three Steps to Security
 This 1936 poster deliberately emphasized the monthly check workers would receive during retirement, not the payroll deductions that would reduce their take-home pay to help finance immediate pensions for the elderly.

 movement. For many working-class Americans, their final years had always been a steady decline into poverty. Unable to work due to age, illness, or the unwillingness of employers to hire them, most relied on family members or charities to survive. The plight of the aged assumed crisis proportions when Depression-era bank failures swept away much of their savings. Townsend clubs, formed to promote government pensions for the elderly, barraged Congress with petitions signed by ten million supporters, sending a clear message to the president and legislators in Washington, D.C. Sensing an opportunity to enact other reforms long-championed by the left, Roosevelt attached

 some controversial measures to the bill that provided pensions for the elderly. Unwilling to risk voting against the extremely popular pension proposal, conservative congressmen grudgingly voted for a law that also provided unemployment benefits, assistance to the disabled, and aid for dependent children. FDR wanted to help the “deserving poor,” needy Americans legitimately entitled to public support, a category open to differing interpretations. What made someone deserving of aid in the new social security system? This poster (22.13) urging Americans to apply for their old-age benefits clearly noted that only industrial workers working for a salary or wage were eligible for the new pension program. The system did not cover agricultural and domestic workers until 1950, a concession to southern and agricultural business interests, who claimed they could not afford the mandatory employers’ contribution to their employees’ Social Security accounts (employers paid half). The Social Security Act of 1935 also set the following criteria for its other categories of aid: being laid off (not fired for cause) from an industrial job, being physically disabled or a widow (not an unwed mother) with children to raise. The Social Security pension system operated along the same lines as private insurance by collecting premiums from individual subscribers in the form of payroll taxes. The public embraced Social Security as a system that simply returned these earlier deposits to retirees. Retired workers, however, began receiving checks in 1940, clearly too soon for them to have paid enough to cover the costs of their pension benefits. Ida May Fuller, a retired legal secretary, received the nation’s first Social Security check for $22.54 after paying a total of $24.75 in payroll taxes. She collected more than $22,000 in Social Security checks before she died at age 100 in 1975.

Supporting Unions
 Political pressures from the left and empathy for the poor had encouraged Roosevelt to create the Social Security system. These same forces influenced the president as he faced a different set of choices concerning the standoff between business and labor. His desire to curtail political challenges from the left and solidify his voter base by building a new coalition that included unions encouraged Roosevelt to choose the side of labor in this simmering industrial dispute. Business leaders’ open hostility to New Deal

 Who was considered part of the “deserving poor” in the new Social Security system?

REFORMS TO ENSURE SOCIAL JUSTICE

 relief and public works programs also prompted FDR to ally himself with labor in 1935. When he proposed a heavy tax on the rich (again inspired by Long), the business elite denounced the wealthy president as “a traitor to his class.” FDR openly mocked his opponents when running for reelection in 1936. “I should like to have it said of my first Administration that in it the forces of selfishness and of lust for power met their match. I should like to have it said of my second Administration that in it these forces met their master,” declared Roosevelt in his last campaign speech before defeating the Republican candidate, Kansas Governor Alf Landon. The general public’s antipathy to the rich was captured perfectly in this photo (22.14) by Dorothea Lange of a gas station in Kern County, California, which displayed a sign declaring “This is your country, don’t let the big men take it away from you” next to the free air pump. Roosevelt’s actions matched his rhetoric. Throughout the great strikes of the nineteenth century, the federal government had usually sided openly with industrialists to break workers’ movements. Thanks to legislation passed during the New



 Deal, the federal government suddenly became labor’s friend. The National Industrial Recovery Act (1933), the same law that created the NRA, provided the first hint of things to come by declaring that workers had the right to organize and bargain collectively. Labor officials often referred to this section of the law, 7(a), as the “Magna Carta” of organized labor because it recognized a right that many industrialists still refused to acknowledge. (Issued in 1215, the real Magna Carta established the basic liberties of Englishmen.) When the Supreme Court declared the National Industrial Recovery Act unconstitutional, FDR signed the Wagner Act (1935), a law sponsored by Senator Robert Wagner (D-NY) to increase the purchasing power of workers by giving them the power to negotiate for higher wages. The Wagner Act created the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) to supervise unions’ elections for their collective bargaining agents. The law prevented employers from firing or blacklisting workers who joined a union, or from infiltrating unions with spies. With this government protection, the union movement exploded. Between 1933 and 1941, union membership rose from 2.9 million to 8.7 million workers. In 1938, FDR went even further with the Fair Labor Standards Act, which established a national minimum hourly wage (set initially at 25 cents, rising gradually to 40 cents), set maximum hours for the workweek (44 hours), and outlawed labor by children under 16 (with some exemptions, such as newspaper carriers). Aimed at industrial workers, the act excluded agricultural and domestic workers. FDR again demonstrated political savvy in maneuvering the bill through Congress. He attached the controversial wage and hours measures to a bill prohibiting child labor, knowing that few congressmen would vote against such a popular measure. 22.14 This Is Your Country This sign reflected the general resentment toward the rich that encouraged Roosevelt to attack business and support unions in 1935.

 How did government support of unions change during the 1930s?



 CHAPTER 22

A NEW DEAL FOR AMERICA: THE GREAT DEPRESSION, 1929–1940

The Resurgence of Labor
 Government regulation gave crucial support to unions, but the task of building a successful labor movement lay with workers. Overcoming workers’ fears that they would lose their jobs if they joined a union posed a significant hurdle for all organizers. When the United Auto Workers (UAW) took on Henry Ford, a strident opponent of unions, organizers passed out handbills assuring workers that “the Wagner Bill is behind you! Now get behind yourselves!” Ford had offered the best terms of employment with his $5-a-day wages and eighthour workdays in the 1910s and revolutionized American industry with his introduction of the assembly line (see Chapter 18). By the thirties, however, workers in unionized auto plants had much higher wages and guaranteed benefits.

 Ford ruled his plants with an iron fist, and in 1937 when five labor organizers tried to pass out handbills to workers entering the Ford motor plant in Dearborn, Michigan, 40 members of the company’s private security force attacked them. As seen in this photo (22.15), the guards unleashed a flurry of punches and kicks, throwing each man face first onto the pavement before tossing him down a set of stairs. One man’s back was broken, and another recounted how two men held his legs apart while the security guards kicked him repeatedly in the groin. A few news photographers managed to smuggle out photographs of the attacks, thwarting the attempt by Ford’s security force to confiscate their film. The shocking images caused a public outcry. The NLRB ordered Ford to stop interfering with union organizing, but securing industry-wide recognition of the UAW required more dramatic action at Ford Motor Company and elsewhere. Ford’s antiunion intimidation had worked in the past, but by the mid-1930s, many workers were ready to fight back. In 1934 alone, 1.5 million workers participated in 1,800 strikes. Support from the government helped the labor movement grow, but so did a new vision of who could join a union. The American Federation of Labor (AFL) was a craft-based union that accepted only skilled workers, like carpenters or cigar makers, who practiced a trade. Excluding unskilled workers from the labor movement made little sense once assembly-line mass production began to dominate the manufacturing process. John L. Lewis, head of the United Mine Workers, argued that to become truly powerful unions needed to find room for unskilled workers, no matter their race or ethnicity. When the AFL expelled Lewis for trying to organize these groups, he formed the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO), a new type of labor union that organized workers within an entire industry rather than by their trade orientation. Within two years of its founding, the CIO boasted 3.7 million members as compared to

22.15 Ford Security Guards Attack Labor
Organizers
 Ford’s guards pull a labor organizer’s jacket over his head to immobilize his arms as they pummel him. Signaling new support for the labor movement, the federal government intervened after this photo was published.

 Why were the CIO’s innovative organizing and strike tactics effective?

Read the Document Investigation of Strikebreaking (1939)


REFORMS TO ENSURE SOCIAL JUSTICE

 the 3.4 million workers who belonged to the AFL. CIO organizers warned the diverse ranks of unskilled workers not to fall for their employers’ old tricks. “The man working beside you, be he Negro, Jew or Pollock [Polish] is a working man like yourself … You work together—FIGHT TOGETHER,” one CIO labor organizer told steelworkers. “We were making a religion of racial unity,” noted another CIO official. In sharp contrast to its enlightened racial views, the CIO joined with the AFL in urging women to voluntarily leave their jobs so men could have them. The CIO did, however, reverse the labor movement’s indifference to electoral politics. Now that the government was actively supporting unions, keeping sympathetic officials in public office became a major CIO goal. Recruiting members became easier when the CIO devised new methods of collective action that bore results. Automobile workers seized the spotlight when they pioneered a new and effective tactic: the sit-down strike. During a sit-down strike workers occupied a factory to paralyze production lines and prevent strikebreakers or management from entering the building. Because sit-down strikes caused the employer, as well as his striking employees, to lose money, this tactic brought employers to the negotiating table more quickly than traditional picket lines. Nearly 400,000 workers participated in sit-down strikes in 1937 alone, causing Time magazine to comment that “sitting down has replaced baseball as the national pastime.” When the UAW took over the main General Motors plant in Flint, Michigan, in 1937, the governor of Michigan and FDR (who had just received 84 percent of the votes cast by organized labor and 81 percent from low-income voters in the 1936 presidential election) refused to authorize the use of troops to retake the plant. By standing with the strikers, FDR solidified his support among the working class. Within six weeks General Motors capitulated and recognized the union. Ford finally recognized the UAW in 1941. Having lost the battle on the ground, the automobile companies fought back through the courts. In 1939, the Supreme Court ruled that sit-down strikes were illegal seizures of property. The union movement’s successes in the automobile, steel, and textile industries markedly improved the daily lives of workers, but even with these gains, workers had few material comforts compared to laborers today. By 1941, factory workers earned an average of $1,449 a year, enough

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Responding to the
Great Depression, Whose New Deal?




 for a married father with two children to buy two dresses for his wife every year, shoes for his children every other year, and a coat for himself every six years while living in a five-room apartment and driving a used car.

A
New Deal for African Americans
 As late as 1932, most black northern voters (few African Americans could vote in the South) remained loyal to the Republican Party and Herbert Hoover. Four years later Gallup polls estimated that 76 percent of northern blacks had voted for FDR. What had FDR done to deserve this newfound loyalty among black voters? Little, it seemed at first glance. During his first administration, powerful Southern Democrats in Congress prevented FDR from proposing any civil rights legislation or guaranteeing equal treatment by New Deal agencies. Still, New Deal programs offered African Americans more federal and state aid than they had ever received before. Southern blacks usually received smaller relief payments than whites, but before 1933, most state agencies had given them nothing. In the 1936 presidential election, Democrats emphasized the benefits that the New Deal had brought to the African American community, proclaiming on billboards: “Do not bite the hand that feeds you.” Eleanor Roosevelt’s well-known interest in civil rights also helped draw black voters to FDR. When black voters abandoned the Republicans for the Democratic Party, they joined the New Deal coalition, a political partnership formed in the mid1930s among liberals, trade unionists, Catholics, and northern blacks that redrew the nation’s political map. The strength of the New Deal coalition increased FDR’s freedom to pursue his legislative agenda. In the newly elected 75th Congress, he did not need a single Southern or Republican vote to pass New Deal legislation. As the black vote gained new importance to the Democratic Party, the administration became more responsive to African American demands. During FDR’s second term, public works projects hired more black workers. FDR also appointed the first black federal judge and convened an unofficial Black Cabinet to investigate civil rights abuses and advise him on racial matters. Nonetheless, racial discrimination continued to plague the lives of African Americans in

 Why did many African Americans switch from the Republican to the Democratic Party in the 1930s?



 CHAPTER 22

 22.16 “There’s No Way Like the American Way” In 1937 this photo captured the irony of trumpeting America as the land of opportunity for whites, while needy black citizens stood in line at a soup kitchen.

A NEW DEAL FOR AMERICA: THE GREAT DEPRESSION, 1929–1940

 the thirties. In Margaret Bourke-White’s 1937 photo (22.16), black residents wait for emergency relief during the Louisville, Kentucky flood, while above them, a billboard poster shows a carefree well-dressed white family driving a car. The image symbolically showcased the racial divide that remained intact throughout the decade. The fate of the Scottsboro Nine, nine black teenagers accused of rape by two young white women while riding on a freight train through Alabama in 1931, underscored the persistence of racial prejudice. The NAACP and the Communist Party took up their defense in well-publicized court cases, while the nine struggled to survive inmate violence, chain gangs, and guard abuse. The last of the Scottsboro Nine was not freed until 1950.

The Supreme Court Weighs In
 In 1936, FDR won reelection with 61 percent of the popular vote, carrying every state except Maine and Vermont. By the late 1930s, Gallup public opinion polls offered another way besides elections to measure support for the president and his policies. Envisioning Evidence: Interpreting Public Opinion Polls indicates strong faith in FDR among the working class. The same could not be said of the Supreme Court. Of the nine justices, four consistently opposed New Deal What role did the Supreme Court play during the New Deal?

 legislation, and two remained unpredictable. By 1937, the Court had declared two major pieces of early New Deal legislation, the NRA and AAA, unconstitutional. With lawsuits against the Wagner Act and Social Security Act on the Court’s docket, Roosevelt decided to act. Suggesting that advanced age (rather than conservative ideology) was hampering the work of the Court, FDR proposed increasing the number of justices to a maximum of 15 by adding one new justice for every one over age 70 who had served more than ten years on the Court. With the conservative bloc all over age 70, Roosevelt’s plan would either increase the size of the court or force the older justices to retire. Either way he would have a chance to appoint judges who were sympathetic to the New Deal. Dubbed the “Court-packing scheme” by detractors, the clash consumed a whole session of Congress and ended with a resounding defeat for FDR. He always maintained that though he lost the battle, he won the larger war with the Court. As Congress debated his proposal to add more justices, the Supreme Court surprised everyone by upholding the constitutionality of the Wagner Act and the Social Security Act. Over the next few years, death and retirement gave FDR the chance to appoint seven justices. The fallout from the Court struggle had negative repercussions for the president, however. Although the Court began upholding New Deal legislation, the battle alienated progressive Republicans who had previously supported the president and pushed conservative Democrats into an alliance with likeminded Republicans. In 1938, Republicans narrowed the Democratic majority in Congress. The bipartisan conservative coalition was now strong enough to thwart new reform initiatives and begin cutting expenditures for New Deal recovery programs. The New Deal thus ground to a halt in 1938, after five years of public policy initiatives, experiments, and reforms. The federal government was now an active presence in the lives of millions, provoking a debate that continues into the twenty-first century over the proper role of the government in the economy and who is deserving of help.

Read the Document Mrs. Henry Weddington, Letter to President Roosevelt (1938)


REFORMS TO ENSURE SOCIAL JUSTICE



Envisioning Evidence
INTERPRETING PUBLIC OPINION POLLS
Claiming to offer insight into the mindset of the common man, George Gallup’s American Institute of Public Opinion began publishing its well-received public opinion polls in 1935. Previous polls had based their accuracy on collecting as many responses as possible. Relying on new statistical sampling theories, Gallup instead interviewed small (3,000–4,000) demographically representative groups in person and through mail questionnaires. Gallup viewed popular opinion polls as a way for “the plain people of the United States” to communicate directly to their elected representatives, but Gallup played a critical role in that conversation. The wording of questions affected responses and Gallup freely interpreted the meaning of his surveys through regular newspaper columns. “What are the main cleavages that exist today in American public opinion?” he asked. According to Gallup polls, “the split between the ‘haves’ and the ‘have nots.’” Relief and Roosevelt, August 24, 1938 Both questions asked together of all income levels, except farm owners. 1. If you (or your husband) lost your (or his) job and couldn’t find other work, about how long could you hold out before you had to apply for relief? 
 2. Are you for or against Roosevelt today?

 Persons already on relief

 Persons already on relief

 One month or less

 One month or less

 Two to six months

 Two to six months

 Six months to two years

 Six months to two years

 Three years or more, or indefinitely, or would never go on relief

For


Against


40%


60%


 Three years or more

10%


20%


30%




20%


80%


100%


Gallup Interprets His Data
 “In view of the relatively high feeling of insecurity among large sections of the population it is not difficult to understand the popularity of old age pensions and other provisions of the Social Security Act.” Source: The New York Times, August 24, 1938, p. 10.

 “It seems clear from this evidence that political attitudes today are determined not so much by theories of government [strong federal government, states rights, communism] as by bread-and-butter economics, that support from the financially insecure continues to be the backbone of New Deal strength.”

Married Women Working, December 25, 1938
 Do you approve of a married woman earning money in business or industry if she has a husband capable of supporting her?

 YES 100%

80%


60%


40%


20%


 Men voters Women voters



 NO

20%


40%


60%


80%


100%


 Men voters Women voters

Respondents Explain Their Answer
 “There aren’t enough jobs for married men” “Married women who work when they don’t have to are just taking bread out of the mouths of others.” “Any one who wants to work should be able to work.” “The problem is to create more jobs for all.” Source: The New York Times, December 25, 1938, p. 23.

View the Closer Look Envisioning Evidence: Interpreting Public Opinion Polls


 How did economic insecurity shape political views during the Depression?



 CHAPTER 22

A NEW DEAL FOR AMERICA: THE GREAT DEPRESSION, 1929–1940

% 1900 = 5%


















World War I










 Herbert Hoover elected president

 Stock market crashes

Reconstruction Finance
 Corporation established

 FDR inaugurated president

 Signals beginning of Depression

 Predicts permanent prosperity

 Hoover’s effort to help businesses and banks with federal loans

Bonus March


CHAPTER REVIEW

 Public outrage over army’s eviction of protesting veterans from Washington, D.C.

 Restores faith and confidence in government and capitalism

 New Deal begun Five year creation of federal agencies, laws, and reforms that restructure American capitalism and provide economic security to citizens

Review Questions
 1. What groups of people did the New Deal help and why? 2. Why did images of breadlines and migrant farmers become enduring symbols of Depression-era suffering?

 4. What conflicting visions prompted the right and left to criticize the New Deal? 5. What new roles did the New Deal establish for the federal government in American society?

 3. Why were there labor protests in the thirties, a time when one might expect workers simply to be grateful for any job on any terms?

Key Terms
 Stock market crash of 1929 A ten-day period beginning on October 20, 1929, when the value of stocks plummeted as panicked investors sold off their stock in droves. This moment is usually considered the official start of the Depression. Bonus March A two-month-long demonstration by forty thousand impoverished World War I veterans in Washington, D.C., that ended violently when the army expelled the protesters. New Deal An avalanche of legislation from 1933 to 1938 intended to promote economic recovery, reform American capitalism, and offer security to ordinary Americans. Dust Bowl Drought and soil erosion caused massive dust storms across southern and plains states throughout the thirties. “Migrant Mother” Dorothea Lange’s 1936 photograph of a destitute woman, which became an iconic portrait of Depression-era suffering.

 Share our wealth Louisiana Senator Huey Long’s plan to redistribute money from the rich to the poor. American Federation of Labor (AFL) A craft-based organization that accepted only skilled workers, like carpenters or cigar makers, who practiced a trade. Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) A brand-new type of labor organization that organized workers within an entire industry rather than by their trade orientation. Sit-down strike Workers occupy a factory to paralyze production lines and prevent strikebreakers or management from entering the building. New Deal coalition A political partnership formed in the midthirties among liberals, trade unionists, Catholics, and northern blacks that redrew the nation’s political map.

CHAPTER REVIEW









Works Progress Administration


Share Our Wealth Movement


 Dust Bowl crisis worsens

 Public works program employs one-fifth of the workforce from 1935 to 1943

 Senator Huey Long’s proposal to redistribute wealth pushes FDR to the left

 Drought, soil erosion result in major ecological disaster

 FDR tries to reform Supreme Court

Wagner Act


 CIO founded

 New Deal coalition forms

 Offers government protection to unions

 Organizes workers by industry rather than by trade

 FDR wins reelection



 Proposal’s failure exposes limits of FDR’s power

 Social Security payroll taxes begin Establishes funding mechanism for federal pensions

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of A New Deal for America.

Questions for Analysis
 1. Why would the sentiments expressed in this political cartoon lead to dissatisfaction with Hoover? View the Image John Baer, “We Demand a New Deal!” (1931), p. 662

 Other Resources from This Chapter Hear the Audio File FDR’s First Inaugural Address, p. 663 Read the Document • Father Charles E. Coughlin, “A Third Party” (1936), p. 667 • Carey McWilliams, Okies in California (1939), p. 671

 2. How did FDR reassure the public about his plan for alleviating their financial hardships?

• Mrs. Henry Weddington, Letter to President Roosevelt (1938),
 p. 680

Read the Document Franklin D. Roosevelt — Radio


View the Closer Look


Address (1933), p. 666


• Images as History: “Migrant Mother”— An American Icon, p. 673
• Competing Visions: Sharing the Wealth, p. 675


 3. What values did post office murals celebrate? View the Closer Look Images as History: Post Office Murals, p. 669

• Envisioning Evidence: Interpreting Public Opinion Polls, p. 681


View the Image
 • Children with “Hoover’s Poor Farm” Sign, p. 660

 4. Why did interpretations of “Migrant Mother” differ? Watch the Video Video Lecture: Dorothea Lange

 • CCC worker (1938), p. 668

View the Map Interactive Map: The Great Depression, p. 670


 and Migrant Mother, p. 672

Watch the Video


 5. How did employers try to break strikes in the 1930s? Read the Document Investigation of Strikebreaking (1939), p. 678

 • Prosperity of the 1920s and the Great Depression, p. 656 • Video Lecture: Responding to the Great Depression, Whose New Deal?, p. 679

 What major decisions set the stage for U.S. entry in the war?

On the Home
Front p. 693


 How did different groups of Americans experience the war?

On the Front Lines
 p. 702

 What challenges did the United States face in the Pacific and European theaters of war?

Ending the Pacific
War p. 711


How was the war in the
 Pacific brought to a close?

 CHAPTER

The Approaching
War p. 686




