 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 13

A
Nation Torn Apart The Civil War, 1861–1865
 The Civil War began in 1861 as a conflict over whether Southern states possessed the right to secede from the Union. But when Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation took effect on January 1, 1863, it became a war against slavery. The soldiers depicted in this joyous scene were among the nearly 200,000 African American soldiers who contributed to the Union army’s successful campaign to defeat the Confederacy. In February 1865, a few weeks after the second anniversary of the Emancipation Proclamation, the popular magazine, Harper’s Weekly, published this drawing, “Entrance of the Fifty-Fifth Massachusetts (colored) Regiment into Charleston Feb 21, 1865.” The image reflected not merely a growing acceptance of slavery’s demise among Northerners, but also the celebration of emancipation as a noble cause, along with restoration of the Union, that helped the North justify the terrible human cost of the war. Emancipation was but one of the many extraordinary aspects of the Civil War that make it the most written-about event in American history. The war pitted American against American, in some cases brother against brother. Senator John J. Crittenden of Kentucky, for example, saw two sons become generals, one Confederate and the other Union. Mary Todd Lincoln, the president’s wife, lost three brothers who fought for the Confederacy. The Civil War was also an unusually bloody war. The 618,000 Americans who died in the four years of conflict far outnumber the 117,000 lost in World War I and the 417,000 in World War II. The war also brought to the fore larger-than-life personalities such as Generals William Tecumseh Sherman, Ulysses S. Grant, Robert E. Lee, and Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson, and it produced moments of heroism that would become the stuff of legend. If these aspects of the war explain its popularity as a historical subject, they also indicate why the Civil War has generated such heated debate. For generations Americans have argued over the true cause of the war and why the North won (or as some like to put it, why the South lost). They have debated the significance and wisdom of crucial decisions such as Lee’s move to attack the North in 1863 or Union General George Meade’s failure to pursue the weakened Confederates after Gettysburg. Yet for all this debate, few commentators dispute this fact: The Civil War brought profound social, political, and economic change to the United States. Most also agree that although the war ended the contentious question of slavery, it immediately raised equally challenging questions about racial equality.

 “War for the destruction of liberty must be met by war for the destruction of slavery.” African American leader FREDERICK DOUGLASS





 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

Mobilization, Strategy,
 and Diplomacy Neither the North nor South envisioned the character and course of the war that began with the South’s firing on Fort Sumter in April 1861. Both sides had to hastily mobilize, recruit, train, and outfit modern armies. The North possessed overwhelming advantages in population and industry, but the South enjoyed superior military leadership, a white population largely united against invading Union armies, and a hope that France or Britain would intervene in the conflict on their behalf.

Comparative Advantages
 and Disadvantages As North and South prepared for war, both sides believed they would win decisively. Journalist Horace Greeley spoke for many Northerners when he boasted of the president of the Confederate States of America and his administration that “Jeff Davis and Co. will be swinging from the battlements at Washington at least by the 4th of July.” On paper this confidence seemed justified. As the table (13.1) illustrates, the Northern states possessed more than twice the population of the Confederacy, giving the North an enormous advantage in soldiers, farmers, and industrial workers. The North also possessed a vast industrial system, nine times greater than that of the Confederacy. Producing 97 percent of the nation’s firearms, 94 percent of its cloth, and 90 percent of its shoes and boots, this system could

Union


Confederacy


Population


22,000,000


 5,500,000 white 3,500,000 enslaved

Industrial Workers


1,300,000


110,000


110,000


18,000


 $1.5 billion

 $155 million

22,000


9,000


97%


3%


$330,000,000


$27,000,000


Factories
Value Goods Manufactured
V
Railroad Mileage
Weapons Manufacturing
 (Percent U.S. total) Banking Capital

13.1 Union Advantages on the Eve of War, 1861
 The enormous disparities between North and South suggested to many a quick Union victory. But many factors beyond these statistics, notably superior Confederate military leadership, would make for a long and bloody war.

 What significant advantages did the North hold over the South on the eve of war?

 provide the Union armies with unlimited supplies. The North also had a modern railroad system twice the size of the Confederacy’s, and it was far more integrated. A final advantage was the firm belief among many Northern soldiers that they were fighting to uphold the Constitution, and the Union. This sentiment was stoked by a profusion of speeches, songs, and printed matter like the poster The Eagle’s Nest (13.2), extolling the Union cause. Demonizing secession as treason by invoking the famous 1830 declaration of President Andrew Jackson, a Southerner and slave owner, “The Union! It must and shall be preserved,” it also draws on familiar images of patriotism such as the bald eagle and the American flag. Many Northerners believed they were indebted to the Founding Fathers, whose sacrifices won American independence and established a republic where all possessed equal opportunity to succeed. Southerners likewise sought to boost their wartime morale. As the song sheet “Secession Quick Step” (13.3) shows, they often drew on the same patriotic images and themes as Northerners. This song and the accompanying image seek to connect the colonists’ break from Britain during the American Revolution with the South’s quest for Confederate independence. Note the reference to “Minute Men” the “Don’t Tread on Me” snake, a popular image of colonial resistance to British authority in the 1770s (see Chapter 4). Southerners also matched Northerners in their confidence about achieving a quick victory. “Just throw three or four shells among those blue-bellied Yankees,” boasted one North Carolinian, “and they’ll scatter like sheep.” Confederates were keenly aware that although they lacked population, industry, and infrastructure, they possessed certain advantages. To begin with, they

Hear the Audio Battle Hymn of the Republic


MOBILIZATION, STRATEGY, AND DIPLOMACY 13.2
The Eagle’s Nest Northerners promoted patriotic sentiment in speeches, songs, and printed matter. This poster, “The Eagle’s Nest,” linked the Union cause to familiar images such as the bald eagle and the flag. 


 were fighting a war for independence that carried with it a sense of destiny that would sustain them through the difficult times ahead—just as it had sustained, they reminded themselves, the overmatched colonists in their fight for independence from a superior Great Britain nearly a century earlier. The South also enjoyed an important geographic advantage: To deny Confederate independence, the North had to conquer the South, an area as large as Western Europe. Furthermore, this monumental invasion and occupation would likely unify the South, including poor whites who might otherwise view the conflict as a war to protect the interests of slaveholders. The South could thus fight a defensive war until the North grew tired of the conflict and withdrew, or until a European power, most likely Britain, which depended heavily on Southern cotton, intervened militarily and forced the North to let the states secede. Finally, whether they knew it or not, in April 1861 Southerners had the upper hand in military leadership. For the first half of the war, generals such as Robert E. Lee and Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson would stymie much larger and better-equipped Northern armies led by inept generals.

Mobilization in the North


13.3 Connecting to the Colonial Cause
 As in the North, Southerners fostered unity, emphasizing the connection between the colonists’ revolt against British rule during the American Revolution and the Confederate bid for Southern independence.

 Mobilization of the Union Army began days after the firing at Fort Sumter with Lincoln’s call for 75,000 volunteers for 90 days’ service and the imposition of a naval blockade along the Southern coast. Eager volunteers jammed recruiting stations, convinced the Union would win quickly and with little loss of life. Among those who clamored to join the Army were thousands of free African Americans anxious to defeat the slaveholding South. Yet they were turned away because of an overabundance of white volunteers and Lincoln’s desire to sidestep issues of slavery and race to avoid provoking the slaveholding states that remained in the Union—Kentucky, Maryland, Delaware, and Missouri—from seceding.

 Why did Southerners seek to link secession to the American Revolution?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

 Unfortunately for Lincoln, the Union Army’s enthusiasm was no substitute for experience. In 1861, there were only 16,000 professional soldiers in the Army, most of them stationed in the West. One-third of the Army’s officers joined the Confederacy. Of those officers who remained, few possessed any real combat experience. To make matters worse, because state officials named the officers to command the new regiments of volunteers, they invariably chose men whose chief qualifications were their political connections and fondness for parading. One regiment, the 11th New York Volunteer Infantry, was perhaps the most vivid example of this phenomenon. As this print (13.4) shows, these volunteers donned flashy uniforms patterned after the Zouaves, France’s famous regiments in Algeria, replete with red silk pantaloons and green jackets. The New York Zouaves enjoyed great celebrity at the war’s outset, and one of them, Colonel Elmer Ephraim Ellsworth (at right), became the Union’s first martyr when he was killed pulling down a Confederate flag in Virginia. Despite their stylishness, however, the 11th New York Zouaves performed disastrously at Bull 13.4 The Zouaves of the 11th New York Many regiments raised to fight for the Union and the Confederacy included inexperienced men whose romantic visions of warfare were expressed in their fanciful uniforms.

 How did the doctrine of states’ rights hinder the Southern war effort?

 Run. As the war progressed both armies replaced special regimental uniforms with Union blue and Confederate gray.

Mobilization in the South
 Unlike the North, the Confederacy needed to create an Army from scratch. Immediately after seceding, Southern states revived, reorganized, and expanded their militias, many of which were more like social clubs than military units. In March 1861, the Confederate Congress established an army of 100,000 volunteers for one-year terms of service, leading to the merging of most state militia companies into the Confederate Army. To thwart the Union’s intended blockade of the Southern coastline, the Confederacy commenced creating a navy and authorizing privateers to seize Union ships. Equipping their soldiers and sailors proved a far greater challenge. Lacking the industrial base of the North, the South built arms factories that eventually turned out some 350,000 rifles. They also imported 700,000 more. Nonetheless, throughout the war Confederate soldiers often needed to scavenge battlefields to find weapons and ammunition. The Confederate effort to thwart the Union blockade was similarly hampered by a lack of shipyards. The Davis administration also had to pay for the war. Possessing few banks and limited reserves of gold and silver, the government tried several schemes, including requiring individual states to pay for the war and imposing an income tax. When none of these policies worked, the Confederate government simply printed paper money. With more than $1 billion in circulation by 1864 (twice the amount issued in the North), the citizens of the Confederacy faced punishing inflation, which reached 9,000 percent by 1865 (as compared with 80 percent in the Union). Another obstacle to Confederate victory was the South’s popular doctrine of states’ rights. It envisioned the ideal national government as one that left most power and authority to the states. Even though the Confederacy ultimately managed to overcome states’ rights opposition and create a centralized national government and military, its efforts were hindered by vociferous critics. Governors Zebulon B. Vance of North Carolina and Joseph E. Brown of Georgia, for example, opposed the incorporation of their state militias into the Confederate Army. Later when the Confederacy enacted a military draft, they raised a loud protest and created hundreds of exemptions for friends and state officials.

MOBILIZATION, STRATEGY, AND DIPLOMACY

NEW YORK MINNESOTA WISCONSIN

Nebraska
Territory


MICHIGAN PENNSYLVANIA

 IOWA

OH I O

R.


The Struggle
 for the Border States



NEW JERSEY DELAWARE

Oh


 o

 i While both sides MARYLAND WEST INDIANA VIRGINIA readied for war, they ILLINOIS (created VIRGINIA en tuc Washington, D.C. Kansas k y in 1863) also struggled for the R Territory MISSOURI KENTUCKY loyalty of the Border NORTH States: Missouri, CAROLINA TENNESSEE Kentucky, Delaware, SOUTH Indian New ARKANSAS CAROLINA and Maryland, the Territory Mexico slave states along the Territory ALABAMA border of the ConGEORGIA AT L AN T I C federacy that had not MISSISSIPPI T E X A S seceded (13.5). These O C E AN held enormous strateLOUISIANA gic value for both sides. FLORIDA Missouri and Kentucky bordered the vital Mississippi Gulf of Mexico River. Kentucky also controlled key sections of the Ohio and KenBorder states (did not secede) tucky Rivers. A seceded Delaware could Confederacy cut off water access to Philadelphia. Worst of Union all, if Maryland seceded it would leave Washington, D.C. surrounded by Confederate terriNote: The western counties of Virginia remained tory, and cost the Union its main railroad route loyal to the Union and were admitted as the state west. of West Virginia in 1863. The Davis administration had strong incentive 13.5 The Vital Border States to lure the Border States into joining the ConfedThe Border States (Missouri, Kentucky, Maryland, and Delaware) eracy. These four states contained nearly half the held enormous strategic, military, economic, and symbolic value South’s white male population and 80 percent of for both sides. In the end, the Lincoln administration succeeded in keeping them in the Union. its industry. Given the South’s disadvantages in manpower and manufacturing, the loss of these states would seriously weaken the Confederate war and suspend habeas corpus—the right of a pereffort. son to petition a judge for release from unlawful Ultimately, the Union managed to hold all four imprisonment. states. Delaware, where less than two percent of the Securing Union control of Missouri also required white population owned slaves, proved relatively a heavy hand. The situation there resembled that of easy to hold. Kentucky remained divided between “Bleeding Kansas” in 1857 (see Chapter 12), with Union and Confederate sympathies. But Lincoln’s pro-Confederate and pro-Union forces fighting for subtle approach, along with the arrival of federal control of the state. But Union forces under General troops, secured the state for the Union. Nathaniel Lyon thwarted the efforts of state officials Maryland, where pro-Confederate sentiment to steer Missouri into the Confederacy. ran high, presented a far greater challenge. On The Union’s success in preventing the April 19, 1861, a pro-Confederate mob attacked the secession of the Border States weakened the 6th Massachusetts Regiment as it passed through Confederate cause in two ways. First, it deprived Baltimore on its way to Washington. The inexpethe Confederacy of soldiers and factories. Second, rienced soldiers panicked and opened fire, killing the retention of four slave states in the Union 12. The mob then destroyed tracks, bridges, and undermined a primary Confederate justification telegraph lines, prompting Lincoln to declare marfor secession, namely, that it was necessary to tial law, arrest dozens of Confederate sympathizers, protect slavery. K

Mississ


 ipp

 iR .

.


 What made the Border States so economically and militarily valuable to the Confederacy?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

Wartime Diplomacy
 Davis hoped to gain from Britain and France diplomatic recognition for the Confederacy and perhaps even military intervention. He knew the leaders and aristocracy of both countries sympathized with the Confederate cause and that their economies depended heavily on Southern cotton. Accordingly, Davis sent emissaries to Britain and France to lobby for recognition. To increase the chances of foreign intervention, the Confederacy in 1861 also established a cotton embargo, a ban on the export of cotton, the South’s most valuable commodity. Because

 the Confederacy wanted to avoid any appearance of blackmailing cotton-importing nations like Britain and France, the embargo was voluntary and unofficial. Although the embargo damaged the Southern economy, Confederates believed it a worthwhile risk if it caused enough economic pain in Britain and France to, in the words of one Charleston newspaper editor, bring about either “the bankruptcy of every cotton factory in Great Britain or France or the acknowledgement of our independence.” Keenly aware that foreign intervention would likely demolish his goal of restoring the Union, Lincoln dispatched his own emissaries to Britain and France. Shortly after Fort Sumter both nations, seeking to avoid war, declared their neutrality and agreed to honor the Union blockade. This was crucial to the North because had Britain or France insisted on their right as neutrals to trade with the South, Lincoln would have been forced either to stop their ships—a policy certain to draw them into the war—or allow them to pass and thereby provide the Confederacy with badly needed supplies. Despite diplomatic efforts, conflict with Britain soon erupted, threatening British neutrality. In November 1861, a U.S. warship stopped the British ship Trent and removed two Confederates heading for Europe to press for foreign recognition. As indicated in this cartoon (13.6) from the British magazine Punch, Britain reacted with outrage to the Trent Affair, putting its military forces on alert. “You do what is right,” Britannia warns a bellicose but smaller America, “or I’ll blow you out of the water.” Lincoln, determined to avoid war, released the two Confederates, claiming that the captain had acted without authority. The roles were reversed in 1863 when the British government, faced with a Union threat of war, prevented delivery to the Confederacy of two ironclad warships built in a British shipyard.

A
Diplomatic Dust-Up  Jack Bull (Great Britain) threatens Uncle Sam in the wake of the Trent Affair, an incident that nearly prompted the British to intervene in the war.

 Why did Lincoln decide to back down and release the Confederates in the Trent Affair?

THE EARLY CAMPAIGNS, 1861–1863



The Early Campaigns, 1861–1863
 Beginning with Bull Run in July 1861, the Confederacy won repeated victories in Virginia, thwarting Union attempts to seize Richmond, the Confederate capital. The Union found success in the West and moved closer to securing control of the Mississippi River. By 1862, new technologies in communications, transportation, and armaments made warfare more complex, protracted, and deadly. The war also assumed a revolutionary character, as slaves flocked to invading Union armies, eventually convincing the Lincoln administration to embrace emancipation as a goal of the war.

No Short and Bloodless War
 In the weeks following Fort Sumter, pressure mounted in both the North and South for a decisive victory, despite the disorganized state of their armies. Although some argued that given the South’s limited resources, its best chance of victory lay with a defensive military posture, most Southerners wanted their army to take the offensive, believing that one or two early victories would bring foreign intervention or prompt Lincoln to abandon efforts to restore the Union by force. Northern leaders faced similar demands. General Winfield Scott had devised a grand strategy called the Anaconda Plan to slowly envelop and strangle the South, but popular sentiment demanded an immediate strike to crush the rebellion. The anticipated first clash, the first Battle of Bull Run, came in mid-July 1861. General Irwin McDowell led 30,000 Union soldiers of the Army of the Potomac south toward the town of Manassas, Virginia, site of an important railroad junction and a small Confederate force commanded by General P. G. T. Beauregard. Hundreds of curious and confident spectators from Washington, D.C., followed the army, many with picnic baskets in hand, hoping to witness some of the excitement. Beauregard positioned his army above Manassas on the south side of a small stream named Bull Run. On July 21 McDowell attacked and nearly drove the Confederates from the field. Beauregard, however, stabilized his troops, and with reinforcements staged a counterassault. Lines of exhausted and undisciplined Union soldiers soon disintegrated into a chaotic, humiliating retreat to Washington. Victory boosted Confederate spirits and confirmed their belief that one Southerner could whip ten Yankees. For the North the stunning humiliation demolished the notion of a short and bloodless war.

 Within a week of the debacle, Lincoln authorized the enlistment of one million volunteers for three-year terms of service. To rebuild the demoralized Army of the Potomac, Lincoln turned to General George B. McClellan. Dubbed the “Young Napoleon” by the press, McClellan was an impressive but arrogant man who treated Lincoln with barely disguised contempt. Lincoln tolerated this disrespect because McClellan inspired professionalism among his troops and by the spring of 1862, had transformed a mass of inexperienced volunteers into a well-trained army numbering some 150,000.

 “I seem to have become the power of the land. I almost think that were I to win some small success now I could become Dictator or anything else that might please me.” GEN. GEORGE B. McCLELLAN to his wife, 1861 As the Army of the Potomac regrouped, Union forces in the West gained two desperately needed victories. As indicated in the map (13.7 on page 382), in February 1862, Union forces led by a virtual unknown named Ulysses S. Grant seized Forts Henry and Donelson. The twin victories gave the Union control of vital communication and transportation routes on the Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers and drove the Confederates out of Kentucky and most of Tennessee. They also created an early hero—Ulysses S. Grant—whose initials, the press suggested, stood for “Unconditional Surrender.” Grant continued south along the Tennessee River to seize more railroad lines as part of the

Read the Document Joseph E. Johnston, A Confederate General
Assesses First Bull Run (1861)


 Why did the First Battle of Bull Run take place before either army was adequately prepared?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

 fleet captured New Orleans. This loss deprived the Confederacy of its largest city and chief source of credit and closed virtually the entire Mississippi to Confederate shipping.

INDIANA ILLINOIS
Oh 
Gr
 an t

(Feb 16, 1862)


(Feb 6, 1862)


Grant


 d

(Nov 23–25, 1863)


 ee

Corinth


Bragg


 pi

 lan

TENNESSEE
Chattanooga 
 l el Bu

Chickamauga
(Sept, 1863)


Te n n e s s


GEORGIA
Bragg 
 ARKANSAS

Mississip


Grant


R.


(June 6, 1862)


 mber

R.


 ton

(April 6–7,
1862)


Memphis


Cu


Grant


Shiloh


(March, 1862)


 KENTUCKY

Fort Donelson


Fort Henry
Battle of Pea Ridge


.


R.


Cairo


R


Jo
 hn s

 MISSOURI

 io

 ALABAMA

Jackson
(May 14, 1863)


Vicksburg
(July 4, 1863)


 LOUISIANA

MISSISSIPPI FLORIDA

Port Hudson


Mobile


Baton Rouge


New Orleans


(May 12,1862)


(April 25,1862)


(April 24,1862)


 ar

F


Fort Jackson


 ra g

 ut

Gulf of Mexico
 Area controlled by Union

 Confederate retreat

 Area seized by Union

 Union victory

 Area controlled by Confederacy Union advance

 Confederate victory (May 12,1862)

 Date of victory

 Confederate advance

13.7 Major Battles in the West, 1862–1863
 Grant’s army and Farragut’s naval force moved swiftly in 1862 to seize control of the Mississippi to cut the Confederacy in half.

 larger Union strategy of taking control of the Mississippi to divide the Confederacy and open the Deep South to invasion. While Grant was encamped near Shiloh Church, Tennessee, Confederates under Albert Sidney Johnston and Beauregard surprised his army on April 6, nearly destroying it. But reinforcements allowed Grant to hold his position. He counterattacked the next day and drove the Confederates off. Grant’s victory secured Union control of the Mississippi River south to Vicksburg, Mississippi by June 1862 (see 13.7). The Confederacy suffered another setback that same month when David G. Farragut’s Union

 Why did the Peninsular Campaign fail?

The Peninsular Campaign
 Lincoln welcomed the successes in the West, but recognized that defeat of the Confederacy required victory over its armies in Northern Virginia. Accordingly, he pressed McClellan to begin an offensive early in 1862. Despite his gallant martial image, however, McClellan seemed unwilling to fight, claiming his troops were not yet prepared. Only after weeks of goading did he agree to begin an offensive. The Peninsular Campaign, as his plan was known, reflected McClellan’s flamboyant style. Rather than a direct overland march on Richmond, he designed a complex plan whereby 400 ships deposited 120,000 soldiers on a long peninsula just east of Richmond at Fortress Monroe, between the James and York Rivers (13.8). To Lincoln’s frustration it took three weeks for the soldiers to get in place. Then McClellan continued to delay. The Confederates exploited McClellan’s delays by sending 17,000 men under General Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson into the Shenandoah Valley. There between early May and June, he defeated larger Union forces, raising fears that he would capture Washington. Concerned for the capital’s security, Lincoln withheld a large force of 30,000 that was scheduled to join McClellan. When McClellan finally began to inch his army toward Richmond in late May, he confronted Confederate General Joseph E. Johnston in the Battle of Fair Oaks from May 31 to June 1, 1862. Although technically a Union victory since Johnston failed to dislodge McClellan’s army, the battle proved inconclusive. Yet it was a turning point in the war because Johnston, severely injured, was replaced by General Robert E. Lee. Lee proved a brilliant commander and strategist who made the most of the Confederacy’s limited resources to bedevil and defeat much larger Union forces. Often this meant taking the offensive as in the Seven Days Battle (June 25–July 1, 1862). Lee attacked with 85,000 troops against McClellan’s 110,000 and forced the Union commander to retreat to a secure location on the James River. The week-long clash produced staggering carnage, but McClellan lost proportionately fewer men than Lee, and his army lay just 25 miles from Richmond. He refused, however, to move on Lee’s

View the Map Interactive Map: The Civil War Part I
1861–1862


THE EARLY CAMPAIGNS, 1861–1863

P E N N S Y LV A N I A
Hagerstown
Antietam


M A RY L A N D


(Sept 17,1862)


R


Washington DC


 e

Le


 McDowell ard 1861

.
 d an

 en

 c

 ARE

Manassas
(July 21,1861 and
Aug 29–30, 1862)


 ma

.


 h

 an ell Cl

Po
 to

Bull Run
 oa

Mc


Le


Baltimore


Harpers
Ferry


R


D E L AW


 e

Frederick




 and, lacking any alternative, placed McClellan in command of all Union armies in northern Virginia. Vainglorious and ineffective as he was, McClellan still commanded the loyalty of his soldiers.

A
New Kind  of War

 u re g

Po r
 te r 18 6

Ch


Be a


Sh


Po p e
18 6 2


 By this time Confederate and Union soldiers had grown accustomed to the rigors of army Cedar Mountain life. Most of the more than three (Aug 9, 1862) Burnside million who served in the two Fredericksburg (Dec 13, 1862) armies were young men from Ja ck s small farms and towns. One of on a nd Le e1 their first challenges was learning to accept the discipline and Ja m Seven Days es R. (June 25–July 1, 1862) authority of military life. They also Richmond Mc had to set aside their romantic visions Cle lla Four Oaks n of glory and get used to spending most Yorktown (May 31–June1, 1862) (May 4, 1862) of their time attending to routine duties, drilling, and enduring long periods of Fortress Monroe V I RGIN IA inactivity. Soldiers also suffered from bad Norfolk food and from disease that raged in the 50 km camps and claimed three lives for every one lost in actual combat. 50 miles Boredom, disease, and hardship, although difficult to endure, were not new to military life. But certain aspects of the Civil War set it apart from previous wars in ways that Area controlled by Union Confederate retreat have led many historians to declare Area controlled by Confederacy Union victory it the first modern war. Although Union advance Confederate victory (May 4,1862) Date of victory Union retreat traditional warfare used relatively Confederate advance small armies and emphasized seiz13.8 Major Battles in the East, 1861–1862 ing and holding territory, modern McClellan devised an elaborate plan to land his army on the Virginia peninsula warfare employed enormous armies below Richmond. But his slowness in moving the army and hesitancy in attacking that utilized the emerging technolohanded the initiative to the Confederates and led to defeat. gies of the Industrial Revolution. The telegraph allowed for instant communication across vast territory between armies weakened army, claiming inadequate intelligence, and civilian leaders. Railroads made it possible to supplies, and men. Thoroughly frustrated, Lincoln ordered McClellan to abandon the Peninsular Cam- shift thousands of reinforcements hundreds of miles in less than a day. Ironclad ships revolutionized napaign, remove his forces to northern Virginia, and val strategy. unite with General John Pope’s army for an overYet what made this war truly modern was the land assault on Richmond. But before slow-moving carnage caused by advances in weaponry. ArtilMcClellan reached him, Lee defeated Pope in the lery became more accurate and deadly, while both Second Battle of Bull Run (August 29–30, 1862). armies used improved rifled muskets capable of Lincoln reassigned Pope to an army in Minnesota Lee 18 6 2 pe Po 2 Lee

 esa

 pea

 y ke Ba



 Why is the Civil War considered the first modern war?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

13.9 The Minie Ball
 The conical-shaped minie ball (left) replaced round musket balls (right) and increased the accuracy of rifle fire. Its adoption during the Civil War contributed to the high death toll in combat.

 killing a man from a distance of 400 to 500 yards (versus 100 yards for traditional muskets). The key technological breakthrough for the rifle was the minie ball, invented in France in the 1840s. As these photographs (13.9) show, the conical-shaped minie ball (left) replaced round musket balls (right) and were the forerunners of the bullet. The grooves inside the rifle barrel caused the minie ball, when fired, to spiral much like a football, increasing its accuracy. Other aspects of modern war included the emphasis on destroying the enemy’s army rather than merely seizing and holding territory and a willingness to inflict suffering on the civilian population. Military commanders on both sides, however, were slow to adjust to these changes. Schooled in traditional warfare at military academies such as West Point, most were reluctant to abandon the strategy of attacking entrenched enemy positions with massed infantry. When defenders of these positions turned their modern weaponry on charging soldiers, the results were horrific.

Toward Emancipation
 Along with modern technology, slavery also shaped the Civil War. At the outset of the conflict, moderates like Lincoln insisted the goal of the war was to preserve the Union, not to abolish slavery. They realized that while many Northerners opposed slavery, they also rejected the idea of racial equality. They also feared that talk of emancipation would cause the Border States to secede and alienate pro-Union residents of the South, who Lincoln hoped would overthrow Confederate rule and return their states to the Union. Abolitionists, however, argued that because the Southern states seceded to protect slavery, reunion could occur only after it was destroyed. But while white Northerners debated emancipation, enslaved African Americans in the South

 How did Lincoln expect the Emancipation Proclamation to benefit the Union war effort?

 took matters into their own hands by fleeing to Union Army lines. Only weeks after the war began, in May 1861, an angry Virginia slaveholder demanded the Union Army observe the terms of the 1850 Fugitive Slave Act and return his three escaped slaves. General Benjamin Butler refused, declaring fugitive slaves contraband of war, or seized property. The Lincoln administration endorsed the contraband policy as a shrewd war tactic likely to cause havoc in the South. Self-emancipating slaves continued to arrive at Union Army camps in ever-growing numbers, totaling close to one million by the war’s end (see Images as History: Who Freed the Slaves?). In response to these events, Congress slowly began the process of dismantling slavery. In August 1861, the First Confiscation Act declared free any slaves used in the Confederate war effort. A Second Confiscation Act in July 1862 empowered the army to seize and render “forever free” the slaves of anyone aiding the Confederacy. That same month Congress authorized the president to let African Americans fight in the Union Army. These measures demonstrated a growing understanding among Northerners that winning the war required the abolition of slavery. The threat to slavery posed by these actions was not lost on Southerners, who feared not only the loss of their slaves but also a large-scale slave insurrection. Slave escapes, rumors of slave revolts, and the increased insubordination of many slaves led to rising anxiety among Southerners. They accordingly stepped up slave patrols and scrutinized slave behavior for any sign of ill intent. Lincoln gradually came to see emancipation not merely as inevitable but as essential for Union victory, since it would “strike at the heart of the rebellion” and prevent British intervention. On July 22, 1862, he informed the cabinet of his intent to issue a decree of emancipation. But to avoid the appearance of acting in desperation, Lincoln waited for a Union victory before issuing this decree. The Union victory came two months later in mid-September at the Battle of Antietam, in Maryland. Lee, choosing to wage a bold offensive, led his army north into Maryland. McClellan, even after acquiring a copy of the Confederate battle plan, reacted slowly, allowing Lee to consolidate his troops. Finally, on September 17, 1862, McClellan attacked Lee’s army. After squandering several chances to defeat Lee, McClellan’s forces were eventually stymied by the last-minute arrival of Confederate reinforcements. The next day,

 View the Closer Look Lincoln visits McClellan

THE EARLY CAMPAIGNS, 1861–1863



Images as History
WHO FREED THE SLAVES?
Why did Abraham Lincoln decide to issue the Emancipation Proclamation in 1862, after stating many, many times that he had no intention of abolishing slavery? There were several reasons, not the least of which was that one year into the war the Confederacy seemed as strong as ever. Lincoln decided that attacking slavery would hasten the end of the war. But there is another, often overlooked reason for Lincoln to change and decide to embrace abolition: From the moment the war began, thousands of slaves began to flee to freedom, often to the camps of Union soldiers. This wave of selfemancipation, vividly captured in this 1867 painting by Theodor Kaufmann, “On to Liberty,” forced the Lincoln administration to formulate wartime policies regarding slavery, a process that ultimately led to emancipation. 
 But even as Kaufmann and others celebrated African Americans’ role in their own liberation, white Americans after the war began to present a different—and inaccurate—version of the story (see Chapter 14). Former slaves raised most of the money to pay for the Freedmen’s Memorial that was unveiled in 1876 in Washington, D.C. But they were excluded from the committee in charge of the monument’s design. As a result, the monument celebrated President Lincoln as the sole individual responsible for emancipation while depicting African Americans as passive figures who played no role at all in gaining their freedom.

 Kaufmann contrasts the darkness of slavery, which the escapees are fleeing, with the bright light of freedom they are moving toward.

 Unlike most images of African Americans in this period, Kaufmann portrays these women as dignified and courageous agents pursuing freedom for their families.

•
•


•


 This smoke is emanating from a battle between Union and Confederate armies. Long before the Emancipation Proclamation, slaves came to believe that the Union Army somehow represented their liberation. So they headed to Union lines, despite the danger. By presenting Lincoln as standing over the kneeling slave, the sculptor emphasizes his—and by extension all white people’s— superiority over African Americans. Note how there are no white people in Kaufmann’s scene of liberation.

•
•
•


•
•


 These two children are reluctant to keep moving ahead, probably because of the gunfire from the battle in the distance.

 The chained slave kneels in a submissive, passive position that suggests that African Americans were merely receiving freedom, rather than playing a key role in seizing it by self-emancipating on a mass scale as depicted in Kaufmann’s painting.

•


Holding the
Emancipation
Proclamation in his
 right hand, while outstretching his left, Lincoln appears like a biblical prophet, or even like Christ, bestowing a blessing upon a sinner.

 How did the actions of slaves push Lincoln toward emancipation?



 CHAPTER 13

13.10 Dead
 Soldiers along the Sunken Road, Antietam (1862) The Civil War was the first military conflict in American history captured by the relatively new medium of photography. Photographs such as this one taken by Alexander Gardner after the Battle of Antietam, brought home to millions of Americans the brutality of modern war. war.

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

 McClellan chose not to attack, despite superior numbers and the shattered condition of Lee’s army. The following day Lee led his army back into Virginia, handing McClellan a technical victory (a frustrated Lincoln, however, soon removed him from command). The battle, as indicated by the grim scene (13.10) of its aftermath captured by photographer Alexander Gardner, claimed 6,000 lives and left 17,000 wounded, making it the deadliest single day of the war. Shortly after Antietam in September 1862, Lincoln issued his preliminary Emancipation Proclamation. Unless the seceded states and parts thereof that were not under Union Army control returned to the Union by January 1, 1863, the decree warned, their slaves “shall be then, thenceforward, and forever free.” Even though the decree left slavery intact in the Border States and areas held by the Union Army, Lincoln knew conservatives, Northern Democrats, and Border State Unionists would react negatively and that Republicans might suffer at the polls that November. Still, he reasoned, the benefits of emancipation far outweighed the risks as it would cause chaos by encouraging slaves to flee their masters and make it highly unlikely that Britain, where anti-slavery sentiment was strong, would intervene in the conflict.

 Why did photography have a more powerful impact on the public than artists’ depictions of battles?

 Though some radicals and abolitionists expressed dismay because the proclamation freed slaves only in the seceded states, they recognized that Lincoln’s simple, terse statement of military policy had transformed the meaning of the conflict. If Northerners by late 1862 realized the war was no mere “insurrection,” they also understood that its goal was something greater than simply a restored Union. It was now a war of subjugation. Reunion would occur only after the fabric of Southern society was destroyed.

Slaughter and Stalemate
 Restoring the Union and abolishing slavery, of course, depended entirely on victory in the field. But the Army of the Potomac, now commanded by General Ambrose E. Burnside, suffered a devastating defeat at the Battle of Fredericksburg on December 13, 1862. Burnside tried one more offensive on January 22, 1863, a disastrous mid-winter effort that became mired in muddy, impassible roads. A despondent Lincoln replaced Burnside with General Joseph Hooker. Not all the news from the Union battlefields in late 1862 was negative. On December 31 Union troops under General William S. Rosecrans turned back an attempt by Confederate General Braxton Bragg to regain western Tennessee and Kentucky in the Battle of Murfreesboro. Bragg’s retreat left the West firmly in the hands of the Union Army for the rest of the war. Lee and his Army of Northern Virginia, however, continued to thwart the Union effort to take Richmond. In the Battle of Chancellorsville, April 30– May 6, 1863, despite commanding a force half the size of Hooker’s, Lee scored a smashing victory. But it came at a price: Stonewall Jackson, the man Lee had come to count on most, was killed accidentally by his own men.

View the Closer Look Images as History: Photography
 and the Visualization of Modern War

BEHIND THE LINES



Behind the Lines
 The war brought challenges and hardships to the Union and Confederate home fronts. Civilians faced shortages of goods, soaring inflation, and conscription. These conditions were more severe in the South where many civilians also came under Union military rule. These problems, coupled with mounting death tolls, led to sagging morale and rising criticism of political leaders in both regions. Occasionally discontent exploded into violent riots. The war placed an especially great demand on women, who assumed new occupational and civic roles.

Meeting the Demands
 of Modern War While war raged in the East and West, Republicans took advantage of their dominant position in Congress to enact legislation long opposed by Southerners. Most were policies to promote industrialization (a high tariff) and westward settlement (the Homestead and Pacific Railway Acts). Several laws, however, were part of an unprecedented effort to outfit and finance a modern army. The National Bank Acts of 1863 and 1864 established a national banking system whereby member banks could issue treasury notes, or “greenbacks,” as currency. The nation’s first income tax, the sale of $400 million in bonds to the public, and the borrowing of $2.6 billion from banks helped pay for the war. The cost of the war increased the federal budget twenty-fold during the war, from $63 million in 1861 to $1.3 billion in 1865. All told, the war effort greatly expanded the size and scope of the federal government. In contrast to the Union’s ability to sustain the war effort, Davis and other Confederate leaders soon discovered that there were limits to Southerners’ willingness to adapt to the demands of modern warfare. In response to the need for more soldiers and revenue, the Confederate Congress established a military draft and an income tax in April 1862. Officials across the Confederacy denounced the measures as gross violations of states’ rights. Among the loudest protestors was Alexander Stephens, Davis’s own vice president. Southerners evaded both the draft and income tax to such an extent that neither measure produced the needed men or money. Draft and tax evasion also occurred on a large scale in the North, to be sure, but greater supplies of men and money diminished their impact.

 These limits were compounded by President Davis. Despite his extensive political and military experience, he proved an ineffective leader for a time of crisis. Unlike Lincoln, he selected a weak cabinet to prevent challenges to his authority and bristled at the slightest disagreement. He also micromanaged the War Department, firing or driving to resignation five secretaries of war in four years. The Confederate Army’s success in the war’s first two years obscured Davis’s flaws, but as the Army’s fortunes declined after 1862, the president’s leadership style sparked rancor and disunity.

Hardships on the
Home Front
 While soldiers fought in the field, civilians in the North and South faced a number of hardships. In the North the arms, metalworking, boot making, and shipbuilding industries boomed, but the scarcity of cotton caused widespread layoffs and closures in the textile industry. Workers’ wages rose by 40 percent, but prices rose even faster as inflation averaged 15 percent annually. In response many workers formed and joined craft unions, but appeals to patriotism and the use of strikebreakers discouraged strikes. Southerners faced far worse economic problems. The Southern economy was hard-hit by the cessation of trade with the North and Europe due to the Union blockade. Southern industry and agriculture were hindered by chronic labor shortages due to military service and by the flight of slaves, and the destruction or seizure of farms and factories by Union armies. As a result, the production of goods and agricultural produce in the South decreased by 30 percent during the war. By contrast Northern output increased significantly. These conditions led to shortages of nearly everything in the South,

 How did the Union fund the war?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

 including food, and the emergence of a thriving black market. The cartoon (13.11) from a Richmond newspaper captured the anger among Southerners directed at speculators and black marketers. A coldhearted speculator counts his profits as a hungry mother and child look through his window. “Anathema on him who screws and hoards / who robs the poor of wheat, potatoes, and bread,” read the first two lines of the accompanying poem.

New Roles for Women
 The war changed the lives of millions of women who remained behind the lines in both the North and South. With hundreds of thousands of men gone to war, women assumed new roles running farms and shops and working in factories and offices. Many did so out of a sense of duty to the war effort, whereas others worked to earn badly needed income, as military pay was low and inflation pushed up the cost of living.

13.11 Anger on
 the Home Front Runaway inflation and scarcity of necessities sparked angry accusations that speculators were hoarding supplies and selling them at extortionate prices. Here a speculator counts his profits while a starving mother and child look on.

 What new opportunities did the war open up for women?

 The war also enabled women to enter previously male-dominated professions such as teaching, civil service, and nursing. In nursing, the shortage of men and the recruitment efforts by women like Dorothea Dix, head of the U.S. Sanitary Commission, led to thousands of women volunteering to serve as nurses in field hospitals despite opposition from male doctors and others who disapproved of women working in such indelicate situations. Supporters argued that women brought to the profession nurturing and domestic skills. As Clara Barton, Civil War nurse and future founder of the American Red Cross, put it, at the end of the war, the American woman “was at least fifty years in advance of the normal position which continued peace would have assigned her.” Over the next 30 years women took over almost completely the profession of nursing. Many women also joined organizations that actively supported the Union cause, such as the Women’s Central Association of Relief, whose 7,000 chapters across the North raised money and sent supplies to the soldiers in the field. Southern women experienced similar changes during the war. They took on new responsibilities such as running farms and plantations, managing stores, working in government, and serving as nurses. Many worked in factories, including more than 500 employed by the Confederate Ordnance Department to fill cartridges, dangerous work that killed dozens in explosions. Their jobs grew more demanding as the war demolished the Southern economy and sent food prices soaring. The Union Army’s sweep across the South in late 1864 and early 1865 left many Southern women and their children destitute and hungry.

View the Closer Look Nurse Ann Bell Tending to Wounded…
Read the Document Memoirs of Clara Barton


BEHIND THE LINES

 “You have given your boys to die for their country, now you can give your girls to nurse them.” MARY STINEBAUGH-BRADFORD, convincing her father to let her care for Union soldiers

 Many Southern women also faced the challenge of maintaining the slave labor system, an increasingly difficult task as thousands of slaves fled to Union lines, leaving farms and plantations with inadequate labor. Many slaves who did not flee took advantage of a planter’s absence and challenged the authority of women unaccustomed to the role of master. As one exasperated wife wrote to her husband, “The Negroes are all expecting to be set free very soon and it causes them to be very troublesome.”

Copperheads
 One group that benefitted from the hard times in the North was the Democratic Party. Even though many Northerners associated it with secession and the Confederacy, it remained a viable political power in the North during the war. After all, it had received 44 percent of the popular vote there in 1860. Many Democrats supported the war against secession, but Copperheads (or “peace Democrats”) argued for a cease-fire, followed by a negotiated peace settlement even if it resulted in an independent Confederacy. A few Copperheads even expressed support for the Confederacy. Lincoln viewed the opposition of Copperheads to the Union war effort as seditious, if not treasonous, and took steps early to squelch it. After the pro-Confederate rioting in Baltimore in 1861, he suspended habeas corpus, citing the section of the Constitution providing “the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when, in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it.” In so doing, Lincoln established a principle he followed for the rest of the war. To save the Union and the Constitution, he would not hesitate to suppress Constitutional guarantees of free speech and the right to a speedy trial. Over the next few years, thousands of Copperheads were jailed for lengthy periods without trial. Copperheads initially attracted few followers, but dissatisfaction with the

 war rose in the winter of 1862–1863 after repeated Union Army failures and the enactment of the controversial Emancipation Proclamation and military draft. Led by former Ohio Congressman Clement Vallandigham, Copperheads denounced Lincoln as a tyrant who abused his power and suppressed free speech by shutting down opposition newspapers and arresting people who voiced hostility toward the Union war effort or sympathy for the Confederacy. Copperheads gained support among farmers in the West by claiming the new Republican tariff hurt them economically and among urban workers and immigrants by stoking racial fears that emancipation would lead to social chaos and job competition. To counter rising Copperhead sentiment, pro-Union speakers, editors, and cartoonists vilified Copperheads as dangerous, disloyal men who threatened the Union. In February 1863, Harper’s Weekly printed the cartoon shown in Competing Visions: Civil Liberties in a Civil War (see page 390). The cartoonist shows the goddess Liberty, who is bearing a shield labeled “Constitution” and a drawn sword, being prevented from engaging in battle against the Confederacy by three peace Democrats depicted as copperhead snakes. To squelch Copperhead activism, the Lincoln administration stepped up arrests. On May 5, 1863, a Union Army commander in Ohio arrested Vallandigham after he delivered a speech denouncing the war and the draft.

Conscription and
Civil Unrest
 Despite the Lincoln administration’s crackdown on Copperhead dissent, opposition to the war among Northerners increased in 1863, especially among those expected to fight. The poor performance of the Union Army in the field, coupled with staggering numbers of killed and wounded, extinguished much of the early enthusiasm for war. Despite offers of cash bonuses and time off in exchange for reenlistment, Union soldiers were heading home as their enlistment terms expired, and recruitment offices now went begging for new recruits. To solve the manpower problem, in March 1863, Congress passed the Conscription Act, which declared all male citizens (and immigrants who had applied for citizenship) aged 20–45 eligible for draft into the army. Each state was assigned a quota of men. If drafted a man could avoid service. He could buy his way out by paying a “commutation fee” of

 Read the Document Letter from J. R. Underwood to Wm. H. Seward (October 24, 1863)



 Why did the Lincoln administration impose a draft in 1863?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

Competing Visions
CIVIL LIBERTIES IN A CIVIL WAR
The following opinions present opposing views on the constitutionality of Lincoln’s policy toward Copperheads. One is a series of resolutions adopted and sent to Lincoln by Democrats. The other is Lincoln’s formal response. Note what the parties define as the greatest threat to civil liberties and the Constitution. Were Lincoln’s actions justified? Are principles such as civil liberties subject to different treatment during a national crisis such as war? On May 19, 1863, a meeting of Democrats, including former Congressman Erastus Corning, in Albany, New York, passed and delivered to Lincoln a series of resolutions accusing the administration of having acted unconstitutionally in placing military authority over civil authority. … Resolved, … we denounce the recent assumption of a military commander to seize and try a citizen of Ohio, Clement L. Vallandigham, for no other reason than words addressed to a public meeting, in criticism of the course of the administration, and in condemnation of the military orders of that general. Resolved, That this assumption of power by a military tribunal, if successfully asserted, not only abrogates the right of the people to assemble and discuss the affairs of government, the liberty of speech and of the press, the right of trial by jury, the law of evidence, and the privilege of habeas corpus, but it strikes a fatal blow at the supremacy of law, and the authority of the State and federal constitutions. Resolved, … That, regarding the blow struck at a citizen of Ohio as aimed at the rights of every citizen of the north, we denounce it as against the spirit of our laws and Constitution, and most earnestly call upon the President of the United States to reverse the action of the military tribunal which has passed a “cruel and unusual punishment” upon the party arrested, prohibited in terms by the Constitution, and to restore him to the liberty of which he has been deprived. 
 On June 12, 1863, Lincoln defended his actions as both constitutional and necessary for the preservation of the Union. GENTLEMEN: …Ours is a clear, flagrant, and gigantic case of rebellion; and the provision of the Constitution that “the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when, in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it,” is the provision which specially applies to our present case.… … Mr. Vallandigham avows his hostility to the war on the part of the Union; and his arrest was made because he was laboring, with some effect, to prevent the raising of troops; to encourage desertions from the army; and to leave the rebellion without an adequate military force to suppress it. He was not arrested because he was damaging the political prospects of the administration, or the personal interests of the commanding general, but because he was damaging the army, upon the existence and vigor of which the life of the nation depends. He was warring upon the military, and this gave the military constitutional jurisdiction to lay hands upon him. Long experience has shown that armies cannot be maintained unless desertion shall be punished by the severe penalty of death.… Must I shoot a simple-minded soldier boy who deserts, while I must not touch a hair of a wily agitator who induces him to desert? … I think that in such a case, to silence the agitator and save the boy is not only constitutional, but withal a great mercy. I … [am un]able to appreciate the danger apprehended by the meeting [in Albany] that the American people will, by means of military arrests during the rebellion, lose the right of public discussion, the liberty of speech and the press, the law of evidence, trial by jury, and habeas corpus, throughout the indefinite peaceful future, … any more than I am able to believe that a man could contract so strong an appetite for emetics during temporary illness as to persist in feeding upon them during the remainder of his healthful life.

 Northern Unionists depicted Copperheads as traitors who threatened the Republic. Here Liberty defends herself from the Copperheads with the shield of Union.

 How did Lincoln justify the suspension of habeas corpus?

BEHIND THE LINES

 $300 to the government or hire a substitute to serve in his place. Men lacking such substantial sums of money ($300 was equivalent to a year’s pay for a common laborer) could simply disappear—which more than 20 percent of draftees did. The draft began in early July and touched off widespread protest. Disturbances broke out in Boston; Troy, New York; Wooster, Ohio; Portsmouth, New Hampshire; and other cities. Opposition to the draft was greatest in New York City, where on July 13, 1863, it erupted in unprecedented violence known as the Draft Riots. For four days mobs of mostly poor, immigrant, and working-class rioters attacked draft offices, Union Army recruiting stations, institutions associated with the Republican Party or abolition, and symbols of wealth and privilege, reflecting animosity toward the inequity that allowed the rich to pay a $300 fee to avoid the draft. Rioters also attacked African Americans. As the image (13.12) illustrates, they lynched at least eighteen. Rioters blamed blacks as the cause of the war and feared them as potential labor competition. The riots resulted in at least 119 deaths and $5 million in property damage. Officials eventually defused opposition to the draft by raising money to pay the $300 commutation fee or hire substitutes for draftees not willing to join the army and allowing

 easy exemptions for reasons of health or family considerations. Discontent and unrest also rocked the Confederate home front. In October 1862, the Confederate Congress passed what came to be known as the “Twenty Negro Law.” It exempted from the draft one white man per plantation that held 20 or more slaves. Supporters argued that the measure was vital to maintaining order and productivity on plantations, but to poor white Southerners it engendered levels of anger and protest similar to those evoked by the commutation provisions in the North. Many cited the law as the reason they deserted from the Confederate Army. Another source of discontent was the shortage of food brought about by drought, the blockade, and Union conquest of Southern territory. When shortages and high prices reached critical proportions in 1863, Southern women led food riots in several towns and cities, including most dramatically in Richmond. “Bread! Bread!” they cried, “Our children are starving while the rich roll in wealth!” The reference to the rich reflected the widespread belief that Confederate leaders and merchants were profiting from the war.

 Read the Document Testimony from Victims of New York’s Draft Riots, July 1863



13.12 Opposition
 to the Draft Turns Violent Poor New Yorkers rioted against the draft in July 1863, venting their anger on army recruiting stations and against African Americans, whom they blamed for the war.

 Why did New Yorkers riot against the draft?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

Toward Union Victory
 Despite many setbacks, by mid-1863, the North’s superior industrial strength, large population, and improved military leadership gave the Union the advantage. So, too, did the decision to allow African Americans to serve in the army, for they provided the Union with badly needed manpower when enlistments were declining. Victories at Gettysburg, Vicksburg, and Atlanta boosted morale in the North and led to Lincoln’s reelection in 1864. Relentless military offensives by Grant in Virginia and William T. Sherman in Georgia led to the Confederate surrender in April 1865. The assassination of President Lincoln, however, dampened the North’s joy.

Turning Point: 1863
 Although the destruction and antiwar sentiment in New York City shocked Lincoln, events elsewhere in 1863 gave him hope. Back in May, Lee had convinced Davis to approve another invasion of the North. It was risky, but they believed it might force Lincoln to pull troops out of the western theater where Grant was threatening to seize the entire lower Mississippi. A victory on Northern soil would also demoralize the Lincoln administration and strengthen the Copperheads and Peace Democrats who were calling for a negotiated settlement. It might even convince France or Britain to intervene. In June, Lee headed north through Virginia’s Shenandoah Valley into Maryland and Pennsylvania. Although slow to react, the Army of the Potomac, now under General George G. Meade, eventually caught up with Lee in central Pennsylvania. On July 1, the two armies collided at Gettysburg, a small town at the junction of several major roads. Although outnumbered 90,000 to 75,000, the Confederates made significant advances that day. The following day the battle’s momentum swung back and forth before Union forces pushed the Confederates back to the previous day’s position. On the third and decisive day, Lee recklessly ordered an all-out assault on the fortified Union center. “Pickett’s Charge,” as it became known, proved gallant, but suicidal. Union forces devastated General George Pickett’s 12,000 men as they tried to cross a mile of open field and ascend Cemetery Ridge. “Picket’s division just seemed to melt away,” recalled one witness. “Nothing but stragglers came back.” With 23,000 Union and 28,000 Confederate soldiers killed and wounded, Gettysburg was by far the bloodiest battle of the war.

 Why did Lee decide to invade the North a second time?

 The next day, July 4, having lost one-third of his men, Lee retreated back toward Virginia. Although frustrated that Meade failed to pursue, Lincoln nonetheless recognized that the Union had won a major victory. Gettysburg marked the last time the Confederate Army invaded the North. That same day Lincoln received news of a vital victory in the West. In May Grant had begun a siege of Vicksburg, the Confederacy’s last stronghold on the Mississippi River. It fell on July 4, severing the Confederacy in two and giving the Union control over the entire Mississippi.

African Americans
 under Arms But the Union Army was still far from ultimate victory. One of the most formidable challenges it faced was finding new recruits. Declining enlistments of whites, and lobbying by black leaders and abolitionists eventually convinced Union officials to form African American regiments. Thousands of free African American men already toiled for the Union Army, moving supplies and building fortifications; now they would have the chance to fight to defeat the Confederacy and end slavery. One of the first and the most famous of all the African American regiments was the 54th Massachusetts, organized in 1863 by leading black abolitionists. “I urge you to fly to arms and smite with death the power that would bury the government and your liberty in the same hopeless grave,” read a recruitment pamphlet written by Frederick Douglass. Among the regiment’s members were two of Douglass’s sons, Lewis and Charles, and the grandson of Sojourner Truth, James Caldwell. Colonel Robert Gould Shaw, son of a leading white Massachusetts abolitionist family, commanded the regiment.

Read the Document Abraham Lincoln, “Gettysburg Address” (1863)


TOWARD UNION VICTORY

 African American soldiers experienced many forms of racism within the Union Army. They served in strictly segregated units under white officers and, as this drawing (13.13) indicates, initially served mainly in noncombat duty as guards and laborers. Many also charged that they received substandard medical care compared to white soldiers. Most galling, as seen in Choices and Consequences: Equal Peril, Unequal Pay (page 394), was that African American soldiers received lower pay than white soldiers. African American soldiers also faced brutal treatment at the hands of Confederates when captured. The Davis administration announced that African American soldiers taken prisoner would be subject to execution as rebellious slaves. Lincoln’s threat of retaliation prevented the Confederacy from carrying out this policy on a wide scale, but African Americans were murdered, tortured, and mutilated. In the most egregious incident (13.14 on page 395), the Fort Pillow Massacre in Tennessee, Confederate troops murdered dozens of captured black soldiers

 in April 1864. This image, which ran in a popular Northern magazine, depicted Confederates as brutal and inhumane. Southern publications ran similar images that alleged Northern atrocities. The creation of all-black units in the Union Army raised another critical issue beyond the question of equality of pay or the assignment of white officers to lead them. Would these units be sent into actual combat? Racist notions led whites to question whether African Americans possessed the courage to fight. Others cautioned that if black



13.13 Held Back
 by Racism Believing African Americans lacked the courage to fight under fire, Union commanders initially relegated them to noncombat roles. Eventually, however, blacks fought in 449 battles, including the Battle of Milliken’s Bend on June 7, 1863 (center).

 “We … have dyed the ground with blood, in defense of the Union, and Democracy. … We have done a Soldier’s Duty. Why can’t we have a Soldier’s pay?” Letter of CORPORAL JAMES HENRY GOODING of 54th Massachusetts to President Lincoln, September 1863

 How were African American soldiers treated in the Union Army?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

Choices and Consequences
EQUAL PERIL, UNEQUAL PAY
At first, the War Department planned to pay African American soldiers the same $13 per month (plus $3.50 for clothes) as white soldiers. Indeed, as the recruitment poster below shows, many early black recruits received equal pay. But in June 1863, the Lincoln administration, fearing a backlash among white soldiers who did not see African Americans as their equals, adopted a two-tier wage scale that paid black soldiers just $7 per month (plus $3 for clothes). Outraged, African American officers and enlisted men of the 54th and 55th Massachusetts (Colored) Infantry pondered their options. 
Choices




 Quietly accept the lower wages as a regrettable but unavoidable trade-off that allowed them to enlist in the Union Army and fight to end slavery.



 Accept the unequal wages as better than nothing and necessary to maintain their families, while protesting the injustice and lobbying for equal pay.



 Reject the lower wages on principle, despite the financial hardship on their families, while fulfilling their duties as soldiers, protesting the injustice, and lobbying for equal pay.



 Lay down their arms and refuse to obey orders until they received equal pay.

Decision
 The men chose the third option, rejecting the lower wages on principle, despite the financial hardship on their families. They even rejected an offer by the governor of Massachusetts to pay the $6 per month difference out of the state treasury, citing the principle of equality that was at stake. Meanwhile they fulfilled their duties as soldiers, protested the injustice, and lobbied the Lincoln administration for equal pay.

Consequences
 The soldiers and their families hung on for more than a year until Congress in June 1864 authorized an equal pay scale for all soldiers regardless of race. By then, given the well-documented professionalism and courage exhibited by black soldiers on the battlefield, the distinction in pay had become an embarrassment to Lincoln’s administration. Not all black regiments, however, made the same decision as the Massachusetts 54th and 55th, and the consequences of their actions were starkly different. Sergeant William Walker of the 21st U.S. Colored Infantry had his men lay down their arms in protest over unequal pay. He was convicted of mutiny and executed.

Continuing Controversies
 How were African Americans in the military treated after the Civil War? The U.S. army eradicated the two-tier pay scale, but not racial segregation. African American leaders protested segregation, but for all subsequent wars through World War II, black soldiers and sailors served in segregated units under mostly white officers. President Harry Truman ordered the military desegregated in 1948.

 What role did African American soldiers play in the Union war effort?

Read the Document James Henry Gooding, “Letter
 to President Lincoln” (1863)

TOWARD UNION VICTORY

 regiments were not used judiciously, critics would accuse the army of racism, asserting it carelessly sent them into harm’s way. The first well-publicized test of African American soldiers came on July 18, 1863, when the 54th Massachusetts led a nighttime assault on Fort Wagner, a key Confederate outpost that guarded Charleston harbor. The Confederates repulsed their attack. But the courage exhibited by the soldiers—the unit lost 100 dead and 146 were wounded—won them universal praise and undermined the racist belief that blacks would not fight. All told 198,000 blacks, including 144,000 former slaves, served in the Union Army and Navy. This number amounted to 10 percent of the total enlisted men even though African Americans comprised only 1 percent of the Northern population. African American soldiers participated in over 449 separate engagements against Confederate troops and 38,000 died during the war. Sixteen black soldiers and four black sailors received the Medal of Honor. “The colored soldiers in this four years’ struggle,” wrote one African American soldier, “have proven themselves in every respect to be men.” Their contribution to the Union war effort proved vital to winning the war.

 Most significant, African American service in the war empowered them to claim full citizenship after the war. “Once let the black man get upon his person the brass letters, U.S., let him get an eagle on his button and a musket on his shoulder and bullets in his pocket,” said Frederick Douglass, “there is no power on earth that can deny that he has earned the right to citizenship.”

The Confederacy Begins
 to Crumble News of the losses at Gettysburg and Vicksburg caused dismay across the South. Moreover, Davis and the Confederate leadership had other reasons to worry. The immediate problem was a lack of men. A draft instituted in April 1862 failed to attract enough recruits. Protests by poor whites forced the revision in 1863 of a provision in the draft law that exempted wealthy whites who held 20 or more slaves, but still new recruits fell short of the number needed. The continued loss of territory to the Union Army exacerbated this trend, as did a sharp rise in desertions, which topped 100,000 by late 1864. (See Envisioning Evidence: Human Resources in the Armies of the Civil War.)

 Read the Document Letter from a Free Black Volunteer to the Christian Recorder



13.14 The
Massacre at Fort
Pillow
In April 1864,
 Confederate soldiers slaughtered dozens of captured African American soldiers at Fort Pillow in Tennessee.

 Why did Lincoln initially agree to pay African American soldiers less than white soldiers?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

Envisioning Evidence
HUMAN RESOURCES IN THE ARMIES OF THE CIVIL WAR
At the outset of the Civil War the Union possessed roughly two and a half times the population of the Confederacy (23 million vs. 9 million). This advantage translated into an immediate and lasting military advantage, as it allowed the Union to field a much larger army and navy throughout the course of the war. Indeed, as the data below shows, this manpower advantage increased over the course of the four-year conflict, in part because of the Lincoln administration’s decision to allow African Americans to serve in the military (and the Confederacy’s resistance to this idea until the last weeks of the war). The Union also enjoyed a much larger and steadily increasing population of immigrants from which to draw fresh recruits. Had the war lasted two or three years, these differences in manpower might not have had played such an important role in determining its outcome. But it lasted four years and it was in the last one that the manpower disparity became most pronounced and significant in determining the final outcome. Relative Military Strength, 1862–1865 


698,808


 The Union’s advantage in population (2.5 times greater than the Confederacy) is reflected in its ability to field a much larger army throughout the war. 527,204

 Number of Soldiers (thousands)

Because the
Confederacy
 largely fought a defensive war, it did not need to match the Union soldier for soldier in order to win.







253,208




620,924


611,250


 The surging number of Union troops in 1863 reflected the imposition of the draft and the decision to allow African Americans into the army.

 Desertions caused much of the decline in Confederate forces (as many as 100,000 deserted in 1864–1865). Confederate leaders in 1864 responded by expanding the age range of men eligible for the draft to 17 to 50 (from 18 to 35 in 1862).

 Both sides suffered huge numbers of casualties in the fierce fighting of 1864. But the Union was able to replace its fallen soldiers far more easily than the Confederacy.

233,586


209,852


154,910












Year


Composition of Union and Confederate Military
African Americans as a
 percentage of overall regional population The 198,000 African American soldiers and sailors who served the Union provided a vital source of manpower to the war effort. The Confederacy’s reluctance to arm slaves (until March 1865, by which time it was too late) left untapped a huge portion of the Southern population (39 percent).

African Americans as a
 percentage of military personnel

 Southerners claimed the Union relied heavily on Immigrants for its army. But it was the Confederacy that drew proportionally more soldiers from its foreign-born population. Immigrants comprised 7.5 percent of the South’s population, but 10 percent of the Confederate Army. In the Union immigrants made up 31 percent of the population, but comprised just 26 percent of its soldiers.

 Foreign-born as a percentage of overall regional population Percentage of foreignborn of total military personnel





Percent




Confederate
 Sources: James McPherson, Ordeal by Fire (New York: Knopf, 1982); James McPherson, Battle Cry of Freedom (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988); U.S. Census, Historical Statistics.

 How did the Union’s 2:1 advantage over the Confederacy in overall population play a role in winning the war?



Union


TOWARD UNION VICTORY

 By mid-1863, the inherent weaknesses of the Confederate economy began to show. The Union blockade, which had stopped only one in eight Confederate ships in 1862, grew increasingly effective. By 1864, it stopped one out of every three Confederate blockade-runners and half of them by 1865. The impact on the import-dependent Southern economy was devastating. Civilians and soldiers alike suffered shortages of food, clothing, and equipment. The growing success of the Union blockade also exposed a critical miscalculation made by the Davis administration in 1861. The embargo on cotton exports failed because Britain possessed a surplus of cotton in 1861 and later found alternative sources in Egypt and India. Moreover, English workers, including an estimated half million who lost their jobs due to cotton shortages, expressed strong sympathy for the Union and thereby made British intervention on behalf of the Confederacy politically controversial. When the South finally lifted the embargo in 1862, the Union blockade was much stronger. The Confederacy’s economic dilemma posed a serious threat to its chances for success. It desperately needed hard currency to buy ships, weapons, ammunition, and other supplies for the war. But the main product it had to sell—cotton—was bottled up in Southern ports, unable to reach markets in Europe. This conundrum is captured in the image (13.15) that adorned “cotton bonds” authorized for sale by the Confederacy in Europe. A Southern version of “Columbia” holds the Confederate flag and leans on cotton bales while looking out to sea at a patrolling Union ship. In exchange for cash (usually 90 percent of face value), investors were promised payment in Southern cotton with interest. The plan brought in



 “The state of despondency that now prevails among our people is producing a bad effect upon the troops. Desertions are becoming very frequent.” ROBERT E. LEE, February 24, 1865

 only $7 million to the Confederate treasury, far less than needed. The Emancipation Proclamation also shook Southern society, as Lincoln had hoped it would. Inspired by word that freedom was at hand, thousands of slaves left their places of bondage and headed for the Union Army or to the Northern states, exacerbating the Confederacy’s labor shortage and further weakening Southern agriculture. Despite these hardships, the Confederacy remained undefeated and the longer Confederates defended their independence, the greater their chances of success. For even as the Union won major victories at Gettysburg and Vicksburg, discontent and war weariness among Northerners grew. If Lincoln hoped to preserve the Union, he needed more military victories—and soon.

Victory in Battle and
 at the Polls The key to winning the war, Lincoln realized, was effective military leadership. After suffering many disappointments and near disasters with a succession of poor generals, Lincoln finally found his man

13.15 Cotton for Sale?
A
Confederate version of “Columbia” (a precursor to Lady Liberty) leans on cotton bales that cannot reach European markets due to the Union blockade represented by the ship passing on the horizon. This image was featured on “cotton bonds” sold in Europe to raise cash for the Confederacy. 
Read the Document The Working Men of Manchester, England Write to
President Lincoln on the Question of Slavery in 1862


 How did the Union blockade affect the Confederate war effort?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

 in Ulysses S. Grant who at the end of 1863 delivered yet another badly needed victory for the Union at the Battle of Chattanooga. On November 23, Grant and the general he increasingly counted on, William T. Sherman, drove Braxton Bragg’s army from Tennessee into Georgia, putting most of eastern Tennessee and the vital Tennessee River under Union control. Already cut in two after the fall of Vicksburg, the Confederates now faced being sliced into thirds. Their main hope was that Northerner dissatisfaction with the war might lead to Lincoln’s defeat in the election of 1864, or at least force him to accept peace negotiations. In early 1864, Lincoln named Grant commander of all the Union armies. Many in the War Department objected, arguing that the rough-hewn soldier who had left the Army in disgrace in 1854 for heavy drinking was an alcoholic who could not be entrusted with a major assignment. But Lincoln had had enough of generals with impressive résumés and martial airs. He

R


.


 KENTUCKY

 om

 ac

20 km


 saw in Grant a commander who understood the key to victory in modern warfare—seek out and destroy the enemy’s army and sources of supplies. Pursuing this policy with single-minded determination, Grant in 1864 devised a two-pronged attack to finish off the Confederacy. As shown in the map (13.16), he sent the Army of the Potomac, now swollen to nearly 120,000, south to destroy Lee’s army of 66,000 and take Richmond. In the West Grant sent General William T. Sherman, a man who shared his understanding of modern warfare, and an army of 90,000 east from Tennessee to destroy General Joseph E. Johnston’s force of 60,000 and seize Atlanta (13.17). The first clash of this campaign, the Battle of the Wilderness, began with Lee attacking Grant on May 5. Over the next two days, aided by the rough, wooded terrain and sluggish Union leadership, the Confederates survived the clash despite Grant’s vastly superior numbers. The inconclusive battle

Po t


 20 miles

 MARYLAND

Culpeper
The Wilderness


Ra p p


Sherma


Kennesaw
Mountain


SOUTH CAROLINA

Atlanta
(July 20–Sept 2, 1864)
 h N erm ov a –D n’s ec M , 1 arc 86 h to 4) the Se Macon S

Cold Harbor


(


R.


Ja m e s R.


NORTH CAROLINA

(June 27, 1864)


 n

(May 23–27, 1864)


 h

 na

.


R


North Anna


 ck

 ut

An


Chickamauga
(Sept 19–20, 1863)


 no

(May 8–12, 1864)
So


 ah an

G ra n t


Lee


Spotsylvania
Courthouse


Chattanooga
(Nov 23–25, 1863)


J.E.
Johnston 

Chancellorsville
Fredericksburg


(May 5–7, 1864)


 VIRGINIA

 TENNESSEE

(June 3, 1864)


 ALABAMA

 a

Richmond
Amelia Court House


Andersonville
Savannah


Lee


A p p o m a t t ox R .


Appomattox
Court House
 Lee surrenders (April 9, 1865)

(Dec 22, 1864)


GEORGIA G
ra n t 
 Sayler’s Creek

Petersburg
Five Forks
(April 1, 1865)


(Besieged, June
1864–April 1865)


 FLORIDA 100 km

(April 6, 1865)


 100 miles

 Area controlled by Union

 Union victory

 Area controlled by Union

 Area seized by Union

 Confederate victory

 Area seized by Union

 Union advance

Fortifications


 Area controlled by Confederacy

 Date(s) of battle

 Union advance

 Confederate advance

(April 1, 1865)


 Confederate retreat Union victory (Dec 22, 1864)

 Date(s) of battle

 Confederate retreat

13.16 The Final Battles in the Virginia Campaign, 1864–1865
 Grant’s strategy for defeating Lee was to combine superior strength and a relentless offensive. It resulted in high casualties, but eventually cornered Lee at Petersburg. Lee surrendered at nearby Appomattox Courthouse on April 9, 1865.

 What distinguished Grant’s approach to war from his predecessors’?

 13.17 Sherman’s March to the Sea, 1864–1865 Sherman dealt a decisive blow to the Confederate cause by waging a scorched-earth campaign across Georgia, destroying vital supplies and weakening Southern morale.

View the Map Interactive Map: The Civil War Part II 1863–1865


TOWARD UNION VICTORY

 left 18,000 federals and 10,000 Confederates killed, wounded, or missing. Normally after so great an engagement, Union commanders spent weeks, if not months, repairing their armies. But the next day Grant ordered his army to move against Lee. Possessing total confidence in his strategy, he also knew that, unlike Lee, he could replace his fallen soldiers. On May 8, the two armies clashed again, ten miles closer to Richmond in the Battle of Spotsylvania Court House, an epic struggle that left another 30,000 casualties between the two armies. Still Grant remained resolute, driving the Union Army southward, trying to draw Lee out for a final, decisive battle. Lee maneuvered his army between Grant and Richmond, playing for time and avoiding total defeat. On June 3 at Cold Harbor, Grant again ordered a massive assault against Lee’s smaller but heavily entrenched force. The result was the greatest loss of life since Fredericksburg. Many Northerners, appalled at the 55,000 Union casualties (to 30,000 Confederate) in a single month, questioned Grant’s competence; others simply called him a butcher. Peace Democrats renewed their calls for an end to the conflict. Altering his strategy, Grant marched his army south to seize the vital railroad junction at Petersburg and cut Richmond off from the rest of the Confederacy. But Lee managed to dig in around Petersburg just before Grant arrived. By now Grant recognized the futility of staging frontal assaults against entrenched troops and settled down for a siege. It was not the aggressive form of warfare he preferred, but the fall of Petersburg and Richmond seemed only a matter of time. Rising popular dissatisfaction with the seemingly endless bloodshed in summer 1864, however, imperiled Lincoln’s chances for reelection (Davis, was serving a six-year term). Democrats tried to capitalize on the dour mood by nominating former Union General George B. McClellan for president and calling for a cease-fire and peace conference. They also hoped McClellan’s outspoken criticism of emancipation would draw votes from racist Northerners. The Republican Party recognized its vulnerability (it had lost many seats in the 1862 congressional elections) and tried to broaden its appeal heading into the 1864 election. First, Republicans adopted the name Union

Hear the Audio When This Cruel War Is Over


 Party to attract pro-war Democrats. Second, they replaced Lincoln’s vice president with Andrew Johnson of Tennessee, a pro-Union Democrat and the only Southern senator not to resign during the secession winter of 1861. Finally, as this campaign broadside (13.18) illustrates, Lincoln’s campaign argued that a vote for McClellan was a vote for slavery and military defeat. While Lincoln shakes hands with an artisan (representing the “free labor” North), McClellan shakes hands with Jefferson Davis who stands beneath the flag of an independent Confederate nation with a slave auction taking place in the background. Behind Lincoln white and black children enjoy the benefits of freedom and education. As late as August 1864, however, Lincoln and many of his supporters expected to lose. In September 1864, however, Lincoln received news that Sherman had captured Atlanta. This crushing blow all but doomed the Confederacy to collapse. It also boosted morale across the North and weakened the Democrats’ peace strategy. Two months later Lincoln soundly defeated McClellan, winning every state except for Kentucky, New Jersey, and Delaware to garner 55 percent of the popular vote. Still his margin of victory—just ten percent—demonstrated just how essential military success was to political victory.

War Is Hell
 Six weeks after Lincoln won reelection, Sherman began to march his army across Georgia (see 13.17) to deprive the Confederate Army of



13.18 Lincoln
Promises Victory
 and Union Lincoln’s 1864 presidential campaign suggested that while he stood for liberty, his opponent, Democrat George B. McClellan, would make peace with the Confederates and preserve slavery.

 What steps did the Republican Party take to improve Lincoln’s chances for victory in 1864?



 CHAPTER 13

13.19 Total War
 and Vengeance Fires set by retreating Confederates, freed slaves, and undisciplined members of Sherman’s army left half of Columbia, South Carolina, in ruins.

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

 badly needed supplies and to demoralize the Southern people. Simultaneously, General George H. Thomas all but destroyed the Confederate army under General John B. Hood at the Battle of Nashville (December 15–16, 1864). One week later, Sherman’s army captured Savannah. Known as Sherman’s March to the Sea, the “scorched earth” campaign traversed 285 miles of Georgia. Sherman’s soldiers lived off the land, taking what agricultural produce and livestock they needed and destroying the rest. They also destroyed Southern infrastructure, tearing up railroad tracks, burning bridges, and pulling down telegraph wires to impair the Confederacy’s ability to move goods, soldiers, and information. Sherman’s army also enticed thousands of slaves to flock to its camps. By the time it reached the coast, Sherman’s campaign of destruction left the Confederate army bereft of a major source of supplies. More important, the campaign demonstrated the effectiveness of a tactic that would become central to modern warfare in the twentieth century: bringing the conflict to the civilian population to undermine its willingness to support the war. “We are not only fighting hostile armies,” Sherman told his men, “but a hostile people, and we must make old and young,

 Why did Sherman destroy so much property in Georgia?

 rich and poor, feel the hand of war, as well as their organized armies.” Sherman compounded the horror felt by Georgians with his policy toward the state’s freed slaves. After meeting with Secretary of War Edwin Stanton and 20 African American ministers to discuss the fate of the freed slaves, Sherman issued Special Field Order No. 15. This directive set aside more than 400,000 acres of seized Confederate land for distribution to former slaves in 40-acre plots. Congress soon followed with the Thirteenth Amendment, which abolished slavery everywhere in the United States (it would be ratified 11 months later). With Georgia in ashes, the stage was set for the final phase of Grant’s plan—crushing Lee’s army between his and Sherman’s forces. On February 1, Sherman left Savannah and headed north into South Carolina. He faced almost no opposition, a sign Southern resistance was disintegrating. As this photograph (13.19) indicates, fire destroyed more than half of Columbia, the capital of South Carolina. Evacuating Confederates and liberated slaves set some of the fires, but some were also started by Union soldiers motivated by vengeance against the state that for decades leading up to the war represented Southern nationalism and ultimately,

TOWARD UNION VICTORY

 secession. Sherman’s men kept moving north into North Carolina where the meager opposition provided by General Joseph E. Johnston’s force slowed him only slightly. As the situation grew critical for the Confederacy, its leaders tried desperate measures. Among them were secret peace negotiations held in February 1865 at Hampton Roads, Virginia, which failed: Union representatives insisted on unconditional surrender (with the suggested possibility of compensated emancipation), while their Southern counterparts demanded recognition of Confederate independence. Confederate officials also began drafting soldiers as young as 17 and as old as 50. The depth of Confederate desperation was revealed in March 1865 when the Confederate Congress authorized a draft of up to 300,000 slaves to serve as soldiers (only two regiments were raised and neither saw combat).

 “If slaves make good soldiers our whole theory of slavery is wrong.” CONFEDERATE MAJOR GENERAL HOWELL COBB, Georgia By now Grant’s nearly nine-month-long siege of Lee’s army at Petersburg began to take its toll. Cut off from supplies, Lee’s men were starving. Thousands had deserted. On April 1 in the Battle of Five Forks, General Philip Sheridan’s cavalry and a large force of infantry cut the only remaining railroad line into Petersburg. When Grant attacked all along the Confederate line the next day, he forced Lee to retreat from both Richmond and Petersburg. Lee’s remaining hope was to slip his ragged army west and south to join forces with Johnston in North Carolina. To prevent this, Sheridan’s cavalry headed them off at a small town named Appomattox Courthouse, Virginia. On April 8, Lee made one last attempt to break out, but failed. “There is nothing left for me to do,” he sadly informed his officers, “and I would rather die a thousand deaths.” The next day, April 9, 1865, Lee surrendered. Lincoln had set a tone of reconciliation in his second inaugural address a month earlier, when he spoke “With malice toward none, with charity for all,” of the need “to bind up the nation’s wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the

Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Meaning of the
Civil War for Americans


 battle and for his widow and his orphan, to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations.” Accordingly, Grant gave generous terms. The 30,000 men in Lee’s army were permitted to go home, providing they swore never again to take up arms against the federal government. Grant also ordered they be given three days’ rations of food and stopped his men from firing their weapons in victory celebration. Celebrations broke out across the North as people, weary of four years of war, reveled in both the victory and the peace. The exultation quickly changed to despair. On the night of April 14, just five days after Lee’s surrender, Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth shot Lincoln at close range as he watched a play at Ford’s Theatre in Washington. Lincoln died early the following day. The tragedy elicited an outpouring of grief for the martyred president among Northerners and freed slaves in the South. After a somber funeral procession in Washington, a train carried Lincoln’s body back to Springfield, Illinois, past some seven million people who lined the tracks. Lincoln’s counterpart Jefferson Davis, who had fled hoping to establish a new Confederate government in Texas, was captured on May 10 and cast in prison. As this image (13.20) shows, the popular anger over the war and Lincoln’s assassination focused on Davis, with many Northerners demanding his execution for treason. Passions cooled, however, and Davis was released after two years without being tried. After Lee’s surrender, the war came to a rapid conclusion. On April 26, Sherman accepted Johnston’s surrender in North Carolina. Others followed suit, with the last Confederate units laying down their arms on June 23. With that, the bloodiest war in American history, one that cost 618,000 lives, was over.



A
Thirst  for Vengeance After the war many Northerners called for Jefferson Davis and other high-ranking Confederates to be hanged as traitors.

 What conciliatory measures toward the Confederates did Grant adopt at Lee’s surrender?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865









 First battle of Bull Run

 Gen. Grant captures Forts Henry and Donelson in Tennessee

 McClellan defeats Lee at Battle of Antietam

 Lee defeats Hooker at the Battle of Chancellorsville

 Victory allows Lincoln to issue the Emancipation Proclamation

 Confederate victory is offset by death of Gen. Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson

 Confederacy wins in a clash of inexperienced armies

 Confederate diplomats removed from the British ship Trent Nearly causes a war between the Union and Great Britain

 Boosts Union morale and brings attention to Grant’s military skill

 Lee repulses McClellan’s Peninsular Campaign Exposes again the poor military leadership in the Union Army

 Lee defeats Burnside at Battle of Fredericksburg Northern morale, boosted after Antietam, sags once again

 Meade defeats Lee at Battle of Gettysburg Turning point in the war, ends the Confederate gamble of invading the North

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Clement Vallandigham arrested Prompts outrage from Copperheads but Lincoln defends action as necessary to win the war

Review Questions
 1. What advantages allowed the Confederacy to enjoy

 military success in the early years of the war? 2. Why did both North and South consider the Border

 States vital? 3. How did African Americans contribute to

 emancipation?

 4. How did the war change Northern society and the

 federal government? 5. What approach to warfare set Generals Ulysses

S.
Grant and William T. Sherman apart from less successful Union military leaders? 6. How did social, economic, and class differences in 
 Southern society contribute to the Confederacy’s defeat?

Key Terms
 Border States The four slave states, Missouri, Kentucky, Maryland, and Delaware that bordered the Confederacy. The Lincoln administration succeeded in keeping them in the Union. Cotton embargo A ban imposed by Confederates in 1861 on the export of cotton, the South’s most valuable commodity, to prompt cotton-importing nations like England and France to intervene to secure Confederate independence. Trent Affair A diplomatic incident in November 1861 when a U.S. Navy vessel stopped the British ship Trent and removed two Confederates heading for Europe to press for British and French intervention. Peninsular Campaign The complex plan developed by General George B. McClellan to capture the Confederate capital, whereby 400 ships deposited 120,000 soldiers just east of Richmond at Fortress Monroe between the James and York Rivers. Emancipation Proclamation The decree announced by Lincoln in September 1862 and taking effect on January 1, 1863, declaring slaves in the seceded states not under Union army control “forever free.” Copperheads Northern Democrats (sometimes called “Peace Democrats”) who opposed the war and the Lincoln

 administration and favored a negotiated settlement with the Confederacy. Conscription Act A law passed by Congress in March 1863 to offset declining volunteers to the Union Army. It declared all male citizens (and immigrants who had applied for citizenship) aged twenty to forty-five eligible to be drafted into the Union Army. The rich could pay a $300 fee to avoid the draft. Draft Riots Four days of rioting in New York City in July 1863 by mostly poor, immigrant, and working-class men who opposed the draft. Sherman’s March to the Sea The 285-mile “scorched earth” campaign of General William T. Sherman across Georgia in late 1864 and early 1865. Sherman’s soldiers seized or destroyed $100 million in goods, hurting Southern morale and depriving the Confederate army of supplies. Special Field Order No. 15 The directive announced by General Sherman in January 1865 during his March to the Sea that set aside more than 400,000 acres of seized Confederate land for distribution to former slaves in 40-acre plots.

CHAPTER REVIEW
herma 
)


 n

(June 27, 1864)




C


Atlanta
S


(July 20–Sept 2, 1864
 h N erm ov a –D n’s ec M , 1 arc 86 h to 4) Macon

(


 MA

Andersonville










 Grant seizes Vicksburg

 Lincoln names Grant Commander of all Union Armies

Union General William T.
 Sherman captures Atlanta

 Thirteenth Amendment passed

 Unlike the inept generals before him, Grant understands the nature of modern warfare

 Sherman begins his “March to the Sea,” destroying Georgian agriculture and infrastructure

 Grant defeats Lee in the Battles of the Wilderness, Spotsylvania, and Cold Harbor

 Lincoln wins reelection

 Entire length of Mississippi River under Union control, severing the Confederacy in two

 Bread riots break out in Confederacy. Draft Riots erupt in New York City Reveal growing discontent over the cost and duration of the war

 The 54th Massachusetts participates in attack on Fortress Wagner

 Ensures the Union war effort will continue

 Abolishes slavery (ratified late 1865)

 Grant captures Petersburg and Richmond Lee surrenders, ending the war

 Lincoln assassinated by John Wilkes Booth Lincoln becomes a martyr figure

 Lee’s army digs in at Petersburg near Richmond; Grant begins siege

 Their courage undermines the belief that African Americans will make poor soldiers

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of A Nation Torn Apart.

Questions for Analysis
 1. How did both the Union and Confederacy use religious and patriotic ideals to bolster support for the war? Hear the Audio Battle Hymn of the Republic, p. 376

 2. Why did the Union army have so much difficulty in defeating the Confederacy? View the Closer Look Lincoln visits McClellan, p. 384

 3. How did the war create new opportunities for women?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Hear the Audio When This Cruel War Is Over, p. 399 Read the Document • Joseph E. Johnston, A Confederate General Assesses First Bull Run (1861), p. 381 • Memoirs of Clara Barton, p. 388 • Letter from J. R. Underwood to Wm. H. Seward (October 24, 1863), p. 389 • Testimony from Victims of New York’s Draft Riots, July 1863, p. 391 • Abraham Lincoln, “Gettysburg Address” (1863), p. 392

View the Closer Look Nurse Ann Bell Tending to


• James Henry Gooding, “Letter to President Lincoln” (1863), p. 394


Wounded…, p. 388


View the Closer Look Images as History: Photography and


 4. What did African Americans hope to achieve by serving in the Union army?

 the Visualization of Modern War, p. 386

View the Map


 Read the Document Letter from a Free Black Volunteer to

• Interactive Map: The Civil War Part I 1861–1862, p. 382


 the Christian Recorder, p. 395

• Interactive Map: The Civil War Part II 1863–1865, p. 398


 5. How did abolitionist sentiment in Britain benefit the Union war effort? Read the Document The Working Men of Manchester, England Write to President Lincoln on the Question of Slavery in 1862, p. 397

Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Meaning of the Civil War
 for Americans, p. 401

How did Reconstruction
 efforts during the war reveal conflicting visions over the kind of freedoms former slaves would be granted?

The Fruits of
Freedom p. 409


 How did freedmen envision and act on their freedom after the war?

The Struggle to Define
Reconstruction p. 412


 Why did Northern Republicans reject President Johnson’s Reconstruction plan?

Implementing
Reconstruction p. 418


 What policies did the Republican Party in the South pursue?

Reconstruction
Abandoned p. 423


 How did changing Northern attitudes affect the end of Reconstruction?

The New South p. 428


 What were the key economic developments in the South after 1877?

 CHAPTER

Preparing for
Reconstruction p. 406




