 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 23

World War II
Fighting the Good War, 1939–1945
 In early December 1941, a Japanese fleet secretly steamed toward Hawaii, stopping within 250 miles of the Hawaiian island of Oahu. At 6:00 a.m. on December 7, Admiral Chuichi Nagumo launched two consecutive waves of bombers, torpedo planes, and dive-bombers. As Japanese pilots approached Pearl Harbor, a naval station on Oahu, they saw American warships parked in a neat row. Moments later those battleships, cruisers, and destroyers were engulfed in flames. It took the government nearly a year to release photos, like the one here, of American ships under attack. Before Pearl Harbor debate raged in the United States over how to respond to the growing threat of war in the Pacific and Germany’s conquest of Europe. Noninterventionists and interventionists offered competing visions of how to protect America’s vital interests in a world torn apart by war. The Japanese assault on Pearl Harbor ended this debate. Questions instead arose over why the United States had given the Japanese such an inviting target. Hoping to pressure Japan into withdrawing from China, President Franklin D. Roosevelt had sent the U.S. Pacific Fleet to Hawaii. There, he believed, the battleships were far enough away from Japan to escape attack but close enough to convince Japan to end its expansionist drive into East Asia. Roosevelt erred on both counts. Instead, Japan resolved to drive the Western powers—the United States, Britain, the Netherlands, and France—out of East Asia. In their attack on Pearl Harbor, the Japanese sank or damaged 18 ships and killed 2,405 Americans. Congress declared war on Japan the day after the attack. On December 11, Germany and Italy declared war on the United States, and Germany’s allies Romania, Bulgaria, and Hungary quickly followed suit. The United States now faced the challenge of fighting resolute and capable enemies in Europe and the Pacific against whom victory was not certain. The attack on Pearl Harbor silenced debate about whether America needed to fight, but were all the changes the war caused in American society positive ones? World War II thrust the United States into a new position of global leadership. Mobilizing the nation’s resources to fight also created vast economic and social changes at home. The United States eventually prevailed against its enemies, but the cost of victory was high on the battlefield and on the home front.

 “Yesterday, December 7, 1941—a date which will live in infamy—the United States of America was suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and air forces of the Empire of Japan.” President FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT





 CHAPTER 23

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

The Approaching War
 From 1939 to 1945, war engulfed nearly the entire globe, as shown on the map (23.1). Huge areas fell under German and Japanese control, naval battles occurred on vast stretches of sea, and colonies provided key materials needed by warring nations. Until 1941, however, the United States remained on the sidelines as Germany attacked continuously in Europe, and Japan launched steady invasions in East Asia. As long as the fighting remained far from their shores, Americans disagreed over whether these wars were theirs to fight. Still coping with the social and financial problems created by the Great Depression, non-interventionists urged the nation to put “America First” and stay out of overseas conflicts. By the late 1930s, however, interventionists increasingly challenged this view, arguing that only direct engagement could prevent the world conflagration from reaching American shores. in 1935, and the Spanish Civil War in 1936–1939. Appointed chancellor in 1933, Hitler immediately In the midst of the Depression, the United States had began turning Germany into a fascist state under to formulate responses to Adolf Hitler’s rise to power Nazi control, a dictatorial in Germany in 1933, Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia form of government that glorified the state over the NEW ZEALAND individual. Widespread 23.1 The World economic suffering, P N AC at War IF EA lingering resentGerman and I C C Japanese wars of O Pearl Harbor ments against the O Hawaii C conquest set the harsh terms of the world aflame. Midway Versailles Treaty (see Chapter 20), and virulent anti-Semitism USA Guam created fertile AU ST R A L I A JAPAN CANADA ground for NaTokyo zism to flourARCTIC ish. Stripped of SOUTH OCEAN their German AMERICA citizenship, CHINA Jews could not practice mediUSSR BRITAIN cine or law, attend GERMANY FRANCE public school after the INDIA age of 14, marry non-Jews, ITALY or enter public parks, zoos, and libraries. Promising to reN store Germany’s economic and miliIA tary prowess and protect the presumed D O IN C A F R I C A “racial superiority” of the German people, E A N Hitler rearmed the country and sought allies. In formulating their response to the rise of Allied powers fascism in Europe, non-interventionists in ConAxis powers gress sought to avoid repeating the mistakes that Occupied countries had led to involvement in the bloodbath of World Neutrals A

 AT

 AN

 PA

N


C


E


 IF

 IC

Fascism and Appeasement


C


E


 LA

O


N


 TI

C


 Principal areas of submarine warfare

 What does this map convey about the scope of World War II?

THE APPROACHING WAR

 War I. Senator Gerald P. Nye, a Republican from North Dakota, chaired a series of Senate investigations in the mid-1930s into the role that American arms manufacturers had played in the nation’s decision to enter World War I. Although the investigations unearthed little hard evidence of a conspiracy, they did reinforce the consensus that the United States had entered that war to continue profitable arms sales and to guarantee that the Allies, the powers who had fought Germany, repaid their war loans to private banks. When these European countries defaulted on their loans during the Depression, public sentiment hardened against helping foreign nations. To ensure that trading with belligerent nations did not drag the country into another war, Congress passed the Neutrality Acts from 1935 to 1939, which restricted arms sales, loans, and transport of goods with nations at war (see U.S. Countdown to War timeline, 23.2). These popular laws encapsulated the widespread non-interventionist vision of avoiding involvement in overseas conflicts that did not directly threaten U.S. territory. Depending on the official policy pursued, the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans could serve as buffers protecting the nation or as pathways to war. Trying to ensure the former, the 1935 Neutrality Act prohibited the sales of arms and ammunition to nations at war. In 1936, Congress barred all loans to warring nations. The 1937 Neutrality Act allowed belligerent nations to purchase non-war-related goods if they paid cash for them and transported them on their own ships, a policy known as “cash and carry.” FDR challenged the non-interventionist vision with his 1937 Quarantine Speech which urged peace-loving countries to isolate aggressor nations and seek peace. Outraged non-interventionists accused him of trying to turn the United States into the world’s policeman. “It’s a terrible thing to look over your shoulder when you are trying to lead— and find no one there,” the president remarked to

 an aide before he publicly reaffirmed his support for the Neutrality Acts. Non-interventionist sentiment peaked in 1938, when Congress debated but did not approve a constitutional amendment that required a national referendum for any declaration of war, except in response to an enemy invasion. The United States was not alone in its desire to remain at peace. Eager to avoid war with Germany, Britain and France recalled how a relatively minor incident (the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand) had become the catalyst for war in 1914 (see Chapter 20). Instead of mobilizing their armies when Germany violated the Versailles Treaty by rearming and threatening its neighbors, France and Britain tried to negotiate. In 1938, Germany annexed Austria and then demanded the Sudetenland, a German-speaking province made part of Czechoslovakia against its will by the Allies, when the Austro-Hungarian Empire collapsed at the end of World War I. By the 1930s many Europeans felt that the Versailles Peace Treaty had punished Germany too severely, creating the widespread impression that Hitler’s actions and demands were reasonable. Taking Hitler at his word that he was interested only in reuniting German-speaking peoples into one nation, Britain and France agreed at the Munich Conference in 1938 to let Germany occupy the Sudetenland. Instead of dampening Hitler’s ambitions, the Munich Conference convinced him that the Western democracies were too weak to oppose him militarily. Arguing that Germany needed “living space” in the East for its people, Hitler initiated his master plan to displace what he demeaningly called the “inferior” Slavic “races,” the peoples living in Eastern Europe, and to exterminate the Jews. Intent on avoiding the mistakes of World War I, when Germany had fought a two-front war, Hitler resolved to fight one war at a time. To accomplish this, in August 1939, he signed a non-aggression pact with Josef Stalin, the dictator of the Soviet Union (USSR). Germany and the USSR

U.S.
Countdown to War, 1931–1941  Japan attacks China

 Japan invades Manchuria









1935–1939
U.S.
Neutrality Acts


German-Soviet
Non-Aggression
Pact


Munich
Conference


 Germany occupies Western Europe, including France

 U.S. embargo against Japan



 Germany invades Poland

U.S.
Lend-Lease
 policy

Shooting war in
 Atlantic between United States and Germany

United States
 declares war on Japan



Battle of
 Britain begins

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Hitler and Roosevelt




Tripartite Pact
 between Gemany, Japan, Italy

 Germany invades the Soviet Union

 Japanese attack Pearl Harbor and Southeast Asia

23.2 Origins of
World War II
The United States
 remained neutral until the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor.

Germany and
 Italy declare war on the United States

 What different lessons did America and other world powers draw from World War I?



 CHAPTER 23

23.3 Hitler in Paris
 Hitler’s quick subjugation of Western Europe brought him to Paris by June 1940. He posed in front of the city’s most recognizable monument, the Eiffel Tower, to underscore France’s defeat and his own power.

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

 secretly agreed to partition Poland and other parts of Eastern Europe, and the USSR offered Hitler supplies for his pending attack on France and Britain. The non-aggression pact ensured that Germany’s eastern border remained peaceful when it attacked Western Europe and the Balkans. Only days after signing the pact, Hitler invaded Poland on September 1, bringing a declaration of war from Britain and France. World War II had officially begun. In April 1940, Hitler began his massive assault on Western Europe by invading Norway and Denmark. He then marched through Luxembourg, Holland, and Belgium to invade France in May. Unlike in 1914, when Germany’s broad attack against French lines ended in a trench stalemate, in 1940, Germany’s Blitzkrieg (lightning war) punched holes in the French defense system and then sent tanks, infantry, artillery, and aircraft through these openings to disrupt communications and threaten the French army from the rear. When German troops entered Paris on June 14, Hitler underscored his triumph by visiting the Eiffel Tower. In this photograph (23.3) Hitler is posing before the landmark, transforming a banal tourist excursion into an act that, by symbolizing his control of Western Europe, carried sinister and tragic overtones. With France under Nazi domination, Italy entered the war on the side of Germany. Through a combination of alliances and force, the Axis, those nations fighting on the German side, quickly took control of the rest of Eastern Europe and the Balkans. As German troops were rolling toward Paris, the British army had escaped capture by evacuating its forces from the French port of Dunkirk. For a full year Britain fought Germany alone, surviving a massive bombing campaign known as the Battle of Britain. That changed in June 1941, however, when Hitler invaded the USSR. Frustrated in his efforts to subdue Britain, Hitler decided that with British forces off the continent, it was time to conquer Russia. Until this point Hitler had fought and won a series of isolated wars, but he made his first major strategic error when he invaded the Soviet Union. Instead of advancing quickly to Moscow, German troops

 How did Hitler rapidly conquer Western and Eastern Europe?

 found themselves bogged down by the late autumn in a massive campaign along an Eastern Front that stretched for thousands of miles from the Baltic to the Black Seas.

The Arsenal of Democracy
 As these events developed in Europe, both President Franklin D. Roosevelt and most of the American people opposed entering the war. Publicly embracing non-interventionist measures during his first two terms, Roosevelt adopted an officially neutral stance as the war spread. Unlike Wilson in World War I, however, FDR did not ask Americans to remain impartial in thought. Immigration restrictions had limited the number of first-generation immigrants from Europe, and Roosevelt had few concerns that well-assimilated Americans of German ancestry might retain strong loyalties to Germany. Indeed, public opinion polls in 1939 revealed that nearly 84 percent of Americans supported the Allies, the powers fighting Germany, with only two percent expressing pro-German views. Despite FDR’s public declaration of neutrality, in private the interventionist argument that inaction would invite catastrophe increasingly influenced his thinking. For the time being Roosevelt tried to satisfy both non-interventionists and interventionists by finding a way to defeat Hitler without actually declaring war. “Our national policy is not directed toward war,” Roosevelt assured Americans. “Its sole purpose is to keep war away from our country and our people.” To help Britain and France without risking the direct involvement that non-interventionists opposed, the Neutrality Act of 1939 revised the “cash and carry” policy to include munitions as well as non-war-related goods. Breaking with the self-imposed two-term limit set by George Washington and respected by every other subsequent president, Roosevelt made the unprecedented decision to run for a consecutive third term in 1940. FDR, who typically kept even his closest advisers guessing before he reached an important decision, surprised everyone, even his wife, with his

THE APPROACHING WAR



 “[I]t is a matter of most vital concern to us that European and Asiatic war-makers should not gain control of the oceans which lead to this hemisphere.” President FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT, radio “Fireside Chat,” December 29, 1940

 announcement. He never explained his decision, but the shock of France falling to Nazi control undoubtedly influenced him to run again. FDR’s candidacy and his selection of a liberal New Dealer, Henry Wallace, as his vice president caused grumbling among conservative Democrats, who nonetheless rallied around him in the general election. The Republican challenger Wendell Willkie and Roosevelt each argued that the nation should offer all the help it could to the Allies short of entering the war. Willkie tried to paint Roosevelt as bent on direct intervention, but this charge and Willkie’s anti-New Deal rhetoric resonated poorly with voters. Roosevelt easily won a third term. FDR saw his task as satisfying “the wish of 70% of Americans to keep out of the war” and “the wish of 70% of Americans to do everything to break Hitler, even if it means war.” To accommodate the public’s conflicting emotions, Roosevelt proposed turning the nation into a “great arsenal of democracy.” By telephone and telegraph, British Prime Minister Winston Churchill pressed FDR continually for aid. Stressing America’s vulnerability, Churchill warned that “overwhelming sea power would be in Hitler’s hands” if Germany defeated Britain, threatening America’s well-being. FDR responded as Churchill hoped. Besides selling Britain arms, FDR agreed to trade 50 old American destroyers for 99-year leases on seven British air and naval bases in the Western Hemisphere. Britain needed these ships to transport weapons overseas. FDR also supported a peacetime draft and invited a leading interventionist, Republican Henry Stimson, to become secretary of war. By 1941, Britain had run out of cash, and neutrality laws still prohibited the United States from loaning the British the money they needed to buy munitions. FDR circumvented these restrictions with a policy called Lend-Lease that loaned rather than sold arms to Britain. The United States would “say to England, we will give the guns and ships that you need, provided that when the war is over you will return to us in kind the guns and ships that we have loaned you,” Roosevelt told Secretary

 of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau. Lend-Lease, FDR explained to the nation, was simply one neighbor helping another to put out a fire. No one would say, FDR noted, “Neighbor, my garden hose cost me $15; you have to pay me $15 for it … I don’t want $15—I want my garden hose back after the fire is over.” Congress, however, prohibited the U.S. Navy from escorting British convoys carrying American goods across the Atlantic. Fittingly, given the analogy that FDR used to explain LendLease, one of the first shipments to Britain contained boxes of fire hoses. When Hitler attacked the USSR in 1941, the United States extended Lend-Lease aid to the Soviets. FDR had formally recognized the Soviet Union in 1933, hoping to find another overseas market for American goods. Trade with the Soviets remained minimal during the Depression, but exploded during the war. By 1945, the United States had provided $50 billion of materiel to the Allies under this program. No one, however, expected Britain and the Soviet Union to return “loaned” ammunition or arms to the United States. Instead, the law left it up to the president to decide what form repayment would take. After the war President Harry S. Truman accepted favorable postwar trade relations as repayment from Britain and demanded $2.6 billion from the Soviet Union for nonmilitary lend-lease goods. Russia did not pay its debt until after the fall of communism in 1991. The debate between non-interventionists and interventionists intensified throughout 1941. Noninterventionists embraced the slogan “America First” and urged Americans to remember the debt and death wrought by the last war. As part of this heated exchange, Dr. Seuss (the alias used by Theodore Geisel, who was to gain fame in the 1950s as the author-illustrator of The Cat in the Hat and other children’s books) drew editorial cartoons for PM, a short-lived left-wing New York magazine that denounced non-intervention as folly. Dr. Seuss depicted non-interventionists as ostriches with their heads in the ground, anti-Semites, and appeasers.

Read the Document Charles Lindbergh, Radio Address (1941)


 How did the competing visions of non-interventionists and interventionists influence FDR’s rhetoric and actions?



 CHAPTER 23

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

 This Seuss cartoon (23.4) shows a non-interventionist wearing an “America First” hat in a bathtub that is jumping with predatory sea creatures adorned with swastikas, the symbol of the Nazi Party. His eyes closed tight, the man ignores the danger, saying with a satisfied smile, “The old Family bath tub is plenty safe for me.” As he moved closer to the interventionist position, FDR voiced similar concerns about the vulnerability of the American coastline. Non-interventionists challenged this assertion. “Water Hazards” (23.5) appeared in the Chicago Tribune, a staunchly Republican newspaper that criticized both the New Deal and intervention. The cartoon ridicules the notion that Germany posed a danger to the United States, arguing that since Hitler (the inept golfer) had yet to land his forces (the golf ball) 22 miles across the English Channel in Britain, the United States had nothing to fear. The false alarms spread by interventionists (the hysterical golf caddy) hurt the nation by drawing Uncle

23.4 Dr. Seuss Lampoons Non-Interventionists in 1941
 Dr. Seuss lampooned non-interventionists for closing their eyes to the threat that Hitler’s navy (depicted here as swastika-marked monsters) posed to American shores. 23.5 “Water Hazards,” 1941 This Chicago Tribune editorial cartoon accuses interventionists of unduly alarming the country about the possibility of a Nazi attack.

 What competing visions did these two cartoons offer on the threat that Hitler posed to the United States?

 Sam’s attention away from addressing the nation’s domestic problems (in this case, playing his own golf game). As non-interventionists feared and interventionists hoped, Lend-Lease opened the door to further U.S. involvement in the European war. Securing American guns and ammunition solved only half the problem for Britain. Because of the number of German submarines patrolling the Atlantic, Secretary of War Henry Stimson warned, sending arms to Britain was like pouring water into a leaky bathtub. When the American destroyer Greer exchanged fire with a German submarine, FDR used the incident to invoke his authority as commander in chief by ordering U.S. naval ships to escort all ships headed to Britain as far as Iceland, which the United States also occupied, and “shoot on sight” any German submarine or ship. Although it remained unclear whether the Germans knew that the Greer was an American ship, FDR denounced the skirmish as a deliberate attack in American waters. “We have sought no shooting war with Hitler. We do not seek it now,” FDR declared in September 1941. “But when you see a rattlesnake poised to strike, you do not wait until he has struck before you crush him. These Nazi submarines and raiders are the rattlesnakes of the Atlantic.” Three months before Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor, the United States was fighting an undeclared naval war with Germany.

THE APPROACHING WAR

 War with Japan The catalyst for America’s formal entry into the war did not come in the Atlantic, however, but on the other side of the globe when Japanese pilots attacked Pearl Harbor, a large naval base in Hawaii, on December 7, 1941. The attackers discovered a neat line of battleships, reproduced in this miniature version of Pearl Harbor (23.6) that Japanese filmmakers constructed for a wartime propaganda film that reminded Japanese audiences of their nation’s great victory against the United States. The attack on Pearl Harbor was the culmination of two decades of tension and mistrust between the two nations. Japan’s desire to establish itself as the major power in the Pacific alarmed the United States, which maintained an array of island possessions and a strong naval presence in the Pacific to support its trade with China. Access to Chinese markets had been a cornerstone of American foreign policy since the SpanishAmerican War. For the Japanese, claiming East Asia as their proper sphere of influence was no different from the United States declaring the Western Hemisphere off-limits to foreign powers through the 1823 Monroe Doctrine and 1904 Roosevelt Corollary. Japan aimed to build the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, creating satellite states throughout Asia that would free Japan from dependence on Western-controlled

 resources like oil, tin, and rubber. In the 1920s the United States and Japan mediated their differences, with Japan agreeing to reduce the size of its navy and renouncing war as an instrument of foreign policy (see Chapter 21). The Japanese army’s 1931 invasion of Chinese-held Manchuria (land long disputed by China, Russia, and Japan), however, signaled the beginning of a direct confrontation between Japan and the United States. Claiming that Manchuria rightfully belonged to Japan, the Japanese army assumed control of all raw materials and industry to support Japan’s military endeavors. In July 1937, Japan attacked China, unleashing a brutal war of conquest. During the infamous Rape of Nanking, a Chinese city, over 250,000 Chinese perished, including 20,000 women, who were raped, tortured, and then executed. “Soldiers impaled babies on bayonets and tossed them still alive into pots of boiling water,” a Japanese soldier later admitted. The Japanese killed more than six million Chinese over the next eight years. American sympathy for Chinese victims and concern over protecting American economic interests in Asia coincided with rising tensions in Europe. By 1940, aiding Britain had become FDR’s foreign policy priority. Containing Japan through escalating economic sanctions and warnings, FDR reasoned, was the best way to defuse the situation in the Pacific,



23.6 Japanese
Model of Pearl
Harbor
 This mock-up of Pearl Harbor, constructed for a Japanese wartime film of the attack, showed American battleships lined up in a row, making them easy targets for aerial bombs.

 How did the United States respond to increasing Japanese aggression?



 CHAPTER 23

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

 so the nation could focus on the war in the Atlantic and Europe. Hoping that a show of force would convince Japan to abandon its imperialist ambitions, the United States began building ships and stationed the Pacific Fleet in Pearl Harbor, 2,500 miles from California (see 23.1). Roosevelt also sent aid to China and in July 1940 imposed a limited embargo on scrap iron and high-octane aviation fuel to Japan. Japan was not deterred. Instead of withdrawing from China, Japan seized parts of French Indochina, in present-day Vietnam. In response, on September 26, 1940, the United States announced a total embargo on scrap metal shipments to Japan. The following day Tokyo signed the Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy, an agreement dedicated to “the establishment of a new order” in East Asia and Europe. Aimed at offering mutual aid if the United States attacked, the pact did not lead to strategic coordination between the European and Asian theaters of war. Japan and Germany shared mutual enemies during the war, but little else. When Japan strengthened its occupation of French Indochina in the summer of 1941, the American government froze Japanese assets in the United States and stopped oil shipments (which accounted for four-fifths of Japan’s oil supply). Diplomatic exchanges continued until the eve of the attack on Pearl Harbor, even though Japan decided in September to launch an expansionist war into resource-rich Southeast Asia to push the United States, the Netherlands, and Britain out of the region. The Japanese calculation that the United States would withdraw from East Asia after a devastating attack on Pearl Harbor proved as faulty as the American belief that sanctions would prevent a war with Japan. The assault on Pearl Harbor ended all debate over entering the war. Having agonized over how far to pull the country toward war, Roosevelt reportedly told an aide that the attack took the matter “entirely

 out of his hands, because the Japanese had made the decision for him.” Despite catching the Americans by surprise, the Japanese victory at Pearl Harbor was far from complete. Although the attack prevented the United States from interfering with Japan’s subsequent invasion of Southeast Asia, Japan failed to destroy America’s Pacific Fleet. Fearing a counterattack Nagumo, on the day of the attack, called off a third air strike on storage tanks containing millions of gallons of fuel oil and on repair facilities. Most American sailors in Hawaii survived the attack, and the navy eventually repaired six of the eight damaged battleships. In another stroke of luck, the Pacific Fleet’s two aircraft carriers were at sea and escaped the attack. The navy also had eleven battleships and two aircraft carriers stationed elsewhere to defend the nation from further attack. Nonetheless, the short-term damage was severe. Over the next 24 hours, Japan attacked American, British, and Dutch territories throughout Southeast Asia. While the attack on Pearl Harbor horrified Americans, it brought hope to the British. Churchill knew immediately that the United States would soon be in the war against Germany. After Pearl Harbor die-hard non-interventionists questioned whether the Japanese attack could have been prevented. Charges of dereliction of duty against the commanders of Pearl Harbor and suspicions that Roosevelt had allowed the attack to take place to enter the war against Hitler (through the back door) surfaced. By early December, American commanders expected a Japanese attack against American Pacific possessions. Most intelligence data, however, indicated that the Japanese would invade the Philippines and mainland Southeast Asia, as they subsequently did. American officials simply overlooked the few bits of information indicating that Hawaii was both a possible and a probable first target.

 “The United States was in the war, up to the neck and in to the death…. I went to bed and slept the sleep of the saved and thankful.” British Prime Minister WINSTON CHURCHILL, upon learning of the 1941 Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor

 How significant was the attack on Pearl Harbor in the short and long run?

Read the Document Franklin D. Roosevelt, “The Four Freedoms” (1941)


ON THE HOME FRONT



On the Home Front
 The U.S. government made the formal declaration of war, but winning it required the active participation of the American people. Americans remember World War II as the “good war” not only because it ended the Depression, but also because it united the nation against its enemies. While unified in the desire to prevail on the battlefield, Americans embraced conflicting visions that kept ethnic, gender, race, and class divisions intact.

Images of the Enemy
 Americans had long exhibited disdain for Asian immigrants and Americans of Asian descent. Before the war discriminatory laws targeted Asian immigrants and their American-born children. These laws segregated swimming pools and dance halls, denied Asians the right to own land, prohibited intermarriage with whites, and prevented Asian immigrants from becoming citizens. The attack on Pearl Harbor provoked more virulent expressions of hatred for the Japanese, leading to even greater discrimination. In the opening days of the war, Life and Time magazines offered the nation a crash course in “how to tell a Chinese from a Jap.” Understanding the difference was crucial, Life magazine asserted, to protect the Chinese Americans, “whose homeland is our staunch ally,” from unwarranted attacks. As the Chinese embassy prepared to hand out identification buttons for Chinese immigrants and Chinese Americans to wear, Life and Time instructed the nation in distinguishing pseudoscientific, stereotypical “racial” characteristics. Life used photos (23.7) to compare the facial features and expressions of a Chinese civil servant with those of General Hideki Tojo, the prime minister who ruled Japan until 1944. The magazine called on readers to note Tojo’s heavy beard and cheekbones and humorless expression, all supposedly key traits of Japanese physiognomy. Time and Life were not alone in feeling a sudden need to distinguish members of the “yellow race.” Congress lifted the ban on Chinese naturalization and granted China an annual quota of 105 immigrants a year. This act symbolically differentiated the Chinese from the Japanese (banned as immigrants in 1924 and prohibited from becoming naturalized citizens, see Chapters 19 and 21), but protected the nation from any substantial increase in Chinese immigration. Renewed outrage against Japan greeted news of atrocities in the Pacific war, such as the April 1942

 23.7 “How to Tell Japs from the Chinese” Lamenting the American tendency to lump all Asians together, Life magazine analyzed the facial features of Chinese and Japanese men to instruct readers in the difference between the two groups—one an ally, the other the enemy.

 What distinctions did Americans now make between the Japanese and Chinese?



 CHAPTER 23

23.8 Plant
Camouflage,
Before and After
 This aircraft factory in Burbank, California, camouflaged its facility with a painted tarp and cardboard houses to create the facade of a suburban housing development to deceive Japanese pilots on the lookout for military targets.

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

Bataan Death March. When American and Filipino
 soldiers finally surrendered their position on the Bataan Peninsula in the Philippines, their Japanese captors forced the sick, starving troops to walk almost 90 miles through the intense heat and jungle to a prisoner of war camp. Out of 70,000 men who began the trek, between 5,000 and 11,000 succumbed to illness, starvation, and beatings from Japanese soldiers. Still these horrors were not enough to explain Americans’ deep-seated hatred for the Japanese. “In Europe we felt that our enemies, horrible and deadly as they were, were still people,” Ernie Pyle wrote in one of his newspaper columns toward the end of the war. “But out here I soon gathered that the Japanese were looked upon as something subhuman and repulsive; the way some people feel about cockroaches or mice.” As Pyle noted, general views toward the Germans were decidedly different. Remembering the vigilante attacks against German Americans in World

 What do these photos reveal about American fears of a Japanese attack?

 War I (see Chapter 20), government propaganda focused on Hitler and Nazism as the enemy, not the German people.

Internment Camps
 In the immediate wake of the attack on Pearl Harbor, Americans were eager for explanations. Rumors circulated that Japanese-American farmers on Hawaii had plowed arrows in their fields to show Japanese pilots the way to military installations. Yet no evidence of internal spying ever surfaced, and suggestions that the government round up and quarantine these Hawaiian residents went nowhere. Composing one-third of Hawaii’s population, people of Japanese descent were too important to the local economy to deport, and there were no ships available to transport replacement workers to the islands. The 110,000 Japanese and Japanese Americans who lived in California, Oregon, and Washington, where they were less vital to the economy, met a different fate. The day after the attack on Pearl Harbor, air raid sirens wailed in San Francisco. Then, when a Japanese submarine torpedoed an American ship off the California coast, Americans feared that the West Coast would soon be under attack. Frenzied officials instituted blackouts; Coast Guard units patrolled the seas. Throughout the war West Coast defense factories camouflaged their plants, as illustrated in these “Plant Camouflage, Before and After” photos (23.8). This aircraft factory in Burbank, California, stretched a tarp over its facilities to make it look like suburban housing from the air. The camouflagers hoped to fool an attacking Japanese pilot seeking a more recognizable military target. Within this atmosphere of heightened anxiety, many viewed Japanese immigrants and Japanese Americans on the West Coast as potential enemy agents. Increasingly the larger public and the government believed that their presence near vital ports and military bases posed a threat to national security. On February 19, 1942, President Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066, permitting the military to declare certain areas off-limits to any or all persons. General John L. DeWitt, head of the Western Defense Command, immediately declared the entire West Coast a military zone closed to “all persons of Japanese ancestry, both alien and non-alien.” His order called for the evacuation of anyone of Japanese descent; even orphanages had to relocate Japanese-American babies. In mid-March 1942, Roosevelt created the War Relocation Authority to oversee the forced removal

Read the Document Japanese Relocation Order, February 19, 1942


ON THE HOME FRONT

 of 38,000 Japanese immigrants and 72,000 JapaneseAmerican citizens to internment camps, where they were held under armed guard. Posted “Instructions to All Persons of Japanese Ancestry” informed Japanese inhabitants that they had only a few days to sell their belongings and settle their affairs. “It is difficult to describe the feeling of despair and humiliation experienced by all of us,” one internee later said, “as we watched the Caucasians coming to look over our possessions and offering such nominal amounts knowing we had no recourse but to accept whatever they were offering.” Evacuees could take only what they could carry. With numbers pinned on their coats, they rode trains to recently abandoned stables or stockyards to await transport to one of ten internment camps in remote areas of the interior West. Offering a conflicting vision that emphasized their loyalty to the United States, most Japanese and Japanese Americans complied quietly with the evacuation order. A few, however, registered their protest against this wholesale violation of their civil rights. For propaganda purposes the Office of War Information hired photographer Dorothea Lange to document that the government was treating evacuees humanely as it contained this suspect population. Sympathetic to the plight of Japanese Americans, Lange managed to capture this scene (23.9) of a Japanese-American veteran reporting to a Santa Anita assembly center in his old military uniform, a silent demonstration of his longstanding loyalty to the country. In January 1943, the army decided to recruit Nisei men, the American-born children of Japanese immigrants. While their parents remained in the camps, these men joined with Japanese Americans from Hawaii to form the 442nd Regimental Combat Team, which became the most decorated American unit in the nation’s history. These men opted to prove their loyalty by fighting for their country in Europe. Other Japanese Americans sought redress in the courts, but the Supreme Court upheld the government’s evacuation policy in 1944. Competing Visions: Civil Liberties and National Security Clash (page 696) examines this civil liberties controversy in more detail. As the tide of the war began to turn in America’s favor, the justification for interning people of Japanese descent weakened. In 1945, the government let inmates return to the West Coast. In 1948, the government offered some restitution to those who had lost homes or businesses. It took until 1988, however, for Congress to offer an apology and a reparation payment of $20,000 to each of the 60,000 surviving internees.



Prosperity, Scarcity, and
Opportunities for Women
 Japanese Americans were among the few to suffer financially from the war. For most Americans jobs were plentiful and wages high. During the war the nation’s gross national product rose 60 percent, and 17 million new jobs were created. To mobilize the economy, the government quickly established a slew of agencies to allocate scarce resources, help businesses convert factories to a wartime footing, and enlist the public’s support for the war. After the difficult years of the Depression, the war-fueled boom was a welcome relief. “People are crazy with money,” one store owner exclaimed. “They don’t care what they buy. They purchase things … just for the fun of spending.” Madison Avenue advertising firms assured the public that consumerism was essential to the American way of life. “Will you ever own another car?” asked one ad. “Another radio? Another gleaming new refrigerator? Those who live under dictators merely dream of such possessions.” Concerns over unemployment gave way to worries about inflation as the money flowing into the economy sent prices soaring. The government tried to curb inflation by instituting price and wage controls. Because the nation’s resources were now being poured into producing military equipment and supplying the troops, consumers faced shortages of all kinds. To deal with the scarcity of resources, the government rationed many goods, including gas, butter, and sugar, by distributing coupon books that allotted families a set amount of each item.

A
Japanese American Protests
Internment
Government
 officials censored this photograph of a JapaneseAmerican veteran who reported to the evacuation center in his old uniform. He gave his name to a Japanese-American staff member who decided instead to affirm his loyalty by cooperating openly with the authorities.

 What competing responses did Japanese Americans have to internment?



 CHAPTER 23

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

Competing Visions
CIVIL LIBERTIES AND NATIONAL SECURITY CLASH
In Korematsu v. United States (1944), the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of relocating and interning Japanese Americans as a justifiable military measure. Three justices dissented from the majority opinion, concluding that internment violated the constitutional rights of Japanese-American citizens. Which side made the stronger argument? How has America resolved a similar dilemma over national security versus civil rights in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks (see Chapter 29)? Justice Hugo Black wrote the majority opinion that upheld the constitutionality of interning Japanese Americans. Exclusion of those of Japanese origin was deemed necessary because of the presence of an unascertained number of disloyal members of the group, most of whom we have no doubt were loyal to this country.… We are not unmindful of the hardships imposed by it upon a large group of American citizens.… But hardships are part of war, and war is an aggregation of hardships. All citizens alike, both in and out of uniform, feel the impact of war in greater or lesser measure. Citizenship has its responsibilities as well as its privileges, and in time of war the burden is always heavier. Compulsory exclusion of large groups of citizens from their homes, except under circumstances of direct emergency and peril, is inconsistent with our basic governmental institutions. But when under conditions of modern warfare our shores are threatened by hostile forces, the power to protect must be commensurate with the threatened danger.… Regardless of the true nature of the assembly and relocation centers—and we deem it unjustifiable to call them concentration camps with all the ugly connotations that term implies…. Korematsu was not excluded from the Military Area because of hostility to him or his race. He was excluded because we are at war with the Japanese Empire, because the properly constituted military authorities feared an invasion of our West Coast and felt constrained to take proper security measures, because they decided that the military urgency of the situation demanded that all citizens of Japanese ancestry be segregated from the West Coast temporarily, and finally, because Congress, reposing its confidence in this time of war in our military leaders—as inevitably it must—determined that they should have the power to do just this. There was evidence of disloyalty on the part of some, the military authorities considered that the need for action was great, and time was short. We cannot—by availing ourselves of the calm perspective of hindsight—now say that at that time these actions were unjustified. 
 Did a legitimate military reason exist to place Japanese Americans in internment camps?

 Justice Frank Murphy dissented, arguing that internment was racially motivated. This exclusion of “all persons of Japanese ancestry, both alien and non-alien,” from the Pacific Coast area on a plea of military necessity in the absence of martial law ought not to be approved. Such exclusion goes over “the very brink of constitutional power” and falls into the ugly abyss of racism … it is essential that there be definite limits to military discretion, especially where martial law has not been declared. Individuals must not be left impoverished of their constitutional rights on plea of military necessity that has neither substance nor support.… No one denies, of course, that there were some disloyal persons of Japanese descent on the Pacific Coast who did all in their power to aid their ancestral land. Similar disloyal activities have been engaged in by many persons of German, Italian and even more pioneer stock in our country. But to infer that examples of individual disloyalty prove group disloyalty and justify discriminatory action against the entire group is to deny that under our system of law individual guilt is the sole basis for deprivation of rights.… To give constitutional sanction to that inference in this case, however well-intentioned may have been the military command on the Pacific Coast, is to adopt one of the cruelest of the rationales used by our enemies to destroy the dignity of the individual and to encourage and open the door to discriminatory actions against other minority groups in the passions of tomorrow.… I dissent, therefore, from this legalization of racism. Racial discrimination in any form and in Japanese-American girl any degree has no justifiable part saying the Pledge of whatever in our democratic way Allegiance of life.

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Civil Liberties
 and National Security Clash

ON THE HOME FRONT



23.10 Norman Rockwell, “Rosie,” Saturday Evening Post, 1943.
 The lyrics to a popular 1942 song, “There’s something true about/Red, white, and blue about/Rosie the Riveter,” inspired Rockwell to set his Rosie against the backdrop of an American flag and place her foot on Hitler’s Mein Kampf. Rockwell thus assured Americans that patriotism, rather than money or career ambitions, encouraged women to take factory jobs.

 To save wool, cotton, and nylon, the War Production Board (WPB) dictated fashion trends by forbidding tailors to make cuffs, vests, or double-breasted jackets for men. The WPB’s demand that bathing suit manufacturers use ten percent less material meant that skintight onepiece bathing suits replaced billowing bathing costumes on beaches. Skirt hemlines also rose to save fabric. The government spent as never before, expanding the federal budget from $9 billion in 1939 to $106 billion by 1945. As in World War I, the nation used conscription to fill the ranks and enlisted the help of big business to provide the guns, tanks, ships, airplanes, and bullets that a modern army needed. Numbers help convey the immensity of the American war effort. The military grew from 227,000 to 16 million, of whom 10 million were conscripted. American industry produced 77,000 ships, 300,000 airplanes, 2.5 million trucks, and 20 million small arms for the American and Allied armed forces. Nearly 15 million civilians relocated during the war to take advantage of opportunities in cities with booming wartime industries such as Los Angeles, New Orleans, Seattle, Detroit, and Philadelphia. The sudden growth of many cities forced hundreds of thousands of recent migrants to live in “the backs of stores, in public buildings, warehouses, and garages,” the Bureau of Labor reported.

 Nearly 19 million women held jobs during the war, for the moment a record high. Many of these women would have worked anyway. Only three million new female workers entered the wartime workforce. Norman Rockwell’s cover illustration for the Saturday Evening Post’s 1943 Memorial Day edition (23.10) introduced the public to “Rosie the Riveter,” an iconic figure representing all female defense workers. Rosie is strong and confident, containing both masculine and feminine attributes. Her bulging biceps offer assurance that she has mastered the skill of shooting rivets through sheets of metal to fasten them together, traditionally a job for men. But she also wears lipstick and rouge as she munches her home-made sandwich, demonstrating her feminine interest in cosmetics and cooking. Rockwell’s Rosie wears no wedding ring, and most working women were single. The War Manpower Commission, a wartime agency charged with keeping American workers on the job, tried with mixed success to lure “Mrs. Stay-atHome” into the wartime 23.11 “Mothers at Work” workforce. Many moth- As the war drew to a close, official posters and private ers, however, expressed advertisements encouraged women to revert to their traditional roles as homemakers. mixed feelings about leaving their children in day care. Once victory seemed ensured in 1944, government-sponsored propaganda reversed course, emphasizing women’s domestic responsibilities instead of their public duties. Toward the end of the war, the Saturday Evening Post carried this “Mothers at Work” ad (23.11) that urged women to consider the toll that working outside the home had on their children. The ad also emphasized this woman’s imminent postwar need for new appliances.

View the Closer Look Images as History: “We Can Do It!” Visual Myths
 about Women’s Roles During World War II

 What competing visions of working women emerged during the war?



 CHAPTER 23

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

 As expected the overall percentage of women working fell to 28 percent (from a wartime high of 36 percent) in 1947 as women quit their jobs to raise families or employers fired them to free up positions for returning veterans. Over 350,000 women served in the armed forces, including 150,000 in the Women’s Army Corps (WAC). Most women in uniform served as nurses and clerks, fulfilling vital communication and record-keeping services. Many men and the media mocked these clerical roles. The press nicknamed the WACs the “Petticoat Army” and their quarters “Fort Lipstick.” The recruiting slogan for the WACs—“Release a man for combat”—underscored the different risks faced by women and men in the military. Female soldiers also performed more traditionally “male” tasks, serving as gunnery instructors, mechanics, and truck drivers, and 1,000 women even flew combat aircraft from domestic manufacturers to overseas bases. General Douglas MacArthur called female troops “my best soldiers.” At least one congressman, however, offered a competing vision, wondering “what has become of the manhood of America?” now that women had a formal place in the armed forces. After the war only a few thousand women remained in uniform as the military cut slots reserved

 for female troops. Their position within the armed forces rebounded a bit, however, in 1948, when Congress gave women a permanent, though segregated, place in the army, navy, and air force. The debate over whether to limit female soldiers to support tasks or use them in active operations was only beginning. Even children pitched in to help the war effort. To encourage children’s active participation, the government released photographs of small girls and boys doing their bit (23.12). This young boy takes care of the family shopping while his parents work in war-related jobs, handing the family’s ration card to the merchant. At home this little girl carefully saves tin and foil in separate jars for the local scrap drive. Millions participated in these morale-building activities, but weapons manufacturers discarded most of the poor-quality aluminum and rubber collected. Money, however, was always in short supply. Classrooms across the nation collected pennies and nickels for war bonds, which the federal government sold to Americans to help finance the war. The remoteness of the war often made it seem like a great adventure to children. War games gained popularity on the nation’s playgrounds, and children joined the Junior Commandos, which trained young uniformed recruits, only a few years away from qualifying to fight in the army, on a rugged obstacle course.

23.12 Children and War
 Children helped in the war effort by collecting metal for neighborhood scrap drives and by shopping with a ration card while their parents worked.

 How did World War II affect childhood?

View the Image “Get in the Scrap” Poster


ON THE HOME FRONT

 With the economy booming, many Americans concluded that wars, by nature, were good for the economy. However, several unique factors made World War II particularly beneficial for the American economy: • The war effort withdrew 16 million servicemen and women from the workforce just as millions of new positions were created, absorbing all surplus labor and creating a labor shortage. • Massive government spending on the war, not the war per se, ended the Depression. If the government had been willing to spend $323 billion (the total cost of the war) on New Deal programs, the economy would likely have rebounded earlier. • The wartime boom years came at the expense of future generations. Taxation paid for less than half of the war’s cost. The government did not pay off its war debts until 1970.



 During the war, labor’s clout, like that of big companies, also expanded. Union rolls swelled from 8.7 to 14.7 million thanks in part to supportive War Labor Board policies. Industrialists tried to use the wartime rhetoric of sacrifice to rein in these growing unions. In one advertisement, for example, the Jenkins Valve firm linked work slowdowns (used to pressure a company to agree to labor’s demands) to the unnecessary deaths of American sailors. The ad showed a small child staring at a sailor’s cap that had washed up along the shore; the caption asked “Is a Plant Slow Down Worth It?” Unions did not abandon strikes, but the war ushered in a less militant era of collective bargaining.

Racial Discord


 The war provided many opportunities for racial minorities to assert their claims for equal rights in American social and political life. These groups ofProsperity and unity of purpose failed to guaran- fered a strikingly different view of the war’s ultimate tee tranquility in labor relations on the home front. purpose. Unlike most white Americans who confined Competing visions on the meaning of wartime sac- their thoughts to the struggle against fascism abroad, many civil rights leadrifice emerged immeers championed a diately. The chairman competing vision that of the National War sought to eradicate disLabor Board dramacrimination at home. tized the difficulty of Using the war to proasking unions for wage mote a double-victory concessions by noting, campaign against both “If you say to the boys, fascism overseas and ‘Why don’t you make racial prejudice at a sacrifice for your Secretary of War HENRY L. STIMSON home, these activists country?’ they are gopromoted a vision of ing to say, ‘That is fine. I am making a sacrifice for my country, but I am not an egalitarian and color-blind society. At first the wartime boom threatened to leave going to make it to increase the profits of General African Americans behind, because many essential Motors.’ ” Big business profited tremendously from the war. Government contracts with generous profit wartime industries refused to hire blacks. In 1941, the African American labor leader A. Philip Randolph margins, federal loans for factory conversion or exthreatened to assemble 10,000 blacks in front of the pansion, and tax write-offs went overwhelmingly to Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., to “demand the nation’s 100 largest companies. Even companies that appeared peripheral to the war effort prospered. the right to work and fight for our country.” Nationally known for organizing a union for black railroad Both Coca-Cola and Wrigley’s Gum, for instance, porters, Randolph realized that FDR’s lock on the got their products declared essential war comblack vote gave him little reason to offer more than modities, thus gaining access to carefully rationed sympathy in private meetings with black leaders about sugar and shipping space. By following American rampant racial discrimination. To pressure FDR to act servicemen around the globe, Coca-Cola cultivated on blacks’ behalf, a step certain to anger the president’s a worldwide taste for its beverage. Wrigley’s Gum white southern supporters, Randolph resolved to pubconvinced the War Department that chewing gum licly protest employment discrimination. reduced stress in workers and troops. The company Randolph’s idea for a march on Washington provided a free stick for every soldier’s combat immediately attracted the support of civil rights rations.

 “If you are going to … go to war … in a capitalist country, you have to let business make money out of the process or business won’t work.”

Read the Document A. Philip Randolph, “Why Should We March” (1942)


 Why was World War II unique compared to other American wars?



 CHAPTER 23

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

 groups and the ire of the White House. When FDR tried to convince Randolph to call off the march, Randolph told him, “We feel as you have wisely said: ‘No people will lose their freedom fighting for it.’” To avoid an embarrassing demonstration that highlighted racial problems at home, FDR agreed to issue an executive order that forbade discrimination in the defense industries and government if Randolph canceled the march. Roosevelt’s order also established the Fair Employment Practices Committee to handle complaints of discrimination. For the first time since Reconstruction, the period following the Civil War, the federal government was intervening directly to protect the civil rights of African Americans. Randolph’s aborted demonstration later inspired the 1963 march on Washington, where black civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. delivered his “I Have a Dream” speech standing before the Lincoln Memorial (see Chapter 27). Interest in direct action grew throughout the war. The Fellowship of Reconciliation’s Committee on Racial Justice initiated a wave of sit-ins, where blacks and whites entered segregated restaurants together and refused to leave when denied service. In Washington, D.C., Howard University students picketed segregated restaurants with signs that read “We Die Together. Let’s Eat Together” and “Are You for Hitler’s Way or the American Way? Make Up Your Mind.” Nearly one million blacks served in the armed forces during the war, including Brigadier General Benjamin O. Davis, the first African American general in the U.S. Army. The War Department finally agreed to train African American pilots, and the Tuskegee Airmen (who received their stateside training at Alabama’s Tuskegee Institute) amassed an admirable war record in Europe. The military remained segregated, however, and most black soldiers served in noncombatant units where they cleared beaches in France of mines, manned supply lines transporting food and ammunition to front-line troops, and built roads and railroads for the advancing army. Within the U.S. black servicemen received daily reminders of their second-class status. When black soldiers entered a whites-only restaurant in Salina, Kansas, the owner stopped them. We “just stood there inside the door, staring at what we had come to see—the German prisoners of war who were having lunch at the counter…. This was really happening. It was no jive talk. The people of Salina would serve these enemy soldiers and turn away black American G.I.’s,” one soldier recalled. The proper epitaph to mark each black soldier’s grave in the Pacific, African Americans

 How did African Americans challenge racial discrimination during the war?

 sarcastically said, would be “here lies a black man killed fighting a yellow man for the protection of a white man.” The double-victory campaign laid the groundwork for the postwar civil rights movement by pioneering new strategies that would later prove extraordinarily successful. The accelerated migration northward also created new bases of political power that would aid the civil rights movement in the 1950s and 1960s. Throughout the war hundreds of thousands of African American civilians hit the road in search of job opportunities in midwestern and western cities. In 1943, Los Angeles welcomed 10,000 black migrants a month, most from Texas and Louisiana. Overcrowding and changing demographics created explosive racial situations in many urban areas. The most serious wartime race riot took place in 1943 in Detroit. Home to the nation’s largest automobile manufacturers, Detroit became the leading producer of military goods when these companies began manufacturing jeeps and tanks for the military. Plentiful jobs drew thousands of migrants to the city, including African Americans, who had trouble finding adequate lodging in the strictly (albeit unofficially) segregated city housing market. White workers, resentful of working next to blacks, staged slowdowns in the city’s wartime defense plants. To protest racial discrimination, some black residents initiated a “bumping campaign,” nudging whites off sidewalks. The anticipated confrontation finally came on a warm spring afternoon when black and white teenagers tussled at a crowded amusement park on Belle Isle. As the violence escalated, a mob of 5,000 whites formed to attack blacks as they crossed the bridge back to the mainland. Racial rampaging soon engulfed the city. Hundreds of African Americans were injured and 25 were killed, before state and federal troops restored order. Nine whites also died in the rioting. Horace Pippin, a self-taught African American painter who rocketed to fame in the late 1930s, took note of the racial discord on the home front in his 1943 painting Mr. Prejudice (23.13). Pippin’s composition expressed doubt that the double-V campaign would succeed. In the painting a racist white worker, backed by a Klansman, hammers a chisel down the center of a V, the symbol of victory. A fellow worker to his left holds a noose—a reference to lynching. The Statue of Liberty, portrayed as an African American woman, is toppling down as the dream of racial unity unravels. The fractured

Read the Document Jim Crow in the Army Camps


ON THE HOME FRONT

 V threatens to crack into two, permanently dividing the friendly white servicemen reaching out to their black comrades in arms—a doctor, sailor, aviator, and soldier, who are all serving loyally during the war. African Americans were not the only targets of racial violence, however. The same summer that racial rioting rocked Detroit, white sailors and soldiers on leave in Los Angeles began a ten-day rampage against Mexican-American zoot-suiters, youths who wore baggy pants, long oversize coats, and broad-brimmed hats. The zoot-suit was a fashion trend established by African American men in the 1930s. By the war years white Americans viewed zoot-suiters at best as juvenile delinquents, who refused to dress and act properly, and at worst as criminal gangs bent on robbery and rape. Some pachucos, as zoot-suiters called themselves, engaged in criminal activity, but most limited their adolescent rebellion to wearing different clothes from adults. The explosive growth in the MexicanAmerican community, coupled with a general intolerance for nonconformity during war, set the stage for the conflict in Los Angeles. Street fights between sailors and Mexican-American men escalated into full-scale rioting, when organized groups of servicemen began attacking boys as young as 12 and Mexican-American businesses. White civilians joined in the rioting, and when a mob came upon a zoot-suiter, they often beat and stripped him and even burned his clothes. The casualties included more than 100 seriously injured Mexican Americans, and at least 100 more who refused hospital care. Newspapers in Los Angeles egged on the white crowds by praising their efforts to rid the city of “hoodlums” and “gangsters.” Federal investigators cited racial prejudice as the cause of the riots, but Los Angeles nonetheless prohibited wearing zoot-suits on city streets. The image of Mexican Americans as disaffected youths belied the reality that 500,000 Latinos served alongside whites in the armed forces during the war, playing a significant role in the doomed defense of the Philippines and winning many Medals of Honor. Perceived as natural warriors, Native Americans encountered less hostility within the armed forces than blacks or Latinos. More than 25,000 Native Americans served, including the famed Navajo code talkers who transmitted secret messages between units in their native language,

 baffling the Japanese, who never deciphered it. Military service offered many young Native Americans their first decent wages and a chance to leave the reservation. Government officials expected military service to hasten assimilation, since Native-American soldiers lived among whites. Yet sending men into combat also gave some tribes a reason to resurrect rituals surrounding battle, such as requiring returning soldiers to spend time in a sweat lodge to cleanse themselves of the evils associated with war. Serving in the military, therefore, both expanded veterans’ knowledge of the wider world and reinforced their own cultural traditions, helping them to see themselves and mainstream society in a different light.



23.13 Horace
Pippin,
Mr. Prejudice
(1943)
 The fractured V in Pippin’s painting suggested that the African American vision of using the war to secure democracy at home and abroad was in jeopardy.

 How did the wartime experiences of African Americans compare to those of Latinos?



 CHAPTER 23

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

On the Front Lines


23.14 War in
 the Pacific Allied victories at Guadalcanal, the Coral Sea, and Midway halted Japanese expansion, preparing the way for the American islandhopping campaign in 1944–1945.

 No bombs fell on mainland American cities and no occupying armies marched through the streets, but with 16 million men in the armed forces, nearly everyone knew someone who might not make it home. The United States essentially fought two separate wars in World War II: one against Germany and its allies in Europe; the other against Japan in the Pacific. The initial news from the battlefront was not good, as the American armed forces encountered one setback after another. Defeating Japan and Germany required time and patience. Victories finally came, but the closer the Allies got to Japan and Germany, the harder their enemies fought. Initially leery of exposing Americans to blood and gore, over time magazines and newspapers began to publish photographs that registered the rising death toll at the front. The public welcomed photographs of enemy destruction as evidence that the nation was nearing victory, but reacted strongly to any sign of suffering by American soldiers. Nothing prepared the public, however, for the shocking details that emerged from liberated Nazi concentration camps in 1945.

Defeat, Then Victory
 Until mid-1942, the American military reeled from one defeat to another in the Pacific. The S OV I E T U N I O N UNITED JAPAN STATES ( U S S R ) attack on Pearl Harbor prevented the Hawaiian Allies les Islands 0 mi mi les United States from interfering with Areas under Japanese control Pearl Japan’s sweeping conquest of SouthHarbor Neutral Japanese perimeter 1944 east Asia and the western Pacific PACIFIC Allied forces islands, as shown in this map OCEAN Major battles Vladivostok (23.14). American and Filipino Atomic bomb soldiers fought courageously MONGOLIA MANCHUKUO Toyama JAPAN in the Philippines; but lacking Hiroshima Tokyo August 6, 1945 March 1945 supplies these troops finally Beijing Seoul surrendered in early 1942. PA C I F I C Yellow Nagasaki Midway To solidify its control of C H I N A OCEAN August 9, 1945 Sea June,1942 East Asia, Japan planned Nanjing Shanghai to attack Australia through Okinawa MARSHALL April–June,1945 TIBET Port Moresby, on New ISLANDS Iwo Jima Guinea, and then fight a Feb.–March 1945 GILBERT ISLANDS decisive battle with the CAROLINE American navy in the ISLANDS Tarawa Hong Kong Nov.,1943 PHILIPPINES western Pacific that would MARIANA (U.S.A.) Bataan Death March BURMA ISLANDS April,1942 force the United States to (Britain) Philippine Sea Saipan Manilla June 19–20, 1944 SO LO MO N sue for a negotiated peace. South June,1944 THAILAND ISLANDS Bay of China Leyte Gulf, The Americans thwarted Bangkok INDOCHINA October 23–25, Guadalcanal Bengal Sea these plans in the Battle of (France) Aug.,1942– Feb.,1943 Saigon the Coral Sea (May 3–8, NORTHEAST NORTH NEW GUINEA 1942) and the Battle of BORNEO Port Midway (June 4–6, 1942). MALAYA BRUNEI PAPUA Moresby Coral Sea May,1942 (Britain) NEW G UINEA In the former a duel of Singapore BORNEO naval aircraft ended with Coral Sea Japan calling off its invaDUTCH EAST INDIES sion of Australia. In the latter AU STR ALIA

 What does this map reveal about the military challenges facing the United States in the Pacific?

View the Map Interactive Map: World War II, Pacific Theater


ON THE FRONT LINES



 PO

RT U

 GA

L


 NO

 RW

 AY

 SW

 ED

 EN

23.15 The
 American dive-bombers surprised Japanese aircraft doubted that their inexperienced army could prevail European Theater carriers in the midst of refueling their planes. Japan’s against the first-rate German troops stationed in The Soviet army heavy losses at Midway prevented it from launching France. As an alternative FDR and Churchill decided fought alone in Europe until the any major naval offensives for the rest of the war. to attack “the soft underbelly of Europe” by first esWestern Allies Midway was a crucial turning point that put Japan tablishing supply and air bases in North Africa and invaded Italy permanently on the defensive. then invading Italy. Despite American blunders on in 1943 and America adopted a “Europe First” strategy, but the battlefield, by summer 1943, the Allies had gained launched the D-Day invasion the war in the European theater began equally poorly control of North Africa and invaded Sicily, as shown of France in for the Allies. Initially the United States wanted to in the map “The European Theater” (23.15). 1944. get supplies across the Atlantic and open up a second Italy’s surrender on September 8, 1943, meant front against Germany in Western Europe. Meetlittle, however. German forces invaded the ing the first goal required winning the Battle of the Italian peninsula, saving Mussolini’s reAtlantic. For 18 months the Allied cause looked gime and bogging Allied troops down grim, as German submarines controlled the seas, in a bloody campaign that lasted until sinking an average of 100 ships a month. The extenMay 1945. When Mussolini tried to sive submarine activity on Map 23.1 illustrates the fe- escape in 1945 with the retreating rocity of the struggle to control the Atlantic. Finally, Germans, Italian resistance in summer 1943, the tide turned in the Allies’ favor. fighters captured him and Better air surveillance, improved radar, the discovery his mistress, shot that the Germans had broken the convoy-routing them, and strung Axis powers code, and breaking the German naval code all conthem upside Areas under Axis tributed to Allied success in the Atlantic. down in a control, May 1941 The issue of opening a second front in Europe Allied powers Neutral remained. Roosevelt was reluctant to commit AmeriAxis forces can land forces until the army was better equipped and Allied forces: U.S.S.R. supplied than its adversaries. But he recognized that Allied forces: U.S. and British F INLA ND committing American ground troops to Major battles the war in Europe would build morale Leningrad at home; it would also prevent the Moscow Sept.,1941–Jan.,1944 ESTONIA Russians from seeking a separate North Sea peace with Germany. S O V I E T DENMARK LATVIA G RE AT U N I O N Baltic Soviet leader Joseph IRELAND ( U S S R ) B RITA IN Sea LITHUANIA Stalin urged Britain Kiev Gdansk AT L A N T I C NETHERLANDS and the United London Battle of Britain Berlin P O LA ND Stalingrad Amsterdam Aug.–Oct.,1940 States to invade OCEAN Aug.,1942– Jan.,1943 G E RMA NY Warsaw D-Day BELGIUM Nazi-occupied Prague June 6,1944 SLOVAKIA Battle of the Bulge France in 1943. Churchill Paris Dec.,1944 – Jan.,1945 Bay of and FDR refused. Britain Munich HUNGARY Biscay SWITZERLAND worried about repeatF RA NCE Budapest ROMANIA Yalta ing the trench stalemate Belgrade Black Sea of World War I, while YUGOSLAVIA Bucharest I S PA I N T A the Americans BULGARIA L Madrid

Istanbul


Y


Rome
 GREECE

Ankara
T U R K E Y


Athens
Casablanca


Oran
SYRI A

 MOROCCO

Mediterranean Sea
 ALGERIA

 LEBANON

I RAQ


Crete


Tripoli


PALESTINE TRANSJORDAN

EG Y P T L I B YA

View the Map Interactive Map: World War II in Europe


 Why did the Western Allies attack the Axis powers first in Italy, rather than France?



 CHAPTER 23

23.16 General
 MacArthur’s Return to the Philippines MacArthur used the press to publicize his return to the Philippines in 1944. Military photographers captured his purposeful stride ashore, and that evening MacArthur proclaimed in a radio address, “People of the Philippines: I have returned … Rally to me.”

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

 public square in Milan, where resistance fighters had been executed. In 1943, the Western Allies launched the first major incendiary attack of the war. The bombing raids on Hamburg, a major industrial German city and port, ignited a firestorm in the hot, dry conditions that killed 45,000 people and wounded nearly 40,000. Germany’s aerial attacks during the Battle of Britain in 1940–1941 had hardened British views about bombing German civilians, while the Americans preferred trying to hit actual military and industrial installations. Dresden, home to key railroad lines, was the site of another devastating incendiary bombing raid in February 1945, which killed approximately 35,000 Germans. Although many American bombs failed to hit their precisely designated industrial or military targets, in fighting Germany, the United States never formally adopted terror bombing, the strategy of dropping high concentrations of bombs on civilian populations to create panic and misery. In November 1943, FDR and Churchill met with Stalin for the first time in Tehran, the capital of Iran, to discuss Allied strategy for the coming year. During the conference FDR privately described Stalin as “altogether quite impressive,” and the president stayed in the Soviet Embassy to build a good rapport with the Soviet leader. Churchill remained leery of Soviet intentions to expand its influence into Eastern Europe after the war. The Soviet victory at Stalingrad (January–February 1943), a pivotal battle that put the Allies on the path to victory, buoyed optimism that the tide had turned in Russia’s favor on the Eastern Front. Within a few months, the Soviets would

 How did the tide gradually turn in favor of the Allies in Europe and the Pacific?

 also end a 900-day German siege of Leningrad that lasted from September 1941–January 1944. Churchill wanted to forestall a Soviet takeover of Eastern Europe by launching an Anglo-American invasion of the Balkans through the Adriatic Sea. FDR doubted that Americans would support such a campaign, when the nation’s traditional interest lay in defending Britain and France. He was also reluctant to send American troops into a region that the USSR clearly intended to dominate after the war. The president was wary of antagonizing the Soviet Union, when he still hoped to convince Stalin to declare war against Japan once the European war ended. Instead, the United States persuaded Britain to join it in an invasion of France in 1944. The campaign in the Pacific followed a similar strategy of attacking Japan in the “soft underbelly” of its empire in the South Pacific. The Americans opened this campaign with successful, but difficult attacks on Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands and on New Guinea. In early 1943, Japan accepted its defeat in the South Pacific by withdrawing its fleet and aircraft to a new defensive line that extended through Southeast Asia, the Philippines, and the Mariana Islands. To keep up the pressure on Japan, the Americans launched a two-pronged attack on Japanese forces in the Central and South Pacific. From the Central Pacific the Americans hoped to establish a naval blockade that cut Japan off from supplies in the south. The United States quickly took the Gilbert and Marshall Islands. During the subsequent invasion of the island of Saipan in the Marianas, the Americans destroyed so many Japanese naval aircraft in the Battle of the Philippine Sea (June 19–20, 1944) that the battle became known as “the Great Marianas Turkey Shoot.” The final capture of the Marianas in August 1944 put the United States, armed with massive and heavily-loaded B-29s that could travel up to 2,000 miles, within striking distance of Japan. “I shall return,” General Douglas MacArthur had proclaimed when FDR ordered him to head to Australia and leave his troops on the Philippines in 1942. On October 20, 1944, he fulfilled this promise by wading ashore in the Leyte Gulf four hours after the first American force landed in a carefully choreographed act

ON THE FRONT LINES

 that MacArthur insisted on filming several times to get just right. To build morale and enhance his reputation as a fearless leader, MacArthur presented himself as part of the invasion force, a general who was willing to get his boots wet and resolutely press forward, as seen in this photo (23.16). The Battle of Leyte Gulf (October 23–25, 1944), the largest naval battle in history, ended with an American victory. It took until July 1945, however, to completely liberate the Philippines from isolated infantry garrisons. With the war advancing well in the Pacific, Americans began to feel optimistic about achieving a swift victory. These hopes faded, however, when Japan switched from fighting a strategic war to waging a war of attrition. Mounting losses, Japan’s leaders reasoned, would force the United States to the negotiating table. With conventional weapons like ships, guns, and planes in short supply, Japan introduced suicidal battlefield tactics on land and sea in the fall of 1944, intensifying the struggle. In the western Caroline Islands, Japanese soldiers fought to the last man. Forcing the Americans to rout out every enemy soldier from an interlocking system of caves and bunkers prolonged the battle and raised American casualties. During the Battle of Leyte Gulf,

 the first kamikaze pilots plowed their planes into six American ships, setting off a cascade of explosions from the ships’ gasoline and ordnance that damaged five and sank one. A month later seaman James Fahey was on a ship under attack. The sailors battled for hours, shooting down a steady stream of incoming aircraft. “The explosions were terrific as the suicide planes exploded in the water … the water looked like it was on fire,” Fahey wrote in his diary. Parts of the destroyed planes fell onto his ship, and during a lull in the action, the sailors sifted through the debris for souvenirs. “The deck near my mount was covered with blood, guts, brains, tongues, scalps, hearts, arms etc. from the Jap pilots,” Fahey recalled. He watched men select body parts to preserve in alcohol and send home to relatives. Soldiers involved in the Pacific island–hopping campaigns exhibited a similar macabre interest in collecting Japanese soldiers’ body parts. In May 1944, Life magazine published “A Wartime Souvenir,” showing an attractive young woman writing a thank-you note to her fiancé for sending her a souvenir Japanese skull (23.17). “The armed forces disapprove strongly of this sort of thing,” Life noted. Yet the image of this woman calmly contemplating her war trophy elicited no controversy. Instead, many Americans exorcised their own desire for revenge against Japan through such images. The press had to handle photographs of American war dead more carefully (see Images as History: Combat Photography, page 706).



23.17 “A Wartime
Souvenir”
In 1944, Life
 magazine chose this photo as its picture of the week. The young woman’s fiancé sent her a Japanese skull with an inscription that read: “This is a good Jap—a dead one picked up on the New Guinea beach.” Collecting enemy body parts as war trophies was common among American troops fighting Japan, but not in the European theater.

The Final Push in Europe
 On June 6, 1944, the Allies launched D-Day (for “debarkation day”), their long-anticipated invasion of Normandy, in northern France, under the command of General Dwight D. Eisenhower. “The eyes of the world are upon you,” the popular leader told his troops. Eisenhower, raised in a poor Jehovah Witness family in Kansas, became a national hero for his successful planning and execution of the D-Day invasions and subsequent offensives through France and Germany. His achievements and sunny personality would make him an appealing postwar presidential candidate in 1952 (see Chapter 24). Although stormy weather made traversing the English Channel treacherous, and the Americans

 What do media images of the Japanese suggest about American wartime culture?



 CHAPTER 23

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

Images as History
COMBAT PHOTOGRAPHY
War photography brings the realities of combat into the homes of ordinary citizens. How do pictures of combat force viewers to think about the overall meaning and worthiness of the conflict? For the first year and a half of American involvement, when there was little good news to report, the military believed that photographs of dead American soldiers would weaken morale on the home front. In 1943, Allied victories in the South Pacific and North Africa raised spirits at home— perhaps a bit too much for some officials. Aware of the long road ahead and the need for continued civilian sacrifice, the War Department approved the dissemination of bloody battlefield photographs. In September 1943, Life published a photograph of three American soldiers lying partially buried in the sand in New Guinea. In the accompanying editorial Life anticipated the public’s shock at seeing the first photograph of American war dead. “Why print this picture, anyway, of three American boys dead upon an alien shore? Is it to hurt people? To be morbid?” Life editors wrote. “Those are not the answers. The reason is that words are never enough.” Magazine editors chose their images from an ever-increasing supply of casualty pictures. Twothirds of the 291,557 American troops killed in battle during the war died in 1944–1945. Photographer Joe Rosenthal’s “Old Glory Goes Up on Mt. Suribachi, Iwo Jima,” a candid shot of five marines and one navy corpsman raising a flag on the Pacific Island of Iwo Jima on February 23, 1945, remains the most famous image from World War II. Rosenthal’s Pulitzer Prize– winning photograph would inspire a Marine Corps statue, erected in Washington, D.C., in 1954. 
 Military censors forbade publication of photographs containing identifiable war dead or badly mutilated corpses, worried that such pictures might depress morale on the home front.

•


“Publication of
 photos showing some of our boys killed in action had a sobering effect on people and brought the realities of war closer to home,” a satisfied War Department official noted.

•


Here Lie Three Americans,” 1943.


 The image of six men working together to push the flag upright conveyed the teamwork necessary to defeat Japan, and that the uphill struggle to victory was not over.

•


•
 Three of the marines in Rosenthal’s photograph died in the ensuing battle. The others returned home and toured the country in an overwhelmingly successful war bond campaign.

 How did the political and military situation influence the way Americans viewed these photographs?

 Critics later accused Rosenthal of staging this photo, a charge he denied.

•


“Old Glory Goes Up on Mount Suribachi, Iwo Jima,” 1945.


View the Closer Look Images as History: Combat
Photography


ON THE FRONT LINES

 faced fierce German resistance on Omaha Beach, one of five landing points, the D-Day invasion was an overwhelming success. The heavy buildup for the attack, involving 175,000 troops, 6,000 aircraft, and 6,000 naval vessels, made complete surprise impossible. But the Allies had increased the invasion’s chances of success by deceiving the Germans into expecting the attack to come elsewhere. Diversionary bombing, false agent reports, and misleading radio communications convinced the Germans to station most of their first-rate infantry divisions farther north. Hitler continued to hold these units and his crack tank formations in reserve even after the D-Day invasion began, certain that the Normandy landings were just a diversion. The German delay in responding gave the Allies the time they needed to establish a beachhead that stretched for 55 miles by the end of the first day. Life photographer Robert Capa hit the beaches with the troops, living up to his famous statement, “If your pictures aren’t good enough, you aren’t close enough.” Anxious to see Capa’s photographs, a rushing darkroom technician used too much heat to dry the film and inadvertently melted nearly all his images. The excessive heat blurred the remaining few, creating a surreal aura to this instantly iconic image (23.18) of an American soldier struggling through the turbulent surf to reach the shore. Capa put down his camera long enough to pull this soldier to safety after a bullet struck him in the right shoulder. It was still a long way from Normandy to Berlin, however. After two more months of hard fighting, the Allies finally began to push forward. On August 15, 1944, the Americans launched a second invasion through the south of France. Within a month these troops had joined with the Normandy invasion forces to establish a continuous Allied front from the English Channel to the German frontier. But Hitler had no intention of going down without a fight. In December 1944, the Germans launched a massive counteroffensive. The Battle of the Bulge, so named for the Germans’ pocket of penetration into Allied lines, was the most massive battle fought by the American Army in Europe. Fighting in the snow and bitter cold, the Allies suffered 77,000 casualties before halting the German counterattack a month later.

View the Image Operation Overlord, Normandy (1944)




 “Two kinds of people are staying on this beach, the dead and those who are going to die.” Colonel GEORGE TAYLOR, urging his dazed troops forward on Omaha Beach during the 1944 D-Day invasions

 When Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin met again in February 1945 at Yalta, a town in the Crimea on Russia’s Black Sea coast, to discuss their next step, Roosevelt was fresh off an unprecedented fourthterm victory in the 1944 presidential election. The Republican candidate Thomas Dewey, a popular New York State governor, had attacked Roosevelt as a “tired old man” no longer up to the challenge of running the war. Roosevelt solidified support within the Democratic Party by replacing the controversial liberal Henry Wallace with Harry S. Truman, a straight-talking moderate senator from Missouri, as his vice-presidential candidate. The selection of an acceptable vice-presidential candidate was important to Democratic Party bosses who feared that the ill Roosevelt might not live to complete a fourth term in office. Suffering from advancing heart disease and the strain of war, Roosevelt nevertheless displayed renewed energy during the campaign, convincing Americans not to “change horses in mid-stream.” He won 432 to 99 votes in the Electoral College, receiving 54 percent of the popular vote.

23.18 D-Day
Invasion, 1944
 Robert Capa’s grainy photograph conveyed the chaos and danger American soldiers faced when they hit the beaches in Normandy, France.

 Why did the Allies prevail on D-Day?



 CHAPTER 23

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

 At Yalta the larger question of how to defeat Germany was behind the Allies. The issues now on the table included governing postwar Germany, ensuring victory over Japan, and maintaining peace in the postwar world. At the conference FDR secured a Soviet promise to enter the war against Japan three months after Germany capitulated. In return Stalin wanted the United States and Britain to grant the Soviet Union territorial concessions in Japan, China, and eastern Poland. For the moment FDR acceded to Soviet control of Eastern Europe, but secured a pledge from Stalin, never honored, to hold free elections in a liberated Poland. The decision at Yalta to name the United States, Britain, France, China, and the USSR as permanent members of the proposed United Nations Security Council, each with the power to veto any resolution, cleared the way to officially create a United Nations (UN) to replace the defunct League of Nations. Delegates from 50 nations met in San Francisco between April 25 and June 26, 1945, to found the UN, an international organization that offered nations a place to discuss their differences and collectively promote economic development and peace throughout the world. To ensure that the United States joined the UN, its creators made participation in UN-peacekeeping missions voluntary. The Security Council veto also gave the United States (and the other major powers) a way to control UN activities. In contrast to World War I, when it failed to join the League of Nations, the United States was one of the first countries to join the UN, which built its headquarters in New York City. Now unstoppable in Europe, the Allies crossed the Rhine River into Germany in March. On April 30, 1945, Hitler committed suicide in a bunker 55 feet underground in Berlin. After dictating his will and marrying his longtime companion Eva Braun, Hitler bit into a cyanide capsule and shot himself in the head. Two days later Russian soldiers entered the bunker and took Hitler’s burned remains, so an autopsy could confirm he was dead. Germany surrendered unconditionally on May 7, 1945.

 America’s Response to the Holocaust In spring 1945, Allied troops began liberating the concentration camps holding Jews, Poles, prisoners of war, and other groups that the Nazis considered enemies or racially inferior. News of the Final Solution, Hitler’s plan to systematically murder the Jews

 and other “lesser” peoples, first reached the West in August 1942. Along with ten other nations, the United States condemned “in the strongest possible terms this bestial policy of cold-blooded extermination.” During the war mainstream American newspapers, fearful of reporting falsified atrocity stories amid a glut of war news, had published little about the Holocaust, the term used to describe this Naziengineered extermination. The United States did little initially to aid European Jews. In January 1944, however, Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau, who was Jewish, protested to FDR that antiSemitism within the State Department had thwarted a plan to ransom 70,000 Romanian Jews with private funds, leaving the United States open to charges that it was acquiescing in the “murder of the Jews.” FDR immediately issued an executive order establishing the War Refugee Board (WRB). Over the next year the WRB saved approximately 200,000 lives by convincing Romania and Hungary to stop deporting Jews and by helping Jews and other victims of Nazi persecution escape or survive in hiding. Envisioning Evidence: Deciphering the Holocaust depicts both the response of the United States to the Holocaust and the scope of German atrocities. Pressed by Jewish groups to undertake a dramatic rescue of Europe’s Jews by bombing either the concentration camps or the railroads leading to them, Roosevelt demurred. He argued that any diversion of military resources from the ultimate goal of winning the war would only prolong the Jews’ suffering. In February 1944 the War Department decided not to send armed forces to rescue “victims of enemy oppression unless such rescues are the direct result of military operations conducted with the objective of defeating the armed forces of the enemy.” Bombing Auschwitz, the main Nazi extermination camp in Poland, became a real possibility only in the summer of 1944. In August Allied planes dropped more than 1,000 bombs on synthetic-oil plants less than 5 miles from Auschwitz. Whether the Allies should have also bombed the gas chambers has provoked heated debate since the war. Advocates argue that destroying the railroad lines leading to Auschwitz or its gas chambers would have slowed down the killing as liberating Allied troops approached the camps, perhaps saving as many as 100,000 Jews. These would have included Anne Frank, a 13-year-old German refugee who was sent to Auschwitz after her family’s capture in Amsterdam and whose journal of her experience in hiding, The Diary of Anne Frank, became a postwar literary classic. Detractors note the Nazi

 What significant decisions were reached at the 1945 Yalta Conference?

ON THE FRONT LINES



Envisioning Evidence
DECIPHERING THE HOLOCAUST
Over-simplifications about the Holocaust depict German Jews as the main victims of Hitler’s Final Solution and the United States primarily as liberators. As the graph shows, most of the six million Jews who died in the Holocaust were Poles. The Germans also killed over three million Soviet prisoners of war, two million nonJewish Poles, nearly 200,000 disabled individuals, 10,000 Jehovah Witnesses, and an undetermined number of homosexuals and Roma or Gypsies. The timeline reveals that during the Depression-plagued 1930s the United States reacted cautiously to Hitler’s persecution of the Jews. Nonetheless, of all nations, the United States still accepted the largest number of Jewish refugees fleeing Nazi persecution. The map marks the major concentration camps that American ground troops liberated in Western Europe, including Buchenwald, Dachau, and Mauthausen, forced labor camps and detention centers where thousands were “worked to death,” starved, executed, and subjected to medical experiments. The Soviet army liberated the extermination camps, including Auschwitz, all located in Eastern Europe. 
Liberation of Major Nazi Camps, 1944-1945
 SWEDEN

Baltic
Sea


 DENMARK

North
Sea


Neuengamme
May 1945
Westerbork
April 1945
Bergen-Belsen
April 1945
Salzwedel
April 1945
Dora-Mittelbau
April 1945


Stutthof
May 1945


Woebbelin
May 1945
Ravensbrueck
April 1945
Sachsenhausen
April 1945


 POLAND

Buchenwald
April 1945


Majdanek
July 1945


Gross-Rosen
February 1945


Ohrdruf
April 1945
Thereslenstadt
Auschwitz
Ghetto
Flossenbuerg
January 1945
April 1945
Gunskirchen
May 1945
Mauthausen
Dachau
SLOVAKIA
May 1945 April 1945 Gusen May 1945 Ebensee Landsberg May 1945 April 1945 
GERMANY FRANCE

 SWITZ.

 ITALY

 AUSTRIA

 HUNGARY

 Camps liberated by the United States Camps liberated by Great Britain/Canada Camps liberated by the Soviet Union May 1945 Date of liberation

 “I have gotten rid of the Jews.” Adolf Hitler, 1944 Jews in the Holocaust POLAND

3,000,000 / 225,000
SOVIET UNION

1,000,000 / 300,000


200,000 / 300,000


 HUNGARY

 GERMANY

160,000 / 330,000


 FRANCE

 ITALY

83,000 / 200,000
 Jews killed in WWII Jews surviving at end of WWII

8,000 / 35,000


America and the Holocaust
 Herbert Hoover tightens immigration restrictions during GreatDepression

 U.S. aircraft within striking distance of Auschwitz

 St. Louis, a ship carrying Jewish refugees without visas, refused entry

 Increased leniency in granting visas as life worsens for Jews in Germany

After Krystallnacht
 (Night of Broken Glass) attacks against Jews, FDR allows 15,000 Germans and Austrian Jewish visitors to stay in the United States





1938–1941
 200,000 Jewish refugees come to the United States

View the Closer Look Envisioning Evidence: Deciphering the Holocaust


Allies try Nazi
 officials for genocide in Nuremberg Trials

United States
 learns of Final Solution

 American soldiers liberate camps

 What insights do this data offer on the scope of the Holocaust and the American response?



 CHAPTER 23

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

 “The wrongs which we seek to condemn and punish have been so calculated, so malignant, and so devastating, that civilization cannot tolerate their being ignored, because it cannot survive their being repeated.” American prosecutor, Supreme Court Justice ROBERT JACKSON, in opening the Nuremberg War Crimes Trials

23.19 German
Civilians Viewing
Corpses in a
Concentration
Camp
Photographs
 from liberated concentration camps, like this one from Buchenwald, Germany, shocked the world. American military commanders forced German civilians, who professed ignorance about the atrocities, to view and bury the dead.

 determination to use any means possible to slaughter the Jews, including mass executions by firing squads and forced marches, until the very end of the war. As the camps were liberated, reporters tried through words and pictures to convey how six million Jews had met their deaths. Even though Americans had grown accustomed to seeing photos of war dead, nothing prepared them for images from the concentration camps. American commanders invited the press into the camps to head off denials over the scope of the Holocaust and Nazi atrocities. Photographs of concentration camps were, one reporter wrote, “so horrible that no newspaper normally would use them, but they were less horrible than the reality.” Soldiers set themselves up as witnesses (a term used to describe both survivors

 How did images instruct Americans about the meaning of the Holocaust and their role as liberators?

 and liberators) who could personally vouch for the extent of the horrors by posing in photographs before piles of corpses and skeletal survivors. “You can photograph results of suffering but never suffering itself,” observed one British politician. By documenting the act of discovering Nazi atrocities, witness photographs helped Americans share the horror that soldiers felt. The American military also posted photographs of concentration camp atrocities in German towns and villages for civilians to see, but many American commanders went further. In the photo shown here (23.19), American soldiers assembled German civilians before a truckload of corpses to listen to a lecture on the barbarity. Forcing German civilians to view the carnage with their own eyes, and in some cases to bury the bodies, was part of a deliberate Allied campaign to make all Germans accept responsibility for their nation’s war crimes. After the war the Allies jointly tried 22 Nazi leaders in the Nuremberg War Crimes Trials. In these trials individual Germans were charged with starting the war, authorizing the killing of prisoners of war, and orchestrating the wartime genocide against victims, who mostly came from nations occupied by Germany (see the “Jews in the Holocaust” chart, page 709). The United States independently tried thousands of other German officials as well. These trials were not enough to calm the fears of survivors. Many left Europe to resettle elsewhere.

Watch the Video Nazi Murder Mills


ENDING THE PACIFIC WAR



Ending the Pacific War
 Germany was now under Allied control, but in the Pacific the war raged on. There the fighting took a desperate turn in 1945, and each victory cost the United States dearly. Despite a mounting death toll, American troops edged closer to Japan, and officials began planning an invasion of the Japanese mainland. News of a successful atomic bomb test in the New Mexico desert dramatically altered political and military calculations on how to achieve victory. Employing this new, terrible weapon eventually generated conflicting views within the United States over the ethics of atomic warfare.

 from harassing B-29s headed to Japan and to provide emergency landing fields for American pilots brought the war home to the crippled planes returning from mainland Japanese people from new air bases in the bombing raids. In their conquest of CHINA R U S S took I A only 216 Marianas. When the bombing campaign began Iwo Jima, the Americans HOKKAIDO in earnest in the Pacific theater in 1945, the prisoners out of 21,000 enemy troops, United States quickly abandoned efforts to difthe rest perishing in the fighting. As Muroran ferentiate between civilian and military targets the marines shot flamethrowers into as it had in Germany. “There are no civilians in caves to flush out enemy soldiers, “the Japan,” declared one air force official. “We are scene became wild and terrible,” one Aomori making War and making it in the all-out fashcorrespondent recalled. “More Japs ion which saves American lives, shortens the S e athe o fcaves. rushed screaming from agony which War is, and seeks to bring about They tumbled over the rocks, Japan Kamaishi an enduring peace.” The United States targeted their clothes and bodies burn67 Japanese cities for incendiary bombing in ing fiercely.” The capture of Sendai 1945, resulting in the destruction of 187 square Okinawa, needed as a stagSado miles and approximately 300,000 deaths ( 23.20). ing area for the invasion J A PA N During one night raid the entire city of Toyama of Japan, was equally HONSHU Hitachi burned to the ground. The most destructive air KOREA bloody. Weeks of attack of the war came on March 9–10, 1945, Tokyo Oki Choshi Fukui when incendiary bombs ignited fires in Tokyo Hiroshima Nagoya Kawasaki August 6, 1945 that American bombers kept going by spreading Kobe gasoline and chemicals over the city. This atYokohama Shimonoseki Hamamatsu Osaka tack destroyed 16 square miles and killed nearly PA C I F I C Yawata 90,000 Japanese—more than would perish from Matsuyama Fukuoka OCEAN the atomic bomb blast over Hiroshima five 200 km SHIKOKU Sasebo months later. 200 miles Japan’s use of “cave and bunker” tactics on Major firebomb attacks (25–50% of city destroyed) land and kamikazes at sea dramatically raised KYUSHU Firebomb attacks the cost of capturing Iwo Jima (February Nagasaki Atomic bomb attacks 19–March 26, 1945) and Okinawa (April 1–June August 9, 1945 Minelaying operations 21, 1945), the last two islands left to be taken before the United States could invade the Japanese homeland. Battles on Iwo Jima and Okinawa produced some of the toughest fighting of 23.20 Attacking Japan In 1945, American firebomb attacks destroyed 67 Japanese the war. cities, while extensive mining of major waterways severely The Americans coveted the seven-mile reduced trade. Millions of Japanese civilians were homeless porkchop–shaped island of Iwo Jima for its and starving by the time the United States dropped two atomic airstrips, both to stop Japanese fighter planes bombs in August.

Edging Closer to Japan


 What new tactics raised the death toll in the Pacific war?



 CHAPTER 23

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

 kamikaze attacks alone killed 5,000 sailors, while ground troops squared off against an entrenched enemy determined to fight to the last man. As on Iwo Jima vast numbers of Japanese soldiers (70,000) perished on Okinawa. In this battle, however, an equal number of Japanese civilians either killed themselves (they had been told of mass rape and torture if taken prisoner) or were killed by Japanese soldiers if they tried to surrender. The Americans suffered 75,000 casualties in capturing Okinawa. With the actual invasion of the Japanese homeland targeted next, the Americans feared facing, in the words of Harry Truman, “an Okinawa from one end of Japan to the other.”

Dropping the Atomic Bomb
 Franklin D. Roosevelt died at the age of 65 of a cerebral hemorrhage on April 12, 1945, while at his cottage in Warm Springs, Georgia. Throngs of mourners lined railroad tracks and streets as the casket holding his remains traveled first to Washington, D.C., for funeral services in the White House and then to his final resting spot at his home in Hyde Park, New York. Many Americans could barely remember a time when FDR had not been president. Roosevelt’s firm grip on power had kept Vice President Harry Truman in the dark about the four-year, $20 billion Manhattan Project, the code-named secret government research program to produce the atomic bomb. Thrust into the presidency, Truman faced critical strategic decisions in Europe and the Pacific, none more important than what to do with the new atomic bomb. In mid-July 1945, the United States exploded its first atomic bomb in the New Mexico desert. Choices and Consequences: How to Use the Atomic Bomb traces Truman’s options and the consequences of his decision to use the bomb against Japan. On August 6, 1945, a B-29 bomber christened the Enola Gay dropped an atomic bomb on the Japanese city of Hiroshima. As pilot Captain Paul Tibbets turned the Enola Gay away from Hiroshima, Sergeant George Caron snapped seven photographs, giving Americans their first look at the telltale mushroom cloud that came to signify nuclear annihilation. Three days later, acting on a standing order to use the atomic bomb “as made ready,” a second atomic bomb was dropped on Nagasaki.

 How did the war against Japan finally end?

 Saved from firebomb attacks because of their minimal military value, Hiroshima and Nagasaki presented virgin ground for a clear demonstration of the bomb’s force. The United States wanted to make a profound impression on the Japanese. Secretary of War Stimson believed “the atomic bomb was more than a weapon of terrible destruction; it was a psychological weapon.” The firebombed ruins of cities like Tokyo, therefore, presented a much less appealing target for demonstrating the full power of a nuclear bomb. American soldiers scheduled to take part in the planned invasion gave little thought to civilian victims. “When we learned to our astonishment that we would not be obliged in a few months to rush up the beaches near Tokyo assault-firing while being machine-gunned, mortared, and shelled, for all the practiced phlegm of our tough facades we broke down and cried with relief and joy. We were going to live. We were going to grow to adulthood after all,” recalled literary critic Paul Fussell in a 1988 essay, “Thank God for the Atom Bomb.”

The Final Surrender
 Truman and his advisers recognized that American possession of the atomic bomb would reshape postwar relations between the United States and the Soviet Union. To key presidential advisers, America’s nuclear monopoly increased the chances of limiting Soviet influence over Eastern Europe and ending the Pacific war without Soviet help. Spies in the Manhattan Project had already alerted Moscow of the bomb’s existence, before Truman finally told Stalin in July 1945 at the Potsdam Conference, held near Berlin, that the United States had developed a potent new weapon. When the first bomb destroyed Hiroshima, the Soviets quickly invaded Manchuria on August 8 to seize their planned territorial objectives before the war ended. By August 10, the combination of two atomic bomb blasts and the Soviet entry into the war caused Japanese Emperor Hirohito to take the unprecedented step of imposing his own views on official policy. Traditionally the emperor simply approved decisions taken by his cabinet. With the peace and militarist factions within his government still divided over whether to make a last stand against the Allies, Hirohito decided for peace. After key military leaders accepted the emperor’s wishes, Japan sued for peace with the condition that the Imperial Institution remain

ENDING THE PACIFIC WAR



Choices and Consequences
HOW TO USE THE ATOMIC BOMB
President Harry Truman considered the bomb a legitimate weapon to use alongside the more conventional tactics of terror bombing, an economic blockade, and a planned invasion of Japan. He did, however, face four choices over how to exploit this new weapon to meet his goals of securing an unconditional surrender from Japan, saving American lives, and establishing American postwar supremacy over the Soviet Union. 
Choices




Demonstrate the
 bomb’s destructive power in a trial blast on an uninhabited area to convince Japan to surrender.



 Drop one atomic bomb and give Japan time to react.



 Drop the two atomic bombs America had developed.



Inform the Soviet
 Union about the bomb before dropping it.

Decision
 Truman chose to drop both atomic bombs on virgin sites in Japan to magnify the psychological shock of one bomb causing so much destruction. Senior advisers rejected a test demonstration of the bomb as impractical. Truman vaguely informed Stalin of “a new weapon of unusual destructive force,” unaware that spies in the Manhattan Project had already alerted Stalin of the bomb’s existence.

Consequences
 On August 6, 1945, “Little Boy,” the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima, destroyed three-fourths of the city and killed 80,000 people instantly. “Fat Man” destroyed two-fifths of Nagasaki and killed 35,000 people on August 9. The Emperor announced Japan’s surrender on August 14. Truman’s attempted secrecy increased Soviet distrust of the United States and unleashed a nuclear arms race between the two nations.

Continuing Controversies
 Should the United States have dropped the bomb? Supporters of Truman’s decision claim that dropping the bomb ended the war. It saved one million American lives by making an invasion of Japan unnecessary and convinced the Japanese government to end the war. Not all supporters, however, agree that the second bomb on Nagasaki was militarily necessary. Critics counter that the bomb was not needed to end the war. Traditional bombing, the blockade, and the Soviet invasion of Manchuria would have ended the war without the planned invasion, they claim. Because the United States accepted a modified surrender that allowed Japan to retain the Emperor, abandoning the demand for unconditional surrender earlier may have convinced Japan to surrender sooner. Finally, some detractors accuse Truman of using the bomb mainly to curtail Soviet territorial ambitions in postwar Europe and Asia. Bomb over Nagasaki, 1945

Watch the Video Atomic Bomb at Hiroshima


 Why does so much controversy surround the dropping the atomic bomb and not conventional weapons?



 CHAPTER 23

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

 intact. Truman agreed, thereby modifying the original goal of unconditional surrender. Could a Japanese surrender have come sooner if the United States had guaranteed the emperor’s office earlier? Before August 6, Truman likened keeping Hirohito to allowing Hitler to remain in power, and he believed that the American people would never accept these terms for peace. In mid-August, however, Truman concluded that letting Hirohito tell the Japanese people to lay down their arms would facilitate the occupation of Japan. Hirohito paved the way for a peaceful surrender, when he addressed the Japanese people on the radio for the first time ever, calling on them to accept his decision. Many of his subjects did not understand Hirohito’s formal Court language, illustrating the social distance

23.21 The Human
Cost of Global War
 Worldwide wartime casualties, those killed and wounded, numbered in the millions.

 maintained between the emperor and his subjects. The formal surrender took place on September 2 aboard the battleship Missouri in Tokyo Bay, attended by delegates from Japan and the Allied nations. The deadliest war in human history, whose death toll is charted in “The Human Cost of Global War” (23.21), had finally ended. When news of the Japanese surrender hit the United States, Americans swarmed into the streets to celebrate the good news. “Every female was grabbed and kissed by men in uniform,” recalled one woman who joined the crowd in Times Square, New York City. The celebrants included a sailor whose impromptu kiss with a passing nurse was captured by Life photographer Alfred Eisenstaedt. The candid shot, “Kiss in Times Square,” became known as “the smack seen round

16,112,566
UNITED STATES

291,557


 NONE

THE ALLIED COUNTRIES

SOVIET UNION

14,500,000


20,000,000


 7,000,000 (approximate numbers) 1,000,000 POLAND

850,000
5,778,000
5,600,000


 FRANCE

210,671
173,260
4,600,000


 BRITAIN

271,311
60,595


10,800,000


THE AXIS COUNTRIES

 GERMANY

2,850,000
2,300,000
7,400,000


 JAPAN

1,506,000
 Troops mobilized

300,000
 Battlefield casualties

4,500,000
 ITALY

279,820
93,000


 How might this distribution of wartime casualties have shaped the postwar world?

 Civilian casualties

ENDING THE PACIFIC WAR



23.22 Kiss in Times
Square, 1945
 Jubilation greeted the news that Japan had surrendered. Two strangers shared a passionate kiss in Times Square, conveying the lifeaffirming energy that filled the air.

 the world” (23.22). Eisenstaedt never revealed the identity of the kissing couple, preferring to let their shielded faces symbolize the exuberance of young men and women who had survived the war. Three nurses and eleven sailors later claimed that they were the individuals in the photograph. Hirohito was not tried as a war criminal, but the Allies intended to punish other Japanese leaders. In the few weeks between the Japanese surrender and the Allied occupation of Japan, more than 1,000 officials and officers committed suicide and others destroyed thousands of documents concerning Japanese mistreatment of prisoners

 of war and massacres of civilians in occupied countries. Nonetheless, the Allies convicted thousands of Japanese in war crimes trials throughout East Asia, including 28 major Japanese leaders in Tokyo. Combat, genocide, and terror bombing took millions of lives during World War II. Americans could rightly see themselves as having both suffered and caused the war’s deadly violence. The United States emerged from World War II as a military superpower, with new moral and strategic reasons to stay engaged in world affairs after its victories against Germany and Japan.

 Why did this photo become an iconic image of World War II?



 CHAPTER 23

WORLD WAR II: FIGHTING THE GOOD WAR, 1939–1945

Vladivostok


M
A


 OLIA

Baltic
Sea


N


 Toyama JAPAN Hiroshima Tokyo August 6, 1945

Beijing


March 1945


Seoul


Yellow
Sea


C H I N A


Nanjing


Nagasaki
August 9, 1945


 on NETHERLANDS Berlin P O LA ND Amsterdam LGIUM G ER MAN Y Warsaw Prague is

Shanghai
Okinawa
April–June,1945


 LITHUANIA

Gdansk


 MANCHUKUO

SLOVAKIA
Battle of the Bulge Dec.,1944–Jan.,1945 
Munich
 CE

 SWITZERLAND

Iwo Jima
Feb.–Ma


 HUNGARY

Budapest
Belgrade


 ROMANI









 Japan attacks China

 Germany invades Poland

 France falls to Germany

 Lend-Lease begins

 Initiates Japan’s expansionist drive in East Asia

Beginning of World War II


 Completes Hitler’s conquest of continental Western Europe

 Interventionist vision prevails as America offers economic aid to Allied side

 Neutrality Acts completed Restrictions on arms sales reflects strong non-interventionist sentiments

 Economic sanctions against Japan

CHAPTER REVIEW

 FDR attempts to halt Japanese aggression

 Japanese attack Pearl Harbor United States officially enters World War II

Review Questions
 1. What conflicting visions did Americans offer in response to the expansionist drives of Germany and Japan? How did these visions influence the American path to war?

 4. What strategic challenges and battlefield conditions did the United States face in the Pacific and European theaters? How did the United States prevail against Japan and Germany?

 2. How did visual images shape Americans’ views of the war and their enemies?

 5. Why did the United States drop the atomic bomb?

 3. How did the war affect racial, labor, and gender relations on the home front? What conflicting visions emerged?

Key Terms
 Non-interventionists Those urging the nation to stay out of overseas conflicts. Interventionists Those advocating direct engagement in overseas conflicts. Neutrality Acts A series of laws from 1935 to 1939 which restricted arms sales, loans, and transport of goods with nations at war. “Cash and carry” A policy that required belligerent nations to pay cash for goods and transport them on their own ships. Munich Conference (1938) Hoping to avoid war, Britain and France agreed to let Germany occupy the Sudetenland, a German-speaking part of Czechoslovakia. Axis Name for nations fighting the Allies, including Germany, Italy, and Japan.

 Allies (World War II) Name for powers fighting Germany, eventually including the United States, Britain, France, and the Soviet Union. Lend-Lease A policy that circumvented “cash and carry” by loaning rather than selling arms to the Allies. Pearl Harbor A U.S. naval base in Hawaii that the Japanese attacked on December 7, 1941. Internment camps Camps in the United States that held people of Japanese descent under armed guard in isolated areas. Manhattan Project Code-named secret U.S. government research program to produce the atomic bomb.

CHAPTER REVIEW









 FDR issues Executive Order 9066

 D-Day landings

 American troops enter concentration camps

 Germany surrenders

 Published images confirm German atrocities

 United States drops atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki

Creation of Japanese American
 internment camps

 Beginning of Anglo-American march to Berlin

 U.S. government learns of Final Solution

 Supreme Court upholds constitutionality of internment camps

 Limited exposure of Hitler’s plan to exterminate the Jews

 Rules that national security outweighs civil rights

 FDR dies Harry Truman assumes presidency



End of European war


 Ends war in Pacific, initiates nuclear arms race

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of World War II.

Questions for Analysis
 1. What arguments did non-interventionists offer against entering World War II before Pearl Harbor?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • Franklin D. Roosevelt, “The Four Freedoms” (1941), p. 692

Read the Document Charles Lindbergh,


• Japanese Relocation Order, February 19, 1942, p. 694


Radio Address (1941), p. 689


A.
Philip Randolph, “Why Should We March” (1942), p. 699 • Jim Crow in the Army Camps, p. 700


 2. What values influenced the portrayal of female war workers?

View the Closer Look
• Competing Visions: Civil Liberties and National Security Clash, p. 696


View the Closer Look Images as History: “We Can
 Do It!” Visual Myths about Women’s Roles During World

• Images as History: Combat Photography, p. 706
• Envisioning Evidence: Deciphering the Holocaust, p. 709


War II, p. 697


View the Image Operation Overlord, Normandy (1944), p. 707


 3. How was childhood militarized during World War I? View the Image “Get in the Scrap” Poster, p. 698

View the Map
• Interactive Map: World War II, Pacific Theater, p. 702
• Interactive Map: World War II in Europe, p. 703


 4. Why did U.S. generals and German civilians visit the liberated concentration camps? Watch the Video Nazi Murder Mills, p. 710

 5. What message does this film convey about the atomic bomb? Watch the Video Atomic Bomb at Hiroshima, p. 713

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Hitler and Roosevelt, p. 687


 Which key foreign policy decisions shaped the early Cold War?

Fighting
Communism: Cold
 and Hot War p. 729

 What were the causes and outcome of the Korean War?

Spies in Our Midst
 p. 737

 How did the anti-communist crusade affect American politics and culture?

Averting Nuclear
War p. 742


How did the United States
 react to Soviet aggression in Berlin and Cuba?

 CHAPTER

Origins of the Cold
War p. 720




