 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 28

Righting a
Nation Adrift
 America in the 1970s and 1980s

 Why did presidents Ford and Carter lose public confidence?

The Rights
Revolution


 p. 858

 What debates emerged over gender identity and the environment?

The Rise of the
Right p. 866


 What constituencies united to form the New Right?

 The vision of the United States as a great and powerful nation suddenly seemed less assured in the 1970s. In 1973, a dispute between the U.S. and Arab nations led to an embargo that severely restricted oil imports. Gas stations across the nation posted signs like this one as they ran out of gas, dotting the American landscape with humiliating reminders that foreign nations could wreak havoc on the U.S. economy. Gas shortages also threatened the vision of America as a prosperous car culture, where it was the birthright of every citizen to work, live, and shop wherever they liked thanks to the freedom of movement that automobiles provided. To many Americans closed gas stations (which reappeared in 1979) were just one sign of a nation adrift. Domestic political scandals, a troubled economy, and lost international prestige made the future look dim. Americans lost confidence in the federal government in the 1970s as the Watergate scandal and cover-up brought down President Richard Nixon, and the post-World War II boom times finally ended, leaving high inflation and unemployment. Economic woes and troubles abroad hampered the efforts of presidents Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter to restore respect for the presidency. Americans did not agree over how to move the nation back onto the path of glory. Feminists and gays fought to extend the social justice campaigns of the 1960s, while the environmental movement focused America’s attention on conserving its natural heritage. A new and powerful conservative coalition, however, formed around a competing vision that focused on protecting traditional values, limiting the role of the government in the economy, and flexing the nation’s power overseas. In the 1980s, after two decades of grassroots activism, the conservative ascendancy was complete. When Ronald Reagan, a committed conservative, became president in 1981, he refused to accept that America had entered an age of limits. Reagan rejected the liberal vision and diagnosed government as part of the problem, not the solution to the nation’s economic woes. He also moved aggressively to restore America’s image as a world power. An immensely popular president, Reagan restored the nation’s confidence in the economy and the presidency, despite suffering political scandals of his own.

 “Government is not the solution to our problem; government is the problem.” President RONALD REAGAN, 1981





 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

Downturn and Scandal
 Americans enjoyed unprecedented prosperity in the 1950s and 1960s, and few expected the bubble to burst. By the 1970s, however, periodic recessions returned, a shocking development for a nation that had grown accustomed to a steadily improving standard of living. The political repercussions were significant. Still reeling from the cultural and civil rights upheavals of the 1960s, the nation’s new economic problems exacerbated the feeling that the country was adrift. The economic downturn, partly caused by turmoil overseas, coincided with a decade-long crisis of presidential leadership that began when political scandal enveloped the Nixon White House.

An Ailing Economy
 An ailing economy created the sense of a nation adrift by the 1970s. In the 1960s Lyndon Johnson had tried to pay for both the Vietnam War (see Chapter 26) and the Great Society programs (see Chapter 27) without raising taxes. Heavy governmental spending created both a ballooning federal deficit and, by pumping so much cash into the economy, inflation. The end of the Vietnam War added rising unemployment to the list of economic woes. Returning veterans entered a job market hit hard by the cancellation of government defense contracts that triggered massive layoffs in the industrial sector. Energy costs were also rising. Americans were six percent of the world’s population, but consumed nearly 40 percent of global energy resources. Due to increased U.S. reliance on Middle Eastern oil, the unending strife in the region affected the daily lives of Americans. The United States had offered Israel strong financial and moral support ever since the United Nations created a homeland for the Jewish people in 1947 by partitioning Palestine into Jewish and Palestinian areas. Israel claimed territory in Palestine as its ancestral land, a view supported by the United States, which also believed that the world owed the Jewish people reparation for the horrors of the Holocaust. To Arab nations, however, the arrival of Jewish immigrants perpetuated the history of hated Western colonization in the Middle East. Wars between neighboring Arab nations and Israel ensued (detailed on 28.1), and disputes over the fate of Palestinian refugees and Israeli land seizures continue to roil the region to this day.

 How did domestic energy needs affect U.S. foreign policy?

 Richard Nixon and subsequent presidents faced a thorny foreign policy dilemma in the Middle East. The U.S. government steadfastly supported Israel’s right to exist, but given America’s growing dependence on Middle Eastern oil, it could not afford to alienate oil-producing Arab nations. The Soviet push to form strong alliances in the Middle East also threatened to turn the oil-rich region into the new Cold War battlefield. In 1973, Egypt and Syria (both armed with Soviet-provided weapons) attacked Israel on Yom Kippur (Judaism’s holiest day) to regain territory lost to Israel in 1967. Nixon’s decision to send military aid to Israel enraged the Arab world. In retaliation the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), an international consortium of oil-producing nations that regulates the price and quantity of oil sold on the world market, announced an oil embargo of the United States. By this point the United States depended on the Middle East for 12 percent of the oil it consumed. The embargo lasted five months, enough time to ravage the American economy. OPEC finally lifted the embargo after Nixon persuaded Israel to withdraw from parts of Egyptian and Syrian territory seized during the Yom Kippur War. In 1974, the nation entered its worst recession since the Great Depression. In typical periods of recession and depression, high unemployment went hand in hand with declining prices and wages. In the 1930s, pumping more federal money into the economy through the New Deal did not end the Depression, but it eased unemployment and stabilized prices, so farmers and businessmen could make a profit. During the financial crisis of the

DOWNTURN AND SCANDAL



USSR USSR

C




 pi



 TURKMENISTAN

 an

S


 AZERBAIJAN

 ea

 GEORGIA



 as



Black Sea
 ARMENIA

 AFGHANISTAN

Tehran


Ankara




 TURKEY

I R A N




 SYRIA

Baghdad


IRAQ LEBANON

Mediterranean Sea




 KUWAIT





Pe


 ISRAEL

 rsi

 JORDAN



 an

BAHRAIN QATAR UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

 LIBYA

SAUDI ARABIA

 EGYPT



Riyadh


 Israel after partition of Palestine 1947 Israel after War of 1948−1949

 OMAN

 LEBANON

 Occupied by Israel after Six-Day War 1967

Strait of
Hormuz


Gulf


SYRIA
Occupied temporarily by Israel Beirut Damascus after Yom Kippur War 1973 Area returned to Egypt Haifa by Israel 1982 
R
 e

Tel Aviv
Amman


 d

Mediterranean Sea


 YEMEN

Jerusalem


S
 e a

ISRAEL JORDAN
Suez 
Cairo


E G


Y


P


Arabian
Sea


 ERITREA (part of Ethiopia until 1993)

T


Gu


SINAI PENINSULA

SAUDI ARABI A

 Sharm el-Sheikh

 lf

Ad
 of

 en Members of OPEC Oilfields

SOMALIA ETHIOPIA

 1 1948-1949: Egypt, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, and Iraq attack Israel 5 1973 OPEC oil embargo of US

 9 1979-1981 Iranian hostage crisis

 2 1953 Shah of Iran installed with US help

 6 1978 Camp David Accords between Egypt and Israel

3 1967 Six-Day War: Israel vs. Egypt, Syria, Jordan


 7 1979 Iranian revolution deposes Shah

11 1980-1988 Iraq-Iran War


 4 1973 Yom Kippur War: Egypt, Syria attack Israel

 8 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan

 12 Part of USSR until 1991

 10 1980 Carter Doctrine: US will defend Persian Gulf

 1974 Israel withdraws from Suez

28.1 Middle East and Persian Gulf, 1947–1988
 Dependence on Middle Eastern oil increased the importance of conflicts in this region for Americans.

 Why did Israel’s troubled relations with its neighbors concern the United States?



 CHAPTER 28

28.2 Inflation and
Unemployment,
1960–1990
 The combination of high unemployment and inflation created a phenomenon dubbed “stagflation” in the 1970s.

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 The decline in the steel industry was even more dramatic. In 1950, the 12% United States produced nearly half of the world’s steel. By 1980, it manu10% factured only 14 percent, a fall hastened by aggressive foreign competitors 8% that reaped the rewards of investing heavily in research and innovation. New furnace technol6% ogy, for instance, allowed Japanese competitors to produce a ton of steel for 4% a third of the price it cost American factories. As American automobile and 2% steel plants closed, a Rust Belt of decaying industrial cities appeared in the 0% Midwest, places plagued with high unemployment, Year crumbling roads, bankRate of inflation Rate of unemployment rupt governments, and high welfare rolls. By the mid-1970s, however, the economy suffered from 1990s, Americans increasingly chose to buy houseboth high unemployment and inflation that kept hold appliances, textiles, and television sets manuprices rising, an unusual combination dubbed factured in places like Japan and Taiwan. “stagflation,” which is pictured on the graph InNorthern manufacturing jobs also evaporated flation and Unemployment, 1960–1990 (28.2). In as American companies relocated to the South, where non-unionized labor costs were cheaper the 1970s, trying to solve one problem, unemployand air-conditioning now made the hot climate ment, often worsened inflation. Tax cuts meant to more hospitable. In 1960, only 18 percent of stimulate a business recovery and create more jobs, Southern homes were air-conditioned; by 1980 for instance, put more money into the economy that figure had risen to 73 percent. A “Sun Belt” and caused prices to rise even further. Trying to of new industrial manufacturing centers includcurtail inflation by raising interest rates put home ing San Diego, Phoenix, Houston, and Atlanta mortgage and business loans out of reach for many boomed. This demographic shift had important Americans. Without access to credit the business political consequences when grassroots conservarecovery stalled. Meanwhile the federal deficit skyrocketed as tax revenue declined, but high spending tism took hold in the Sun Belt, shifting the electoral map in favor of Republicans. on defense and entitlement programs like Social The economic picture was not all bleak, howSecurity, welfare, and Medicaid continued. ever. In the 1970s, the American economy began The rising unemployment had deep roots in a historic shift from a manufacturing-based the ailing auto and steel industries, long the backeconomy to one dominated by service-sector bone of the American economy. In 1970, the Big and high-tech jobs. No longer a leader in auto Three automakers, General Motors, Ford, and or steel manufacturing, America gained new Chrysler, sold 89 percent of the cars marketed in preeminence in high-tech fields like aerospace, the United States. Within ten years their market electronics, and eventually computers. In the share dropped to 66 percent. Faced with higher 1890s, Henry Ford had built his first car in his gas prices, American consumers bought smaller, garage before revolutionizing the auto industry more fuel-efficient cars imported from Japan. Percentage of Inflation and Unemployment, 1960–1990

 What economic problems plagued the United States in the 1970s?

Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Rise and Fall
 of the Automobile Economy

DOWNTURN AND SCANDAL

 (see Chapter 21). In 1976, Steven Jobs and Stephen Wozniak, 21 and 26 years old respectively, followed in Ford’s footsteps by constructing their first personal computer in a family garage. The pair founded Apple Computers a year later, envisioning a machine that would transform daily life. The first Apple logo showed the seventeenthcentury mathematician Sir Isaac Newton sitting under the apple that supposedly fell off a tree and hit him on the head, inspiring him to develop his theory of universal gravitational pull that revolutionized modern scientific thought. The subsequent, permanent logo just retained the apple. In 1976, the claim that computers could transform the world as much as Newton’s theories seemed ludicrous. Yet within a year the computer age got underway when Apple released the first home computer designed for the general public. The computer revolution received another boost in 1980 when 29-year-old Bill Gates, the cofounder of an obscure start-up company called Microsoft, signed an agreement with International Business Machines (IBM) to provide operating software for its home computers. The deal made Gates a billionaire within two years.

Frustration at Home
 Nixon initially embraced the same moderate course as Eisenhower, with whom he had served as vice president from 1953 to 1961. Like Eisenhower, Nixon billed himself as a fiscal conservative who was willing to accept popular social welfare programs like Social Security and Medicare. As the economic outlook worsened, however, Nixon instituted wage and price controls in 1971 to curb inflation, the most drastic government intervention in the economy since World War II. Conservative outrage over his fiscal policies had little effect on Nixon, who intended to stay in the political center. He hoped to bolster the moderate wing of the Republican party by turning disgruntled Southerners, Northern blue-collar workers, and white suburbanites (Democrats who had voted for him in 1968; see Chapter 27), into lifelong Republicans. Called “the silent majority” these voters rejected some, but not all, of the liberal vision. The silent majority disliked Great Society programs that primarily aided minorities, but they still subscribed to the New Deal orthodoxy that made the government responsible for ensuring prosperity. Nixon’s budget-cutting, therefore,

Watch the Video Richard Nixon Presidential
Campaign Ad (1968)




 targeted social-welfare programs for minorities and the poor, measures that partially appeased fiscal conservatives without touching New Deal programs like Social Security that former Democrats and many moderate Republicans viewed as sacrosanct. Nixon also tried unsuccessfully to reduce the jumble of laws and programs that made welfare assistance to the poor expensive to administer. The poor viewed his proposal to guarantee all Americans a minimum income of $1,600 ($8,500 in today’s dollars) as too low, while conservatives opposed it for redistributing income. Nixon gained the loyalty of the silent majority by trying to tame the Supreme Court, which under the leadership of Chief Justice Earl Warren (see Chapter 27) had issued controversial rulings on school prayer and desegregation. When Warren retired in 1969, Nixon appointed Warren Burger to replace him, believing that Burger would influence his colleagues to offer a more restrained interpretation of the Constitution than Warren. Burger, however, had no intention of reducing the Court’s commitment to school integration. The Court insisted that the North develop school busing programs to catch up with the South where, by 1971, 77 percent of black children attended school with white children. The 1954 Brown v. Board of Education decision outlawing segregated schools had set off massive resistance throughout the South (see Chapter 25). In the 1970s, opposition to court-mandated integration moved northward as the silent majority found its collective voice and took to the streets. Busing sent black and white children to schools outside their neighborhoods, generating opposition in Northern, ethnic white enclaves where angry white parents objected to “big government” turning their children into “guinea pigs.” Boston became a hotbed of anti-busing fervor. On April 5, 1976, 200 white working-class Irish American teenagers began an adult-supervised anti-busing march in downtown Boston. Joseph Rakes, one of the teenage protesters, who brought along his family’s American flag, later recalled feeling “blind anger” at busing policies that were destroying his close-knit South Boston community. “They took half the guys and girls I grew up with and said, ‘You’re going to school on the other side of town.’ Nobody understood it at 15,” Rakes explained. When Ted Landsmark, an African American lawyer on his way to a meeting, crossed the protesters’ path, the students pounced on him.

 How did the “silent majority” shape politics in the 1970s?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

28.3 “The Soiling of Old Glory,” 1976
 The image of an anti-busing protester in Boston preparing to ram an African American lawyer with a flagpole underscored that deeply ingrained racial prejudices were more than just a Southern problem.

 Boston Herald photographer Stanley Forman’s Pulitzer-Prize winning photo “The Soiling of Old Glory” (28.3) showed Rakes poised to attack Landsmark with his flagstaff. In the photo Landsmark apparently struggles to free himself from the grip of another white man grabbing him from the rear. Contrary to the impression given by the photo, however, the man holding Landsmark was actually helping him to his feet after white youths had thrown him to the ground and beaten him. Rakes never hit Landsmark with the flagstaff. Yet when Landsmark, a seasoned civil rights activist, who had marched from Selma to Montgomery in 1965 (see Chapter 27), went to the hospital, he had doctors put a large bandage on his broken nose. Landsmark knew that the appearance of severe injuries would draw more press attention. The portrait of raw racial hatred captured in the photograph, and Landsmark’s heavily bandaged face at How does this photograph compare to the images of racial violence in the South seen in earlier chapters?

 a press conference the following day, shocked white Boston and encouraged the city’s leaders to initiate a sustained campaign to deescalate racial tensions. When the new school year began in September, Time magazine trumpeted the “Truce in Boston.” By this time, however, the Supreme Court’s stance had shifted, thanks to Nixon’s more conservative appointments. After the Court ruled that independent suburban school districts did not have to participate in inner-city busing programs, accelerated “white flight” to the suburbs created a core of all-black urban schools ringed by suburban white schools in Boston and in other cities.

The Watergate Scandal
 By reshaping the political landscape, Nixon won a landslide victory against antiwar Democrat George McGovern in 1972 (see Chapter 27). Yet rather Read the Document Boston Busing (1975)

DOWNTURN AND SCANDAL

 than ushering in an era of unchallenged Republican control, Nixon became embroiled in the Watergate scandal, an episode of presidential criminality that created a constitutional crisis, ended Nixon’s political career, and helped the Democrats retake the White House in 1976. On June 17, 1972, a night watchman caught five burglars breaking into the offices of the Democratic National Committee in a Washington, D.C., building complex called Watergate. The plan, financed by Nixon’s reelection campaign and approved by White House staffers, called for the burglars to fix a broken telephone wiretap installed during a previous break-in so the Nixon campaign could listen to Democratic phone calls. After Nixon disavowed any previous knowledge of the plot, the story slid off the front pages, and he easily won re-election. When the burglars went on trial in early 1973, however, one confessed to accepting a bribe to keep quiet about the White House’s involvement in planning the break-in. In response the Justice Department and Senate launched two separate investigations. Washington Post reporters Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward detailed the growing scandal in articles based on information from a secret informant whom they identified only by the nickname, Deep Throat (revealed in 2005 as William Mark Felt, the FBI’s deputy director). During one Senate committee hearing, Senator Howard Baker asked the key question: “What did the President know, and when did he know it?” Secret tapes that Nixon had made of all White House conversations promised to provide the answer. The showdown over gaining access to these tapes and what they revealed transformed the Watergate burglary into a constitutional crisis over whether the president was above the law. Two competing visions of presidential power emerged. Nixon refused to turn over the tapes to the Justice Department or Congress, claiming that the constitutionally protected right of executive privilege



 meant he could keep advice from counselors private. Investigators argued that the president had no constitutional right to withhold evidence of corruption or abuse of power. Nixon next tried to use his authority to control the investigation. When Archibald Cox, who headed the Justice Department investigation, secured a court order for the tapes on Saturday, October 20, 1973, Nixon ordered Attorney General Elliot Richardson to fire Cox. Richardson and the deputy attorney general refused and resigned. The third-ranking official in the Justice Department finally fired Cox. Outrage greeted news of the “Saturday Night Massacre,” and Nixon endured a cacophony of car horns sounding outside the White House day and night, where protesters urged passing motorists to “Honk for Impeachment.” After much delay and controversy, Nixon finally turned over highly edited versions of his taped White House conversations, enraging his critics even further. Liberal political cartoonists lampooned Nixon as a tyrant and a crook (see Images as History: Watergate through Political Cartoons, page 850). In July 1974, the House Judiciary Committee issued articles of impeachment against Nixon, charging him with obstruction of justice, abusing his presidential powers by ordering the CIA, FBI, and Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to harass his political enemies, and violating the Constitution by refusing to honor congressional subpoenas. The Supreme Court also unanimously ruled that Nixon could not withhold information pertaining to his own potential criminal wrongdoing. On August 5, 1974, Nixon finally released the remaining tapes, and the nation heard the president authorize a cover-up plan. On June 23, 1972, Nixon had instructed the CIA to tell the FBI to end its Watergate investigation to protect “national security.” Two days later, on August 8, 1974, to avoid impeachment proceedings almost certain to remove him from office, Nixon became the first president in U.S. history to resign, and Vice President Gerald Ford became president. “Our long national nightmare is over,” the new president assured the nation.

 “When the president does it that means that it is not illegal.” RICHARD NIXON in 1977, defending his actions as necessary for national security

 “A government of laws was on the verge of becoming a government of one man.” Attorney general ELLIOT RICHARDSON

 Read the Document House Judiciary Committee’s Conclusions on Impeachment (1974)

 What competing views of presidential power emerged during the Watergate crisis?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

Images as History
WATERGATE THROUGH POLITICAL CARTOONS
Political cartoons have been a mainstay of political debate in America since the colonial era. “If the prime role of a free press is to serve as critic of government, cartooning is often the cutting edge of that criticism,” stated Herb Block, who drew under the pseudonym Herblock. Political cartoonists like Herblock and Paul Conrad followed the long career of Richard Nixon from his early days as a communist-hunting congressman through his resignation as president. Their illustrations caricatured his face and shoulders, depicting a long beak-like nose, dark circles under his eyes, five o’clock shadow, and slumping shoulders. Some conservative cartoonists defended Nixon, even as the Watergate scandal deepened. One caricature depicted the media as piranhas nipping at Nixon’s heels as he tried to reach calmer waters, suggesting that he was the victim of a media feeding frenzy. When Nixon resigned, a Bert Whitman cartoon in the Phoenix Gazette showed the president exiting center stage, leaving behind spotlights that illuminated his foreign policy successes such as ending the Vietnam War and improving relations with China and the Soviet Union. To these conservative commentators Nixon’s record as a strong leader in the world mattered more than his transgressions at home. 
 The cartoon, Herblock later noted, “comments not only on his situation at the time, but on his veracity and honesty—without using any words other than his own.”

•
•


 Nixon struggles to pull the two ends of a severed tape together, a reference to the severely edited tapes of White House conversations that Nixon had released to Watergate investigators.

•


 By depicting Nixon with the word “not” in his mouth, Herblock transformed Nixon’s 1973 statement, “I’m not a crook” into “I am a crook” in this 1974 cartoon.

Herblock, Nixon Hanging
Between the Tapes,
Washington Post, 1974
 Conrad satirized the president’s paranoia by depicting Nixon as a despot sitting in the dark, creating “enemies lists” (which eventually included 30,000 people).

 By 1973, the public knew that Nixon had instructed the FBI and IRS to harass people he considered political “enemies.” The list included Paul Conrad, who drew political cartoons for the Los Angeles Times.

 To prevent future presidents from using the FBI to spy on their domestic critics, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (1978) required secret judicial approval for any internal surveillance of U.S. citizens. After the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, Congress loosened these restrictions on monitoring Americans at home.

 The cartoon title suggested that Nixon, rather than his opponents, destroyed his presidency.

 What insights do these cartoons offer into the Watergate scandal?

•


•


•


•
Paul Conrad, His Own Worst Enemy, Los Angeles Times, 1973


View the Closer Look Images as History: Watergate
Through Political Cartoons


A CRISIS OF PRESIDENTIAL LEADERSHIP



A
Crisis of Presidential Leadership  The Watergate scandal and the scars from the Vietnam War tested Americans’ faith in the federal government. Congress moved to limit the powers of the president, and Americans disagreed over the direction to take in foreign policy post-Vietnam. The challenges were significant: dealing with renewed Soviet aggression, ensuring that support for Israel did not alienate oil-producing Arab nations, and improving relations with Central America.

A
Weakened Presidency  When Gerald R. Ford became president, for the first time a man unelected as either president or vice president led the nation. Nixon had appointed Ford, then Republican House Minority leader, as his vice president in 1973, invoking the TwentyFifth Amendment to fill the office after disgraced Vice President Spiro Agnew resigned for having accepted bribes while governor of Maryland. During his 24 years in Congress, Ford built a reputation as an honest, fiscally conservative Republican and won the respect of legislators in both parties. “I’m a Ford, not a Lincoln,” he said when he became vice president, distancing himself from both the elite who bought luxurious Lincoln cars and the political genius of the nation’s sixteenth president. Ford’s modesty compared favorably with Nixon’s obsessive quest for power. Believing that the nation wanted to turn the page quickly on the Watergate scandal, Ford announced that he was giving Nixon a “full, free, and absolute pardon” for any illegal acts that he might have committed as president. A long trial and possibly imprisoning the former president would only prolong the nation’s agony, he believed. Ford, however, had misread the public’s mood. His approval rating sank to 42 percent amid accusations that he was fulfilling the terms of a backroom deal made while Nixon was still president—a pardon in return for the presidency. Nixon went free, but over 70 others were eventually convicted of Watergaterelated crimes. Ford never recovered from this loss of confidence in his leadership. An emboldened Congress reined in presidential power. Nixon had accepted large donations from businessmen in return for favors and influence. In response Congress created a Federal Election Commission (FEC) in 1974 to monitor federal elections. Congress also limited campaign contributions by individuals and official political organizations and

 established a system of public funding for presidential elections. Opponents immediately challenged the constitutionality of these restrictions. In 1976, the Supreme Court struck down a provision that limited how much an individual could spend of his or her own money to win elected office, claiming that such restrictions (except for candidates who accepted matching federal funds) violated the First Amendment right to free speech. These efforts to curb influence-peddling through campaign donations had unintended consequences. Political action committees (PACs), which represented private interest groups, such as labor, business, and retirees, were allowed to donate more money than individuals, increasing their sway over the politicians they supported. To repair public faith in the presidency, President Ford tried to shape a post-Vietnam foreign policy that restored America’s image as an invincible superpower without reigniting fears that the nation was overextending its reach or behaving unethically. Exposés about how the United States was conducting the Cold War acquainted Americans with their government’s willingness to support dictators around the world who pledged friendship to the United States over the Soviet Union. In 1974, The New York Times exposed the CIA’s covert involvement in the overthrow of Salvador Allende, the democratically elected Marxist president of Chile. With aid from CIA operatives, anti-Soviet and pro-American General Augusto Pinochet seized power and established a brutal 16-year dictatorship that tortured, imprisoned, and killed dissenters. Congressional investigations also exposed CIA plots to assassinate leftist leaders in the Congo, Cuba, and the Dominican Republic. To regain public confidence in how the government was waging the Cold War, Ford prohibited any government employee from engaging or conspiring in assassination plots. Complaints over

 How did Congress and Ford respond to Nixon’s wrongdoing?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 human rights violations influenced him less. Ford Rumsfeld and poured money into the American refused to cut off U.S. aid to Pinochet and supmissile program. ported the military junta that seized power in Argentina in 1976. Ford also tried to build on Nixon’s foreign policy successes by retaining Henry Kissinger as secretary of state and national security advisor. Ford initially accepted Kissinger’s view that détente, the policy of using diplomatic, economic, and cultural contacts As the 1976 presidential contest approached, Ford to improve U.S. relations with China and the Soviet faced a strong challenge in the Republican primaUnion, would promote global stability by lowering ries from 65-year-old Ronald Reagan, a former the risk of nuclear war. Consequently Ford abided film actor who had just finished his second term by the terms of the 1972 Strategic Arms Limitation as governor of California. Reagan’s father had kept Treaty, or SALT I, the first treaty between the Soviet the family afloat during the Depression by workUnion and the United States that limited the deploy- ing for the Works Project Administration, but ment of intercontinental and submarine-launched some key adult experiences gradually transformed ballistic missiles. this son of the New Deal into a staunch conservaNixon had also signed tive. During the Second the 1972 Anti-Ballistic MisRed Scare, Reagan became sile (ABM) Treaty, in which concerned about commuthe United States and the nism’s influence in Holly Soviet Union agreed to wood, and he objected to A bumper sticker that reflected refrain from creating napaying nearly 70 percent widespread voter apathy in the tional missile defense sysof his film earnings in 1976 presidential election tems. This treaty embraced taxes. In 1962, he joined the long-standing logic of the Republican Party, mutually assured destrucenthusiastically supported tion (MAD), the belief that the guarantee of a Barry Goldwater in 1964, and became governor of devastating nuclear counterattack would deter California in 1966. In a close vote, Ford prevailed the United States and Soviet Union from ever at the Republican convention, but Reagan vowed employing their nuclear arsenals. By pledging to to “rise and fight again.” remain defenseless against a nuclear attack, each Ford’s Democratic opponent was former Georside hoped to dampen fears that it would ever gia Governor Jimmy Carter, a surprise choice, launch a first strike against the other. Ford also whom few Americans knew when he declared his joined with the Soviet Union and 31 other nacandidacy. Carter’s political ambitions even surtions to sign the 1975 Helsinki Accords, which prised his own mother. When he told her that he accepted the current East-West balance of power was running for president, she replied, “President in Europe. of what?” Carter’s Baptist faith and the image he Ford’s moderate course invited pounding criticultivated of an uncorrupted Washington outsider cism from the left and the right, ultimately spelling who could restore honor to the White House atthe demise of détente. Conservative critics, led by tracted conservative Democrats who had voted California Governor Ronald Reagan, lambasted for Nixon. “I will never lie to you,” Carter assured Ford for “giving” away Eastern Europe to the Soviet voters. Union. Liberal critics shared conservatives’ concerns Neither candidate generated much enthusiasm. about Soviet treatment of dissidents. Bipartisan The made-up campaign slogans in this politiobjections also arose over letting the Soviets maincal cartoon (28.4)—“Gerald R. Ford: a perfectly tain a larger arsenal of long-range and submarineadequate guy for the seventies” and “Oh . . . Why launched nuclear missiles than that of the United Not? Ford in ’76”—captured the general apaStates. Over time Ford began to share these concerns thy to Ford’s campaign. An equally lackluster that the Soviet Union was untrustworthy. Certain campaigner, Carter benefited from the nation’s that the Soviets were continuing to build long-range ongoing economic woes, anger over Watergate, intercontinental ballistic missiles, Ford heeded the and Ford’s misstep in pardoning Nixon. Carter advice of his hawkish defense secretary Donald managed to temporarily reassemble the New Deal

The Leadership Crisis
Continues: Carter in the
White House


 “Don’t Vote, It Only Encourages Them.”

 What competing visions arose over Nixon’s efforts to reshape U.S.-Soviet relations?

Watch the Video Gerald Ford Presidential Campaign Ad (1976)


A CRISIS OF PRESIDENTIAL LEADERSHIP

 coalition of white Southerners, urban blacks, and union members to carry the election by 297 to 240 electoral votes. Less than 55 percent of the electorate even bothered to vote, however, a historic low and disappointing follow-up to the 1960s, when countless civil rights activists had put their lives on the line to secure this right. On his inauguration day Carter chose to walk from his swearing in on the Capitol steps to the White House with his wife and family rather than ride in a limousine, the type of populist gesture that he frequently made as president. Ford had pardoned Nixon in an attempt to heal wounds quickly. Carter tried to remove another source of festering discord by pardoning 10,000 Vietnam War draft resisters, many of whom had fled to Canada, a move that enraged conservatives but earned him the gratitude of liberal Democrats. Seeking to solidify liberal Democratic support, Carter moved quickly to build on the liberal vision of Democrats John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson by creating the Department of Education and working with Congress to establish a “Superfund” to clean up the nation’s most polluted areas. He also appointed the most women and minorities to federal office of any previous president. Carter’s outsider status and his tendency toward self-righteousness, however, hampered his presidency. A hard worker, who rose early and went to bed late, he pored over every memorandum, even personally handling requests to use the White House tennis court during his first six months in office. The fiscally conservative Carter had strong philosophical differences with liberal Democrats who emphasized the advantages of deficit-spending over balancing the federal budget. Carter believed that too much government regulation was hampering the business recovery, while liberal Democrats felt that regulation was necessary to protect the public. The president eventually prevailed, convincing Congress to deregulate the trucking, communication, and airline industries.

 Identifying rising oil costs as the main cause of the nation’s economic woes, Carter urged Americans to consume less oil in a 1977 television address that recalled Franklin D. Roosevelt’s famous fireside chats. As a fire crackled behind him, Carter, dressed in a cardigan sweater, called the energy crisis “the moral equivalent of war,” which was the title of a famous essay by nineteenth-century philosopher William James. To discourage consumption, Carter proposed ending the price controls that kept oil and gas prices low and imposing higher federal taxes on gasoline. To prevent price-gouging, he also wanted oil and gas companies to pay higher taxes on their profits. Carter tried to craft a vision that would appeal to both laissez-faire adherents who liked the idea of lifting price controls so the market determined the price of oil, and liberals who believed in government regulation to rein in corporate profits and protect the environment. The resulting energy law in 1978 compromised between these conflicting visions. It lifted price controls, raised the sales taxes on gas-guzzling cars, and offered tax incentives for using alternative energy sources such as coal and solar heating. The law did not, however, include a windfall profits tax on oil and gas company profits. The country soon felt the effects of lifting price controls without also raising taxes on oil



28.4 Do You Get
 the Feeling This Campaign Lacks a Little Something? Like Carter, Ford failed to generate much enthusiasm among the electorate in the 1976 presidential election.

 Why did the 1976 presidential election fail to engage the country?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 and gas company profits. In 1979, OPEC raised prices four times in five months, and revolution in Iran curtailed its oil exports. Images of motorists waiting for hours in line to buy gas, last seen during the 1973 oil embargo again dominated the news. The crisis reached its zenith on June 13, 1979, when over half of the nation’s service stations ran out of gas. Meanwhile Exxon, an American company that imported oil from overseas, announced first quarter earnings of $1.9 billion in 1980, a record profit by an American corporation. Carter renewed his call for a windfall-profit tax on oil and gas companies, hoping to use this revenue to fund public transportation, develop alternative energy sources, and help the poor pay for heating. To stimulate interest in energy conservation, Carter took to the airwaves to deliver an address soon dubbed the “malaise speech.” America, he lamented, was enmeshed in a moral and spiritual crisis. The nation had gone from one that celebrated “hard work, strong families, close-knit communities, and our faith in God” to one that worshiped “self-indulgence and consumption.” Carter’s call for Americans to “seize control again of our national destiny” aroused only resentment over his sermonizing.

 28.5 Hey, man … like I don’t CARE what it’s costing me This political caricature blamed Americans’ oil addiction for the nation’s energy problems.

 What different opinions surfaced about the root of America’s energy problems?

 These two political cartoons, both drawn in 1980, encapsulated competing notions of where blame for the energy crisis lay. Bob Taylor, drawing for the Dallas Times Herald, focused on the nation’s insatiable appetite for oil (28.5). He portrayed Uncle Sam as a drug addict willing to pay any price for his next fix of oil. “Hey, man . . . like I don’t CARE what it’s costing . . . I need it,” a disheveled and stony-eyed Uncle Sam says as he prepares to inject a barrel of oil into his vein. By contrast John Milt Morris’s “Profitsharing plan!” indicted OPEC and American oil companies for price-gouging, viewing the consumer as a victim of their conspiracy to empty his pockets (28.6). A sign posted outside one gas station presented a third view by proclaiming “Higher prices, More Sass, Bad President, Out of Gas,” putting the blame squarely on Carter’s shoulders.

New Paths in Foreign Affairs
 Carter had more success in foreign affairs than in domestic matters, although not without encountering opposition to his Wilsonian-inspired vision of America championing democracy worldwide. Constant meddling in the domestic affairs

28.6 Profit Sharing Plan
 Expressing more sympathy for the average consumer, this caricature accused oil-producing nations and oil companies of creating artificial shortages to gouge consumers.

Watch the Video Jimmy Carter, “Crisis of Confidence” (1979)


A CRISIS OF PRESIDENTIAL LEADERSHIP

 of neighboring nations, he noted, had earned the United States the reputation as an imperial exploiter throughout Latin America. Liberal Democrats rejoiced when Carter resolved to make human rights and the spreading of democracy the centerpieces of his foreign policy. The president’s first major achievement was consistent with his desire to forge a new path in American diplomatic relations. Making amends for past American wrongdoing (see Chapter 19), Carter negotiated a treaty that returned the Panama Canal to Panama in 2000. The United States had controlled the Canal Zone since 1903, but by the 1970s, America’s bigger submarines and ships did not fit through the canal, reducing its importance to national security and the economy. Three previous presidents had recognized these facts and opened negotiations, but Carter sealed the deal and won Senate ratification for the agreement in 1978. Giving up control of the Panama Canal failed to dramatically improve relations between the United States and Latin America. Overtures to normalize relations with the Communist Cuban dictator Fidel Castro went nowhere. Carter also faced a severe test in Nicaragua, where civil war pitted the anti-communist dictator Anastasio Somoza against the Cuban-supported Sandinista rebels. When the Sandinistas prevailed, Carter offered them economic aid in the vain hope that he could dissuade them from creating a Cubanlike authoritarian communist state. Turning to Asia, Carter continued along the path forged by Nixon and established diplomatic relations with the People’s Republic of China in 1979. This decision angered conservatives who viewed Taiwan, where the Nationalist government had fled after the Communist takeover of the mainland in 1949, as the rightful government of China. “To the Communists and those others who are hostile to our country,” Reagan fumed, “President Carter and his supporters in the Congress seem like Santa Claus. They have given the Panama Canal away, abandoned Taiwan to the Red Chinese, and they’re negotiating a SALT II treaty (with the Soviets) that could very well make this nation NUMBER TWO.” Ignoring these criticisms Carter signed the SALT II pact in June 1979, which capped missiles and bombers on each side. But as Reagan’s comments revealed, American disaffection with détente ran deep. In the 1970s, Soviet-backed regimes took control of Angola, Somalia, Ethiopia,



 “An inordinate fear of communism has led us to embrace any dictator who joined in our fear.” President JIMMY CARTER, making human rights a guiding principle in U.S. foreign policy

 and Afghanistan, confirming skeptics’ fears that détente had strengthened the enemy. Additional signs of Moscow’s aggressive intentions came in 1977 when the Soviets began aiming new, highly accurate intermediate-range missiles (SS-20s) at Western Europe. Carter responded by securing NATO’s authorization to install Pershing II missiles in Western Europe, which could reach Moscow in ten minutes. Strained Soviet-American relations took another hit when the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in December 1979 to prop up its faltering Marxist government. The Soviets were eager to keep a friendly regime in power along their border, but the United States feared their ambitions might stretch into the oil-rich Middle East. Calling the invasion “the most serious threat to peace since the Second World War,” Carter announced the Carter Doctrine, a declaration that the United States would use armed forces to stop any outside power from making inroads into the Persian Gulf region. He withdrew the SALT II treaty from the Senate, increased defense spending, cut off shipments of grain and technology to the Soviet Union, and announced that the United States would boycott the summer Olympics in Moscow. The Carter administration also sent aid to Muslim fundamentalist rebels battling the Soviets in Afghanistan, whose ranks included the Saudi-born Islamic militant Osama bin Laden. A wealthy recent college graduate dedicated to establishing an Islamic state in Afghanistan, bin Laden would later found al-Qaeda, an Islamic fundamentalist terrorist organization. The Cold War had long held the attention of American presidents. The United States was just learning, however, to take conflicts in the Middle East as seriously. Carter hoped to lessen tension by negotiating an end to hostilities between Israel and Egypt. In 1978, he invited Egyptian President Anwar El Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin to Camp David, a presidential mountain retreat in Maryland. Thirteen days of tense Did Carter’s dealings with the Soviet Union continue or undo initiatives undertaken by Nixon and Ford?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 negotiations ended with the Camp David Accords. Israel agreed to give the Sinai Peninsula back to Egypt in 1982 (see 28.1). In return Egypt became the first Arab state to recognize Israel’s right to exist. The United States rewarded each side with pledges of substantial military aid, support that continues to this day. Befriending Egypt neutralized the only credible military threat to Israeli security and brought a previous Soviet ally into the American fold, strengthening the American position in the Middle East. If the Middle East gave Carter his greatest diplomatic victory, it also provided the low point of his presidency. In 1953, the United States had helped overthrow the left-leaning Iranian government and reinstated the reliably anti-communist Shah of Iran to ensure American access to Iranian oil. In 1979, radical Islamists overthrew the Shah, who fled the country. An Islamic cleric and revolutionary, the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, became the head of the world’s first radical Islamist government. Khomeini’s intense dark eyes, long snowy beard, and flowing robes made him appear dark and dangerous to Americans, who recoiled at his ferocious denunciations of the United States as “the Great Satan.” In October 1979, Carter made a fateful decision when he reluctantly agreed to let the ailing Shah of Iran, who was living in Mexico, into the United States for medical treatment. If the United States “turned our backs on the fallen Shah, it would be a signal to the world that the U.S. is a fair-weather friend,” National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski told Carter. At 3:00 a.m. on November 4, 1979, the State Department received a telephone call from panicked officials in the American embassy in Teheran, the capital of Iran, reporting that a mob of Iranian university students had broken into the compound. The students proceeded to take embassy employees hostage. Khomeini had not ordered the hostage-taking, but he supported the students’ demands that the United States return the Shah and his fortune to Iran to secure the hostages’ release. His government, worried that the United States might try to return the Shah to power, wanted him in hand. The Iranian hostage crisis became the defining event in Carter’s presidency as Iranian revolutionaries held 52 Americans captive for 444 days. The media coverage was unprecedented, and most reporters viewed the crisis as a humiliating blow to America’s honor. ABC News

 How did Carter respond to old and new problems in the Middle East?

 created a late-night show, “Nightline,” that gave constant updates on “America Held Hostage” and repeatedly showed film footage of Iranian crowds chanting “Death to America” and the blindfolded captives. Frustration with Carter’s inability to resolve the crisis caused his approval ratings to sink to 28 percent. How to proceed was not clear, however, and Carter’s key advisors offered him conflicting recommendations. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance focused on saving the hostages’ lives and argued that the United States needed to negotiate patiently, no matter how long it took. National Security Advisor Brzezinski worried more about protecting America’s image as a global superpower. He felt that the longer the crisis lasted, the weaker America appeared to the rest of the world, emboldening America’s enemies. The Soviet

 “The release of the American hostages had become almost an obsession with me.” President JIMMY CARTER comments on the Iran hostage crisis in his memoirs

 invasion of Afghanistan a month into the hostage crisis seemingly corroborated Brzezinski’s vision. Choices and Consequences: Ending the Iranian Hostage Crisis explores Carter’s options and the repercussions of his decision to try to rescue the hostages. Five months later Iraqi ruler Saddam Hussein launched an invasion of Iran to acquire its oil fields, and Khomeini finally decided to negotiate in earnest. Iran could no longer afford its diplomatic isolation, needing to reestablish its global trading networks to fend off the attack. After months of negotiations the United States agreed to give Iran $7.9 billion (the estimated value of the Shah’s holdings in the United States) and pledged not to interfere in Iranian domestic affairs. Carter hoped to deliver the good news to the American people that the hostages were coming home before he left office on January 20, 1981. Instead, Khomeini waited until a few minutes after the new president Ronald Reagan was sworn into office to release the hostages, denying Carter a final triumph.

View the Image The Signing of the Camp David Accords (1978)


A CRISIS OF PRESIDENTIAL LEADERSHIP



Choices and Consequences
ENDING THE IRANIAN HOSTAGE CRISIS
When Iranian students stormed the U.S. Embassy and took Americans hostage in 1979, President Carter faced a choice over whether to follow the advice of Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, who recommended patient negotiations, or National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski, who favored using force to end the crisis. For five months Carter brokered a compromise between these two positions by freezing Iranian financial assets in the United States, engaging in secret negotiations, and beefing up the American naval presence in the Arabian Sea. As Carter began his 1980 reelection bid, mounting public frustration along with concern that American inaction had encouraged the Soviet Union to invade Afghanistan, increased the pressure on Carter for decisive action. 
Choices




 Wait for Iran to tire of its diplomatic isolation, and then negotiate the hostages’ release without alienating the rest of the Muslim world.



 Make a show of strength by bombing Iranian oil refineries and military bases and mining harbors.



 Use Special Forces to rescue the hostages.

Decision
 When an Iranian negotiator told the administration that a diplomatic resolution was months away, Carter decided to act. In April, 1980, while Vance was out of town, Carter authorized a rescue mission by Special Forces.

Consequences
 Swirling desert sands and a collision between American aircraft doomed the rescue mission in its first stages, further humiliating the United States. Vance immediately resigned, and in July the Shah died in Egypt, ending the question of returning him to Iran. When Iraq invaded Iran in September, seeking oil-rich territory, Khomeini decided to end Iran’s diplomatic isolation. Winning concessions from the United States, Iran released the hostages on January 20, 1981, the day that Ronald Reagan was inaugurated president.

 The ex-hostages arrive at Frankfurt, Germany on January 21, 1981, the day after their release.

Continuing Controversies
 How important was the hostage crisis for the United States in the long-term? Some say it was very important. The hostages’ prolonged captivity branded Carter as inept and contributed to his reelection loss. To contain Iran, the United States supported Saddam Hussein during his eight-year war with Iran, again using a repressive Middle Eastern dictator to advance American interests. The hostage crisis also created a

 negative image of Islam in the United States that future Islamic terrorist attacks reinforced. The crisis was not so important, others counter, rejecting it as a major reason for Reagan’s victory. In the 1980s, the failed Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the Camp David Accords, and using a secular Iraq to contain Iranian influence protected U.S. economic interests in the region, diminishing the long-term significance of the hostage crisis.

 What larger significance did Carter’s advisors attach to the Iranian hostage crisis?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

The Rights Revolution
 Social turbulence did not cease with the end of the Vietnam War. Feminists and gay activists carried the 1960s’ rights revolution into the 1970s and 1980s, striking at the heart of gender identity in American society. Meanwhile the environmental movement sought to reverse the toll of industrial pollution on the nation’s natural habitats.

The Equal Rights
Amendment and
Abortion Controversies


28.7 Women and
Work, 1900–2000
 As more women entered the workforce, combating discrimination in the workplace became a major issue for the women’s movement.

 Feminist political demands received unprecedented attention in the 1970s. To eradicate gender discrimination and sexual inequality at the workplace, feminist organizations lobbied for equal pay for equal work, an end to sexual harassment, and paid maternity leave. These bread-and-butter issues became even more pressing as the economic downturn of the 1970s forced more women into the workplace. The chart Women and Work, 1900–2000 (28.7) shows the steady increase in the percentage of single and married women who worked outside the home over the second half of the twentieth century. Changing attitudes toward married women working and declining birthrates





Percentage


























Year
 Percentage of single women working Percentage of married women working Percentage of widowed, separated, and divorced women working







 contributed to the increased female presence in the job market. Thanks to vacuum cleaners, gas and electric stoves, washing machines and dryers, women in the 1970s spent less time doing housework than their counterparts earlier in the century. Supermarkets, fast food, and prepackaged foods also simplified the tasks of shopping and cooking for a family. Nonetheless, working women faced challenges including the lack of affordable day care and the difficulty of convincing men to pitch in at home. On average women worked 15 hours (outside and inside the home) more a week than men. “You’re on duty at work. You come home, and you’re on duty,” complained one wife. With one in two marriages ending in divorce, single-parenting often put more strains on working women with children. The most common reason couples gave for divorcing in the 1970s and 1980s: arguments over domestic responsibilities. The feminist movement, however, faced challenges convincing working women that feminism provided the answer to the problems they faced balancing work and home life or advancing in the workplace. The press, one activist noted, portrayed the feminist as “a total weirdo—bra-burner, man-hater, lesbian, sickie!”—exaggerated stereotypes that threatened the movement’s growth. Many women proved reluctant to publicly identify themselves as feminists, even if they privately supported the women’s movement goals, fearing social stigmatization as unfeminine. Divisions within the women’s movement created another major obstacle. Poor minority women often saw racial and ethnic prejudice as bigger obstacles to their economic advancement than gender discrimination, and regarded white, upper-middle-class feminists with suspicion. Feminism, in the words of one black woman, was “basically a family quarrel between White women and White men.” Divisions between radicals and

 What were the consequences of shifting trends in the female workforce?

THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION

 moderate feminists (see Chapter 27) also prevented women from speaking with one voice. The feminist movement occasionally benefited from positive media coverage, as during made-fortelevision moments like the heavily hyped “battle of the sexes” in 1973 between tennis stars Billie Jean King and Bobby Riggs. Millions of Americans tuned in to watch King defeat Riggs, a self-proclaimed “male chauvinist pig” who argued that even a 55-year-old former tennis champion like himself could defeat the best female player in the world. Riggs announced his conversion to the feminist cause by shouting “equality for women” as he hit the final volley into the net. King’s triumph advanced opportunities for women’s professional sports. Feminist campaigning also led to the passage of Title IX of the 1972 Education Act, prohibiting gender discrimination in education. This law revolutionized high school and college sports by forcing administrators to create more teams and scholarships for female students. Despite negative media portrayals and problems attracting working-class women, the feminist movement enjoyed other successes in the early 1970s. Cities established shelters for battered women and rape-crisis centers. Congress also passed the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) in 1972, a proposal that congressional supporters had introduced regularly since 1923 that stated, “equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex.” Within three years, 34 of the 38 states needed for ratification of the ERA had approved the measure. This avalanche of change outraged cultural conservatives who charged that the ERA would destroy the American family. Phyllis Schlafly, a conservative Illinois lawyer with six children, led the anti-ERA crusade. Catapulting into the national spotlight, Schlafly helped forge the coalition among Catholics, Southerners, antifeminists, religious fundamentalists, and fiscal conservatives that pushed the Republican Party to the right throughout the 1970s. Feminists branded Schlafly a hypocrite, pointing out that she was a well-educated woman who had enjoyed a satisfying career in Republican politics before spearheading the anti-ERA campaign. “She’s an extremely liberated woman,” asserted Karen DeCrow, the president of the feminist National Organization for Women. Competing Visions: Defining the Ideal Woman (page 860) explores the debate over female gender identity in the 1970s. Schlafly’s anti-feminist message resonated in the Southern and Mountain states, areas without strong local feminist organizations to offer a competing view of how gender discrimination adversely affected women in



 the workplace. In the end the anti-ERA forces prevailed. The ERA remained three states short when the deadline for approving the measure came in 1982, the first of many conservative political victories to come in the 1980s. The rancor over legalized abortion, however, far surpassed the barbs exchanged over the ERA. Between 700,000 and 800,000 women a year sought illegal abortions, and botched procedures by incompetent practitioners working in unsanitary conditions killed 2,000–3,000 patients annually. The signs (28.8) in this 1970 St. Louis, Missouri protest march, held on the anniversary of the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment, listed the right of legalized abortion as a key feminist demand. It remained the right of individual states sttattess to to determine dete de term te rmin rm inee the in t legality th l

28.8 Women Marching for Equal Rights
 These protesting feminists carried signs demanding legalized abortions, children’s day care centers, passage of the Equal Rights Amendment, and more female candidates for political office.

 How did the women participating in this protest march define female liberation?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

Competing Visions
DEFINING THE IDEAL WOMAN
What did it mean to be a woman? Cultural conservatives answered “wife and mother;” feminists disagreed. In 1972, Gloria Steinem, founder of Ms., a popular feminist magazine, argued that both women and men would be happier once freed from the straitjacket of culturally constructed gender roles. Conservative activist Phyllis Schlafly countered that gender identity was rooted in biology. Gloria Steinem argued that women’s liberation would benefit men as well as women. 
 Phyllis Schlafly claimed that the “Positive Woman” embraced her distinctly female role.

 I don’t think most women want to pick up briefcases and march off to meaningless, depersonalized jobs…. We want to liberate men from those inhuman roles as well. We want to share the work and responsibility, and to have men share equal responsibility for the children. Probably the ultimate myth is that children must have fulltime mothers, and that liberated women make bad ones. The truth is that most American children seem to be suffering from too much mother and too little father. Women now spend more time with their homes and families than in any other past or present society we know about. To get back to the sanity of the agrarian or joint family system, we need free universal day care. With that aid, as in Scandinavian countries, and with laws that permit women equal work and equal pay, man will be relieved of his role as sole breadwinner and stranger to his own children. No more alimony. Fewer boring wives. Fewer childlike wives…. No more wives who fall apart with the first wrinkle because they’ve been taught that their total identity depends on their outsides. No more responsibility for another adult human being who has never been told she is responsible for her own life, and who sooner or later says some version of, “If I hadn’t married you, I could have been a star.” Women’s Liberation really is Men’s Liberation, too.… Colleague marriages, such as young people have now, with both partners going to law-school or the Peace Corps together, …. Communes; marriages that are valid for the child-rearing years only, there are many possibilities. The point is that Women’s Liberation is not destroying the American family. It is trying to build a human compassionate alternative out of its ruins.

 The first requirement for the acquisition of power by the Positive Woman is to understand the differences between men and women…. She rejoices in the creative capability within her body and the power potential of her mind and spirit. She understands that men and women are different, and that those very differences provide the key to her success as a person and fulfillment as a woman. The women’s liberationist, on the other hand, is imprisoned by her own negative view of herself and of her place in the world around her…. Women must be made equal to men in their ability not to become pregnant and not to be expected to care for babies they may bring into the world. This is why women’s liberationists are compulsively involved in the drive to make abortion and childcare centers for all women, regardless of religion or income, both socially acceptable, and government-financed…. The Positive Woman looks upon her femaleness and her fertility as part of her purpose, her potential, and her power. She rejoices that she has a capability for creativity that men can never have … A Positive Woman cannot defeat a man in a wrestling match or boxing match, but she can motivate him, inspire him, encourage him, teach him, restrain him, reward him, and have power over him that he can never achieve over her with all his muscle…. The overriding psychological need of a woman is to love something alive. A baby fulfills this need in the lives of most women. If a baby is not available to fill that need, women search for a baby-substitute. This is the reason why women have traditionally gone into teaching and nursing careers. They are doing what comes naturally to the female psyche.

Gloria Steinem


 Do Steinem and Schlafly offer realistic or clichéd depictions of women’s lives, or a combination of both?

Phyllis Schlafly


View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Defining the Ideal Woman


THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION

 of abortion throughout the sixties and early seventies. California took the lead in changing what the Los Angeles Times called “Our Archaic Abortion Law” that only allowed a woman to end a pregnancy if her life was in danger. Bending to the popular will, then-California Governor Ronald Reagan reluctantly signed a bipartisan bill in 1967 that let women terminate pregnancies in cases of rape and incest and fetuses with severe physical and mental defects, a decision he later called a mistake. Texas, however, still only allowed abortions if a pregnancy jeopardized a woman’s life. Feminists felt that women, not male doctors, should have the right to make medical decisions about their own bodies. In 1970, Norma McCorvey, an unmarried, poor, pregnant 25-year-old, sued Texas under the pseudonym Jane Roe claiming that she had the right to a legal and safe abortion based on her constitutional “right to privacy.” The Supreme Court dealt the feminist movement a stunning victory when it legalized abortion in its 1973 Roe v. Wade decision. The ruling came too late for McCorvey, who gave birth to a baby girl and gave her up for adoption as the case moved through the courts. In rendering the Roe v. Wade decision, the Supreme Court ruled that the “right to privacy . . . is broad enough to encompass a woman’s decision whether or not to terminate her pregnancy.” The Court decision prohibited states from criminalizing abortion in the first trimester, but allowed them to regulate abortion in the second trimester and prohibit it during the third trimester when a fetus became viable. The Court, however, sidestepped a key question that would provoke much future controversy. “We need not resolve the difficult question of when life begins,” the Court asserted. Critics argued that the Court had invented a right to privacy that did not exist in the Constitution. Supporters countered that court decisions over the last century had established this right. The debate soon seeped into national politics, when the Democrats assumed the mantle of the party dedicated to maintaining a woman’s right to choose an abortion and the Republicans became predominantly against the right to abortion, a position that came to be known as “pro-life.”

Read the Document Roe v. Wade (1973)


 The vocabulary embraced by each side in the abortion debate revealed competing visions of what abortion meant. Supporters of legalized abortion called themselves “pro-choice,” a label encapsulating their view that abortion was a question of personal liberty. In contrast “pro-life” forces believed that human life began at conception (not when a fetus was viable outside the womb); they therefore viewed abortion as tantamount to murder. Both sides employed the language of rights, the “rights of women” (pro-choice usage) squaring off against those of “unborn children” (pro-life term). The activist women facing off in this debate had different life experiences and conceptions of motherhood. Pro-life activists had often built their lives around children and the home and were outraged by their suspicion that pro-choice women had abortions “as a matter of convenience.” Prochoice activists tended to marry later, had more education, and were less religious. They usually wanted careers as well as children and refused to allow biology to dictate their life choices. Twenty years after Roe v. Wade McCorvey changed her mind about abortion and became a born-again Christian, who joined the anti-abortion crusade. Her reversal illustrated the growing momentum of the pro-life movement, which used images of children, like the one affixed to the sign of this 1979 pro-life demonstrator protesting in Washington, D.C. (28.9), to emphasize the rights of children.



 28.9 Pro-life Protest, 1979 Pro-life demonstrators who opposed legalized abortion put the focus on the right of unborn children to have a life rather than the right of women to control their own bodies.

 What different visions separated the pro-life and pro-choice camps?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 In the twenty-first century, the pro-life movement took advantage of new ultrasound portraits of fetuses in the womb that showed beating hearts to underscore their argument that life began at conception. Unable to overturn the Roe decision directly, pro-life activists secured a ban on federal funding for abortions. Some states also required parental notification when minors sought abortions.

Gay Rights


AIDS
Memorial Quilt, The panels of the AIDS Memorial Quilt portrayed the disease’s victims as sons, brothers, and lovers with strong ties to their families and communities to challenge stereotypes of homosexuals as diseased pariahs. 
 The rights revolution also encompassed the gay and lesbian subcultures that existed in the shadows of mainstream society until the 1960s. Except for a few men and women who joined fledgling gay rights groups after World War II, most gay men and lesbians before the 1960s chose to live “in the closet,” hiding their same-sex preferences from the world. Unlike blacks, women, and other minority groups, gay Americans did not have a long history of organizing to defend their rights. Heterosexual Americans uniformly disparaged gays as deviant and morally reprehensible. The American Psychiatric Association categorized homosexuality as a “mental disorder,” a position it did not jettison until 1973. Taking the psychological stereotyping a step further, Time magazine viewed homosexuality as “a pernicious sickness.” “If you were gay and you

 How similar were the Gay Rights and Civil Rights Movements?

 accepted those societal norms, then you were at war with yourself,” stated one college student as he recalled his own struggle to come to terms with his homosexuality. Exposure as a homosexual or lesbian could mean losing everything—job, spouse, friends, and social position. In the 1960s the Civil Rights Movement and the hippie counterculture assault on sexual taboos inspired some gay people to “come out of the closet” and challenge the ways that American society ostracized them. The true awakening of the gay rights movement came during the Stonewall riot on June 28, 1969, when patrons frequenting the Stonewall Inn, a Greenwich Village male gay bar, fought back during a New York City police raid. This open defiance electrified the gay community, and the next morning a huge crowd gathered outside the Stonewall Inn, chanting “Gay Power,” a modification of the “Black Power” slogan that black militants embraced (see Chapter 27). Energized gay men and lesbians founded the radical Gay Liberation Front in response to Stonewall, while hundreds of smaller gay rights groups sprouted up throughout the country. These organizations formed gay support groups on campuses, lobbied for antidiscrimination laws, marched in Gay Pride parades, and followed the “sit-in” model of the Civil Rights Movement by staging “kiss-ins” in restaurants. “We should have the same right to

Read the Document The Gay Liberation Front, Come Out (1970)


THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION

 express our affection publicly as heterosexuals have,” asserted lesbian activist Barbara Gittings. The increased visibility of the gay rights movement provoked a conservative response. In 1977, the deeply religious pop singer Anita Bryant, known to most Americans for her appearances in Florida orange juice television commercials, spearheaded a campaign to overturn a gay rights law in Dade County, Florida. Her victory galvanized forces on both sides of the gay rights debate. Fundamentalist churches opposed legislation granting gays legitimacy, lobbying strongly for laws that prevented homosexuals from teaching in public schools. Gay rights groups ridiculed the notion that gay men, because they preferred men as sexual partners, were pedophiles. A more insidious challenge loomed ahead, however. In 1981, the mainstream press began printing stories of a mysterious ailment sweeping through homosexual communities in New York and San Francisco. Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), a virus transmitted through the exchange of bodily fluids, ravaged the immune system of its victims. Acquiring AIDS was a virtual death sentence in the 1980s; the disease killed over 100,000 Americans by 1990. Because in the U.S. AIDS disproportionately struck homosexuals, the nation viewed the epidemic as more than a public health crisis. The raging political debate over the status of homosexuals in America colored the competing visions about AIDS. Religious conservatives viewed AIDS as God’s retribution against the “morally degenerate,” ignoring evidence that AIDS could also strike the heterosexual population. (Thousands of hemophiliacs and other straight Americans for example, died after contracting AIDS from tainted blood transfusions.) Having just recently repudiated the notion that gay people were mentally ill, homosexuals now confronted fears that they were all diseased. AIDS patients told heartbreaking stories of losing their jobs, being turned away from hospital emergency rooms, and facing eviction from apartments by landlords who feared contamination. The gay community lobbied vigorously for increased federal funds to find a medical cure for the disease. Still, having fought so long to escape police harassment and end legal penalties for consensual homosexual acts, many gay activists were leery about urging homosexual men to modify their sexual behaviors. Larry Kramer chastised gay activists who “took the position that sexual promiscuity was the one freedom we had and that we had to fight to maintain it—even if it killed us. And it did kill us, a lot of us.”

View the Image Sign at a Gay Pride March




 Kramer instead worked to popularize the “safe sex” message—no exchange of bodily fluids—that eventually gained currency in the gay community. The two images shown here illustrate the competing visions within the gay community over how to best draw media attention to the mounting AIDS death toll. In 1987, the AIDS Memorial Quilt, the brainchild of San Francisco activist Cleve Jones, began touring the country after an inaugural unfurling on the National Mall in Washington, D.C. The nation’s largest-ever public art endeavor, the quilt (28.10) made the individual stories of AIDS visible by allowing family and friends to create a square for a loved one, homosexual or heterosexual, lost to the disease. Squares were the size of a human grave, and they portrayed a mixture of embroidered personal remembrances and treasured possessions like jewelry. Radical activists adopted a less poignant and more militant tone. Embracing the slogan “SILENCE = DEATH,” the AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT-UP) staged its first “funeral” demonstration in 1987 to demand better medical treatment. Protesters lay down on a busy Wall Street intersection until police carried them away (28.11), employing the same civil disobedience tactics used by the Civil Rights Movement in the 1960s. ACT-UP also conducted phone “zaps” that barraged officials with calls on AIDS-related issues and barricaded the doors to the Food and Drug Administration to protest delays

28.11 Act-Up Protestors Stage a Funeral Demonstration in Wall Street
 Militant gay activists used civil disobedience to protest high prices and slow federal approval of life-saving anti-AIDS drugs. [Source: John Sotomayor/The New York Times/ Redux Pictures]

 What competing strategies did gay activists develop to publicize the AIDS crisis?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 in approving AIDS-fighting drugs. The New York Times called ACT-UP, “rude, rash, effective.” On September 14, 1989, seven ACT-UP members handcuffed themselves to the balcony of the New York Stock Exchange to protest the huge profits that Burroughs-Wellcome, a pharmaceutical company, had amassed selling AZT, the only drug then available to inhibit the progression of AIDS. Four days later, as a result of negative publicity, Burroughs-Wellcome dropped the price of AZT 20 percent. By 1996, a drug “cocktail” dramatically reduced AIDS-related deaths. A relentless safe-sex campaign and screening of donated blood also lowered the infection rate.

Environmentalism
 On April 22, 1970, communities throughout the nation celebrated their first Earth Day. New York City crowds walked through a block-long plastic bubble to breathe pure air; demonstrators in Boston protested noise pollution; and population control

 advocates in Bloomington, Indiana, handed out free birth control pills. Earth Day made environmentalism visible, but the variety of causes that activists championed revealed the competing visions within the environmental movement. For New Left and counterculture environmentalists, eating organically produced food grown without pesticides became a symbolic way of purging the poison of mainstream American values out of their lives. Politicians interested in securing environmentally friendly legislation framed pollution as a straightforward health issue. To win widespread support for laws mandating lead-free gas and paint, they focused, for example, on how lead poisoning damaged children’s brains. Traditional conservationist societies like the Sierra Club and Audubon Society concentrated on preserving pristine wild habitats from development. They supported expanding the National Park Service to safeguard wildness areas and provide recreational sanctuaries for over-taxed citizens living in the industrial world.

28.12 Environmental Disasters 1960-2010
 Intense media coverage of man-made environmental disasters led to increased regulation of offshore drilling, nuclear energy, and the disposal of industrial waste. Love Canal, 1978 When dumped chemical waste sickened residents. Congress created the “Superfund” requiring companies to clean up toxic waste sites.

WASHINGTON NORTH MONTANA

 VERMONT

SOUTH DAKOTA W YO M I N G

Santa Barbara Oil Spill, 1969
 Offshore drilling was banned near coastlines after a drilling accident dumped 3 million gallons of oil into southern California waters.

NEBRASK A

Cuyahoga River Fire, 1969
 Outrage over the heavily polluted river catching fire spurred clean water regulations and the creation of the EPA.

U T AH
 NEVADA

NEW YORK

 MICHIGAN

 OHIO

MASSACHUSETTS RHODE ISLAND CONNECTICUT PENNSYLVANIA NEW JERSEY DELAWARE

INDIANA WEST VIRGINIA

 ILLINOIS

MARYLAND WASHINGTON DC

COLORADO KANSAS

 MISSOURI

 KENTUCKY

NEW ARIZONA

 OKLAHOMA

VIRGINIA NORTH CAROLINA

 TENNESSEE

CAL I F OR NI A

PACIFIC OCEAN

NEW HAMPSHIRE

WIS CONS IN

OR EG O N IDAHO

 MAINE

 MINNESOTA

 DAKOTA

SOUTH CAROLINA

 ARKANSAS

MEXICO ALABAMA

Three Mile Island, 1979
 Support for nuclear energy evaporated after a nuclear reactor leaked radioactive gas.

GEORGIA T E X A S

Arctic
National
Wildlife
Refuge
AL ASK A

MISSISSIPPI LOUISIANA FLORIDA

 CANADA

Exxon Valdez Oil Spill, 1989
 Opposition intensified to drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge after a tanker ran aground, spilling 11 million gallons of oil.

 How did the nation respond to modern environmental disasters?

Gulf of Mexico Oil Spill, 2010
 In the nation’s largest oil spill a blown-out offshore well leaked oil for 3 months, leading to inconclusive investigations into industry practices.



ATLANTIC OCEAN

 miles

 kms



THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION

 Presidential support for environmental reforms had begun during the Kennedy and Johnson administrations (see Chapter 27), and in the 1970s Nixon and Carter also increased federal environmental controls. New laws required the removal of asbestos (a cancer-causing building material) from schools. Companies had to reduce the amount of airborne toxins that their factories produced and clean up sites they had contaminated. Car manufacturers installed required catalytic converters that helped reduce automobile pollution by 75 percent. Meanwhile the consumer protection movement spearheaded by Ralph Nader led to the creation of a federal Consumer Product Safety Commission that could ban the sale of hazardous products, from cribs to cars. While the general public applauded changes that made their lives healthier and safer, blue-collar workers feared that new, expensive pollution controls on industry 28.13 Three Mile Island Nuclear Reactor Towers America rejected nuclear power after the accident at the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant. That decision, coupled with limited federal support for solar and windgenerated power, increased the nation’s dependence on overseas oil.



 simply encouraged industrialists to move their factories overseas. “If you’re hungry and out of work, eat an environmentalist,” read one popular labor union bumper sticker. Two well-publicized environmental scandals, however—one at Love Canal, a waterway near Niagara Falls, New York, and the other at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania—convinced most Americans that their well-being depended on strict federal environmental regulation (28.12). After years of ignoring residents’ complaints about rising levels of miscarriages and birth defects, New York State finally admitted in 1978 that the foul-smelling industrial waste dumped into the Love Canal contained deadly toxins that had polluted the area’s ground and air. Congress responded by creating a Superfund to clean up dangerously polluted areas, spending $400 million over 20 years to restore the Love Canal region. In 1979, the partial meltdown of a nuclear reactor at the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant in Pennsylvania caused nearly 100,000 panicked residents to flee when radioactive steam poured into the air. No one was hurt, but the government-sponsored clean-up took 14 years. Despite new, more stringent federal regulations for nuclear reactors, Americans equated the image of nuclear reactor towers with danger (28.13) and refused to accept new nuclear power plants in their neighborhoods despite a strong industrywide safety record. Not all Americans applauded new environmental regulation. A “Sagebrush Rebellion” arose in the West among conservatives demanding that the federal government return federally controlled lands to the states. Western miners, ranchers, and loggers chafed under new federal restrictions that limited their access to water, their ability to hunt predators, and their grazing rights on federal lands. Western votes helped Ronald Reagan win the presidency in 1980, and as president he listened sympathetically to their complaints about federal environmental policies. An avid outdoorsman who enjoyed riding horses at his California ranch, Reagan did not believe that the environment was in jeopardy. Emphasizing economic growth he loosened recently enacted pollution controls on industry and reduced the size and budget of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), an agency founded under Nixon’s watch to enforce federal environmental regulations.

 Which environmental visions prevailed in the 1970s and 1980s?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

The Rise of the Right
 Successful attacks on environmental regulation were just one component of a resurgent conservative coalition that emerged as the dominant force in American politics in the 1980s. Through right-leaning policy institutes, magazines, lobbying groups, and direct mail campaigns, conservatives spearheaded a powerful political movement whose vision Ronald Reagan championed when he entered the White House. A charismatic leader, Reagan’s unrelenting optimism changed the national mood. The vision of a nation adrift evaporated as confidence in the economy and government rebounded.

The New Conservative
Coalition
 The emerging conservative coalition known as the New Right created alliances among groups with different concerns and views of what America and American government should be, reshaping the Republican Party in the process. Conservatives differed on whether a balanced budget or cutting taxes would guarantee prosperity. They disputed whether the government should actively promote conservative values or adopt a more libertarian approach that reduced governmental activity in all spheres. In the 1970s, the mix of ideas grew even more complicated, when neoconservatives, defectors from the liberal ranks, joined the conservative coalition. Seeking to explain his own political journey from the left to the right, Irving Kristol defined neoconservatives as “liberals who’ve been mugged by reality.” Neoconservatives focused mostly on foreign affairs, urging the nation to cast off its Vietnam hangover and stand proud in the world again. Their insistence that America had the right to act unilaterally in world affairs soon prevailed over lingering noninterventionism in conservative thinking. Former working-class and Southern Democrats also joined the emerging conservative coalition. Angry over court-ordered integration and busing, affirmative action programs that reserved jobs or school slots for minorities, and rising crime, these newcomers accepted the conservative orthodoxy of smaller government when it came to programs that primarily benefited minorities. Ethnic Northern whites in the Rust Belt resented their declining economic clout as industrial jobs evaporated, and they responded to Republican claims that “limousine liberal” elites were out of touch with workingclass America. Finally the popularity of grassroots

 Who made up the New Right?

 conservative movements among burgeoning Sun Belt populations from Florida to Arizona completed the political realignment in the 1980s. In the late 1970s, simmering resentment against increasing taxes exploded into open revolt. Big business and the well-to-do had long championed lower income and corporate taxes. Now the working class and middle class joined the tax revolt by demanding lower property taxes. Voters in California spearheaded the tax rebellion in 1978 when they approved Proposition 13. This ballot referendum, which reduced property taxes by 57 percent, caused drastic cuts in funding for public schools and universities. Voters in other states soon followed suit and increasingly found the Republican anti-tax message appealing. The Republican Party also benefited from the rise of the Religious Right, conservative Christian groups that defended traditional values and supported right-wing political causes—the most sustained grassroots movement of the late twentieth century. Reagan saw the benefits of reaching out to the Religious Right, hoping to create a strong conservative coalition that would “attract those interested in the so-called ‘social issues’ and those interested in economic issues.” Protestant Fundamentalists had mobilized their ranks in the 1920s to end the teaching of evolution in Southern public schools. After the Scopes Trial (see Chapter 21), the mainstream media paid little attention to religious conservatives, but Fundamentalist radio stations, publishing houses, and revival meetings thrived in the South. Fundamentalists ended their self-imposed exile from mainstream politics in the 1950s when religious conservatives supported the nation’s Cold War crusade against godless communism. The Supreme Court’s 1962 ruling against school prayer (see Chapter 27) incensed Fundamentalists, as did Carter’s attempts to revoke

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Evangelical Religion
 and Politics, Then and Now

THE RISE OF THE RIGHT



 the tax-exempt status of religious schools that failed conservative Catholics, who shared their concerns to integrate racially. about religious instruction in schools, abortion, and But politics alone does not explain why fundagay rights. Along with other members of the New mentalism became a nationwide phenomenon in the Right, the Religious Right voted overwhelmingly for 1970s, when nearly a quarter of the 50 million ProtReagan in the 1980 presidential election. estant Americans described themselves as born-again Christians. In an era when sprawling suburbs and rancorous cultural debates created a sense of social fragmentation, close-knit Fundamentalist churches offered members cohesive communities, where During the 1980 presidential campaign, Reagan people with similar values spoke the same language. focused voters’ attention on the nation’s economic The Fundamentalist vision of leading a morally upwoes by repeatedly asking “are you better off than right life in keeping with divine will attracted white, you were four years ago?” Reagan’s cheerfulness, humiddle-class suburbanites along with white, rural mor, and athleticism offered a residents, creating a strong stark contrast to Carter’s more grassroots religious movedrawn and weary demeanor. ment that cut across class and Memorizing his speeches and regional, if not racial, lines. delivering them in a soothEvangelical preachers, such as ing baritone voice, Reagan’s Pat Robertson, Jerry Falwell, charisma helped him amass Oral Roberts, Jimmy Swagan almost worshipful followgart, Robert Sculler, and Jim ing. His victory capped the and Tammy Bakker, built rise of the New Right, a twomedia empires preaching that decade ascendancy that Wathe Bible contained the literal tergate and Carter’s election truth to millions of television had interrupted. Reagan won viewers—further popularizing the election by an impressive the appeal of the Fundamenmargin: 489 to 49 electoral talist vision. votes. In his inaugural address In the late 1960s, Nixon he entreated the nation “to claimed to speak for the “sibelieve in our capacity to perlent majority” who objected form great deeds . . . after all, to liberal policies in the priwhy shouldn’t we believe that? vacy of their living rooms. We are Americans.” ComIn the 1980s, Republican mentators likened Reagan’s politicians showered atten28.14 America Can Be Saved (1979) victory over the unpopular tion on the “moral majority,” The cover of Jerry Falwell’s book illustrated the new Carter in 1980 to Franklin a well-organized network of connection between religious fundamentalism and D. Roosevelt’s triumph over political activism in the 1970s. politically active religious Herbert Hoover in 1932 conservatives. In 1979, Falwell founded the Moral Majority, which he described (see Chapter 22). Each man created new coalitions that reshaped the political landscape; each inspired as a “pro-life, pro-family, pro-morality, and prothe country at a moment when it felt besieged. American” organization. The cover of Falwell’s 1979 Reagan entered the presidency passionate about book, America Can Be Saved, showed him in front cutting income and corporate taxes, reducing social of a huge American flag, melding patriotism with religious fervor to create a vision of faith and conser- welfare spending, and fighting communism. He immediately sent Congress a budget that cut spendvative politics providing salvation to a nation adrift ing for social programs, increased allocations for (28.14). The Moral Majority and other conservative defense, and lowered taxes. Embracing the theory religious groups registered two million new voters of supply-side economics, pro-business officials for the presidential contest of 1980. In the past Funin the Reagan administration believed that letting damentalists had distrusted Catholicism, but now, entrepreneurs keep more of their profits would fuel political concerns outweighed doctrinal differences. economic growth, creating more and better-paying Fundamentalists formed a political alliance with

Setting a New Course:
Reagan at Home


View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Two Presidential
Views of America


 Why did the Religious Right thrive in the 1980s?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 “Please tell me you’re all Republicans.” A wounded President RONALD REAGAN to the emergency surgical team before they operated, 1981 jobs that generated enough tax revenue to offset the increases in military spending that Reagan proposed. Liberal Democrats, however, suspected that Reagan had a more sinister reason for slashing taxes. Reagan, they charged, planned to starve the budget to force Congress to undertake even more draconian cuts in New Deal and Great Society social welfare programs that conservatives longed to abolish. Liberal Democrats derided his budget proposal as trickledown economics, an approach discredited during the Hoover administration (see Chapter 22), when aid to the wealthy failed to create more jobs for the poor.

28.15 President Reagan Shot, 1981
 The last photo shows Secret Service agent Jerry Parr shoving Reagan into his presidential limousine as a bullet hits him, but no one realized that Reagan had been shot until he reached the hospital.

 Why was Reagan so popular?

 Democrats in Congress were determined to fight Reagan’s proposals. Then a nearly tragic turn of events gave Reagan an unexpected advantage. On March 30, 1981, a deranged 25-year-old named John Hinckley (seeking to impress teenage film actress Jodie Foster) shot Reagan, his press secretary James Brady, and two others outside a Washington hotel. After hearing a firecracker-like pop, news photographer Ron Edmonds took three quick photos (28.15): The first shows the president flinching as he hears shots; the second shows him turning to locate the source of the shooting; in the third, Secret Service agent Jerry Parr pushes Reagan into the presidential limousine as a bullet ricocheted off the car door and hit Reagan under his left armpit. Parr’s quick-thinking is credited with saving Reagan’s life—if Parr had not pushed the president down then the bullet would have likely hit him in the head. In the hospital, with a bullet lodged near his heart, Reagan maintained his trademark cheerfulness, telling his distraught wife, “Honey, I forgot to duck.” Americans rallied to his side, and when Reagan returned to work a month later, he presented his 70 percent approval ratings as evidence that the nation supported his budget proposal. It passed easily with bipartisan support from conservative Democrats. The top tax rate dropped from 70 percent to 50 percent, lowered again to 28 percent in 1986. Reagan’s image as a resolute leader got another boost when he fired 11,000 striking air traffic controllers in August 1981, enforcing a ban on strikes by federal employees working in critical industries. Liberal critics lamented that the president’s act sent a chilling message to organized labor, whose membership rolls and willingness to strike declined throughout the decade. In 1984, Reagan easily won his reelection bid against Democrat Walter Mondale. Mondale energized the Democratic Party when he selected New York Congresswoman Geraldine Ferraro as his running mate, the nation’s first female vice presidential candidate, but he made a key error by stating that he would raise taxes to close the deficit. Mondale expected Americans to reward him for his candor about the worrisome federal debt, but the nation was in no mood to fret. Reagan scored well with television campaign ads that centered on the theme “Morning Again in America.” They featured scenes of small-town America where contented citizens celebrated marriages, schoolchildren pledged allegiance to the flag, and friends laughed together. “America is prouder, stronger, better. Why would we want to return to where we were less than four short years ago?” the voiceover asked. Many Americans agreed, and Reagan won every vote in the Electoral College except those

Watch the Video Ronald Reagan on the Wisdom of Tax Cuts


THE RISE OF THE RIGHT

 from Mondale’s home state of Minnesota and the District of Columbia, with a landslide total of 525 to 13. Reagan remained relentlessly pro-business throughout his presidency. Driven to free private industry from government regulations that, in his view, restricted its growth, Reagan convinced Congress to deregulate the savings and loan industry. Once freed from strict government oversight, these banks lost huge amounts of depositors’ money in speculative investments. In 1989, President George H. W. Bush, Reagan’s successor, convinced Congress to bail them out at great cost to taxpayers rather than accept wide-scale bank failures that would certainly have sent the economy into a deep recession. As the budget battles and savings and loan debacle revealed, Reagan’s fiscal policies remained controversial. During his time in office, the federal debt nearly tripled (from $994 billion in 1981 to $2.6 trillion in 1988) as the hoped-for tax revenue failed to materialize and the military build-up continued unabated. After a serious recession in 1981–1983, the economy began to improve as inflation lessened and business activity picked up. The return of prosperity muted the impact of liberal criticism and helped Republicans argue that people at all class levels were doing better financially under Reagan’s stewardship. Democrats and Republicans offered competing visions on the economy throughout the 1980s. Democrats lamented the increased concentration of income in the hands of the top fifth of the population. “What I want to see above all is that this remains a country where someone can always get rich,” Reagan stated in 1983. Chief executive officers (CEOs) of leading corporations had no reason for complaint. Their average salaries, adjusted for inflation, rose from $3 million to $12 million a year during Reagan’s eight years in office, while outlays for subsidized housing dropped from $30 billion to $7 billion. In 1980, the average CEO made 40 times more than the average factory worker. By 1989, CEOs earned 93 times more. To Democrats Reagan’s economic policies helped the rich get richer while the poor got poorer. Republicans countered that consumption was a better measurement of Americans’ overall financial health than income distribution. In the 1980s, Americans went on a buying spree that rivaled the postwar boom of the 1950s, purchasing nearly 88 million cars, 63 million VCRs, and 62 million microwave ovens. Items previously available only to the wealthy, such as refrigerators and telephones, were found in nearly every American household by 1990. While the poorest Americans were not living as well as the richest, their

Read the Document Ronald Reagan, Speech at the
Brandenberg Gate (1987)




 material circumstances were much improved when compared with those of previous generations. Reagan spoke eloquently about cutting taxes and slashing welfare. He was decidedly less passionate about education, housing, health care, and the environment, often letting subordinates make key decisions in these areas. His hands-off management style differed vastly from Carter’s micromanagement. Reagan rarely worked more than eight hours a day, enjoyed many vacations to his California ranch, and usually took an afternoon nap. “It’s true that hard work never killed anyone, but I figure why take the chance?” he joked. Reagan’s detractors viewed his detachment as senility and charged that he was just a figurehead. Supporters sometimes agreed that Reagan put his trust in the wrong hands. Over 100 members of his administration were indicted or forced to resign amid corruption charges, stemming in part from Reagan’s lax oversight of his subordinates, who often acted without consulting him.

Foreign Policy Triumphs
 and Scandals Reagan did more than reject the liberal economic vision; he also overturned the foreign policy initiatives set in place by his Republican predecessors. He changed the rules of the Cold War by abandoning MAD, the doctrine embraced by American and Soviet policymakers since the 1950s, as the basis for U.S. defense against the Soviet Union. Remaining defenseless against enemy nuclear weapons was an essential component of MAD. The ability to shoot down incoming missiles, the doctrine asserted, might encourage the enemy, who no longer feared its own destruction, to attack. Reagan offered a competing view. “Let me share with you a vision of the future which offers hope,” he declared in 1983, announcing the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI). Challenging the view that vulnerability made America more secure, Reagan proposed building a missile shield that used lasers from space satellites to destroy incoming missiles. Publicly, he argued that his plan was compatible with the 1972 ABM treaty (which critics disputed), since he intended to share the technology with the Soviets. Privately, he expected the Soviet Union to go bankrupt trying to match the United States in building its own missile defenses. Despite the billions spent on research, the SDI project failed. SDI nonetheless hurt the Soviet Union. A rapidly changing slate of elderly Soviet leaders responded to Reagan’s challenge much as he expected. The new leaders increased military

 How did Democrats and Republicans differ on the state of the economy in the 1980s?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 spending, ignoring the devastating consequences for Soviet citizens. In the 1980s, the Soviet Union spent between 15 and 17 percent of its GNP on defense, compared to 6.5 percent by the United States. Pervasive shortages meant that Soviet citizens spent hours in long lines outside poorly stocked stores, stoking discontent with communist rule. Closer to home, Reagan looked for ways to destabilize communist and leftist regimes in the Caribbean and Central America, activities portrayed on the map, American Intervention in Latin America, 1980–2000 (28.16). In Nicaragua he hoped to unseat the leftist Sandinistas. Sandinista aid to Marxist rebels battling the pro-American government in El Salvador confirmed Reagan’s fears that communism was on the march in Central America, and he approved covert CIA assistance to the Contras, counterrevolutionary forces in Nicaragua that opposed the Sandinistas. Congress had a different view of Central America. To continue the move away from direct interference in other nations’ domestic affairs (a process begun by Ford and Carter), Congress prohibited the CIA and Department of Defense from funding any effort to overthrow the Sandinistas. National Security Council (NSC) Director Robert McFarlane and his assistant Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North convinced Reagan that these restrictions did not prevent the NSC from soliciting millions from Saudi Arabia and private donors

 to aid the Contras. When Congress heard about these donations in 1984, it prohibited the government from using non-American funds to unseat the Sandinistas. To thwart the regional expansion of communism, in October 1983 Reagan ordered U.S. troops to invade the tiny Caribbean island of Grenada. The president ostensibly dispatched U.S. forces to rescue American medical students trapped in Grenada, when a leftist government seized control. The troops’ real mission was to remove a government seeking Cuban and Soviet military aid. By ordering troops into battle without consulting Congress, Reagan also used his powers as commander-in-chief (some argued unconstitutionally) to restore the strength of the presidency, badly diminished since Watergate. Reagan supporters celebrated America’s swift victory in Grenada, but critics viewed the event differently. They accused Reagan of using the Grenada invasion to distract Americans from more dismal news coming out the Middle East. Two days before the Grenada invasion, an Islamist suicide bomber had plowed a vehicle loaded with explosives into an unsecured barracks housing U.S. peacekeeping troops in Beirut, Lebanon, killing 241 servicemen. Iranian-backed Islamist terrorist groups (angry over U.S. support for Israel and Iraq, Iran’s enemy) then increased their assaults against the United States by taking Americans hostage in Lebanon.

UNITED STATES

ATLANTIC OCEAN
New Orleans 
Houston


BAHAMAS
Miami 
Gu l f o f
M ex i c o


US VIRGIN ISLANDS

Havana


CUBA CUBA
Carter tries to normalize relations 1977–1978 
BELIZE HONDURAS GUATEMALA
Tegucigalpa 
28.16 American
Intervention in Latin
America, 1980–2000
The United States
 continued to maintain Latin America as a sphere of influence in the 1980s.

Domingo


Guatemala


EL SALVADOR US
aid to government fighting communist rebels 1979–1992 
 US invasion 1983

Caribbean Sea
NICARAGUA US
aid to Contras fighting Sandinistas 1981–1986 Iran-Contra scheme 1985–1986 
Caracas


 VENEZUELA

Panama Canal


COSTA RICA

Panama City


 COLOMBIA

PA C I F I C OCEAN

PANAMA US
agrees to future return of canal 1978 US invasion 1989 Return of canal 2000 
 How did Reagan’s foreign policy initiatives break with policies set by Nixon and Carter?

PUERTO RICO

 GRENADA

 JAMAICA (Br.)

Mexico City


 MEXICO

Guantanamo Bay


DOMINICAN REPUBLIC HAITI
Santo 
Bogotá


THE RISE OF THE RIGHT

 Reagan’s desires to end the Middle Eastern hostage crisis and halt the spread of communism in Central America led to the biggest political scandal of his administration. In the Iran-Contra scandal, Reagan administration officials sold arms to Iran to secure the hostages’ release and then illegally used the proceeds to support the anti-Communist Contras in Nicaragua. The problems began in 1985 when Reagan asked his new NSC director John Poindexter and Oliver North to devise a covert plan to sell arms to Iran, which needed the weapons for its war with Iraq. As part of the secret agreement, the United States demanded that Iran secure the release of hostages held in Lebanon. After the deal went through, a few hostages were freed, but the arms-for-hostages deal backfired. Reagan’s willingness to pay bribes to free American hostages encouraged militant Islamist groups to seize more over the next two years. Even more troubling, Poindexter and North secretly decided to divert profits from the arms sales to the Contras in Nicaragua—directly violating the congressional ban on aid to the anti-Communist rebels. When an American cargo plane carrying arms to the Contras crashed in 1986, their illegal action was exposed. Convicted of breaking the law, the pair won appeals based on legal technicalities and went free. Poindexter and North claimed that Reagan knew nothing about their illegal diversion of funds to the Contras. “I made a very deliberate decision not to ask the president so I could insulate him,” Poindexter testified before Congress. The public accepted this explanation, viewing Reagan as a hands-off administrator who could not always control his subordinates. With his approval rating dipping to below 50 percent, Reagan hoped to restore confidence in his leadership by improving relations with the Soviet Union. The night before he became the Soviet leader in 1985, 54-year-old Mikhail Gorbachev admitted to his wife, “We can’t go on living like this.” Gorbachev was referring to both the ironclad Soviet control over the domestic economy and the government’s long obsession with a possible American nuclear attack. Gorbachev embraced reform to save the Soviet Union, not destroy it. Eager to reduce Soviet outlays for defense so he could pump funds into the long-ignored economy, Gorbachev also moved to reduce tensions with the United States. When Reagan and Gorbachev met in Washington, D.C., in December 1987, the pair took a historic step by signing the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty that approved the destruction of all U.S. and Soviet intermediate-range missiles in Europe. Past



 arms treaties had curtailed the growth of nuclear stockpiles. For the first time a U.S.-Soviet pact actually reduced nuclear arms. The thaw in relations continued when Gorbachev withdrew Soviet forces from Afghanistan in 1988 and reduced support for communist regimes throughout the world. Like Carter, Reagan enjoyed his greatest successes and failures in the foreign policy arena. He rewrote the rules of the Cold War and achieved a new accommodation in U.S.-Soviet relations. The Iran-Contra scandal, however, brought back fears in some circles that the imperial presidency of the Nixon years had returned.

The Reagan Revolution
 Reagan was a popular president, but supporters’ claims of a “Reagan Revolution” appear exaggerated. Reagan lowered taxes for the wealthy and permanently curtailed the growth of the welfare state. He appointed right-leaning judges to the federal judiciary, including Sandra Day O’Connor as the first female Supreme Court justice. Cultural conservatives remained loyal to Reagan even though he offered little more than lip-service to their goals of outlawing abortion, returning prayer to public schools, or ending affirmative action. As president Reagan always won applause when he proclaimed, “government is not the solution to our problem; government is the problem.” Yet when he left office, the New Deal and Great Society were as vibrant and relevant as the day he entered the White House. Americans still expected the federal government to pay pensions, guarantee unemployment benefits, curb pollution, and help educate poor children. Rather than leaving an enduring institutional legacy, Reagan presided over a profound shift in political vision. His pro-business policies reinvigorated faith that an unfettered free market could make Americans prosperous, and his open alliance with the Religious Right brought discussion of issues that concerned cultural conservatives into the center of American political discourse. In foreign policy neoconservatives’ interventionist ideas became influential in Republican circles. Finally, “Reagan succeeded in reviving national confidence at a time when there was a great need for inspiration. This was his great contribution as president,” reporter Lou Cannon concluded. In a testament to Reagan’s popularity, George H. W. Bush became the first vice president since Martin Van Buren (who followed the well-liked Andrew Jackson in 1837) to win election immediately after the president under whom he served completed his term.

 How does Reagan’s legacy compare to that left by Franklin D. Roosevelt?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s S LEBANON

Mediterranean Sea




ISRAEL JORDA



LIBYA EGYPT







1977–1978


 Congress passes ERA

 OPEC oil embargo against the United States

 Nixon resigns

 First home computer marketed

 Gerald Ford, the first unelected vice president, becomes president

 Computer revolution begins

 Ford pardons Nixon

 Secures lasting peace between Egypt and Israel

 Provokes heated debate over gender roles in American society

 Watergate burglary

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Sets in motion constitutional crisis over extent of presidential power

 Dramatizes American dependence on overseas oil exports

 Roe v. Wade legalizes abortion Religious conservative coalition forms in opposition

 Shakes public confidence in Ford’s leadership

Camp David Accords


Review Questions
 1. What were the differences and similarities between the Watergate and Iran-Contra scandals? 2. How did concerns over human rights, communism, and the domestic economy influence foreign relations during the 1970s and 1980s?

 3. How did Ronald Reagan’s political vision differ from those embraced by his predecessors in the White House? 4. What competing visions animated debates over feminism, gay rights, and environmentalism? 5. Why did the New Right become so influential?

Key Terms
SALT I
(1972) The first treaty between the Soviet Union and the United States that limited the deployment of intercontinental and submarine-launched ballistic missiles and the creation of missile-defense systems. Mutually assured destruction (MAD) The claim that the guarantee of a devastating nuclear counter-attack would deter the United States and Soviet Union from ever employing their nuclear arsenals. Camp David Accords (1978) Israel agreed to give the Sinai Peninsula back to Egypt; in return Egypt became the first Arab state to recognize Israel’s right to exist. Iranian hostage crisis Defining event in Carter’s presidency as Iranian revolutionaries held 52 Americans captive for 444 days. Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) A proposed constitutional amendment, which stated that “equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex.” 
 Roe v. Wade (1973) Supreme Court decision that legalized abortion. Stonewall riot A 1969 battle between patrons of a Greenwich Village male gay bar and police that became the catalyst for the gay rights movement. Religious Right A collection of right-wing Christian groups that defended traditional values and supported conservative political causes. Iran-Contra scandal A law-breaking scheme that sold arms to Iran to secure the hostage’s release and used the proceeds to support anti-Communists in Nicaragua. Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (1987) Approved the destruction of all U.S. and Soviet intermediate-range missiles in Europe.

CHAPTER REVIEW



7–1978


 JAMAICA (Br.) BELIZE HONDURAS LA Tegucigalpa

 a

Caribbean
NICARAGUA US
aid to Contras fighting Sandinistas 1981–1986 Iran-Contra scheme 1985–1986 
Panama Canal


COSTA RICA

P


Cit




1980–1981


1983–1985


1987–1988


 Meltdown of nuclear reactor at Three Mile Island

 AIDS epidemic begins

 Reagan announces SDI

 Stigmatizes gay people as diseased

 Challenges MAD doctrine

 ACT-UP stages first funeral demonstration

 Americans reject nuclear energy as an alternative to oil

 President Reagan shot

 Iran-Contra scandal

 Upsurge in popularity helps controversial budget plan pass

 Most serious presidential scandal since Watergate

 Iranian hostage crisis begins Carter’s approval ratings plummet

 Puts pressure on government to fund anti-AIDS research

Intercontinental-Range Nuclear
 Forces Treaty signed Spells the final phases of the Cold War

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Righting a Nation Adrift.

Questions for Analysis
 1. What role did the car industry play in the 20th century economy? Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Rise and Fall of the Automobile Economy, p. 846

 2. How does this campaign ad speak to the concerns of the silent majority?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • House Judiciary Committee’s Conclusions on Impeachment (1974), p. 849 • Roe v. Wade (1973), p. 861 • The Gay Liberation Front, Come Out (1970), p. 862

View the Closer Look
• Images as History: Watergate Through Political Cartoons, p. 850


Watch the Video Richard Nixon Presidential Campaign


• Competing Visions: Defining the Ideal Woman, p. 860


Ad (1968), p. 847


View the Image


 3. How did the integration of Boston’s public schools compare to the experiences of the Little Rock Nine in 1957? Read the Document Boston Busing (1975), p. 848

 4. What different views did Carter and Reagan offer on the state of American society?

• The Signing of the Camp David Accords (1978), p. 856
• Sign at a Gay Pride March, p. 863


Watch the Video
• Gerald Ford Presidential Campaign Ad (1976), p. 852
• Jimmy Carter, “Crisis of Confidence” (1979), p. 854


View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Two Presidential


• Video Lecture: Evangelical Religion and Politics,
Then and Now, p. 866


Views of America, p. 867


• Ronald Reagan on the Wisdom of Tax Cuts, p. 868(


 5. How does this speech encapsulate Reagan’s Cold War policy? Read the Document Ronald Reagan, Speech at the Brandenberg Gate (1987), p. 869

 Why did the Cold War end?

Contested Visions of
Government p. 884


 Why was presidential politics so controversial?

Transforming Daily
Life p. 888
American Family Structure, 1972
Not Married Children
10%
Not Married
No Children
16%


Married No Children
29%


 Married with Children 45%

 How did technological and demographic changes transform American society?

New Threats in
 the Post-Cold War World p. 894

How did the United States
 respond to 9/11?

 CHAPTER

 “A Moment Rich with Promise” p. 876



