 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 7

Jeffersonian
America
An Expanding Empire of Liberty,
1800–1824
 In 1800, Republican Thomas Jefferson won the presidential election against his Federalist opponent John Adams. After nearly a decade in opposition, Republicans celebrated their presidential triumph with toasts and songs about “Jefferson and Liberty.” Federalists, however, feared that the new president—whom they had denounced as an atheist, a tool of the French, and a supporter of Thomas Paine’s radical democratic ideas—would undo all their work of the previous decade. In this Federalist political cartoon from 1800, Mad Tom in a Rage, Jefferson’s ally Thomas Paine and the Devil tear down the federal edifice created by Washington and Adams. The Federalist fears captured in the cartoon were not only unfounded, but President Jefferson turned out to be a very different person from Vice President Jefferson, the leader of the Republican opposition during the Adams administration. Rather than mount a full-scale attack on Federalist policy, Jefferson adopted a less confrontational approach. In his presidential inaugural, he struck a conciliatory tone and reminded Americans: “We are all republicans—we are all federalists.” Jefferson also promised the nation “a wise and frugal government.” Implementing this, however, proved difficult as he took over the reigns of power in his first term. The opportunity to purchase the Louisiana Territory and double the size of the new nation, led him to cast aside constitutional strict construction, which restricted the powers of the federal government to those explicitly delegated by the Constitution. By the end of Jefferson’s second term in 1809, some Americans believed that the Jeffersonian Republicans had become indistinguishable from their Federalist opponents. Jefferson’s anointed successor, James Madison, made additional compromises that some of his supporters believed betrayed the ideas he had championed as a member of the Republican opposition in the 1790s. Foreign affairs proved especially vexing for both Jefferson and Madison. Each man had tried to prevent American entanglement in the war between Britain and France. Despite their efforts, however, America was dragged into the European conflict, eventually going to war against Britain in 1812. Although the war was fought against the British, the conspicuous losers in the conflict were the Indian tribes in the Northwest and Southwest, who lost a valuable ally in Britain and suffered defeats by American troops. The demands of fighting the war also forced Republicans to reconsider the necessity of much of Hamiltonian economic policy. By the end of the presidency of James Monroe in 1825, the fourth Virginian to become president, the old political labels of Republican and Federalist had become nearly meaningless, and were soon to be supplanted by two new political parties.

 “The revolution of 1800 was as real a revolution in the principles of our government as that of 1776 was in its form; not effected, indeed, by the sword, as that, but by the rational and peaceable instrument of reform, the suffrage of the people.” THOMAS JEFFERSON to Judge Spenser Roane, 1819





 CHAPTER 7

JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA: AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY, 1800–1824

Politics in Jeffersonian America
 Jefferson’s presidential triumph in 1800 ushered in a new era in American political life. After a decade of Federalist rule, and despite the courts remaining bastions of Federalist power, Republicans now controlled the presidency and Congress. Despite Jefferson’s efforts to avoid the bitter partisanship that had characterized politics during the previous decade, American politics remained deeply divisive. In an age when gentlemen lived by a code of honor, political insults could easily turn into personal affronts, and might result in tragic results. Before the end of his presidency, Jefferson’s vice president, Aaron Burr, would slay Jefferson’s longtime opponent, Alexander Hamilton, in a duel, and Burr would become a fugitive from justice. Former president John Adams sarcastically observed that his fellow citizens had made great strides in the “arts of lying and libeling and the other arts which grow out of them, such as wielding the cudgel and pistol.”

Liberty and Small
Government
 Jefferson set out his views of government in his inaugural address on March 4, 1801. Although he invoked shared values, including faith in representative government and the rule of law, Jefferson also made clear how his idea of government differed from that of his opponents. Throughout the 1790s, Federalists had worked to endow the new government of the United States with sufficient power to become a great nation, modeled on Britain’s commercial and military might. Following Hamilton’s lead, Federalists had increased the size of the central government and military and had also used their expansive view of federal power to crush political opposition. By contrast, Jefferson hoped to reduce the size of the federal government. Jefferson invoked the ideal of liberty, not power. He described the state governments as the proper defenders of liberty. In contrast to Federalists, who supported a national bank and enacted a host of taxes, including the unpopular whiskey tax, Jefferson sought to reduce the burdens government placed on the people. Rather than favor commerce he emphasized the “encouragement of agriculture” with “commerce as its handmaid.” To achieve “economy in public expense,” he would scale back the size of government. An alert citizenry, a vigorous militia, and strong state governments were the foundation upon which to build America’s future. Finally, opposing laws such as the Sedition Act, Jefferson praised freedom of the press, reminding Americans that political conflict was a testimony to the vitality of American life, not a sign of weakness.

 What does Monticello reveal about Jefferson’s values?

The Jeffersonian Style
 Jefferson’s inaugural not only set out his philosophical differences with Federalists but also gave him the occasion to dramatize them. Jefferson’s vision had always melded democratic ideals to aristocratic tastes. He labored to create a different presidential style from those who came before him. Jefferson loathed the pomp and ceremony that Washington and Adams had used to exalt the presidency. Rather than ride to his inaugural in an elegant coach, Jefferson walked behind a small band of Maryland militia. Instead of delivering his annual address to Congress from a monarch-like throne as his predecessors had done, he had a clerk read them. Jefferson also rejected the elegant balls that Federalists had staged during the Washington and Adams presidencies as smacking too much of European-style monarchy. Abandoning the pomp and aristocratic style of his predecessors and replacing it with a more democratic style defined the public face of Jefferson’s presidency. Yet, Jefferson remained a rich Virginian slaveholder whose tastes were anything but common. Although Jefferson dispensed with much of the formality of his predecessors, his presidency still reflected his aristocratic tastes. Dinner with Jefferson involved an unusual mix of informality and aristocratic style. He dressed informally when he entertained guests, wearing a pair of worn leather slippers, which shocked those used to the formality of Washington and Adams. Yet those invited to Monticello, the home Jefferson designed himself, in the mountains of western Virginia (7.1), found themselves in an architectural masterpiece that confidently proclaimed its owner’s wealth and exquisite

 Read the Document Jefferson’s First Inaugural Address

POLITICS IN JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA



 taste. The food and wine served at these dinners were equally impressive. Jefferson regaled his dinner guests with the sensual delights of his table and the dazzling brilliance of his conversation, which ranged over everything from philosophy to agriculture. A connoisseur of fine wines, Jefferson’s annual wine bill for his first term in office came to $2,400, almost ten times the yearly income of a typical artisan.

Political Slurs and the Politics
 of Honor Literate and urbane, Thomas Jefferson was deeply influenced by the Enlightenment, particularly its emphasis on reason and science. One of his many interests was fossils. Jefferson wrote about mammoths in his book Notes on Virginia. Four months after his inauguration, his friend, the artist Charles Wilson Peale, set out to exhume the remains of a mastodon in upstate New York. President Jefferson, enthusiastically supporting Peale, even authorized the use of U.S. military equipment to aid in the dig. The expedition proved to be a monumental undertaking, as reflected in Peale’s painting of the event (7.2). The disinterment of the giant fossil testified to American ingenuity. To Jefferson, the expedition was a symbol of the new nation’s commitment to the values of the Enlightenment. His interest in fossils and mastodon bones, however, provided an easy target for his enemies, who mocked him as “the mammoth philosopher” or the “mammoth of democracy.” In response, his supporters attempted to turn Jefferson’s passionate interest in

 7.1 Jefferson’s Monticello Jefferson’s design for Monticello borrowed elements from English architecture, including the classical columns, and the latest Parisian styles, such as the domed roof that caps the building.

 mastodons to his advantage. The president was presented with a “mammoth cheese” weighing more than 1,200 pounds. The delivery of the cheese to the president became a sensation and filled newspaper columns for months. Mammoth jokes, however, were among the milder partisan attacks leveled at Jefferson. His lavish home at Monticello also prompted sarcastic comments. Federalists pointed out the obvious contradiction between the president’s support for democracy and his own aristocratic tastes in architecture, food, and wine. His enemies also highlighted the contradiction between Jefferson’s impassioned defense of liberty and his life as a slaveholder. Monticello was a large working plantation and was therefore home to a sizable African American slave community. Indeed, as the chart and illustration in Envisioning Evidence: The World of Slavery at Monticello show, slaves vastly outnumbered Monticello’s free white population, which included Jefferson’s family and white laborers on the mountaintop.

7.2 Exhuming the
First American
Mastodon
Charles Wilson
 Peale’s painting of the exhumation of the mammoth is a tribute to American ingenuity and the Enlightenment values esteemed by Jefferson. The centerpiece of the painting is not the fossils, but a machine to remove water from the dig, a visual tribute to American science and engineering.

 What does Monticello reveal about Thomas Jefferson’s ideas and values?



 CHAPTER 7

JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA: AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY, 1800–1824

Envisioning Evidence
THE WORLD OF SLAVERY AT MONTICELLO
As the pictogram below illustrates, at Monticello, Thomas Jefferson and his family were surrounded by a large community of African American slaves who worked in the kitchens and gardens, and served as skilled craftsmen. Jefferson owned as many as 150 slaves and he employed them in a variety of occupations at Monticello and on the other lands he owned. Slaves worked the fields, built furniture, manufactured nails, cooked Jefferson’s meals, and worked in a variety of other occupations that made it possible for him to maintain his aristocratic lifestyle. Compared to the splendor of the main house at Monticello, the typical dwelling of a slave was extremely humble. Who Lived at Monticello? Thomas Jefferson and his family lived at Monticello with enslaved African Americans and free European and American craftsmen. This chart represents the population of this busy plantation in the late 1790s. Thomas Jefferson Planter, Statesman Maria Jefferson Eppes Jefferson’s daughter Martha Jefferson Randolph Jefferson’s daughter Ann Cary Randolph Child 
Thomas Jefferson
Randolph
Child


John Wayles Eppes
 Planter, Maria’s husband Thomas Mann Randolph Planter, Martha’s husband Ellen Wayles Randolph Child

Cornelia Jefferson
Randolph
Child


Free European and American Craftsmen


Enslaved African Americans


 What role did slavery play in life at Monticello?

POLITICS IN JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA

 Jefferson’s slaves were housed in cramped and primitive dwellings. The contrast between these humble slave shacks and the mansion inhabited by Jefferson and his family provided a striking visual contrast to anyone who visited Monticello. Attacks on the president became intensely personal. One of Jefferson’s former supporters, the disgruntled newspaper editor James Callender, accused Jefferson of taking Sally Hemings, a Monticello slave, “as his concubine.” This political cartoon (7.3) portrays Jefferson as a cock courting the hen Sally Hemings. The press charged that the president had a slave mistress, and tales of Jefferson’s “Monticellan Sally” appeared in newspapers. Although Jefferson ignored these accusations, the Sally Hemings scandal persisted long after he left the presidency. Among the descendents of Monticello’s slaves, the belief that Jefferson had fathered children with Sally Hemings became part of a family oral tradition that persisted for more than two centuries. Many descendents of Jefferson and modern scholars doubted the truth of these rumors until modern forensic DNA testing provided strong evidence that a male in Jefferson’s blood line was the likely father of at least one child by Sally Hemings. Although not everyone has been persuaded, many scholars now believe that Jefferson did have a sexual relationship with Hemings. Federalist attacks on Jefferson went well beyond slurs on his character. His most vocal critics charged that had white Southerners not been entitled to count three-fifths of their slaves in apportioning electoral votes in 1800, (part of the compromise worked out in the Constitutional Convention, see Chapter 5) Jefferson would have lost to Adams. However, the charge that Jefferson was a “Negro President” was not entirely true, since he won clear majorities in the North and mid-Atlantic and his margin in the Electoral College would have been even greater if presidential electors from those regions had more accurately reflected the popular vote in the states that supported Jefferson. Jefferson was not the only politician whose reputation was dragged through the mud. Attacks on character were frequent, and in a culture in which honor played a central role, they demanded an appropriate response. If an apology or retraction were not forthcoming, a man might demand satisfaction on the field of honor, resulting in a duel. Leading politicians participated in duels, and gentlemen typically owned dueling pistols. Often, friends intervened and prevented a duel from reaching its deadly conclusion. Efforts to avert tragedy

Read the Document Memoirs of a Monticello Slave




 “Of all the Damsels on the green on mountain or in valley A lass so luscious ne’er was seen As Monticellan Sally” Boston Gazette, 1802 failed in the most famous duel of the era; no one stopped the face-off between Vice President Aaron Burr and his longtime rival in New York politics, Alexander Hamilton. Burr’s candidacy for governor of New York in 1804 was undermined by Hamilton’s attacks. A newspaper reported that Hamilton had described the vice president as “a dangerous man and one who ought not be trusted with the reins of government.” Hamilton also insulted Burr’s personal integrity and honor. Burr demanded an apology. When Hamilton refused, Burr challenged him to a duel. On July 11, 1804, the two men met across the river from New York City in Weehawken, New Jersey, and Burr fatally shot Hamilton. Authorities in both New York and New Jersey immediately charged Burr with murder, and he fled to Philadelphia, where he remained a fugitive. News of the duel spread through the country. In Baltimore, angry citizens burned the vice president in effigy. Eventually, the charges against Burr were dropped; although dueling was still illegal in most states, duelers were rarely prosecuted.

7.3 Jefferson and
Sally Hemings
 Jefferson’s enemies spread rumors about his illicit sexual relationship with his slave Sally Hemings. This caricature of Jefferson as a cock and Sally Hemings as a hen presents the scandal in comic terms.

 What role did honor play in the political culture of Jeffersonian America?



 CHAPTER 7

JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA: AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY, 1800–1824

An Expanding Empire of Liberty
 Many of Jefferson’s supporters hoped that the new president would radically restructure the balance of power between the states and the federal government. Mandan w They would be disappointed. Rather than a wholesale assault on the Hamiltonian Cheyenne Sioux system, Jefferson opted for a more modest, less confrontational approach. The exception was the judiciary. The Federalists had expanded and seeded it with opponents of Jefferson, presenting him with a major challenge. Still Jefferson believed that his election had ushered in a revolutionary change that altered the course of America’s future. Jefferson’s vision for the future depended on preserving his ideal of a yeoman republic. Perhaps his greatest challenge was posed by the unexpected opportunity to purchase the entire Louisiana Territory from the French Emperor Napoleon. To justify this purchase, which required an enormous and unprecedented exercise of federal power, Jefferson would need to accept a Hamiltonian view of the Constitution. Jefferson’s vision of an expanding “empire of liberty” peopled by independent yeoman farmers came into conflict with his vision of limited government. ouri R.

Mandan Villages
 (winter quarters 1804–05)

Dismantling the
Federalist Program
 Jefferson’s approach to change in government was moderate and conciliatory. Instead of purging all Federalists, he dismissed only those who were corrupt, inept, or who posed serious obstacles to his agenda. Similarly, although Jefferson had contemplated declaring the Sedition Act unconstitutional, he simply refused to bring forward any new indictments, pardoning individuals prosecuted by Federalists and allowing the law to expire. Jefferson remained committed to the ideal of a republican system in which the states, not the federal government, retained most authority. The powers of the federal government pertained to “the external and mutual relations only of these states.” The

 states were responsible for the “principal care of our persons, our property.” With states’ rights in mind, Jefferson reduced the size of the federal government. He directed Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin to eradicate the national debt created by the Federalists. Gallatin severed the connection between the Bank of the United States and the federal government, using the sale of the government’s interest in the bank to lower the national debt. To make up for the loss of income from the repeal of unpopular taxes, Jefferson relied on the sale of Western lands and tariffs on imports. Convinced that the militia could protect America’s peacetime interests, he slashed the budget of the navy and the army, sharply reducing the size of both. This decision would create problems for Jefferson in his second term. Without a powerful navy to protect American merchant ships, France and Britain could threaten the new nation’s commerce.

 “They have retired into the The Courts: The Last Bastion judiciary as a stronghold. There of Federalist Power the remains of federalism are to Early in his first term, Jefferson told a supporter be preserved and fed from the that the Federalists “have retired into the juditreasury, and from that battery ciary as a stronghold.” One of the last acts of John Federalist administration had been the all the works of republicanism Adams’s passage of the Judiciary Act of 1801, which created new circuit and district court judges and are to be beaten down other legal offices, such as clerks, federal marshals, and erased.” justices of the peace, and attorneys. With new THOMAS JEFFERSON to JOHN DICKINSON, December 19, 1801

 Was Jefferson’s election in 1800 a real revolution?

 appointments, Adams had hoped to solidify the Federalists’ control of the judiciary. The Judiciary Act also reduced the number of Supreme Court

Hear the Audio File Jefferson and Liberty


AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY

 justices from six to five. (The reduction would take effect upon the death or retirement of one of the sitting justices.) By reducing the number of Supreme Court justices, Federalists hoped to minimize the likelihood that Jefferson would appoint a justice during his tenure. Jefferson instructed Secretary of State James Madison to withhold any of the new appointments that arrived after he was to be sworn in as president. A disappointed office seeker, William Marbury, sued Madison, seeking a court order to compel Jefferson to turn over his commission. In what became a landmark in American constitutional law, Marbury v. Madison (1803) strengthened the powers of the federal judiciary, fixing the doctrine of judicial review as a cornerstone of American constitutional law. See Choices and Consequences: John Marshall’s Predicament on page 196.

The Louisiana Purchase
 In his first Inaugural Address, Jefferson described America as a “chosen country, with room enough for our descendants to the thousandth and thousandth generation.” To remain a republic of virtuous yeoman farmers and keep alive the ideal of an “empire of liberty,” the nation, he argued, would have to expand westward. Jefferson’s vision of an expanding empire of liberty, however, had little room for African Americans and demanded that Indians either assimilate or perish. The first test of the limits of the President’s vision, especially his concept of liberty, became apparent in his response to news of Gabriel’s Rebellion, the slave uprising in Virginia, in 1800 (see Chapter 6). The uprising prompted soulsearching by white Virginians, including a proposal to emancipate slaves and settle them on Western lands. Virginia’s Governor James Monroe took this proposal seriously and sought the president’s advice. Jefferson opposed the plan, however, because he viewed such lands as vital to America’s future. He did not wish to see land that could go to whites and help preserve his vision of a yeoman republic set aside for blacks. The West was essential to Jefferson’s vision of the nation. When he took office, more than 500,000 Americans lived west of the Appalachian Mountains; access to the Mississippi River had become crucial to their prosperity. Agricultural produce destined for New Orleans traveled on large flat boats down the Mississippi. Pinckney’s Treaty (1795) with Spain provided navigation rights to this vital economic corridor. When the Spanish ceded



 Louisiana to France in 1800, they also turned over control of the Mississippi to Napoleon Bonaparte, France’s ambitious military ruler. Napoleon’s decision to close New Orleans to American shipping alarmed many in Congress. Some Americans advocated seizing the city. Preferring a negotiated settlement, Jefferson sent a delegation to France to purchase the port from Napoleon. When they arrived in Paris, the envoys were astounded to learn that Napoleon was willing to sell all of Louisiana to the United States. Acquisition of Louisiana would double the size of the United States; but the Constitution did not authorize the president to purchase new territory. To fulfill his dream of securing enough land for the nation to remain a yeoman republic, Jefferson had to abandon his constitutional philosophy of strict construction, which limited the powers of the federal government to those expressly delegated by the Constitution. Although Jefferson contemplated amending the Constitution to enable such a purchase, he feared that Napoleon might withdraw his offer before an amendment could be ratified. So Jefferson abandoned his constitutional ideals to achieve his political objective. With the Louisiana Purchase, the United States acquired the Louisiana Territory from France in 1803, thereby securing control of the Mississippi River and virtually doubling the size of the new nation (7.4 on page 197).

 “There is on the globe one single spot, the possessor of which is our natural and habitual enemy. It is New Orleans, through which the produce of three-eighths of our territory must pass to market, and from its fertility it will ere long yield more than half of our whole produce and contain more than half our inhabitants.”

Read the Document Thomas Jefferson to John C. Breckinridge,
“Constitutionality of the Louisiana Purchase” (1803)


THOMAS JEFFERSON, 1802

 Was the Louisiana Purchase consistent with Jefferson’s ideals?



 CHAPTER 7

JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA: AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY, 1800–1824

Choices and Consequences
JOHN MARSHALL’S PREDICAMENT
The case of Marbury v. Madison pitted President Jefferson against the new Federalist Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, John Marshall. Jefferson, a champion of states’ rights, resented the Federalist-controlled judiciary and, in particular, Marshall, an ardent nationalist who supported a strong central government and a powerful judiciary. Marbury v. Madison presented Marshall with a tremendous opportunity to enhance the power of the court, but it also set up the possibility of a serious conflict between the court and the executive branch. Could Marshall compel Jefferson to deliver the commission against his will? What if Jefferson refused the court order? Although Marshall sought to strengthen the power of the court, a direct confrontation with Jefferson might have the opposite effect if Marshall ruled against the president and Jefferson ignored the court’s ruling. Marshall had three possible options. 
Choices




 Give Marbury his commission.

Continuing
Controversies
 What role should judicial review play in a democracy? The power of unelected judges to overturn acts of the legislature struck many Americans in Jefferson’s day as undemocratic and inconsistent with representative government. Modern critics still argue that judicial review is undemocratic. Supporters of judicial review argue that the courts serve a necessary countermajoritarian role. By protecting minorities against overbearing majorities, a strong judiciary with the power of judicial review safeguards individual liberty. The controversy that began with Marbury v. Madison continues to this day.

 How did John Marshall avoid a showdown with Jefferson in Marbury v. Madison?



 Deny Marbury the commission.



 Acknowledge the legitimacy of Marbury’s claim, while somehow avoiding a showdown between the court and the executive branch.

Decision
 Marshall stated emphatically that Marbury was entitled to the commission. But he asserted just as strongly that he could not order Madison to deliver the commission because the Supreme Court lacked jurisdiction to hear the case. Thus, Marshall used a technical legal issue to avoid a showdown between the executive and the judiciary. To arrive at this result, Marshall declared part of an earlier law, the Judiciary Act of 1789, unconstitutional.

John Marshall


Consequences
 Legal scholars usually regard Marbury v. Madison as one of the most important and brilliant opinions in Supreme Court history. Marshall gave all the parties in the case a partial victory. By affirming that Marbury was entitled to the commission, Marshall gave him a moral victory, while also handing Jefferson a practical political victory. His ruling strengthened the concept of judicial review, the notion that courts might overturn acts of the legislature when they conflicted with the Constitution, thus giving the biggest victory to the Supreme Court, whose power was enhanced.

Read the Document Marbury v. Madison


AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

Blackfoot
Fort Clatsop
 (winter quarters 1805–06)

Chinook
Missou


Clatsop


Nez
Percé


OREGON COUNTRY



 ri R.

Mandan
Crow
Shoshone
Cheyenne


 MAINE (part of Mass.)

Mandan Villages
 (winter quarters 1804–05)

VERMONT NEW HAMPSHIRE NEW MASSACHUSETTS YORK RHODE ISLAND

Sioux


PENNSYLVANIA
Fort Ross (Russian 1812) 
Arapaho


DELAWARE MARYLAND

OH IO

 INDIANA

Pawnee


NEW CONNECTICUT JERSEY

TERRITORY VIRGINIA

 EAN

St. Louis
 KENTUCKY

C


Comanche
Ri


R.


Apache


TENNESSEE SOUTH CAROLINA

 pi

T E R R ITO RY


 PA

NORTH CAROLINA

Osage


Mississip


OC IC IF

S PA N I S H


MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY

 GEORGIA

ATL ANTIC O CEAN

Natchez


 o G ra

 nd

New Orleans


 e

SPANISH FLORIDA

Louisiana Purchase 1803


Gulf of Mexico


Route of Lewis and Clark, 1804–06


Sioux


 Indian tribe

7.4 Louisiana Purchase
 Jefferson acquired approximately 827,000 square miles of Western territory, doubling the size of the United States. One of the primary goals of the Lewis and Clark expedition was to map this region.

Lewis and Clark
 In January 1803, six months before news of the purchase of Louisiana, Jefferson had requested funds from Congress for an expedition to explore and map the Western parts of the continent. Meriwether Lewis, Jefferson’s private secretary, headed the expedition. Lewis invited Captain William Clark, an army officer with experience in mapmaking, to join him in commanding a “Corps of volunteers for North Western Discovery.” Beginning their heroic trek westward in the frontier town of St. Louis, the intrepid explorers set out on keelboats, long narrow boats that could carry ten tons of supplies. The expedition traveled up the Missouri River. Progress was slow and the explorers sometimes had to wade along the bank to pull the boats forward by ropes.

 Still, if all went well, they could travel 14 miles on a good day. The purchase of Louisiana added a new element to the mission. In addition to gathering information about native plants, animals, and geography, Lewis was charged with negotiating commercial treaties with Indian tribes and informing the European and American traders inhabiting the Louisiana Territory that they were now subject to the laws of the United States. The small band of explorers included a French interpreter, Toussaint Charbonneau, and his Shoshone wife, Sacagawea, who served the corps ably as a translator. Her presence also signaled the Indians that Lewis and Clark’s intentions were peaceful. An armed group of men might have easily been viewed as a war party. The inclusion of

 What role did Sacagawea play in the Lewis and Clark Expedition?



 CHAPTER 7

JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA: AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY, 1800–1824

 7.5 Jefferson’s Indian Hall at Monticello Jefferson’s main entrance hall contained many Indian artifacts, including a Mandan buffalo-hide robe which hung from the balcony (far right). The images painted on these robes often depicted heroic exploits of the warriors who wore them.

 Sacagawea and her young child—neither could be perceived as a warrior—helped the Corps of Discovery avoid conflict. Clark stressed the importance of this when he wrote in his journal, “a woman with a party of men is a token of peace.” Enduring incredible hardship, including temperatures as low as 45 below zero, the Corps of Discovery traversed almost 4,000 miles. The trek took more than two years. The map (7.4) shows the path of Lewis and Clark. The Corps provided invaluable information about the geography, biology, and peoples of the West. Jefferson had instructed Lewis and Clark to obtain information about the indigenous cultures they encountered, including their languages, traditions, and occupations. Although gathering intelligence would prove invaluable for future diplomatic negotiations and trade with these peoples, Jefferson’s instructions also reflected his lifelong interest in Indian cultures. Many items that Lewis

 What were the main goals of the Lewis and Clark expedition?

 and Clark collected were displayed in Jefferson’s “Indian Hall” at Monticello. Many Indian artifacts were on view in this space, including an impressive Mandan buffalo robe which hangs above the entrance to the room (7.5).

Indian Responses to
Jeffersonian Expansionism:
Assimilation or Revivalism
 Jefferson’s interest in the Indians was motivated by a paternalistic regard for Indians and Indian cultures. He believed that Indian societies, although inferior to Western culture, had a primitive nobility worthy of respect. In choosing to view Indians this way, Jefferson carried forward a much older notion of noble savagery that had warped European views of Indians since their first encounters more than 300 years earlier.

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Lewis and Clark:
 What were they trying to accomplish?

AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY

 A student of the Enlightenment, Jefferson also believed that environment shaped culture. Taken together these two beliefs led him to be cautiously optimistic in his view of the future of AmericanIndian relations, a noticeable contrast with his deeply pessimistic view of future relations between enslaved African Americans and white Americans. Indians simply needed to abandon their traditional ways, and adopt Western agriculture and cultural values. Once they shed their traditions, Indians could then freely intermarry with whites. Assimilation and absorption would solve America’s Indian problem. Once Indians were amalgamated into American society, their lands could be made available for settlement, which would help sustain the ideal of a yeoman republic, and thereby ensure the viability of Jefferson’s political vision for America. Jefferson supported trade with Indians, including granting them generous terms of credit which would encourage indebtedness and force Indians to sell their lands to pay off their debts. Jefferson also hoped to teach Indians Western agricultural practices and to promote western-style gender roles in the division of labor. The goal was to have Indian women abandon work in the fields and take up tasks more typical of Western women, including spinning. In 1803, he encouraged Georgia Indian Agent Benjamin Hawkins to help the Creeks pursue “agriculture” and “household manufacture.” Although some tribes followed the path of assimilation, others rejected Western ways entirely. In the 1790s, a cultural revival occurred among the Iroquois in western New York and the Shawnee, Creeks, and Cherokees on the trans-Appalachian frontier. The revival aimed at revitalizing Indian religious beliefs and cultural practices. The revivalists also attacked the European and American practices that had been incorporated into Indian cultures. One leader in the Indian revival movement was Handsome Lake, who led a revitalization movement among the Seneca of New York beginning in 1799. Among the values he championed was abstinence from alcohol. Traders during the colonial period had introduced alcohol among Indian peoples, creating a serious problem for many indigenous communities. Handsome Lake had himself battled with his own alcohol addiction. A key turning point in his life occurred when he experienced religious visions



 that led him to revive aspects of the Iroquois Great Law of Peace. This ideal was central to the Great Iroquoian Confederacy and enjoined members of the confederacy to seek diplomatic, not military, solutions to conflicts. In 1801, Handsome Lake traveled to Washington, D.C., to meet with President Jefferson to defend the land claims of his people against encroachment from settlers. Another effort at religious and cultural revival took place among the Shawnee and other tribes of the Great Lakes region. The leader of this movement, the Prophet Tenskwatawa, also battled with alcohol addiction. His plan for a revival of traditional culture also came to him in religious visions. The Prophet instructed his people to reject Western influences and return to traditional Indian ways. In contrast to Handsome Lake’s evocation of peace, Tenskwatawa adopted a more militant stance. He joined his brother, the military leader Tecumseh, in organizing rival Indian nations to work together to resist American expansion into Indian lands. This pan-Indian resistance movement united six tribes to repel white encroachments in Ohio and Indiana. Rather than seek peaceful accommodation with the United States, this movement resolved to defend Indian lands by force.

 “To promote this disposition to exchange lands. . . . we shall push our trading uses, and be glad to see the good and influential individuals among them run in debt, because we observe that when these debts get beyond what the individuals can pay, they becoming willing to lop them off by a cession of lands. . . . In this way our settlements will gradually circumscribe and approach the Indians.” THOMAS JEFFERSON to WILLIAM HENRY HARRISON, 1803

 Read the Document Jefferson’s Confidential Message to Congress (1803)

 What were the central beliefs of Handsome Lake’s religious revival?



 CHAPTER 7

JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA: AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY, 1800–1824

Dissension at Home
 In 1804, Jefferson easily defeated his opponent, the Federalist Charles Pinckney, by 162 electoral votes to 14 to start a second term as president. The margin of victory was a tribute to the achievements of his first administration, during which he had overseen a peaceful, relatively smooth transition from Federalist to Republican rule. Jefferson had dismantled parts of the government bureaucracy, overseen a robust economy, and preserved the ideal of a nation of yeoman farmers by acquiring the vast new territory of Louisiana. In contrast to the successes of his first term, however, challenges at home and abroad marred his second four years in office. Divisions within the Republican movement plagued Jefferson’s second term. Meanwhile, his effort to avoid entanglement in European conflicts would lead him to institute an embargo against foreign trade that proved extremely unpopular in New England and seaport towns and cities dependent on foreign trade.

 Jefferson’s Attack on the Federalist Judiciary

7.6 Portrait of
Aaron Burr
Artist John
 Vanderlyn, a protégé of Burr, painted this striking portrait of the controversial politician during Burr’s tenure as vice president.

 The final element in the Republican strategy to rein in the Federalist judiciary involved using the constitutional power of impeachment to remove two of the most controversial Federalist judges. Toward the end of his first term, Jefferson scored a victory by removing Judge John Pickering of New Hampshire, a notorious drunk. Although he had clearly been unqualified to hold office, many of Jefferson’s supporters were worried about using impeachment as a partisan tool. Some Republicans doubted that Pickering’s deplorable behavior qualified as “high crimes and misdemeanors,” the Constitution’s criteria for removal from office. Still, Jefferson managed to persuade enough members of the Senate to convict Pickering. Buoyed by his victory in the election of 1804, Jefferson next turned his attention to Samuel Chase, a federal judge who had used the bench as a pulpit to denounce Jefferson and his ideas by delivering long-winded speeches to juries. Few Republicans would have disputed the charge that Chase was partisan and obnoxious, but neither of these was an impeachable offense if one construed the Constitution according to Jefferson’s rule of strict construction. Ardent Republicans argued that impeachment was the only tool to check the excesses of unelected judges. More moderate Republicans and Federalists insisted that an impeachable offense had to be a criminal act; stridency and

 partisanship were simply not impeachable offenses. The Senate failed to convict Chase, and the episode drove a wedge between the radical and moderate wings of Jefferson’s coalition.

The Controversial Mr. Burr
 The duel between Hamilton and Burr ended the latter’s public political career, but not his political scheming. Burr was soon charged with conspiracy and treason. The exact details of his plot are sketchy, but he appears to have planned to raise a private army to conquer Mexico. The evidence that he intended to invade American territory is less compelling. In any case Burr was certainly one of the more flamboyant personalities of the early Republic, a quality his friend and protégé, painter John Vanderlyn, captured in this portrait (7.6). Jefferson pushed hard to prosecute Burr for treason. Chief Justice John Marshall refused to construe the treason clause in more broad terms, forcing the government to produce two witnesses who could testify that Burr had waged war against the United States. Under this more precise definition of treason, the prosecution was unable to convict Burr. Marshall’s decision to read the treason clause in such narrow terms infuriated Jefferson, who on this occasion seemed to embrace a theory of constitutional interpretation at odds with his own preferred theory of strict construction. In essence, when it came to Burr, Jefferson argued that one ought to construe the Constitution’s definition of treason in Hamiltonian terms. Having avoided the charge of treason Burr went into exile in Europe after the trial but eventually returned to New York to start a lucrative law practice.

 Why did Jefferson target the federal judiciary and seek to limit its power?

AMERICA CONFRONTS A WORLD AT WAR



America Confronts a World at War
 In 1803, within two weeks of its sale of Louisiana, France was again at war with Britain. Although Napoleon’s armies dominated the European continent, Britain’s navy commanded the seas and defeated the French fleet at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805. During the early phases of the European conflict, American merchants reaped enormous profits by trading with both the French and the British. However, both Britain and France, eager to exert economic pressure on their enemies, set out to blockade the ports of their adversaries. The United States argued that neutral nations had a right to carry on nonmilitary trade with both sides in the conflict, but neither Britain nor France honored this idea. The British navy boarded and searched American ships and seized cargoes without providing compensation. Even more galling to Americans was the British practice of impressment, forcing merchant seamen to serve in the British navy. Many American sailors had once served in the British navy but now claimed American citizenship. The British refused to recognize these claims, arguing that the men were deserters still subject to British law. Between 1803 and 1812, the British navy abducted and impressed 6,000 Americans. The tense environment on the high seas reached a crisis in 1807, when the British warship the Leopard fired at an American navy ship, the Chesapeake. Three Americans were killed and 18 wounded. The British abducted four American sailors whom they charged were deserters from the Royal Navy. People in America’s seaports clamored for revenge for the Chesapeake Affair. Citizens of Norfolk, Virginia, were particularly outraged because the Chesapeake had been built in the town’s shipyards. Norfolk passed a resolution denouncing this outrageous assault on American liberty and honor. One British diplomat noted that “the lowest order of the Americans are much irritated and inclined for violent measures.” Mobs took to the streets to protest in many of the nation’s ports. President Jefferson instructed the governors of the states to be prepared to call up 100,000 militia men.

The Failure of
Peaceable Coercion
 Hoping to avoid war with the British and French, Jefferson proposed a policy of “peaceable coercion.” “Our commerce,” Jefferson wrote, “is so valuable to them, that they will be glad to purchase it, when the only price we ask is to do us justice.” The Embargo Act of 1807 became the cornerstone of “peaceable coercion.” By keeping America’s ships out of harm’s way and depriving Britain and France of the economic benefits of American trade, Jefferson hoped to pressure both sides to respect the rights of neutrals on the high seas. Smugglers flouted the ban, and it proved unpopular in New England and seaports, where it hit the shipping business hard. American exports fell from $108 million in 1807 to $22 million in 1808. To enforce the embargo along the Canadian border, Jefferson had to send troops, a policy he had decried during the Whiskey Rebellion a decade earlier. Federalists in New England, whose political fortunes had been flagging,

 now regained their voice, rallying against Jefferson and his “dambargo.” As this cartoon (7.7) lampooning Jefferson’s efforts to avoid foreign conflict suggests, the embargo did not intimidate Britain or France, but it weakened the American economy.

 Madison’s Travails: Diplomatic Blunders Abroad and Tensions on the Frontier The presidential election of 1808 marked the first time that Republicans split over who should lead them. James Madison, who had been Jefferson’s closest advisor during the turbulent 1790s, was Jefferson’s choice. Quiet, almost scholarly in temperament, Madison had impressive accomplishments. He had been an architect of the Constitution, had drafted the Bill of Rights, and had served as Jefferson’s secretary of state. Other choices were former Anti-Federalists George Clinton and James Monroe.

 What was peaceable coercion?



 CHAPTER 7

7.7 Intercourse or
Impartial Dealings
 Jefferson stands helpless, caught between King George III and Napoleon.

JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA: AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY, 1800–1824

 Clinton’s candidacy fizzled, but Monroe gained support. Borrowing from a practice begun in 1800, congressmen met in a caucus to decide on a presidential and vice-presidential candidate. The Republican caucus decided that Madison would carry forward Jefferson’s mantle. Jefferson’s Embargo Act not only divided Republicans but also strengthened the fortunes of the Federalists in places such as New England, where the economic impact of the embargo hit hardest. The Federalist candidate, Charles Pinckney, received three times as many votes as he had in 1804, doing particularly well in New England. Despite the strong Federalist showing in New England and New York, Madison defeated Pinckney by 122 to 47 electoral votes to become the fourth president of the United States. Unfortunately for Madison he had inherited a major foreign policy crisis from Jefferson. The embargo had not forced Britain and France to change their policy. The main casualties from this policy had been Southern agriculture and New England commerce. Madison’s faith in a peaceful solution received a boost when Britain’s ambassador opened talks about ending the embargo. Britain even accepted Madison’s insistence that it pay reparations for the Chesapeake incident and offered to stop

View the Image British Impressment


 searching and seizing American vessels in neutral waters. However, the British government repudiated the generous terms negotiated by the British ambassador, dashing hopes for peace. Frustrated by the diplomatic impasse, Congress sought another solution to the problem. A House select committee headed by Nathaniel Macon proposed to provide muchneeded customs revenue by allowing British and French goods back into American harbors if they were transported on American ships. Although the measure failed, a second proposal, Macon’s Bill No. 2, did pass. The most important provision of Macon’s Bill No. 2 stipulated that when either Britain or France repealed its restrictions on neutral trade, America would reinstate sanctions against the other nation. Seizing on this law, Napoleon promised that France would honor the rights of neutrals. Napoleon, who had little intention of keeping his word, thus used Macon’s bill to drive a wedge between the United States and Britain. The British pointed out that Napoleon’s promise was hardly sufficient proof to meet the terms set by Macon Bill No. 2 to lift commercial sanctions. Britain complained that America’s new posture toward France and continuing hostility to Britain were not justified. Rather than provide a means to normalize relations with both France and Britain, American policy heightened tensions with Britain. The repeated violation of their neutrality was not the only American grievance against Britain. As American settlers streamed into the new state of Ohio (1803) and the Indiana Territory, many of them blamed the British for instigating Indians to attack them. Britain’s lucrative trade with these Indians included the sale of firearms, and these weapons proved especially useful to Tecumseh, whose pan-Indian resistance movement was gathering followers as Indians faced further encroachments on their land. Although Tecumseh’s brother, the Prophet, exhorted his followers to reject all aspects of white civilization, European military technology proved too useful to abandon. Tecumseh worked to convince various tribes to unite to oppose further American expansion. Indigenous peoples’ resolve to resist Western expansion intensified after a series of treaties

 How did British relations with Indians in the Northwest exacerbate political tensions with America?

AMERICA CONFRONTS A WORLD AT WAR

 signed at Fort Wayne (1809), in which the United States wrested three million acres of land from the Delaware and Potawatomi in Indiana. To squash resistance, William Henry Harrison led a military expedition against Tecumseh and his supporters in 1811. Harrison’s expedition burned to the ground the village of Tippecanoe, the center of Tecumseh’s pan-Indian movement. After this attack Tecumseh entered into a formal alliance with the British, who supplied further arms to the Indians. Confident that their alliance with the British would help defeat American forces, Tecumseh and his allies stepped up attacks on American settlements along the frontier.

The War of 1812
 Frustrated by the inability of peaceable coercion to force Britain to respect American rights on the high seas and angered by British support for Tecumseh, Madison began preparations for war. He called Congress into an early session in fall 1811. Republicans dominated Congress but were divided over war against Britain. Many Republicans from the mid-Atlantic, especially New York, were reluctant to take on the most powerful navy in the world. “Old Republicans,” the more radical states’ rights wing of the Jeffersonian coalition who were particularly strong in Madison’s home state of Virginia, feared that war would lead to the creation of a large military establishment and new taxes. Madison drew his strongest support from a group of War Hawks, young Republican congressmen from the South and West who were intensely nationalistic, resented British attacks on American rights, and favored an aggressive policy of expansion into Indian-occupied territory and the annexation of Canada. The two leading War Hawks were Henry Clay, a first-term congressmen from Kentucky, and John C. Calhoun, an up-country South Carolinian educated at Yale. The House voted to declare war by 79 to 49. The margin in the Senate was 19 to 13. No single pattern accounts for all the votes, but enthusiasm for the war ran high in many parts of America. Regional, economic, and party identities shaped the final vote. British involvement with western Native American tribes, particularly in the supply of guns, angered Westerners. Northeastern Republicans who favored war were motivated by anger against this latest threat to American freedom from British tyranny. They saw a struggle that had begun during

 the Revolution and would not end until America was truly free of British power. Federalists viewed the vote as another example of the Republicans’ distorted vision of the world. For Federalists, France, not Britain, was the true enemy. Federalists were unanimously opposed to the war, a sentiment which intensified when they learned that the British had been prepared to yield on some points of contention. Anger over Federalist opposition to war led to violence. One Baltimore Federalist newspaper editor who criticized the war was targeted by a mob of angry Republicans, who attacked his office and destroyed his printing press. His attempt to resume printing after the incident triggered a full-scale riot that plunged the city into chaos and was put down only when the militia was called out. The resulting destruction of property and loss of life were the worst instance of public unrest in the young nation’s short history and earned Baltimore the nickname “Mob Town.” The war pitted the United States against Britain for the second time in less than a half century. As this political cartoon shows (7.8), the primary justification for the War of 1812 was Britain’s violation of American neutrality and seizure of American sailors. In the cartoon, Columbia, the symbol of America, reminds France and Britain that they must respect free trade and seamen’s rights or face retribution. The other issue, British support for Indian attacks on frontier settlements, also galvanized popular support for the war effort, particularly in the West. For a better understanding of the division over entering the war, see Competing Visions: War Hawks and Their Critics.



7.8 Columbia
Teaches John Bull
His New Lesson
 Columbia, depicted as the goddess of liberty, stands before other symbols of the new American nation, including an eagle and a shield bearing the stars and stripes of the American flag. She warns France’s Napoleon and Britain’s John Bull to respect American rights.

 Who were the War Hawks?



 CHAPTER 7

JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA: AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY, 1800–1824

Competing Visions
WAR HAWKS AND THEIR CRITICS
Americans were deeply divided over the War of 1812. In the Southwest support for the war was motivated by concern over Britain’s Indian policy. Representative Felix Grundy, a prominent War Hawk from Tennessee, charged that the British had instigated Indian violence against Americans. Indians killed three of Grundy’s brothers in the conflict along the frontier. By contrast, the sharp-tongued, Virginian conservative John Randolph, a prominent “Old Republican” became a vocal critic of the war. Fiercely independent, Randolph dismissed Grundy’s suggestion of an Indian–British conspiracy, instead putting the blame for Western conflicts squarely on the settlers who violated Indian land claims. How did Grundy’s experiences as a Westerner color his decision to support war? Was Randolph’s response likely to attract political support (why or why not)? Why would Randolph opt to frame his opposition in these terms? In this impassioned speech, Felix Grundy accused the British of arming and inciting American Indians to take up arms against Americans. “It cannot be believed, by any man who will reflect, that the savage tribes, uninfluenced by other powers, would think of making war on the United States. They understand too well their own weakness and our strength. They have already felt the weight of our arms; they know they hold the very soil on which they live as tenants in sufferance. How, then, sir are we to account for their late conduct? In one way only; some powerful nation must have intrigued with them, and turned their peaceful dispositions towards us into hostilities. Great Britain alone has intercourse with those Northern Tribes.” 
 John Randolph’s response to Grundy dismissed the notion of a conspiracy. The source of conflict along America’s frontier, Randolph argued, was the greed of Westerners who encroached on Indian lands. Session after session, their table had been piled up with Indian treaties, for which the appropriations has been voted as a matter of course, without examination. Advantage had been taken of the spirit of the Indians, broken by the war which ended in the treaty of Greenville [1795]. Under the ascendancy then acquired over them, they had been pent up by subsequent treaties into nooks, straightened in their quarters by a blind cupidity seeking to extinguish their title to immense wilderness, for which (possessing, as we do already, more land than we can sell or use) we shall not have occasion for half a century to come. It was our own thirst for territory, our own want of moderation, that had driven these sons of nature to desperation.”

A
Scene on the Frontiers as Practiced by the “Humane” British and Their “Worthy” Allies 

Read the Document Pennsylvania Gazette, “Indian Hostilities” (1812)


 Why did Westerners believe that the British were encouraging Indian violence against Americans?

AMERICA CONFRONTS A WORLD AT WAR

Lake


 BRITISH

Sup


Lake Superio


 (CANADA)

 r

 er

 io

 BRITISH

 r

NORTH AMERICA MAINE
(part of Mass.) 
 VERMONT

NORTH AMERICA

Michillimackinac
July 17, 1812


 (CANADA)

Montreal


Baltimore
 OHIO

Washington D.C.


NEW JERSEY

 n

 ga

INDIANA TERRITORY

 ga

RHODE ISLAND

 PENNSYLVANIA

Aug 15, 1812


 CONNECTICUT

 DELAWARE

MICHIGAN TERRITORY

 VIRGINIA

A


 IAN

LOUI S



Gulf of Mexico


Sacketts
Harbor


Fort Niagara


NEW Y OR K

 rie

Erie
Fort
Defiance


Fort
Stephenson


P E N N S Y LV A N IA


Tippecanoe


OH IO

Nov 7, 1811


AT L AN T IC

New Orleans Nov 7, 1814


OC E A N

Jan 8, 1815


 ario Lake Ont

 Put-in-Bay Sept 10, 1813

March 27, 1814


Pensacola


 ke E Fort Malden L a

Fort Meigs


SOUTH CAROLINA GEORGIA

April 27, 1813


Oct 5, 1813


 Detroit surrendered Aug 16, 1812

 k attac

NORTH CAROLINA

 TENNESSEE

Horseshoe Bend


British


York (Toronto)


Queenston Heights
Battle of the Thames Oct 13, 1812


MARYLAND KENTUCKY

Plattsburgh
Sept 11, 1814


 ron

E


HAMPSHIRE MASSACHUSETTS

 rie

Hu


Lake


Fort Dearborn


NEW YORK

Lake M
 ichi

 ario L. Ont

 ke

Lake Mi
 chi

 NEW

 u ro n

MICHIGAN TERRITORY

La


 eH ak

 n

L


ILLINOIS TERRITORY



SPANISH FLORIDA

INDIANA TERRITORY

 Rather than challenge Britain on the high seas, the American war effort concentrated on Canada (7.9). Attacking the British in Canada appealed to the War Hawks. Canada was poorly defended, and Americans mistakenly believed that Quebec’s large French-speaking population would eagerly join Americans to expel the British from Canada. Seizing Canada would also deprive Tecumseh of his primary source of arms. Given the power of the British Empire, particularly its naval superiority, the focus on conquering Canada, or at least holding it hostage to force Britain to respect neutral rights on the high seas, seemed a promising strategy. American efforts to wrest Canada from Britain, however, failed miserably as British troops beat back incursions into Canada along the U.S. border. The British also harassed America’s coastal settlements and blockaded its ports. In the most audacious move of the war, in August 1814, the British captured Washington, D.C., and burned the capital. The British assault forced President Madison and his wife Dolley to flee. British troops feasted on an elegant dinner that had been set out for the president and his wife and took many items from the executive mansion,

Interactive Map: War of 1812
View the Map o


Sept 13–14, 1814


Cincinnati


Washington D.C.


 Surrendered and burned Aug 24, 1814

K E N TU C K Y


 American victories American victories over Indians British victories Forts

 Fort McHenry (Baltimore)

Dayton


V IR GIN IA


 American troop movements British troop movements British naval blockade

 including Madison’s medicine chest, which the British government returned 125 years later to President Franklin Roosevelt. The British next bombarded but failed to take Fort McHenry in Baltimore harbor. An eyewitness to the attack, Francis Scott Key, composed a patriotic poem, “The Star Spangled Banner,” that became America’s national anthem in the 1930s. Although the American navy was no match for the British Navy in the Atlantic, it did defeat the British on the Great Lakes, at Put-in-Bay and Niagara Falls. While diplomatic efforts to end the war intensified, the British suffered a crushing defeat when they assaulted New Orleans in January 1815. Andrew Jackson, the American commander at New Orleans, led a mixture of regular troops, militia, free blacks, and a few Indians. Jackson even accepted help from French pirates. The victory made him a national hero celebrated in ballads such as the Hunters of Kentucky. “Old Hickory” (Jackson’s nickname) became a symbol of steadfastness and bravery. Newspapers proclaimed the victory a symbol of the “Rising Glory of the American Republic.” Neither side in this battle knew that the two nations had already signed a peace treaty. It took two weeks for word of peace to reach Louisiana,

7.9 Major Battles
 of the War of 1812 America’s effort to seize Canada failed, but some of the fiercest fighting occurred along this northern frontier.

 What were the main military consequences of the War of 1812?



 CHAPTER 7

JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA: AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY, 1800–1824

 “Nothing was adjusted, nothing was settled—nothing in substance but an indefinite suspension of hostilities was agreed to.” JOHN QUINCY ADAMS, describing the Treaty of Ghent (1815) arriving after the battle was over. The Treaty of Ghent in 1814, named for the Belgian city where the negotiations were conducted, ended the fighting but failed to settle the long-standing

 issues between the two nations. Indeed, if judged by the terms of the peace treaty, the War of 1812 accomplished little. The issues at stake at the beginning of the war, including the impressment of American sailors and the rights of neutral trade, remained unresolved. In private, some Americans, including John Quincy Adams, who negotiated the treaty, felt it did little more than end hostilities. The American public generally regarded the war as a victory, calling it the Second War for Independence. At least America had defended its honor, forcing the most powerful nation in the world to treat the new republic with respect, a perception reflected in this painting celebrating the treaty (7.10); America, represented by Columbia, reaches out the hand of friendship to Britannia. While the British and Americans had fought to a draw, the most conspicuous losers in the war were the Indians living along the frontier, who lost an important ally when the British withdrew and were forced to make major land concessions to Americans. Pan-Indian nationalists such as Tecumseh suffered a severe setback at the hands of William Henry Harrison and Andrew Jackson, whose military successes secured the transAppalachian frontier, the Western territory beyond the Appalachian Mountains, for settlement.

The Hartford Convention
 While many Americans celebrated Jackson’s victory over the British at New Orleans, Federalists in New England convened at the Hartford Convention in Hartford, Connecticut, to protest the War of 1812. Although some Federalists in New England had flirted with secession, the delegates to the Hartford Convention stopped well short of advocating the breakup of the Union. Although New

7.10 Treaty of Ghent
 In this representation of the peace accord worked out between America and Britain at Ghent, Belgium, Columbia and Britannia hold hands. Two sailors unfurl the flags of their nations, proclaiming a new era of harmony.

 What were the main goals of the Hartford Convention?

AMERICA CONFRONTS A WORLD AT WAR



7.11 The Hartford Convention or Leap, No Leap
 In this cartoon George III beckons to Federalists in Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode Island to jump off the cliff and join him, promising them “titles, nobility,” and other rewards for abandoning their fellow states.

 England Federalists had denounced the radical states’ rights ideas that Jeffersonians had espoused in response to the Alien and Sedition Crisis in 1798, they now echoed many of those ideas. The convention delegates proposed constitutional amendments that would strengthen New England’s influence in the Union. In particular, they sought to require a two-thirds majority for commercial regulations, declarations of war, and the admission of new states. To weaken the South’s influence in Congress, the Hartford Convention also called for a repeal of the three-fifths compromise, which allowed Southerners to count a percentage of their slaves for the purposes of determining a state’s

 representation in the House. The Hartford Convention’s proposals were publicized at the same time as news of the Treaty of Ghent and the victory at New Orleans were fueling a new sense of national pride. In this political cartoon ridiculing the Hartford Convention (7.11), leading New England Federalists appear ready to leap off a cliff into the welcoming arms of Britain’s king. Federalists’ narrow sectionalism appeared out of step with the public’s new patriotic fervor. Even in their New England stronghold, Federalists saw themselves irreparably damaged as a movement. The War of 1812 facilitated the demise of the Federalists as a viable political organization.

 How are the actions of New England states represented in the political cartoon on the Hartford Convention above?



 CHAPTER 7

JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA: AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY, 1800–1824

The Republic Reborn:
Consequences of the War of 1812
 The War of 1812 transformed America, its politics, economy, society, and relations with other nations. The postwar era inaugurated a period of nationalism that was evidenced in diplomacy, economic policy, and law. There was broad popular support for a stronger central government, one capable of dealing with foreign challenges and spurring domestic economic growth. Thus the partisan squabbling of the Jeffersonian era gave way to the necessities of fighting a war. These realities forced leading politicians to unite the best aspects of Jeffersonian politics with Hamiltonian economics. John Quincy Adams, secretary of state under James Monroe, proved to be an effective diplomat, skillfully negotiating important treaties for the United States. The demands of the wartime economy not only spurred economic and technological innovation but also increased demand for manufactured goods, such as firearms and textiles for uniforms. The new nationalist ethos and a more sympathetic attitude toward economic development were evidenced in the decisions of the Supreme Court after the war.

The National Republican
Vision of James Monroe


A
View of  the President’s House in the City of Washington after the Conflagration of the 24th of August, 1814 Repairs to the damaged executive mansion included a new coat of white paint. The residence became known as “the White House.”

 The war radically transformed Republican political and constitutional ideas. In his annual message to Congress in 1815, the first after the Treaty of Ghent, Madison suggested that the nation expand the size of its military and reaffirmed his support for a national bank and for protective tariffs for American industry. Seeking to push beyond this nationalist agenda, Madison floated the idea of chartering a national university and even considered amending the Constitution to give the federal government the power to promote internal improvements such as roads and canals. Madison clung to one traditional republican idea. He believed that to exercise such powers required a constitutional amendment. Although on this one point of constitutional theory Madison reasserted the traditional Republican view of the limited scope of federal

 power, as a practical matter he had aligned himself with much of the old Hamiltonian agenda. Indeed, John Quincy Adams, son of the former president and a staunch Federalist, believed that Madison and “the Republicans had out-Federalized Federalism.” The collapse of Federalists after the War of 1812 led to a shift away from the rancor that had characterized politics during the Jeffersonian era. Following Madison as president, James Monroe sought to unite the political ideals of Jeffersonianism with aspects of Hamiltonian economic theory. For a brief period he managed to create an administration free of the partisan divisions that had characterized American politics since Washington’s second term. As a gesture toward nonpartisan politics, the Republican Monroe named the brilliant Federalist John Quincy Adams as his secretary of state and appointed men from different regions to heal old sectional tensions. He also took a lesson from Washington, the other president who seemed most successful at rising above party, and embarked on a goodwill tour of the nation. Monroe began his tour in Boston, a city with strong Federalist sympathies. Praising the gesture, a Boston newspaper proclaimed an Era of Good Feelings to describe the absence of bitter partisan conflict during Monroe’s presidency. Monroe also restored luster to the presidency. He became noted for his stylish entertaining in the executive mansion. To repair the smoke damage to the executive mansion (7.12), a result of the British

 Why was Monroe’s presidency described as an “Era of Good Feelings”?

THE REPUBLIC REBORN: CONSEQUENCES OF THE WAR OF 1812

 attack on Washington during the War of 1812, Monroe had its exterior painted a brilliant white. The official residence of the President of the United States has been known as the White House ever since. Monroe not only sought to reconcile Federalist and Jeffersonian ideals. He also served as a bridge between the political cultures of two different centuries, the eighteenth and nineteenth. Monroe was the last president with ties to the generation that fought the Revolution and wrote the Constitution. His roots in the eighteenth century appear in the clothes he wore at his inauguration. Most men had abandoned their wigs and replaced breeches and silk stockings with trousers. But Monroe retained the ideals and dress of eighteenth-century gentility. In this portrait, he wears breeches and silk stockings (7.13). If Monroe’s personal style and values harked back to the eighteenth century, many of his policies as president reflected newer ideas including the idea that it was vital to encourage the expansion of the nation’s “domestic market” encouraging “an active intercourse between the extremes and throughout every portion of our Union.” One aging Federalist remarked that “the Party in Power seems disposed to do all that federal men ever wished.”



Diplomatic Triumphs
 After the war, Secretary of State John Quincy Adams resolved outstanding border disputes with Britain. In the Rush-Bagot Treaty of 1817, the United States and Britain limited naval armaments on the Great Lakes. An accord reached the following year set the new boundary between the Louisiana Territory and Canada at the 49th parallel. The British also recognized American fishing rights off Labrador and Newfoundland, and America and Britain agreed to continue to occupy jointly the Oregon Territory in the Pacific Northwest. These diplomatic successes effectively normalized U.S.-Canadian relations and created a peaceful border between the two countries that has persisted for more than 200 years. Adams was now free to address the southern boundary disputes with Spain. America had long been eager to wrest Florida from Spain. In March 1818, Andrew Jackson led a raid into Spanish Florida to attack the Seminoles. Under the pretext of protecting American settlements against Indian attack, he captured two Spanish forts, thereby further weakening Spain’s bargaining position. Rather than risk war, Spain ceded all claims to Florida and recognized U.S. sovereignty in Louisiana in the Adams-Onis Treaty of 1819. Spain’s empire in the Americas had been crumbling for two decades. In 1811, Paraguay and Venezuela declared independence from Spain. In 1818, Chile declared its independence, and Peru followed suit in 1821. Building on the goodwill generated by the resolution of the northern boundary issue between the United States and Canada, Britain’s foreign minister suggested in 1823 that the United States and Britain issue a declaration that neither intended to annex the newly liberated states in Spanish America. Although Monroe was tempted to accept the British offer, Adams advised against it, and Monroe followed his advice. In his annual message to Congress in 1823, he presented a general policy for Spanish America. This statement, the Monroe Doctrine, reiterated the policy outlined in Washington’s Farewell Address that America would not meddle in European affairs. It also warned European powers that the United States would view intervention in the affairs of the newly independent states of Spanish Americas as a threat to its security. 7.13 Portrait of President James Monroe This image captures Monroe’s role as a transitional figure between the eighteenth-century world of the Founders and a new era in American politics. He appears without the wigs favored by eighteenth-century gentlemen, but his silk stockings and knee breeches reflected the fashions of the founding generation.

Read the Document Monroe Doctrine (1823)


 What were the major ideas associated with the Monroe Doctrine?



 CHAPTER 7

JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA: AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY, 1800–1824

Economic and Technological
Innovation


7.14 Slater Mill
 The earliest factories were not imposing structures belching forth smoke, but small water-powered mills. Slater’s first water-powered mill resembled the clapboard wooden structures that had been used to grind grain or saw logs and that easily blended into their rural settings.

 The War of 1812 not only led to a renewed political commitment to economic development but also spurred a remarkable period of technological development. America’s embargo against foreign goods and the demands of the wartime economy provided incentives for economic innovation. Firearms production was improved, steam engines powered new modes of transportation, and new agricultural technology led to a boom in cotton production. Artist and inventor Samuel Morse captured the age’s search for political consensus and fascination with technology in his painting of the House of Representatives. See Images as History: Samuel Morse’s House of Representatives and the National Republican Vision. Not surprisingly the war spurred innovation in the production of firearms. The federal arsenals at Springfield, Massachusetts, and Harpers Ferry, Virginia, played a pivotal role in advancing these developments. Indeed, by the mid-1820s, Harper’s Ferry had pioneered a mass production technique for manufacturing firearms. In place of older artisan methods, in which master craftsmen handcrafted items for production, the system used new power machinery to cut and shape standardized parts. By 1820, John H. Hall had perfected the manufacturing techniques for “fabricating arms exactly alike and with economy by the hands of common workmen.” Hall began producing a new breech-loading rifle, an improvement over the traditional muzzle-loading muskets.

 View the Closer Look Images as History: Samuel Morse’s House of Representatives and the National Republican Vision

 A simple, but far-reaching technological improvement in agricultural production transformed the American economy. The cotton gin, an invention by Eli Whitney, an industrious Connecticut Yankee working as a tutor on a Southern plantation, easily removed the seeds that adhered tenaciously to short staple cotton, a hearty plant well suited to Southern climate and soil. Whitney’s cotton gin revolutionized cotton agriculture. Before his invention, an adult slave needed a whole day to clean a single pound of cotton. Whitney’s cotton gin allowed a single slave to clean 50 pounds of cotton a day. In 1790, the South produced 3,000 bales of cotton. By 1810, the cotton gin facilitated the production of 178,000 bales. (Each bale weighed approximately 480 pounds.) Immediately after the War of 1812, cotton production almost doubled again to 334,000 bales. Cotton would provide huge new economic incentives for slave-based agriculture by making it much cheaper to produce cotton for market. Although cotton exports to Britain consumed much of this new cash crop, some of the cotton was purchased for domestic textile manufacturing. In 1793, Samuel Slater established a mechanized spinning factory in Pawtucket, Rhode Island. His mill was a relatively modest structure whose size and architectural style fit the scale of a small New England village. The first mills depended on water power and took advantage of natural waterfalls to power water wheels (7.14). Slater pioneered the mill village model of

 What was the economic significance of Whitney’s cotton gin?

THE REPUBLIC REBORN: CONSEQUENCES OF THE WAR OF 1812



Images as History
SAMUEL MORSE’S HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES AND THE NATIONAL REPUBLICAN VISION
In 1819 Samuel Morse began his ambitious painting of the House of Representatives. The painting not only reflected the political ideas of the Era of Good Feelings, it projected a nationalist vision of America’s bright future. How did Morse’s emphasis on architectural grandeur convey the values of Monroe and Nationalist Republican belief? Although the crowded chamber bustles with activity, Morse presented a scene of cordiality and harmony. The painting captures the time before formal political business began, a decision that allowed Morse to create a scene free of conflict or tension. Morse chose a rare evening session of the House to illustrate. This decision allowed him to further shift the focus away from the actions of politicians. Occupying the dramatic center of the painting is the House of Representative’s doorkeeper, who is lighting a large chandelier to illuminate the evening’s activities. The painting thus pays tribute to America’s technological progress. It links America’s political institutions symbolically to light and progress. 
 Benjamin Henry Latrobe, the architect responsible for rebuilding the Capitol after the War of 1812, chose multicolored stones for the columns supporting the roof of the House. This particular architectural element became a visual symbol of the idea of federalism, in which the different states, represented by the stones, blended together in a single harmonious republican structure, a classical column. A number of distinguished guests are in the House chamber, including the entire Supreme Court, and a number of guests occupy the gallery. The inclusion of the Pawnee chief, Petalesharo, signifies America’s inevitable subjection of Indians. Morse’s painting idealizes a brief moment in American politics that was already on the wane by the time his painting was displayed. Monroe’s vision of a National Republican consensus and the “era of good feelings” was being supplanted by rising sectional tensions over slavery and a new era of partisan conflict. Morse highlighted the multicolored stone columns, which symbolized the ideal of federalism. The Indian figure in the gallery symbolized Monroe’s diplomatic achievements and the inevitable subjugation of America’s indigenous population.

•


•


 Why did Morse highlight architecture and minimize the people in his painting?

•


 Morse focused on the act of lighting the House’s impressive chandelier, a symbol of American progress. Samuel Morse’s The Old House of Representatives



 CHAPTER 7

JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA: AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY, 1800–1824

 industrial production. Others later adapted his model by creating entirely new mill villages in which the company owned the adjacent farmland and rented it to men whose families worked in the mills. This Rhode Island or “family” model of the mill village was an important economic development in manufacturing.

 “The present moment is every way favorable to the establishment of a great national policy and of great national institutions, in respect to the army, the navy, the judicial, [and] the commercial … interests of the country.” Justice JOSEPH STORY [1816]

Judicial Nationalism
 No figure captured the new nationalist spirit more fully than the young Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story. A brilliant lawyer, Story was only 32 when James Madison appointed him to the Court. Madison hoped that Story, an anti-embargo Republican from Massachusetts, would check the nationalism of Chief Justice John Marshall. Madison would not be the last president to be shocked and disappointed by one of his Supreme Court appointments. Story proved to be as nationalistic as Marshall. Story’s decisions on the court supported the power of the federal judiciary and limited that of the states. In landmark decisions, Marshall and Story helped strengthen the federal government and the courts and paved the way for economic growth. The most famous case dealing with federalism was McCulloch v. Maryland. The case arose when the state of Maryland levied a tax on the Baltimore branch of the Second Bank of the United States. Most Republicans had made their peace with the idea of a bank, but some continued to resent this highly visible symbol of Hamiltonian federalism. Marshall declared the Maryland state tax unconstitutional and affirmed an essentially Hamiltonian view of the powers of the federal government. According to Marshall the federal government enjoyed broad powers under the

 “necessary and proper” clauses of the Constitution, which allowed it to charter a bank. Marshall further argued that the power to tax was also the power to destroy and allowing the state to tax a federally chartered institution would have allowed Maryland to undermine an act of the federal government. While Marshall conceded that the powers of the federal government were not unlimited, he affirmed that within its sphere of authority it enjoyed enormous latitude to accomplish any legitimate constitutional objective. In contrast to many Republicans who accepted the Jeffersonian idea that individual states could judge the constitutionality of federal acts, the Marshall Court insisted that only the Supreme Court could determine when the federal government had exceeded its authority. No other decision rendered by the Court generated so much controversy as that of McCulloch v. Maryland. For radical opponents of the Marshall Court, McCulloch seemed to realize the Anti-Federalists’ most dire predictions. Anger over McCulloch led many Republicans, particularly in the South, to develop a more aggressive version of states’ rights. They challenged the authority of the Supreme Court to decide arguments between the states and the federal government. For nationalists such as Marshall and Story, however, the creation of a more powerful central government was essential to the survival of the United States. The Marshall Court also decided cases dealing with the law and the economy. One of the most important cases dealing with economic development also expanded the scope of federal power over commerce. In Gibbons v. Ogden (1824), a case involving steamboats, the Court grappled with the scope of federal powers over interstate commerce. In that case Marshall construed the word commerce broadly to encompass “every species of commercial intercourse.” The Court also held that federal power over interstate commerce did not end at the borders of each state, but extended within states when that commerce was intermingled with economic activity that crossed state lines. Although in the nineteenth century the federal government did not exploit its power over interstate commerce to the fullest, the power to regulate interstate commerce is currently one of the most far-reaching possessed by the federal government.

 Which Marshall Court decisions best illustrate the Court’s nationalism?

CRISES AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE NATIONAL REPUBLICAN CONSENSUS



Crises and the Collapse of
 the National Republican Consensus The patriotic sentiments stirred by the War of 1812 and the emergence of a new consensus around a Hamiltonian economic vision contributed to a period of prosperity and optimism. The new consensus, however, proved fragile, and a severe depression soon followed the postwar economic boom. Slavery also vaulted to national attention when Missouri sought admission to the Union as a slave state. The hope that Monroe’s creative synthesis of the Jeffersonian and Hamiltonian visions might usher in a new Era of Good Feelings proved short lived as economic and political crises again divided the nation.

The Panic of 1819
 Economic expansion, in part driven by the demand for cotton, led to a growth in the financial sector of the American economy. States chartered new banks, so that the number of banks doubled between 1815 and 1818, from just over 200 to more than 400. In 1816, Congress chartered a Second Bank of the United States, which further fueled economic expansion and land speculation. Between 1815 and 1818, land sales more than tripled. However, the price of cotton and other agricultural products exported by America dropped in 1819, leading to a severe economic downturn that affected nearly every aspect of the American economy. Since much of the expansion in credit by American banks was tied to agricultural production, the crisis spread to financial institutions. The value of land purchased on credit dropped sharply, and when these loans came due, speculators were unable to repay the banks that had loaned them the money to buy these properties. The American economy, now heavily dependent on cotton, sank into depression. As speculators defaulted on their obligations, banks collapsed. Nearly every region of the country was affected. The Panic of 1819, the economic crisis triggered by the drop in agricultural prices and bank failures, produced unprecedented economic hardship. While the sudden downturn in the economy hurt Western land speculators and cotton producers in the Deep South, it also devastated the growing urban centers of the Northeast. In Philadelphia three out of four workers

 lost their jobs. In New York the number of people classified as paupers increased from 8,000 to 13,000 in a year.

The Missouri Crisis
 The economic downturn was soon overshadowed by another crisis. In 1819, Missouri applied for admission to the Union as a slave state. Congressman John Tallmadge from New York demanded that Missouri ban further imports of slaves and agree to eliminate slavery before joining. Public meetings across the Northeast protested Missouri’s proposed admission as a slave state. Slavery now came to the center of American politics.

 “Agricultural languishes— farmers cannot find profit in hiring labourers... mechanics are in want of employment” JAMES FLINT, comments on the Panic of 1819 in Letters from America (1822) The growth of cotton agriculture and the prospect of large swathes of territory in the West entering the Union as slave states prompted a political crisis. Whereas Northern congressmen denounced slavery as a violation of the ideals of the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution, Southerners defended the institution, invoking the

 What was the Missouri crisis?



 CHAPTER 7

JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA: AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY, 1800–1824

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA MAINE
(Admitted as free state, 1820) VERMONT 
Oregon
Territory
(Joint U.S.–British
 occupation of disputed territitory)

NEW HAMPSHIRE

Michigan
Territory


MASSACHUSETTS NEW YORK

Michigan
Territory


Unorganized
Territory


 PENNSYLVANIA

OHIO ILLINOIS

RHODE ISLAND CONNECTICUT NEW JERSEY DELAWARE MARYLAND

INDIANA VIRGINIA

 MISSOURI (Admitted as slave state, 1821)

KENTUCKY NORTH CAROLINA

 TENNESSEE

Missouri Compromise Line 36˚ 30'


SOUTH CAROLINA

Arkansas
Territory


PACIFIC OCEAN

 ALABAMA

New Spain
(Independent Mexico, 1821)


ATL ANTIC OCEAN

 GEORGIA

MISSISSIPPI LOUISIANA

Florida
Territory


 Slave states and territories

Gulf of
Mexico


 Free states and territories Open to slavery by Missouri Compromise Closed to slavery by Missouri Compromise Missouri Compromise line

7.15 The Missouri Compromise
 The Missouri Compromise established a new policy for dealing with slavery in Western territories. The compromise drew an imaginary line across the map of the United States. Land south of this line acquired during the Louisiana purchase would be open to slavery, whereas territory north of it would be free.

 language of the Virginia and Kentucky resolutions to support the right of the states to decide the slavery question. A Georgia congressman warned that Tallmadge had “kindled a fire which all the waters of the ocean cannot put out, which seas of blood can only extinguish.” The New Yorker’s amendment passed the House, where the Northeast enjoyed a significant majority, but was defeated in the Senate, where the North and South were more closely balanced.

 What were the main provisions of the Missouri Compromise?

 To avert a constitutional crisis, Congress worked out a compromise. Henry Clay, one of the most influential figures in Congress, was a key player in negotiating this solution. The Missouri Compromise called for the admission of Missouri as a slave state. Maine, which had been part of Massachusetts but had been seeking independence for some time, entered as a free state, thus preserving the balance between free states and slave states in the Senate. The Missouri

Read the Document Missouri Act (1820)


CRISES AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE NATIONAL REPUBLICAN CONSENSUS

 Compromise drew an imaginary line across the territory acquired through the Louisiana Purchase at 36° 30ʹ latitude (7.15). Land below this imaginary dividing line would be slave territory; land above it would be free. Thomas Jefferson wrote to a friend that the crisis struck him as a “fire bell in the night.” Being awakened from a sound sleep by a fire alarm, the metaphor chosen by Jefferson, evoked the magnitude of the Missouri crisis. For Jefferson the Missouri crisis had etched the issue of slavery onto the map of the United States and would make any resolution of it in the future impossible. The debate over Missouri prompted John Quincy Adams to write in his diary that “Slavery is the great and foul stain upon the North American Union.” For the moment, however, most politicians seemed unwilling to contemplate erasing the great stain.

 Denmark Vesey’s Rebellion The problem of slavery resurfaced in summer 1822. Newspapers from Charleston to Boston and as far west as the Illinois Territory carried the sensational story of Denmark Vesey, a free African American artisan from Charleston, South Carolina, who had been arrested, tried, and executed for—so the charges went—leading a slave insurrection. A talented and charismatic man, Vesey had won a lottery jackpot in 1799 and used his earnings to purchase his freedom and set up a small carpentry shop. A natural leader, he became a prominent member of an African American church that became an important



 meeting place for free blacks and slaves. Rumors of a slave revolt led authorities to arrest him and charge him with plotting an insurrection, the so-called Denmark Vesey Uprising, said to have been aimed to free slaves in Charleston by violence. Modern historians differ over how to interpret the evidence that was used to convict Vesey and his alleged followers. Some historians deny that Vesey was a revolutionary figure bent on leading an uprising and see him instead as an unfortunate victim, a vocal free black leader who became a scapegoat for paranoid Charleston whites ever fearful of slave insurrection. Others believe that there was a plot, although its scope remains uncertain. Whether the proposed insurrection was real or imagined, the evidence gathered to convict Vesey provides a window into the way whites perceived slave culture in the Charleston region. According to the trial records, urban slaves and free blacks conspired with the many slaves who worked on the plantations surrounding Charleston. The rebels, the records suggest, were poised to take advantage of the mobility enjoyed by African Americans in this region, an area in which travel was less restricted than in other parts of the South. Charleston’s slaves were often hired out by their masters and often traveled without direct supervision. The task system employed by Carolina plantation owners also provided slaves with considerable autonomy and mobility. After finishing their day’s tasks, slaves could work their own small plots of land, hunt, or fish. Slaves not only used this surplus food to supplement their

 “I went up to the Capitol and heard Mr. King in the Senate, upon what is called the Missouri question. . . . He laid down the position of the natural liberty of man, and its incompatibility with slavery in any shape. He also questioned the Constitutional right of the President and Senate to make the Louisiana Treaty . . . .[later] We attended an evening party at Mr. Calhoun’s, and heard of nothing but the Missouri question and Mr. King’s speeches. The slave-holders cannot hear of them without being seized with cramps. They call them seditious and inflammatory, when their greatest real defect is their timidity.” JOHN QUINCY ADAMS, Reflections on the Missouri Question (1820)

Read the Document An Account of the Late Intended Insurrection
 Among a Portion of the Blacks of this City (1822)

 How did the Missouri crisis contribute to the climate of fear in Charleston during the Vesey trial?



 CHAPTER 7

JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA: AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY, 1800–1824

 meager rations but also often sold it in Charleston’s markets. The ease of travel facilitated communication between slaves and freedmen. Free black churches provided places for African Americans, both slaves and free blacks, to discuss ideas, including perhaps revolution. The prosecution claimed that Vesey, an active member of Charleston’s African Methodist Episcopal Church, had used the church as a place to recruit others to his cause. The alleged insurrection was planned for the summer, when many whites left the city for cooler climates. If Vesey’s plan was real and not invented by his prosecutors, his conception was a bold one. After seizing the city arsenal, Vesey and his followers allegedly planned to burn the city and sail to Haiti. (In 1804, Saint Domingue became the independent country of Haiti.) The Caribbean island’s own revolutionary experience might have inspired Vesey, who saw the Haitian uprising as a model for toppling slavery in America. When

 South Carolina’s governor heard about the plot, he ordered out the militia. The authorities arrested Vesey and others alleged to have been engaged in his conspiracy. The trial record portrays Vesey as an articulate man, well aware of the recent debates over the Missouri Compromise, including the speeches of antislavery congressmen from New England. The rise of abolitionist sentiment in the North was a sign that the time for revolution was ripe. The plot that emerges from the evidence presented at the trial also demonstrates the persistence of African religious and cultural traditions among both free blacks and slaves. One of Vesey’s chief co-conspirators, for example, a slave named Gullah Jack, had a reputation as a conjurer who would provide Vesey’s followers with magical charms to protect them from harm. There is also evidence that African American culture had developed its own distinctive approach to Christianity. African Christianity highlighted themes taken from the

 7.16 List of people executed as listed in published trial record

 Why did white residents of Charleston blame northerners for the Vesey insurrection?

View the Map Interactive Map: Missouri Compromise 1820–1821


CRISES AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE NATIONAL REPUBLICAN CONSENSUS

 plight of the ancient Israelites. Thus Vesey was said to have reminded his followers that God had delivered the children of Israel out of bondage in Egypt and would surely deliver slaves to freedom now. As this page from the published trial records shows, (7.16), Charleston’s authorities sent 34 blacks, including Vesey, to the gallows. For the Charleston white elite who prosecuted Vesey, one lesson of the trial was that “the indiscreet zeal in favor of universal liberty, expressed by many of our fellow-citizens in the States north and east of Maryland; aided by the Black population of those States” threatened the institution of slavery. The sectional tensions caused by slavery and the growing animosity between Northern abolitionists, black and white, and Southern defenders of slavery would only turn more bitter.

Jeffersonian America and the
Politics of Compromise
 Jefferson’s election in 1800 ushered in a new era in American politics. Although Jefferson did not usher in a revolution, he did scale back the size of government. By shrinking the government, Jefferson effectively eliminated the threat posed by Hamilton’s fiscal and military programs, but without having to repudiate all the accomplishments of the two previous administrations. Indeed, Jefferson discovered that he could put a powerful federal government to good Republican use. The purchase of Louisiana was difficult to reconcile with Jefferson’s own theory of strict construction,



 but Jefferson put his constitutional scruples aside to make the purchase. By the time James Madison became president, leading Republicans had adopted much of the Hamiltonian economic agenda. America’s difficult experiences during the War of 1812 seemed to underscore the wisdom of many of Hamilton’s proposals. The next president, James Monroe, took these lessons to heart; his administration sought a nonpartisan synthesis of Jeffersonian and Hamiltonian values. The press hailed Monroe’s presidency as an Era of Good Feelings, a time in which partisan rancor gave way to consensus and a new wave of nationalism. This brief respite from partisanship proved short-lived, however. Within a decade, partisan divisions resurfaced and laid the foundation of a new two-party system. If there were conspicuous losers in the Jeffersonian era it was American Indians and slaves. The former faced a more powerful and well-organized American government eager to expand westward. The War of 1812 had a disastrous impact on Western tribes, who lost an important ally, Britain, in their struggles against the United States. Finally the cotton boom and introduction of land well suited to cotton agriculture meant that the institution of slavery became stronger. The issue of slavery, particularly its expansion, would play an increasingly important role in American public life. The Missouri Compromise demonstrated the potentially divisive nature of the issue of slavery. For the moment, American politics had resolved this crisis, but rather than diffuse this problem, slavery would remain a potentially explosive issue in American politics.

 “The cession of that kind of property [slaves] ... would not cost me a second thought; if in that way, a general emancipation and expatriation could be effected.... But, as it is, we have the wolf by the ears, and we can neither hold him, nor safely let him go. Justice is in one scale, and self-preservation is in the other.” THOMAS JEFFERSON to JOHN HOLMES, 1820

 What were some of the main political compromises of the Jeffersonian era?



 CHAPTER 7

JEFFERSONIAN AMERICA: AN EXPANDING EMPIRE OF LIBERTY, 1800–1824

 rapaho

 OHIO

 INDIANA

Pawnee


TERRITORY
St. Louis KENTUCKY 
Comanche


 TENNESSEE

 pi Missi ssip

Apache


R.


Osage


MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY

 GEO

Natchez
New Orleans


1800–1802








 Jefferson elected president

Louisiana Purchase


 Burr and Hamilton duel

Embargo Act


 Peaceful transfer of power from Federalists to Republicans

 Jefferson acquires Louisiana Territory, doubling the size of the nation

 Vice President Burr kills opponent Alexander Hamilton in a duel

 Jefferson adopts a policy of peaceful coercion and institutes an embargo

 Sally Hemings scandal

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Jefferson is accused of having a slave mistress

Marbury v. Madison
 John Marshall asserts power of Supreme Court to decide constitutionality of acts of Congress (judicial review)

Review Questions
 1. What role did honor play in the political culture of the new nation? 2. Why was Jefferson ridiculed as the mammoth of democracy?

 4. What were the main causes of the War of 1812? What were its most important economic consequences? 5. What was the “Era of Good Feelings”?

 3. Which features of Jefferson’s domestic policy agenda were the most successful and why?

Key Terms
 Louisiana Purchase The acquisition by the United States of the Louisiana Territory from France in 1803, thereby securing control of the Mississippi River and nearly doubling the size of the nation. Embargo Act of 1807 The cornerstone of Jefferson’s plan of peaceable coercion that attempted to block U.S. trade with England and France to force them to respect American neutrality. War of 1812 The war fought between Britain and America over restrictions on American trade. British trade with American Indians, particularly trade in weapons, was also an issue. Hartford Convention A meeting of Federalists in Hartford, Connecticut, to protest the War of 1812. The convention proposed several constitutional amendments intended to weaken the powers of the slave states and protect New England interests. Era of Good Feelings A term that the press coined to describe the absence of bitter partisan conflict during the presidency of James Monroe.

 Monroe Doctrine A foreign policy statement by President Monroe declaring that the Americas were no longer open to colonization and that the United States would view any effort to reassert colonial control over independent nations in the Western Hemisphere as a threat to America. Cotton gin Eli Whitney’s invention for removing seeds from cotton. Panic of 1819 A downturn in the American economy in 1819 that plunged the nation into depression and economic hardship. Missouri Compromise The congressional compromise in which Missouri entered the Union as a slave state, and Maine was admitted as a free state to preserve the balance of slave and free states in Congress. The law also drew an imaginary line at 36° 30ʹ through the Louisiana Territory. Slavery was prohibited north of this line. Denmark Vesey Uprising An alleged plot led by a free black man, Denmark Vesey, to free slaves in Charleston and kill their masters.

CHAPTER REVIEW



1814–1815




1819–1822


War of 1812


Treaty of Ghent


Missouri Compromise


United States and Britain go to war


 Britain and America sign a treaty ending the War of 1812

 James Monroe elected president

Battle of New Orleans


 Monroe inaugurates the “Era of Good Feelings”

 Andrew Jackson and his troops defeat the British at Battle of New Orleans



 Settles the issue of slavery in the territories by drawing an imaginary line across the map of the United States and creating a permanent division between slave and free territory

 Denmark Vesey charged with plotting an uprising Slaves and free blacks in Charleston, S.C., are captured, charged with plotting an insurrection, tried, and executed

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Jeffersonian America.

Questions for Analysis
 1. Was Jefferson successful at implementing his vision of government?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Hear the Audio File Jefferson and Liberty, p. 194 Read the Document

 Read the Document Jefferson’s First Inaugural Address,

• Memoirs of a Monticello Slave, p. 193


 p. 190 • Thomas Jefferson to John C. Breckinridge, “Constitutionality of the Louisiana Purchase” (1803), p. 195

 2. What role did the Louisana purchase play in Jefferson’s vision for the future?

• Marbury v. Madison, p. 196
 • Jefferson’s Confidential Message to Congress (1803), p. 199

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Lewis and Clark: What


• Pennsylvania Gazette, “Indian Hostilities” (1812), p. 204


 were they trying to accomplish?, p. 198

• Missouri Act (1820), p. 214


3. What was the Monroe Doctrine?


 View the Closer Look Images as History: Samuel Morse’s House of Representatives and the National Republican Vision, p. 210

Read the Document Monroe Doctrine (1823), p. 209
View the Image British Impressment, p. 202


 4. How did the rise of cotton agriculture help precipitate the Missouri Crisis? View the Map Interactive Map: Missouri Compromise 1820–1821, p. 216

 5. What does the Denmark Vesey conspiracy trial reveal about the growing tensions over slavery in American politics? Read the Document An Account of the Late Intended Insurrection Among a Portion of the Blacks of this City (1822), p. 215

View the Map Interactive Map: War of 1812, p. 205


 What changes in American society facilitated the rise of democracy?

Andrew Jackson and
His Age p. 225


 What political and constitutional ideas defined Jackson’s presidency?

 White Man’s Democracy p. 233

 How did race shape the nature of democracy in the Jacksonian era?

Democrats, Whigs,
 and the Second Party System p. 239

 Who were the Whigs and what did they believe?

Playing the
Democrats’ Game:
Whigs in the Election
 of 1840 p. 246

Why did the Whigs win the
 election of 1840?

 CHAPTER

Democracy in
America p. 222




