 But even as Kaufmann and others celebrated African Americans’ role in their own liberation, white Americans after the war began to present a different—and inaccurate—version of the story (see Chapter 14). Former slaves raised most of the money to pay for the Freedmen’s Memorial that was unveiled in 1876 in Washington, D.C. But they were excluded from the committee in charge of the monument’s design. As a result, the monument celebrated President Lincoln as the sole individual responsible for emancipation while depicting African Americans as passive figures who played no role at all in gaining their freedom.

 Kaufmann contrasts the darkness of slavery, which the escapees are fleeing, with the bright light of freedom they are moving toward.

 Unlike most images of African Americans in this period, Kaufmann portrays these women as dignified and courageous agents pursuing freedom for their families.

•
•


•


 This smoke is emanating from a battle between Union and Confederate armies. Long before the Emancipation Proclamation, slaves came to believe that the Union Army somehow represented their liberation. So they headed to Union lines, despite the danger. By presenting Lincoln as standing over the kneeling slave, the sculptor emphasizes his—and by extension all white people’s— superiority over African Americans. Note how there are no white people in Kaufmann’s scene of liberation.

•
•
•


•
•


 These two children are reluctant to keep moving ahead, probably because of the gunfire from the battle in the distance.

 The chained slave kneels in a submissive, passive position that suggests that African Americans were merely receiving freedom, rather than playing a key role in seizing it by self-emancipating on a mass scale as depicted in Kaufmann’s painting.

•


Holding the
Emancipation
Proclamation in his
 right hand, while outstretching his left, Lincoln appears like a biblical prophet, or even like Christ, bestowing a blessing upon a sinner.

 How did the actions of slaves push Lincoln toward emancipation?



 CHAPTER 13

13.10 Dead
 Soldiers along the Sunken Road, Antietam (1862) The Civil War was the first military conflict in American history captured by the relatively new medium of photography. Photographs such as this one taken by Alexander Gardner after the Battle of Antietam, brought home to millions of Americans the brutality of modern war. war.

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

 McClellan chose not to attack, despite superior numbers and the shattered condition of Lee’s army. The following day Lee led his army back into Virginia, handing McClellan a technical victory (a frustrated Lincoln, however, soon removed him from command). The battle, as indicated by the grim scene (13.10) of its aftermath captured by photographer Alexander Gardner, claimed 6,000 lives and left 17,000 wounded, making it the deadliest single day of the war. Shortly after Antietam in September 1862, Lincoln issued his preliminary Emancipation Proclamation. Unless the seceded states and parts thereof that were not under Union Army control returned to the Union by January 1, 1863, the decree warned, their slaves “shall be then, thenceforward, and forever free.” Even though the decree left slavery intact in the Border States and areas held by the Union Army, Lincoln knew conservatives, Northern Democrats, and Border State Unionists would react negatively and that Republicans might suffer at the polls that November. Still, he reasoned, the benefits of emancipation far outweighed the risks as it would cause chaos by encouraging slaves to flee their masters and make it highly unlikely that Britain, where anti-slavery sentiment was strong, would intervene in the conflict.

 Why did photography have a more powerful impact on the public than artists’ depictions of battles?

 Though some radicals and abolitionists expressed dismay because the proclamation freed slaves only in the seceded states, they recognized that Lincoln’s simple, terse statement of military policy had transformed the meaning of the conflict. If Northerners by late 1862 realized the war was no mere “insurrection,” they also understood that its goal was something greater than simply a restored Union. It was now a war of subjugation. Reunion would occur only after the fabric of Southern society was destroyed.

Slaughter and Stalemate
 Restoring the Union and abolishing slavery, of course, depended entirely on victory in the field. But the Army of the Potomac, now commanded by General Ambrose E. Burnside, suffered a devastating defeat at the Battle of Fredericksburg on December 13, 1862. Burnside tried one more offensive on January 22, 1863, a disastrous mid-winter effort that became mired in muddy, impassible roads. A despondent Lincoln replaced Burnside with General Joseph Hooker. Not all the news from the Union battlefields in late 1862 was negative. On December 31 Union troops under General William S. Rosecrans turned back an attempt by Confederate General Braxton Bragg to regain western Tennessee and Kentucky in the Battle of Murfreesboro. Bragg’s retreat left the West firmly in the hands of the Union Army for the rest of the war. Lee and his Army of Northern Virginia, however, continued to thwart the Union effort to take Richmond. In the Battle of Chancellorsville, April 30– May 6, 1863, despite commanding a force half the size of Hooker’s, Lee scored a smashing victory. But it came at a price: Stonewall Jackson, the man Lee had come to count on most, was killed accidentally by his own men.

View the Closer Look Images as History: Photography
 and the Visualization of Modern War

BEHIND THE LINES



Behind the Lines
 The war brought challenges and hardships to the Union and Confederate home fronts. Civilians faced shortages of goods, soaring inflation, and conscription. These conditions were more severe in the South where many civilians also came under Union military rule. These problems, coupled with mounting death tolls, led to sagging morale and rising criticism of political leaders in both regions. Occasionally discontent exploded into violent riots. The war placed an especially great demand on women, who assumed new occupational and civic roles.

Meeting the Demands
 of Modern War While war raged in the East and West, Republicans took advantage of their dominant position in Congress to enact legislation long opposed by Southerners. Most were policies to promote industrialization (a high tariff) and westward settlement (the Homestead and Pacific Railway Acts). Several laws, however, were part of an unprecedented effort to outfit and finance a modern army. The National Bank Acts of 1863 and 1864 established a national banking system whereby member banks could issue treasury notes, or “greenbacks,” as currency. The nation’s first income tax, the sale of $400 million in bonds to the public, and the borrowing of $2.6 billion from banks helped pay for the war. The cost of the war increased the federal budget twenty-fold during the war, from $63 million in 1861 to $1.3 billion in 1865. All told, the war effort greatly expanded the size and scope of the federal government. In contrast to the Union’s ability to sustain the war effort, Davis and other Confederate leaders soon discovered that there were limits to Southerners’ willingness to adapt to the demands of modern warfare. In response to the need for more soldiers and revenue, the Confederate Congress established a military draft and an income tax in April 1862. Officials across the Confederacy denounced the measures as gross violations of states’ rights. Among the loudest protestors was Alexander Stephens, Davis’s own vice president. Southerners evaded both the draft and income tax to such an extent that neither measure produced the needed men or money. Draft and tax evasion also occurred on a large scale in the North, to be sure, but greater supplies of men and money diminished their impact.

 These limits were compounded by President Davis. Despite his extensive political and military experience, he proved an ineffective leader for a time of crisis. Unlike Lincoln, he selected a weak cabinet to prevent challenges to his authority and bristled at the slightest disagreement. He also micromanaged the War Department, firing or driving to resignation five secretaries of war in four years. The Confederate Army’s success in the war’s first two years obscured Davis’s flaws, but as the Army’s fortunes declined after 1862, the president’s leadership style sparked rancor and disunity.

Hardships on the
Home Front
 While soldiers fought in the field, civilians in the North and South faced a number of hardships. In the North the arms, metalworking, boot making, and shipbuilding industries boomed, but the scarcity of cotton caused widespread layoffs and closures in the textile industry. Workers’ wages rose by 40 percent, but prices rose even faster as inflation averaged 15 percent annually. In response many workers formed and joined craft unions, but appeals to patriotism and the use of strikebreakers discouraged strikes. Southerners faced far worse economic problems. The Southern economy was hard-hit by the cessation of trade with the North and Europe due to the Union blockade. Southern industry and agriculture were hindered by chronic labor shortages due to military service and by the flight of slaves, and the destruction or seizure of farms and factories by Union armies. As a result, the production of goods and agricultural produce in the South decreased by 30 percent during the war. By contrast Northern output increased significantly. These conditions led to shortages of nearly everything in the South,

 How did the Union fund the war?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

 including food, and the emergence of a thriving black market. The cartoon (13.11) from a Richmond newspaper captured the anger among Southerners directed at speculators and black marketers. A coldhearted speculator counts his profits as a hungry mother and child look through his window. “Anathema on him who screws and hoards / who robs the poor of wheat, potatoes, and bread,” read the first two lines of the accompanying poem.

New Roles for Women
 The war changed the lives of millions of women who remained behind the lines in both the North and South. With hundreds of thousands of men gone to war, women assumed new roles running farms and shops and working in factories and offices. Many did so out of a sense of duty to the war effort, whereas others worked to earn badly needed income, as military pay was low and inflation pushed up the cost of living.

13.11 Anger on
 the Home Front Runaway inflation and scarcity of necessities sparked angry accusations that speculators were hoarding supplies and selling them at extortionate prices. Here a speculator counts his profits while a starving mother and child look on.

 What new opportunities did the war open up for women?

 The war also enabled women to enter previously male-dominated professions such as teaching, civil service, and nursing. In nursing, the shortage of men and the recruitment efforts by women like Dorothea Dix, head of the U.S. Sanitary Commission, led to thousands of women volunteering to serve as nurses in field hospitals despite opposition from male doctors and others who disapproved of women working in such indelicate situations. Supporters argued that women brought to the profession nurturing and domestic skills. As Clara Barton, Civil War nurse and future founder of the American Red Cross, put it, at the end of the war, the American woman “was at least fifty years in advance of the normal position which continued peace would have assigned her.” Over the next 30 years women took over almost completely the profession of nursing. Many women also joined organizations that actively supported the Union cause, such as the Women’s Central Association of Relief, whose 7,000 chapters across the North raised money and sent supplies to the soldiers in the field. Southern women experienced similar changes during the war. They took on new responsibilities such as running farms and plantations, managing stores, working in government, and serving as nurses. Many worked in factories, including more than 500 employed by the Confederate Ordnance Department to fill cartridges, dangerous work that killed dozens in explosions. Their jobs grew more demanding as the war demolished the Southern economy and sent food prices soaring. The Union Army’s sweep across the South in late 1864 and early 1865 left many Southern women and their children destitute and hungry.

View the Closer Look Nurse Ann Bell Tending to Wounded…
Read the Document Memoirs of Clara Barton


BEHIND THE LINES

 “You have given your boys to die for their country, now you can give your girls to nurse them.” MARY STINEBAUGH-BRADFORD, convincing her father to let her care for Union soldiers

 Many Southern women also faced the challenge of maintaining the slave labor system, an increasingly difficult task as thousands of slaves fled to Union lines, leaving farms and plantations with inadequate labor. Many slaves who did not flee took advantage of a planter’s absence and challenged the authority of women unaccustomed to the role of master. As one exasperated wife wrote to her husband, “The Negroes are all expecting to be set free very soon and it causes them to be very troublesome.”

Copperheads
 One group that benefitted from the hard times in the North was the Democratic Party. Even though many Northerners associated it with secession and the Confederacy, it remained a viable political power in the North during the war. After all, it had received 44 percent of the popular vote there in 1860. Many Democrats supported the war against secession, but Copperheads (or “peace Democrats”) argued for a cease-fire, followed by a negotiated peace settlement even if it resulted in an independent Confederacy. A few Copperheads even expressed support for the Confederacy. Lincoln viewed the opposition of Copperheads to the Union war effort as seditious, if not treasonous, and took steps early to squelch it. After the pro-Confederate rioting in Baltimore in 1861, he suspended habeas corpus, citing the section of the Constitution providing “the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when, in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it.” In so doing, Lincoln established a principle he followed for the rest of the war. To save the Union and the Constitution, he would not hesitate to suppress Constitutional guarantees of free speech and the right to a speedy trial. Over the next few years, thousands of Copperheads were jailed for lengthy periods without trial. Copperheads initially attracted few followers, but dissatisfaction with the

 war rose in the winter of 1862–1863 after repeated Union Army failures and the enactment of the controversial Emancipation Proclamation and military draft. Led by former Ohio Congressman Clement Vallandigham, Copperheads denounced Lincoln as a tyrant who abused his power and suppressed free speech by shutting down opposition newspapers and arresting people who voiced hostility toward the Union war effort or sympathy for the Confederacy. Copperheads gained support among farmers in the West by claiming the new Republican tariff hurt them economically and among urban workers and immigrants by stoking racial fears that emancipation would lead to social chaos and job competition. To counter rising Copperhead sentiment, pro-Union speakers, editors, and cartoonists vilified Copperheads as dangerous, disloyal men who threatened the Union. In February 1863, Harper’s Weekly printed the cartoon shown in Competing Visions: Civil Liberties in a Civil War (see page 390). The cartoonist shows the goddess Liberty, who is bearing a shield labeled “Constitution” and a drawn sword, being prevented from engaging in battle against the Confederacy by three peace Democrats depicted as copperhead snakes. To squelch Copperhead activism, the Lincoln administration stepped up arrests. On May 5, 1863, a Union Army commander in Ohio arrested Vallandigham after he delivered a speech denouncing the war and the draft.

Conscription and
Civil Unrest
 Despite the Lincoln administration’s crackdown on Copperhead dissent, opposition to the war among Northerners increased in 1863, especially among those expected to fight. The poor performance of the Union Army in the field, coupled with staggering numbers of killed and wounded, extinguished much of the early enthusiasm for war. Despite offers of cash bonuses and time off in exchange for reenlistment, Union soldiers were heading home as their enlistment terms expired, and recruitment offices now went begging for new recruits. To solve the manpower problem, in March 1863, Congress passed the Conscription Act, which declared all male citizens (and immigrants who had applied for citizenship) aged 20–45 eligible for draft into the army. Each state was assigned a quota of men. If drafted a man could avoid service. He could buy his way out by paying a “commutation fee” of

 Read the Document Letter from J. R. Underwood to Wm. H. Seward (October 24, 1863)



 Why did the Lincoln administration impose a draft in 1863?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

Competing Visions
CIVIL LIBERTIES IN A CIVIL WAR
The following opinions present opposing views on the constitutionality of Lincoln’s policy toward Copperheads. One is a series of resolutions adopted and sent to Lincoln by Democrats. The other is Lincoln’s formal response. Note what the parties define as the greatest threat to civil liberties and the Constitution. Were Lincoln’s actions justified? Are principles such as civil liberties subject to different treatment during a national crisis such as war? On May 19, 1863, a meeting of Democrats, including former Congressman Erastus Corning, in Albany, New York, passed and delivered to Lincoln a series of resolutions accusing the administration of having acted unconstitutionally in placing military authority over civil authority. … Resolved, … we denounce the recent assumption of a military commander to seize and try a citizen of Ohio, Clement L. Vallandigham, for no other reason than words addressed to a public meeting, in criticism of the course of the administration, and in condemnation of the military orders of that general. Resolved, That this assumption of power by a military tribunal, if successfully asserted, not only abrogates the right of the people to assemble and discuss the affairs of government, the liberty of speech and of the press, the right of trial by jury, the law of evidence, and the privilege of habeas corpus, but it strikes a fatal blow at the supremacy of law, and the authority of the State and federal constitutions. Resolved, … That, regarding the blow struck at a citizen of Ohio as aimed at the rights of every citizen of the north, we denounce it as against the spirit of our laws and Constitution, and most earnestly call upon the President of the United States to reverse the action of the military tribunal which has passed a “cruel and unusual punishment” upon the party arrested, prohibited in terms by the Constitution, and to restore him to the liberty of which he has been deprived. 
 On June 12, 1863, Lincoln defended his actions as both constitutional and necessary for the preservation of the Union. GENTLEMEN: …Ours is a clear, flagrant, and gigantic case of rebellion; and the provision of the Constitution that “the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when, in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it,” is the provision which specially applies to our present case.… … Mr. Vallandigham avows his hostility to the war on the part of the Union; and his arrest was made because he was laboring, with some effect, to prevent the raising of troops; to encourage desertions from the army; and to leave the rebellion without an adequate military force to suppress it. He was not arrested because he was damaging the political prospects of the administration, or the personal interests of the commanding general, but because he was damaging the army, upon the existence and vigor of which the life of the nation depends. He was warring upon the military, and this gave the military constitutional jurisdiction to lay hands upon him. Long experience has shown that armies cannot be maintained unless desertion shall be punished by the severe penalty of death.… Must I shoot a simple-minded soldier boy who deserts, while I must not touch a hair of a wily agitator who induces him to desert? … I think that in such a case, to silence the agitator and save the boy is not only constitutional, but withal a great mercy. I … [am un]able to appreciate the danger apprehended by the meeting [in Albany] that the American people will, by means of military arrests during the rebellion, lose the right of public discussion, the liberty of speech and the press, the law of evidence, trial by jury, and habeas corpus, throughout the indefinite peaceful future, … any more than I am able to believe that a man could contract so strong an appetite for emetics during temporary illness as to persist in feeding upon them during the remainder of his healthful life.

 Northern Unionists depicted Copperheads as traitors who threatened the Republic. Here Liberty defends herself from the Copperheads with the shield of Union.

 How did Lincoln justify the suspension of habeas corpus?

BEHIND THE LINES

 $300 to the government or hire a substitute to serve in his place. Men lacking such substantial sums of money ($300 was equivalent to a year’s pay for a common laborer) could simply disappear—which more than 20 percent of draftees did. The draft began in early July and touched off widespread protest. Disturbances broke out in Boston; Troy, New York; Wooster, Ohio; Portsmouth, New Hampshire; and other cities. Opposition to the draft was greatest in New York City, where on July 13, 1863, it erupted in unprecedented violence known as the Draft Riots. For four days mobs of mostly poor, immigrant, and working-class rioters attacked draft offices, Union Army recruiting stations, institutions associated with the Republican Party or abolition, and symbols of wealth and privilege, reflecting animosity toward the inequity that allowed the rich to pay a $300 fee to avoid the draft. Rioters also attacked African Americans. As the image (13.12) illustrates, they lynched at least eighteen. Rioters blamed blacks as the cause of the war and feared them as potential labor competition. The riots resulted in at least 119 deaths and $5 million in property damage. Officials eventually defused opposition to the draft by raising money to pay the $300 commutation fee or hire substitutes for draftees not willing to join the army and allowing

 easy exemptions for reasons of health or family considerations. Discontent and unrest also rocked the Confederate home front. In October 1862, the Confederate Congress passed what came to be known as the “Twenty Negro Law.” It exempted from the draft one white man per plantation that held 20 or more slaves. Supporters argued that the measure was vital to maintaining order and productivity on plantations, but to poor white Southerners it engendered levels of anger and protest similar to those evoked by the commutation provisions in the North. Many cited the law as the reason they deserted from the Confederate Army. Another source of discontent was the shortage of food brought about by drought, the blockade, and Union conquest of Southern territory. When shortages and high prices reached critical proportions in 1863, Southern women led food riots in several towns and cities, including most dramatically in Richmond. “Bread! Bread!” they cried, “Our children are starving while the rich roll in wealth!” The reference to the rich reflected the widespread belief that Confederate leaders and merchants were profiting from the war.

 Read the Document Testimony from Victims of New York’s Draft Riots, July 1863



13.12 Opposition
 to the Draft Turns Violent Poor New Yorkers rioted against the draft in July 1863, venting their anger on army recruiting stations and against African Americans, whom they blamed for the war.

 Why did New Yorkers riot against the draft?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

Toward Union Victory
 Despite many setbacks, by mid-1863, the North’s superior industrial strength, large population, and improved military leadership gave the Union the advantage. So, too, did the decision to allow African Americans to serve in the army, for they provided the Union with badly needed manpower when enlistments were declining. Victories at Gettysburg, Vicksburg, and Atlanta boosted morale in the North and led to Lincoln’s reelection in 1864. Relentless military offensives by Grant in Virginia and William T. Sherman in Georgia led to the Confederate surrender in April 1865. The assassination of President Lincoln, however, dampened the North’s joy.

Turning Point: 1863
 Although the destruction and antiwar sentiment in New York City shocked Lincoln, events elsewhere in 1863 gave him hope. Back in May, Lee had convinced Davis to approve another invasion of the North. It was risky, but they believed it might force Lincoln to pull troops out of the western theater where Grant was threatening to seize the entire lower Mississippi. A victory on Northern soil would also demoralize the Lincoln administration and strengthen the Copperheads and Peace Democrats who were calling for a negotiated settlement. It might even convince France or Britain to intervene. In June, Lee headed north through Virginia’s Shenandoah Valley into Maryland and Pennsylvania. Although slow to react, the Army of the Potomac, now under General George G. Meade, eventually caught up with Lee in central Pennsylvania. On July 1, the two armies collided at Gettysburg, a small town at the junction of several major roads. Although outnumbered 90,000 to 75,000, the Confederates made significant advances that day. The following day the battle’s momentum swung back and forth before Union forces pushed the Confederates back to the previous day’s position. On the third and decisive day, Lee recklessly ordered an all-out assault on the fortified Union center. “Pickett’s Charge,” as it became known, proved gallant, but suicidal. Union forces devastated General George Pickett’s 12,000 men as they tried to cross a mile of open field and ascend Cemetery Ridge. “Picket’s division just seemed to melt away,” recalled one witness. “Nothing but stragglers came back.” With 23,000 Union and 28,000 Confederate soldiers killed and wounded, Gettysburg was by far the bloodiest battle of the war.

 Why did Lee decide to invade the North a second time?

 The next day, July 4, having lost one-third of his men, Lee retreated back toward Virginia. Although frustrated that Meade failed to pursue, Lincoln nonetheless recognized that the Union had won a major victory. Gettysburg marked the last time the Confederate Army invaded the North. That same day Lincoln received news of a vital victory in the West. In May Grant had begun a siege of Vicksburg, the Confederacy’s last stronghold on the Mississippi River. It fell on July 4, severing the Confederacy in two and giving the Union control over the entire Mississippi.

African Americans
 under Arms But the Union Army was still far from ultimate victory. One of the most formidable challenges it faced was finding new recruits. Declining enlistments of whites, and lobbying by black leaders and abolitionists eventually convinced Union officials to form African American regiments. Thousands of free African American men already toiled for the Union Army, moving supplies and building fortifications; now they would have the chance to fight to defeat the Confederacy and end slavery. One of the first and the most famous of all the African American regiments was the 54th Massachusetts, organized in 1863 by leading black abolitionists. “I urge you to fly to arms and smite with death the power that would bury the government and your liberty in the same hopeless grave,” read a recruitment pamphlet written by Frederick Douglass. Among the regiment’s members were two of Douglass’s sons, Lewis and Charles, and the grandson of Sojourner Truth, James Caldwell. Colonel Robert Gould Shaw, son of a leading white Massachusetts abolitionist family, commanded the regiment.

Read the Document Abraham Lincoln, “Gettysburg Address” (1863)


TOWARD UNION VICTORY

 African American soldiers experienced many forms of racism within the Union Army. They served in strictly segregated units under white officers and, as this drawing (13.13) indicates, initially served mainly in noncombat duty as guards and laborers. Many also charged that they received substandard medical care compared to white soldiers. Most galling, as seen in Choices and Consequences: Equal Peril, Unequal Pay (page 394), was that African American soldiers received lower pay than white soldiers. African American soldiers also faced brutal treatment at the hands of Confederates when captured. The Davis administration announced that African American soldiers taken prisoner would be subject to execution as rebellious slaves. Lincoln’s threat of retaliation prevented the Confederacy from carrying out this policy on a wide scale, but African Americans were murdered, tortured, and mutilated. In the most egregious incident (13.14 on page 395), the Fort Pillow Massacre in Tennessee, Confederate troops murdered dozens of captured black soldiers

 in April 1864. This image, which ran in a popular Northern magazine, depicted Confederates as brutal and inhumane. Southern publications ran similar images that alleged Northern atrocities. The creation of all-black units in the Union Army raised another critical issue beyond the question of equality of pay or the assignment of white officers to lead them. Would these units be sent into actual combat? Racist notions led whites to question whether African Americans possessed the courage to fight. Others cautioned that if black



13.13 Held Back
 by Racism Believing African Americans lacked the courage to fight under fire, Union commanders initially relegated them to noncombat roles. Eventually, however, blacks fought in 449 battles, including the Battle of Milliken’s Bend on June 7, 1863 (center).

 “We … have dyed the ground with blood, in defense of the Union, and Democracy. … We have done a Soldier’s Duty. Why can’t we have a Soldier’s pay?” Letter of CORPORAL JAMES HENRY GOODING of 54th Massachusetts to President Lincoln, September 1863

 How were African American soldiers treated in the Union Army?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

Choices and Consequences
EQUAL PERIL, UNEQUAL PAY
At first, the War Department planned to pay African American soldiers the same $13 per month (plus $3.50 for clothes) as white soldiers. Indeed, as the recruitment poster below shows, many early black recruits received equal pay. But in June 1863, the Lincoln administration, fearing a backlash among white soldiers who did not see African Americans as their equals, adopted a two-tier wage scale that paid black soldiers just $7 per month (plus $3 for clothes). Outraged, African American officers and enlisted men of the 54th and 55th Massachusetts (Colored) Infantry pondered their options. 
Choices




 Quietly accept the lower wages as a regrettable but unavoidable trade-off that allowed them to enlist in the Union Army and fight to end slavery.



 Accept the unequal wages as better than nothing and necessary to maintain their families, while protesting the injustice and lobbying for equal pay.



 Reject the lower wages on principle, despite the financial hardship on their families, while fulfilling their duties as soldiers, protesting the injustice, and lobbying for equal pay.



 Lay down their arms and refuse to obey orders until they received equal pay.

Decision
 The men chose the third option, rejecting the lower wages on principle, despite the financial hardship on their families. They even rejected an offer by the governor of Massachusetts to pay the $6 per month difference out of the state treasury, citing the principle of equality that was at stake. Meanwhile they fulfilled their duties as soldiers, protested the injustice, and lobbied the Lincoln administration for equal pay.

Consequences
 The soldiers and their families hung on for more than a year until Congress in June 1864 authorized an equal pay scale for all soldiers regardless of race. By then, given the well-documented professionalism and courage exhibited by black soldiers on the battlefield, the distinction in pay had become an embarrassment to Lincoln’s administration. Not all black regiments, however, made the same decision as the Massachusetts 54th and 55th, and the consequences of their actions were starkly different. Sergeant William Walker of the 21st U.S. Colored Infantry had his men lay down their arms in protest over unequal pay. He was convicted of mutiny and executed.

Continuing Controversies
 How were African Americans in the military treated after the Civil War? The U.S. army eradicated the two-tier pay scale, but not racial segregation. African American leaders protested segregation, but for all subsequent wars through World War II, black soldiers and sailors served in segregated units under mostly white officers. President Harry Truman ordered the military desegregated in 1948.

 What role did African American soldiers play in the Union war effort?

Read the Document James Henry Gooding, “Letter
 to President Lincoln” (1863)

TOWARD UNION VICTORY

 regiments were not used judiciously, critics would accuse the army of racism, asserting it carelessly sent them into harm’s way. The first well-publicized test of African American soldiers came on July 18, 1863, when the 54th Massachusetts led a nighttime assault on Fort Wagner, a key Confederate outpost that guarded Charleston harbor. The Confederates repulsed their attack. But the courage exhibited by the soldiers—the unit lost 100 dead and 146 were wounded—won them universal praise and undermined the racist belief that blacks would not fight. All told 198,000 blacks, including 144,000 former slaves, served in the Union Army and Navy. This number amounted to 10 percent of the total enlisted men even though African Americans comprised only 1 percent of the Northern population. African American soldiers participated in over 449 separate engagements against Confederate troops and 38,000 died during the war. Sixteen black soldiers and four black sailors received the Medal of Honor. “The colored soldiers in this four years’ struggle,” wrote one African American soldier, “have proven themselves in every respect to be men.” Their contribution to the Union war effort proved vital to winning the war.

 Most significant, African American service in the war empowered them to claim full citizenship after the war. “Once let the black man get upon his person the brass letters, U.S., let him get an eagle on his button and a musket on his shoulder and bullets in his pocket,” said Frederick Douglass, “there is no power on earth that can deny that he has earned the right to citizenship.”

The Confederacy Begins
 to Crumble News of the losses at Gettysburg and Vicksburg caused dismay across the South. Moreover, Davis and the Confederate leadership had other reasons to worry. The immediate problem was a lack of men. A draft instituted in April 1862 failed to attract enough recruits. Protests by poor whites forced the revision in 1863 of a provision in the draft law that exempted wealthy whites who held 20 or more slaves, but still new recruits fell short of the number needed. The continued loss of territory to the Union Army exacerbated this trend, as did a sharp rise in desertions, which topped 100,000 by late 1864. (See Envisioning Evidence: Human Resources in the Armies of the Civil War.)

 Read the Document Letter from a Free Black Volunteer to the Christian Recorder



13.14 The
Massacre at Fort
Pillow
In April 1864,
 Confederate soldiers slaughtered dozens of captured African American soldiers at Fort Pillow in Tennessee.

 Why did Lincoln initially agree to pay African American soldiers less than white soldiers?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

Envisioning Evidence
HUMAN RESOURCES IN THE ARMIES OF THE CIVIL WAR
At the outset of the Civil War the Union possessed roughly two and a half times the population of the Confederacy (23 million vs. 9 million). This advantage translated into an immediate and lasting military advantage, as it allowed the Union to field a much larger army and navy throughout the course of the war. Indeed, as the data below shows, this manpower advantage increased over the course of the four-year conflict, in part because of the Lincoln administration’s decision to allow African Americans to serve in the military (and the Confederacy’s resistance to this idea until the last weeks of the war). The Union also enjoyed a much larger and steadily increasing population of immigrants from which to draw fresh recruits. Had the war lasted two or three years, these differences in manpower might not have had played such an important role in determining its outcome. But it lasted four years and it was in the last one that the manpower disparity became most pronounced and significant in determining the final outcome. Relative Military Strength, 1862–1865 


698,808


 The Union’s advantage in population (2.5 times greater than the Confederacy) is reflected in its ability to field a much larger army throughout the war. 527,204

 Number of Soldiers (thousands)

Because the
Confederacy
 largely fought a defensive war, it did not need to match the Union soldier for soldier in order to win.







253,208




620,924


611,250


 The surging number of Union troops in 1863 reflected the imposition of the draft and the decision to allow African Americans into the army.

 Desertions caused much of the decline in Confederate forces (as many as 100,000 deserted in 1864–1865). Confederate leaders in 1864 responded by expanding the age range of men eligible for the draft to 17 to 50 (from 18 to 35 in 1862).

 Both sides suffered huge numbers of casualties in the fierce fighting of 1864. But the Union was able to replace its fallen soldiers far more easily than the Confederacy.

233,586


209,852


154,910












Year


Composition of Union and Confederate Military
African Americans as a
 percentage of overall regional population The 198,000 African American soldiers and sailors who served the Union provided a vital source of manpower to the war effort. The Confederacy’s reluctance to arm slaves (until March 1865, by which time it was too late) left untapped a huge portion of the Southern population (39 percent).

African Americans as a
 percentage of military personnel

 Southerners claimed the Union relied heavily on Immigrants for its army. But it was the Confederacy that drew proportionally more soldiers from its foreign-born population. Immigrants comprised 7.5 percent of the South’s population, but 10 percent of the Confederate Army. In the Union immigrants made up 31 percent of the population, but comprised just 26 percent of its soldiers.

 Foreign-born as a percentage of overall regional population Percentage of foreignborn of total military personnel





Percent




Confederate
 Sources: James McPherson, Ordeal by Fire (New York: Knopf, 1982); James McPherson, Battle Cry of Freedom (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988); U.S. Census, Historical Statistics.

 How did the Union’s 2:1 advantage over the Confederacy in overall population play a role in winning the war?



Union


TOWARD UNION VICTORY

 By mid-1863, the inherent weaknesses of the Confederate economy began to show. The Union blockade, which had stopped only one in eight Confederate ships in 1862, grew increasingly effective. By 1864, it stopped one out of every three Confederate blockade-runners and half of them by 1865. The impact on the import-dependent Southern economy was devastating. Civilians and soldiers alike suffered shortages of food, clothing, and equipment. The growing success of the Union blockade also exposed a critical miscalculation made by the Davis administration in 1861. The embargo on cotton exports failed because Britain possessed a surplus of cotton in 1861 and later found alternative sources in Egypt and India. Moreover, English workers, including an estimated half million who lost their jobs due to cotton shortages, expressed strong sympathy for the Union and thereby made British intervention on behalf of the Confederacy politically controversial. When the South finally lifted the embargo in 1862, the Union blockade was much stronger. The Confederacy’s economic dilemma posed a serious threat to its chances for success. It desperately needed hard currency to buy ships, weapons, ammunition, and other supplies for the war. But the main product it had to sell—cotton—was bottled up in Southern ports, unable to reach markets in Europe. This conundrum is captured in the image (13.15) that adorned “cotton bonds” authorized for sale by the Confederacy in Europe. A Southern version of “Columbia” holds the Confederate flag and leans on cotton bales while looking out to sea at a patrolling Union ship. In exchange for cash (usually 90 percent of face value), investors were promised payment in Southern cotton with interest. The plan brought in



 “The state of despondency that now prevails among our people is producing a bad effect upon the troops. Desertions are becoming very frequent.” ROBERT E. LEE, February 24, 1865

 only $7 million to the Confederate treasury, far less than needed. The Emancipation Proclamation also shook Southern society, as Lincoln had hoped it would. Inspired by word that freedom was at hand, thousands of slaves left their places of bondage and headed for the Union Army or to the Northern states, exacerbating the Confederacy’s labor shortage and further weakening Southern agriculture. Despite these hardships, the Confederacy remained undefeated and the longer Confederates defended their independence, the greater their chances of success. For even as the Union won major victories at Gettysburg and Vicksburg, discontent and war weariness among Northerners grew. If Lincoln hoped to preserve the Union, he needed more military victories—and soon.

Victory in Battle and
 at the Polls The key to winning the war, Lincoln realized, was effective military leadership. After suffering many disappointments and near disasters with a succession of poor generals, Lincoln finally found his man

13.15 Cotton for Sale?
A
Confederate version of “Columbia” (a precursor to Lady Liberty) leans on cotton bales that cannot reach European markets due to the Union blockade represented by the ship passing on the horizon. This image was featured on “cotton bonds” sold in Europe to raise cash for the Confederacy. 
Read the Document The Working Men of Manchester, England Write to
President Lincoln on the Question of Slavery in 1862


 How did the Union blockade affect the Confederate war effort?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

 in Ulysses S. Grant who at the end of 1863 delivered yet another badly needed victory for the Union at the Battle of Chattanooga. On November 23, Grant and the general he increasingly counted on, William T. Sherman, drove Braxton Bragg’s army from Tennessee into Georgia, putting most of eastern Tennessee and the vital Tennessee River under Union control. Already cut in two after the fall of Vicksburg, the Confederates now faced being sliced into thirds. Their main hope was that Northerner dissatisfaction with the war might lead to Lincoln’s defeat in the election of 1864, or at least force him to accept peace negotiations. In early 1864, Lincoln named Grant commander of all the Union armies. Many in the War Department objected, arguing that the rough-hewn soldier who had left the Army in disgrace in 1854 for heavy drinking was an alcoholic who could not be entrusted with a major assignment. But Lincoln had had enough of generals with impressive résumés and martial airs. He

R


.


 KENTUCKY

 om

 ac

20 km


 saw in Grant a commander who understood the key to victory in modern warfare—seek out and destroy the enemy’s army and sources of supplies. Pursuing this policy with single-minded determination, Grant in 1864 devised a two-pronged attack to finish off the Confederacy. As shown in the map (13.16), he sent the Army of the Potomac, now swollen to nearly 120,000, south to destroy Lee’s army of 66,000 and take Richmond. In the West Grant sent General William T. Sherman, a man who shared his understanding of modern warfare, and an army of 90,000 east from Tennessee to destroy General Joseph E. Johnston’s force of 60,000 and seize Atlanta (13.17). The first clash of this campaign, the Battle of the Wilderness, began with Lee attacking Grant on May 5. Over the next two days, aided by the rough, wooded terrain and sluggish Union leadership, the Confederates survived the clash despite Grant’s vastly superior numbers. The inconclusive battle

Po t


 20 miles

 MARYLAND

Culpeper
The Wilderness


Ra p p


Sherma


Kennesaw
Mountain


SOUTH CAROLINA

Atlanta
(July 20–Sept 2, 1864)
 h N erm ov a –D n’s ec M , 1 arc 86 h to 4) the Se Macon S

Cold Harbor


(


R.


Ja m e s R.


NORTH CAROLINA

(June 27, 1864)


 n

(May 23–27, 1864)


 h

 na

.


R


North Anna


 ck

 ut

An


Chickamauga
(Sept 19–20, 1863)


 no

(May 8–12, 1864)
So


 ah an

G ra n t


Lee


Spotsylvania
Courthouse


Chattanooga
(Nov 23–25, 1863)


J.E.
Johnston 

Chancellorsville
Fredericksburg


(May 5–7, 1864)


 VIRGINIA

 TENNESSEE

(June 3, 1864)


 ALABAMA

 a

Richmond
Amelia Court House


Andersonville
Savannah


Lee


A p p o m a t t ox R .


Appomattox
Court House
 Lee surrenders (April 9, 1865)

(Dec 22, 1864)


GEORGIA G
ra n t 
 Sayler’s Creek

Petersburg
Five Forks
(April 1, 1865)


(Besieged, June
1864–April 1865)


 FLORIDA 100 km

(April 6, 1865)


 100 miles

 Area controlled by Union

 Union victory

 Area controlled by Union

 Area seized by Union

 Confederate victory

 Area seized by Union

 Union advance

Fortifications


 Area controlled by Confederacy

 Date(s) of battle

 Union advance

 Confederate advance

(April 1, 1865)


 Confederate retreat Union victory (Dec 22, 1864)

 Date(s) of battle

 Confederate retreat

13.16 The Final Battles in the Virginia Campaign, 1864–1865
 Grant’s strategy for defeating Lee was to combine superior strength and a relentless offensive. It resulted in high casualties, but eventually cornered Lee at Petersburg. Lee surrendered at nearby Appomattox Courthouse on April 9, 1865.

 What distinguished Grant’s approach to war from his predecessors’?

 13.17 Sherman’s March to the Sea, 1864–1865 Sherman dealt a decisive blow to the Confederate cause by waging a scorched-earth campaign across Georgia, destroying vital supplies and weakening Southern morale.

View the Map Interactive Map: The Civil War Part II 1863–1865


TOWARD UNION VICTORY

 left 18,000 federals and 10,000 Confederates killed, wounded, or missing. Normally after so great an engagement, Union commanders spent weeks, if not months, repairing their armies. But the next day Grant ordered his army to move against Lee. Possessing total confidence in his strategy, he also knew that, unlike Lee, he could replace his fallen soldiers. On May 8, the two armies clashed again, ten miles closer to Richmond in the Battle of Spotsylvania Court House, an epic struggle that left another 30,000 casualties between the two armies. Still Grant remained resolute, driving the Union Army southward, trying to draw Lee out for a final, decisive battle. Lee maneuvered his army between Grant and Richmond, playing for time and avoiding total defeat. On June 3 at Cold Harbor, Grant again ordered a massive assault against Lee’s smaller but heavily entrenched force. The result was the greatest loss of life since Fredericksburg. Many Northerners, appalled at the 55,000 Union casualties (to 30,000 Confederate) in a single month, questioned Grant’s competence; others simply called him a butcher. Peace Democrats renewed their calls for an end to the conflict. Altering his strategy, Grant marched his army south to seize the vital railroad junction at Petersburg and cut Richmond off from the rest of the Confederacy. But Lee managed to dig in around Petersburg just before Grant arrived. By now Grant recognized the futility of staging frontal assaults against entrenched troops and settled down for a siege. It was not the aggressive form of warfare he preferred, but the fall of Petersburg and Richmond seemed only a matter of time. Rising popular dissatisfaction with the seemingly endless bloodshed in summer 1864, however, imperiled Lincoln’s chances for reelection (Davis, was serving a six-year term). Democrats tried to capitalize on the dour mood by nominating former Union General George B. McClellan for president and calling for a cease-fire and peace conference. They also hoped McClellan’s outspoken criticism of emancipation would draw votes from racist Northerners. The Republican Party recognized its vulnerability (it had lost many seats in the 1862 congressional elections) and tried to broaden its appeal heading into the 1864 election. First, Republicans adopted the name Union

Hear the Audio When This Cruel War Is Over


 Party to attract pro-war Democrats. Second, they replaced Lincoln’s vice president with Andrew Johnson of Tennessee, a pro-Union Democrat and the only Southern senator not to resign during the secession winter of 1861. Finally, as this campaign broadside (13.18) illustrates, Lincoln’s campaign argued that a vote for McClellan was a vote for slavery and military defeat. While Lincoln shakes hands with an artisan (representing the “free labor” North), McClellan shakes hands with Jefferson Davis who stands beneath the flag of an independent Confederate nation with a slave auction taking place in the background. Behind Lincoln white and black children enjoy the benefits of freedom and education. As late as August 1864, however, Lincoln and many of his supporters expected to lose. In September 1864, however, Lincoln received news that Sherman had captured Atlanta. This crushing blow all but doomed the Confederacy to collapse. It also boosted morale across the North and weakened the Democrats’ peace strategy. Two months later Lincoln soundly defeated McClellan, winning every state except for Kentucky, New Jersey, and Delaware to garner 55 percent of the popular vote. Still his margin of victory—just ten percent—demonstrated just how essential military success was to political victory.

War Is Hell
 Six weeks after Lincoln won reelection, Sherman began to march his army across Georgia (see 13.17) to deprive the Confederate Army of



13.18 Lincoln
Promises Victory
 and Union Lincoln’s 1864 presidential campaign suggested that while he stood for liberty, his opponent, Democrat George B. McClellan, would make peace with the Confederates and preserve slavery.

 What steps did the Republican Party take to improve Lincoln’s chances for victory in 1864?



 CHAPTER 13

13.19 Total War
 and Vengeance Fires set by retreating Confederates, freed slaves, and undisciplined members of Sherman’s army left half of Columbia, South Carolina, in ruins.

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865

 badly needed supplies and to demoralize the Southern people. Simultaneously, General George H. Thomas all but destroyed the Confederate army under General John B. Hood at the Battle of Nashville (December 15–16, 1864). One week later, Sherman’s army captured Savannah. Known as Sherman’s March to the Sea, the “scorched earth” campaign traversed 285 miles of Georgia. Sherman’s soldiers lived off the land, taking what agricultural produce and livestock they needed and destroying the rest. They also destroyed Southern infrastructure, tearing up railroad tracks, burning bridges, and pulling down telegraph wires to impair the Confederacy’s ability to move goods, soldiers, and information. Sherman’s army also enticed thousands of slaves to flock to its camps. By the time it reached the coast, Sherman’s campaign of destruction left the Confederate army bereft of a major source of supplies. More important, the campaign demonstrated the effectiveness of a tactic that would become central to modern warfare in the twentieth century: bringing the conflict to the civilian population to undermine its willingness to support the war. “We are not only fighting hostile armies,” Sherman told his men, “but a hostile people, and we must make old and young,

 Why did Sherman destroy so much property in Georgia?

 rich and poor, feel the hand of war, as well as their organized armies.” Sherman compounded the horror felt by Georgians with his policy toward the state’s freed slaves. After meeting with Secretary of War Edwin Stanton and 20 African American ministers to discuss the fate of the freed slaves, Sherman issued Special Field Order No. 15. This directive set aside more than 400,000 acres of seized Confederate land for distribution to former slaves in 40-acre plots. Congress soon followed with the Thirteenth Amendment, which abolished slavery everywhere in the United States (it would be ratified 11 months later). With Georgia in ashes, the stage was set for the final phase of Grant’s plan—crushing Lee’s army between his and Sherman’s forces. On February 1, Sherman left Savannah and headed north into South Carolina. He faced almost no opposition, a sign Southern resistance was disintegrating. As this photograph (13.19) indicates, fire destroyed more than half of Columbia, the capital of South Carolina. Evacuating Confederates and liberated slaves set some of the fires, but some were also started by Union soldiers motivated by vengeance against the state that for decades leading up to the war represented Southern nationalism and ultimately,

TOWARD UNION VICTORY

 secession. Sherman’s men kept moving north into North Carolina where the meager opposition provided by General Joseph E. Johnston’s force slowed him only slightly. As the situation grew critical for the Confederacy, its leaders tried desperate measures. Among them were secret peace negotiations held in February 1865 at Hampton Roads, Virginia, which failed: Union representatives insisted on unconditional surrender (with the suggested possibility of compensated emancipation), while their Southern counterparts demanded recognition of Confederate independence. Confederate officials also began drafting soldiers as young as 17 and as old as 50. The depth of Confederate desperation was revealed in March 1865 when the Confederate Congress authorized a draft of up to 300,000 slaves to serve as soldiers (only two regiments were raised and neither saw combat).

 “If slaves make good soldiers our whole theory of slavery is wrong.” CONFEDERATE MAJOR GENERAL HOWELL COBB, Georgia By now Grant’s nearly nine-month-long siege of Lee’s army at Petersburg began to take its toll. Cut off from supplies, Lee’s men were starving. Thousands had deserted. On April 1 in the Battle of Five Forks, General Philip Sheridan’s cavalry and a large force of infantry cut the only remaining railroad line into Petersburg. When Grant attacked all along the Confederate line the next day, he forced Lee to retreat from both Richmond and Petersburg. Lee’s remaining hope was to slip his ragged army west and south to join forces with Johnston in North Carolina. To prevent this, Sheridan’s cavalry headed them off at a small town named Appomattox Courthouse, Virginia. On April 8, Lee made one last attempt to break out, but failed. “There is nothing left for me to do,” he sadly informed his officers, “and I would rather die a thousand deaths.” The next day, April 9, 1865, Lee surrendered. Lincoln had set a tone of reconciliation in his second inaugural address a month earlier, when he spoke “With malice toward none, with charity for all,” of the need “to bind up the nation’s wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the

Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Meaning of the
Civil War for Americans


 battle and for his widow and his orphan, to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations.” Accordingly, Grant gave generous terms. The 30,000 men in Lee’s army were permitted to go home, providing they swore never again to take up arms against the federal government. Grant also ordered they be given three days’ rations of food and stopped his men from firing their weapons in victory celebration. Celebrations broke out across the North as people, weary of four years of war, reveled in both the victory and the peace. The exultation quickly changed to despair. On the night of April 14, just five days after Lee’s surrender, Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth shot Lincoln at close range as he watched a play at Ford’s Theatre in Washington. Lincoln died early the following day. The tragedy elicited an outpouring of grief for the martyred president among Northerners and freed slaves in the South. After a somber funeral procession in Washington, a train carried Lincoln’s body back to Springfield, Illinois, past some seven million people who lined the tracks. Lincoln’s counterpart Jefferson Davis, who had fled hoping to establish a new Confederate government in Texas, was captured on May 10 and cast in prison. As this image (13.20) shows, the popular anger over the war and Lincoln’s assassination focused on Davis, with many Northerners demanding his execution for treason. Passions cooled, however, and Davis was released after two years without being tried. After Lee’s surrender, the war came to a rapid conclusion. On April 26, Sherman accepted Johnston’s surrender in North Carolina. Others followed suit, with the last Confederate units laying down their arms on June 23. With that, the bloodiest war in American history, one that cost 618,000 lives, was over.



A
Thirst  for Vengeance After the war many Northerners called for Jefferson Davis and other high-ranking Confederates to be hanged as traitors.

 What conciliatory measures toward the Confederates did Grant adopt at Lee’s surrender?



 CHAPTER 13

A NATION TORN APART: THE CIVIL WAR, 1861–1865









 First battle of Bull Run

 Gen. Grant captures Forts Henry and Donelson in Tennessee

 McClellan defeats Lee at Battle of Antietam

 Lee defeats Hooker at the Battle of Chancellorsville

 Victory allows Lincoln to issue the Emancipation Proclamation

 Confederate victory is offset by death of Gen. Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson

 Confederacy wins in a clash of inexperienced armies

 Confederate diplomats removed from the British ship Trent Nearly causes a war between the Union and Great Britain

 Boosts Union morale and brings attention to Grant’s military skill

 Lee repulses McClellan’s Peninsular Campaign Exposes again the poor military leadership in the Union Army

 Lee defeats Burnside at Battle of Fredericksburg Northern morale, boosted after Antietam, sags once again

 Meade defeats Lee at Battle of Gettysburg Turning point in the war, ends the Confederate gamble of invading the North

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Clement Vallandigham arrested Prompts outrage from Copperheads but Lincoln defends action as necessary to win the war

Review Questions
 1. What advantages allowed the Confederacy to enjoy

 military success in the early years of the war? 2. Why did both North and South consider the Border

 States vital? 3. How did African Americans contribute to

 emancipation?

 4. How did the war change Northern society and the

 federal government? 5. What approach to warfare set Generals Ulysses

S.
Grant and William T. Sherman apart from less successful Union military leaders? 6. How did social, economic, and class differences in 
 Southern society contribute to the Confederacy’s defeat?

Key Terms
 Border States The four slave states, Missouri, Kentucky, Maryland, and Delaware that bordered the Confederacy. The Lincoln administration succeeded in keeping them in the Union. Cotton embargo A ban imposed by Confederates in 1861 on the export of cotton, the South’s most valuable commodity, to prompt cotton-importing nations like England and France to intervene to secure Confederate independence. Trent Affair A diplomatic incident in November 1861 when a U.S. Navy vessel stopped the British ship Trent and removed two Confederates heading for Europe to press for British and French intervention. Peninsular Campaign The complex plan developed by General George B. McClellan to capture the Confederate capital, whereby 400 ships deposited 120,000 soldiers just east of Richmond at Fortress Monroe between the James and York Rivers. Emancipation Proclamation The decree announced by Lincoln in September 1862 and taking effect on January 1, 1863, declaring slaves in the seceded states not under Union army control “forever free.” Copperheads Northern Democrats (sometimes called “Peace Democrats”) who opposed the war and the Lincoln

 administration and favored a negotiated settlement with the Confederacy. Conscription Act A law passed by Congress in March 1863 to offset declining volunteers to the Union Army. It declared all male citizens (and immigrants who had applied for citizenship) aged twenty to forty-five eligible to be drafted into the Union Army. The rich could pay a $300 fee to avoid the draft. Draft Riots Four days of rioting in New York City in July 1863 by mostly poor, immigrant, and working-class men who opposed the draft. Sherman’s March to the Sea The 285-mile “scorched earth” campaign of General William T. Sherman across Georgia in late 1864 and early 1865. Sherman’s soldiers seized or destroyed $100 million in goods, hurting Southern morale and depriving the Confederate army of supplies. Special Field Order No. 15 The directive announced by General Sherman in January 1865 during his March to the Sea that set aside more than 400,000 acres of seized Confederate land for distribution to former slaves in 40-acre plots.

CHAPTER REVIEW
herma 
)


 n

(June 27, 1864)




C


Atlanta
S


(July 20–Sept 2, 1864
 h N erm ov a –D n’s ec M , 1 arc 86 h to 4) Macon

(


 MA

Andersonville










 Grant seizes Vicksburg

 Lincoln names Grant Commander of all Union Armies

Union General William T.
 Sherman captures Atlanta

 Thirteenth Amendment passed

 Unlike the inept generals before him, Grant understands the nature of modern warfare

 Sherman begins his “March to the Sea,” destroying Georgian agriculture and infrastructure

 Grant defeats Lee in the Battles of the Wilderness, Spotsylvania, and Cold Harbor

 Lincoln wins reelection

 Entire length of Mississippi River under Union control, severing the Confederacy in two

 Bread riots break out in Confederacy. Draft Riots erupt in New York City Reveal growing discontent over the cost and duration of the war

 The 54th Massachusetts participates in attack on Fortress Wagner

 Ensures the Union war effort will continue

 Abolishes slavery (ratified late 1865)

 Grant captures Petersburg and Richmond Lee surrenders, ending the war

 Lincoln assassinated by John Wilkes Booth Lincoln becomes a martyr figure

 Lee’s army digs in at Petersburg near Richmond; Grant begins siege

 Their courage undermines the belief that African Americans will make poor soldiers

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of A Nation Torn Apart.

Questions for Analysis
 1. How did both the Union and Confederacy use religious and patriotic ideals to bolster support for the war? Hear the Audio Battle Hymn of the Republic, p. 376

 2. Why did the Union army have so much difficulty in defeating the Confederacy? View the Closer Look Lincoln visits McClellan, p. 384

 3. How did the war create new opportunities for women?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Hear the Audio When This Cruel War Is Over, p. 399 Read the Document • Joseph E. Johnston, A Confederate General Assesses First Bull Run (1861), p. 381 • Memoirs of Clara Barton, p. 388 • Letter from J. R. Underwood to Wm. H. Seward (October 24, 1863), p. 389 • Testimony from Victims of New York’s Draft Riots, July 1863, p. 391 • Abraham Lincoln, “Gettysburg Address” (1863), p. 392

View the Closer Look Nurse Ann Bell Tending to


• James Henry Gooding, “Letter to President Lincoln” (1863), p. 394


Wounded…, p. 388


View the Closer Look Images as History: Photography and


 4. What did African Americans hope to achieve by serving in the Union army?

 the Visualization of Modern War, p. 386

View the Map


 Read the Document Letter from a Free Black Volunteer to

• Interactive Map: The Civil War Part I 1861–1862, p. 382


 the Christian Recorder, p. 395

• Interactive Map: The Civil War Part II 1863–1865, p. 398


 5. How did abolitionist sentiment in Britain benefit the Union war effort? Read the Document The Working Men of Manchester, England Write to President Lincoln on the Question of Slavery in 1862, p. 397

Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Meaning of the Civil War
 for Americans, p. 401

How did Reconstruction
 efforts during the war reveal conflicting visions over the kind of freedoms former slaves would be granted?

The Fruits of
Freedom p. 409


 How did freedmen envision and act on their freedom after the war?

The Struggle to Define
Reconstruction p. 412


 Why did Northern Republicans reject President Johnson’s Reconstruction plan?

Implementing
Reconstruction p. 418


 What policies did the Republican Party in the South pursue?

Reconstruction
Abandoned p. 423


 How did changing Northern attitudes affect the end of Reconstruction?

The New South p. 428


 What were the key economic developments in the South after 1877?

 CHAPTER

Preparing for
Reconstruction p. 406




 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 14

Now That We
Are Free
Reconstruction and the New South,
1863–1890
 The Civil War ended in April 1865, concluding the bloodiest and most divisive conflict in American history. The period that followed came to be known as Reconstruction for several reasons. Most obviously, the name called to mind the need to rebuild the war-torn South. It also referred to the effort to reestablish the Union torn apart by secession. Finally, it indicated the need to remake Southern society in the wake of slavery’s destruction. The complexities and challenges of this last goal are evident in Winslow Homer’s 1876 painting, A Visit from the Old Mistress, which depicts ex-slaves being visited by their former owner. The elegant clothing worn by the “Old Mistress” suggests she has money, but clearly the relationship between the women has changed significantly in the wake of emancipation. To begin with, the mistress has come to visit the former slaves in their home, suggesting a diminishing of her status and power relative to them. The scene also lacks any sense of the affection that plantation owners always assured themselves existed between slaves and masters. Indeed, the three African American women eye the mistress warily. One of them even chooses to remain seated in what surely would have been considered a show of contempt. The old order was gone, but what would replace it remained unclear in the aftermath of the war. Americans entered the Reconstruction period facing the profound questions raised by war and emancipation. Could whites and former slaves live together in peace and mutual respect? What rights were the freedmen entitled to, and who would guarantee these rights? The different answers articulated by freedmen and white Southerners revealed sharply divergent visions of the future and led to a bitter struggle to define the meaning of freedom. “Verily,” observed ex-slave Frederick Douglass, “the work does not end with the abolition of slavery, but only begins.”

 “Never before had I a word of impudence from any of our black folk, but they are not ours any longer.” SUSAN BRADFORD, observing the defiant attitude among former slaves on her Florida plantation, 1865





 CHAPTER 14

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

Preparing for Reconstruction
 Long before the Emancipation Proclamation took effect on January 1, 1863 countless thousands of enslaved Africans took advantage of the chaos produced by the war to liberate themselves. Their actions raised a host of questions about what rights the freedmen would be entitled to, including land ownership and voting. Lincoln and his advisers preferred to wait until the war was won before addressing these questions, but actions taken by the freedmen to assert their rights and secure their liberty forced the Lincoln administration to develop policies during the war that ultimately shaped postwar Reconstruction.

Emancipation Test Cases
 Even before the Emancipation Proclamation took effect, the federal government realized that it needed to enact policies regarding the growing numbers of freedmen in areas of the South occupied by the Union army. These policies varied by region and were shaped by local customs and the attitudes of freedmen and white officials. As such, they amounted to test cases for the coming debate over Reconstruction. Three of these test cases revealed both the promise and the conflict surrounding emancipation. The first test case began when federal forces seized the Sea Islands off the coast of South Carolina in November 1861. They found a vast system of cotton plantations, but no planters. The latter had fled, leaving behind 10,000 slaves, who moved quickly to establish new lives based on their understanding of freedom. While clearly posed, “Planting Sweet Potatoes” (14.1), shot by a New Hampshire photographer visiting a regiment from his state stationed on one of the islands, captured one fundamental way in which ex-slaves expressed their freedom. Rejecting cotton, a crop they associated with slavery, they planted crops of their own choosing, such as sweet potatoes and corn for local consumption. Freedom for the African Americans of the Sea Islands

 meant a future as independent farmers living free of white control. Many Northern whites who arrived after the military takeover, however, brought with them a different vision of the future for the Sea Islands. Convinced that Sea Island blacks should resume their labors on cotton plantations—not as slaves but as paid wage earners—federal officials chose not to grant land to the freedmen. This decision was driven in part by the sincere belief that subsistence farming on small tracts of land was backward, harmful to the long-term

14.1 Freedmen in the Sea Islands Cultivating
Sweet Potatoes, 1862
 Most freedmen refused to grow cotton, considering it a symbol of slavery. They grew sweet potatoes and other crops, such as corn, primarily for their own consumption.

 How did freedmen define freedom in the Sea Islands?

Read the Document Charlotte Forten, “Life on the Sea Islands”


PREPARING FOR RECONSTRUCTION

 interests of the freedmen and also by the racist notion that African Americans could not handle freedom responsibly without the guidance of white employers. Consequently, they auctioned the land off to the highest bidder. Northern investors bought most of the land, hired freedmen as wage laborers, and resumed cotton cultivation. A second test case unfolded on Davis Bend, the Mississippi plantations owned by Confederate President Jefferson Davis and his brother Joseph. Before the Civil War, they had tried to make Davis Bend a model slave-labor community, where slaves received better food and were granted considerable autonomy. The Davis brothers hoped other planters would follow their example and thus refute the abolitionist argument that slavery was inhumane. Instead, Davis Bend became a model of a very different sort of ideal, one that vividly demonstrated what freedmen could achieve if granted land and autonomy. When General Ulysses S. Grant arrived and found the former slaves running the plantations, he ordered federal officials to lease land to the freedmen. Unlike the freedmen of the Sea Islands, the African American residents of Davis Bend did not have to contend with Northerners seeking to reassert



 white control over the land and impose a wage labor system. As a consequence, by 1865 Davis Bend residents had established their own local government and cleared a profit of $160,000 in cotton sales. A third and far larger test case for emancipation policy began in Louisiana and was eventually extended up the Mississippi Valley affecting some 700,000 former slaves. Soon after Union forces seized New Orleans in April 1862, army officers established a policy to guide the transition from slavery to emancipation. As in the Sea Islands, the policy reflected the racist belief among Northern whites that African Americans could not responsibly handle their freedom and therefore needed strict rules of conduct and work. Blacks were required to remain on their plantations, working as wage laborers bound by one-year contracts. Those wishing to travel, even for short distances, required a pass from the plantation owner. Runaways and resisters, as depicted in this 1864 drawing (14.2), would be forcibly returned to their plantations. Offsetting these harsh provisions was a ban on corporal punishment for plantation labor. Freedmen bitterly opposed the new system, arguing that it rendered them nearly

14.2 Freedmen
Forcibly Returned
 to Their Plantations, Violators of the Reconstruction plan were deemed “vagrants” and forcibly returned to their plantations.

 Why did Union officials define freedom for former slaves so narrowly in Louisiana?



 CHAPTER 14

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

 powerless under the authority of their former masters. In New Orleans, home to the South’s largest free black population before the war, African Americans began to demand equal rights for all freedmen, including the right to vote and hold office. Although their efforts failed, they sparked a national debate over freedmen’s rights that would dominate Reconstruction. The experiences in the Sea Islands, Davis Bend, Louisiana, and elsewhere during the war created conflicting visions regarding the rights of freedmen, land redistribution, and the authority of exslave owners. Yet emancipation also revealed the optimism of the freedmen and their commitment to defend their newly won freedom and make the most of it.

 Lincoln’s Ten Percent Plan Even as the Civil War raged, President Lincoln had begun to formulate an official Reconstruction policy. In keeping with his moderate political views before the war, Lincoln proposed a moderate Reconstruction policy. As he suggested so eloquently in his second inaugural address, he intended to deal with the defeated South “with malice toward none” and “charity for all” to “achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves….” He believed that extending lenient terms to the South would convince Confederates to surrender sooner and speed the healing process necessary for the good of the Union. Vengeance, he held, would only delay Reconstruction. It might even inspire defeated Confederate soldiers to form renegade bands of insurgents to wage a war of terrorism for years to come.

 “A more studied outrage on the legislative authority of the people has never been perpetuated.” Wade-Davis Manifesto denouncing Lincoln’s veto of the Wade-Davis Bill In December 1863, Lincoln issued his Proclamation of Amnesty and Reconstruction, also known as the Ten Percent Plan. Intended to establish Southern state governments, the plan pardoned all Southerners (except high-ranking military officers and Confederate officials) who

 What advantages did Lincoln see in a moderate Reconstruction policy?

 took an oath pledging loyalty to the Union and support for emancipation. As soon as 10 percent of a state’s voters took this oath, they could call a convention, establish a new state government, and apply for federal recognition.

Radical Republicans Offer
 a Different Vision Lincoln’s lenient plan enraged many Radical Republicans. In July 1864, Radical Republican leaders Senator Benjamin Wade of Ohio and Congressman Henry W. Davis of Maryland cosponsored the Wade-Davis Bill, a Reconstruction program designed to punish Confederate leaders and destroy the South’s slave society. Southerners could reestablish new state governments only after a majority of a state’s voters signed an “ironclad” oath declaring they never aided the Confederate army or government. Southerners who served as high-ranking army officers or government officials would be stripped of their citizenship, including the right to vote and hold office. The former Confederate states would be readmitted only after a long period of punishment and a clear demonstration of their commitment to the Union, emancipation, and freedmen’s rights. Lincoln quietly pocket vetoed the bill. Furious, Radicals sought to replace him as the Republican Party presidential nominee in 1864. Although the effort failed, it exposed the deeply divided opinions regarding Reconstruction. Lincoln and his fellow Republicans did manage to find common ground on two issues. In late January 1865, at the urging of Lincoln’s administration, Congress passed the Thirteenth Amendment, abolishing slavery. The measure ended any ambiguity over the Emancipation Proclamation, abolishing slavery everywhere in the United States and offering no compensation to former slaveholders. By year’s end 27 states, including eight former Confederate states, would ratify the amendment. In March 1865, Congress established the Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and Abandoned Lands. Known simply as the Freedmen’s Bureau, it became an all-purpose relief agency in the war-ravaged South, distributing food, providing emergency services, building schools, and managing confiscated lands. It represented the first attempt by the federal government to provide social welfare services and quickly became the bedrock institution for implementing Reconstruction policy.

Read the Document Carl Schurz, “Report on the Condition
 of the South” (1865)

THE FRUITS OF FREEDOM



The Fruits of Freedom
 Many Southerners were stunned by the response of their slaves to freedom. Clinging to self-serving paternalistic notions of the plantation as one big family under the benign authority of the master and planter, they were taken aback when their slaves refused to obey their orders or exhibited anger or disrespect toward them. Susan Bradford, a young woman living on a Florida plantation, wrote in her diary that she was “hurt and dazed” when one of her former slaves refused to prepare a dinner for her mother. “Tell her if she want any dinner,” sneered the free woman, “she kin cook it herself.” “I believed that these people were content, happy, and attached to their masters,” wrote one South Carolina planter in 1865, unable to comprehend why slaves abandoned their masters “in [their] moment of need.” It would be the first of many such shocking experiences for whites, who never imagined that slavery might one day be abolished.

Freedom of Movement
 Even before the guns of the Civil War went silent, African Americans had begun to explore the meaning of their freedom and formulate their own vision of a reconstructed postwar South, both of which included unrestricted mobility. Under slavery, movement was sharply limited, and few slaves ventured far from their plantations. In the chaos of war, however, and later with official emancipation, African Americans hit the road. Many did so to escape the plantations that were home to their former masters and countless bitter memories. Others simply reveled in free and unfettered movement. They wandered for the pleasure of it with no particular destination in mind. As these advertisements (14.3) from the Colored Tennessean, Tennessee’s only African American–owned newspaper, indicate, many freedmen also journeyed in search of loved ones sold away years before. African American mobility led to a sharp rise in the black population of Southern cities. In contrast to rural life, black settlements in cities offered more varied job opportunities, albeit nearly always menial, difficult, and low paid. Urban life also provided freedmen access to strong black institutions such as churches, charities, and newspapers. Southern whites reacted to black mobility with both alarm and disdain. Just as former slaves equated freedom with mobility, their former masters saw in it a shocking reminder that the old order was gone. As a consequence, in one of the first expressions of resistance to black freedom, white Southerners passed vagrancy laws intended to restrict African American mobility.

Read the Document James C. Beecher, “Report
 on Land Reform” (1865, 1866)

Forty Acres and
 a Mule Many freedmen also tried to become landowners. If travel was a symbolic expression of their new freedom, land was freedom in concrete form. Land, the freedmen believed, would give their freedom meaning by providing an independent living, free of planter control. The idea that freedmen would receive land in addition to their freedom originated during the war. As Southerners abandoned their plantations before the advancing Union army, ex-slaves often took control, partitioned land, and planted crops. Freedmen defended these extralegal actions as simple justice, citing the generations of unpaid labor that they and their ancestors had performed on farms and plantations. “The property which they [former slaveholders] hold,” asserted a group of freedmen, “was nearly all earned by the sweat of our brows.”

14.3 Freedmen
Searching for Loved
Ones Sold Away
 during Slavery These classified advertisements in the August 12, 1865 Colored Tennessean were just two of thousands published in mainly black-owned newspapers during Reconstruction. They vividly highlight the efforts of freed-men to overcome one of slavery’s harshest legacies. [Source: (t) ICHi-36218; Information Wanted: Of a man by the name of Elias Lowery McDermit; Nashville, Tennessee; 1865; Creator “The Colored Tennessean”; (b) ICHi-36219. Saml Dove wishes to know of the whereabouts of his mother; Utica, NY. Aug 5 1865. Looking for his mother, Areno and his sisters and brother.]

 “Give us our own land and we take care of ourselves; but without land, the old masters can hire or starve us, as they please.” A South Carolina freedman speaking to a Northern journalist, 1865 To bring order to these unofficial acts of confiscation, General William T. Sherman issued in early

 Why did freedmen believe they were owed land?



 CHAPTER 14

14.4 The Misses
 Cooke’s School Room, Freedman’s Bureau, 1866 The Cooke sisters moved from the North to Richmond, Virginia to run one of hundreds of Freedmen’s Bureau schools established across the South.

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

 1865 Special Field Order No. 15. It announced that 400,000 acres of abandoned land from northern Florida to the South Carolina Sea Islands would be distributed to freedman in 40-acre plots. Weeks later Congress established the Freedmen’s Bureau, authorizing it to rent to freedmen 40-acre plots of confiscated and abandoned land, along with a mule. By June some 40,000 freedmen lived on land distributed by Sherman, while thousands more rented plots under control of the Freedmen’s Bureau. Whether they owned land or worked as farm laborers for wages, African Americans used their freedom to change the way they worked. They often refused to work in gangs under overseers because it reminded them of slavery. Instead they preferred working independently, under the direction of elder family members. Many African American women left the field to work in their homes and care for children. African Americans and Radical Republicans wanted land redistribution programs, popularly known as “forty acres and a mule,” enacted across the South. Before long, however, their optimism would give way to bitter disappointment as nearly all the land was returned to its original white owners.

 Uplift through Education Along with land, freedmen sought education as an essential element of their freedom. Laws prohibiting the education of slaves had left most freedmen illiterate. But if they learned to read and write, they

 could conduct their own legal and business affairs, acquire better-paying jobs, read newspapers, and participate more fully in politics. General O. O. Howard, the first head of the Freedmen’s Bureau, also viewed education as an essential goal of Reconstruction. Working with charitable societies and African American leaders, the Freedmen’s Bureau helped build 3,000 schools across the South that by 1870 served 150,000 students of all ages. By 1875, literacy among freedmen jumped from 10 percent to 30 percent (and 52 percent by 1900). In the early years of Reconstruction, educated single white women from the North like the Cooke sisters (14.4) made up the majority of the teachers in these schools. Often sponsored by Northern charitable societies, they saw themselves as missionaries dedicated to the uplift of the freedmen. The journal that published this image in 1866, Frank Leslie’s Illustrated Weekly, shared this vision. Note how the artist depicted the children in spotless attire with all of them focused on their studies. That the vision of these teachers and their sponsors went beyond merely teaching ex-slaves to read is shown in this image (14.5) of a brief biography of African American poet Phillis Wheatley. Published in 1866 by a Boston Christian organization, it demonstrates an effort to inspire ex-slaves’ quest for education and independence by instilling pride in African American achievement. Educating freedmen, however, proved no easy job. Southern whites often put up fierce resistance

14.5 Education and Inspiration
 Some Northern charitable societies, like the Boston Tract Society, published and distributed books to both teach reading and inspire African Americans.

 Why did education become such a priority for African Americans?

 Watch the Video Video Lectures: The Schools that the Civil War and Reconstruction Created

THE FRUITS OF FREEDOM

 to African American education, especially in more remote areas. One report in 1865 described the hardships teachers faced: “Compelled to live on the coarsest diet … subjected to the jeers and hatred of her neighbors … swamped in mud—the school shed a drip, and her quarters little better; raided occasionally by rebels, her school broken up and herself insulted, banished, or run off.” The Freedmen’s Bureau and Northern aid societies also established more than a dozen black colleges, including Howard in Washington, D.C., and Hampton in Virginia. One of their most immediate goals was to train black teachers. By 1870, African American teachers outnumbered white teachers in freedmen’s schools. Many freedmen teachers became community leaders and ran for political office. At least 70 former teachers won seats in Southern state legislatures during Reconstruction.

The Black Church
 The vast network of black churches established during Reconstruction provided an even greater source of community leadership. Black churches had existed in the South before the Civil War, but most were part of larger white congregations and subject to strict white control. Southern whites usually insisted that white ministers lead black congregations to ensure that preaching never challenged slavery and white domination. When the war ended, countless African American congregations of Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians, and other sects separated from white ones. They resented their inferior status in white-controlled churches and longed to practice a more emotional, expressive worship style disdained by whites. Most important, they wanted black clergymen who could address their spiritual and social needs. Often churches assumed a central place in the lives of freedmen. Religious services provided spiritual and psychological support for blacks’ daily struggles. Churches also ran schools and provided charitable services to the community. As this illustration (14.6) of a freedmen community at Trent River, North Carolina, demonstrates, African Americans built a church in the center that doubled as a schoolhouse and meeting place. Churches also offered African Americans a degree of self-government, electing members to serve as trustees and on committees overseeing parish life and budget management. African American women, in particular, filled numerous roles, planning



 events, raising money, and running programs such as temperance societies. Like their white counterparts, African American churches also sponsored countless initiatives, such as burial societies, fraternal organizations, and youth groups. With the church taking so prominent a place in African American life, black ministers, like black teachers, assumed major leadership roles. White hostility convinced most ministers to concentrate on building up their communities from within. Still, many ministers entered politics to advance the cause of black equality, including more than 100 elected to Southern state legislatures during Reconstruction. Reverend Richard H. Cain, for example, went to Charleston, South Carolina, in 1865, where he assisted at a black church. Two years later he served as a delegate to the state constitutional convention, followed by terms in the state senate and U.S. House of Representatives. African Americans’ response to emancipation showed that they understood freedom as more than simply an end to slavery. Freedom included the right to free movement and travel, to labor for themselves under conditions of their own choosing, on land granted to them by the government. It meant self-improvement through education and self-help organizations. It meant establishing their own institutions and building their own communities. It also meant full civil and social equality with whites, including the right to vote and hold office.

14.6 The Black Church Anchors Freedmen Communities
 African Americans organized thousands of churches across the South to address both their spiritual and social needs. In the freedmen settlement of Trent River, North Carolina, a simple structure served as a church, school, and meetinghouse (from Harper’s Weekly, June 9, 1866).

 How did the black church become such a vital institution in freedmen communities?



 CHAPTER 14

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

The Struggle to Define
Reconstruction
 As freedmen in the South worked to define, protect, and extend their freedoms, political leaders in Washington, D.C., debated how to reconstruct the South. The debate revealed sharply divergent visions of the postwar South’s social, political, and economic order. Radical Republicans wanted to replace the old slavocracy with an interracial democracy protected by federal authority. Conservatives sought to limit Reconstruction to granting ex-slaves freedom and opposed proposals to distribute land and grant full equality to ex-slaves. Moderates held the balance of power in deciding most of these questions, but they lacked a clear vision of the postwar South and made their decisions in response to events as they unfolded. was a bitter racist who abhorred the notion of black equality. Committed to maintaining white supremacy, Johnson outlined in May 1865 a lenient policy toward the South designed to rapidly re-establish Southern state governments and Andrew Johnson, who became president after restore the Union. It offered pardons, amnesty, Lincoln’s assassination in April 1865, was a compliand the return of all confiscated property to cated man. Although he once owned slaves, like many Southerners who took an oath of allegiance to the other poor whites from the backcountry of eastern Union. Former Confederate leaders and planters Tennessee, he grew up deeply suspicious of the planter possessing more than $20,000 in personal wealth, aristocracy. As a politician, he gained a wide followhowever, would have to apply to him personally ing among poor farmers for his populist criticism of for a pardon. planter power. He opSecond, Johnson posed secession and was set out the terms the only senator from a for readmitting exseceding state who did Confederate states to not withdraw from the the Union. As soon as Senate in early 1861. Johnson appointed a Lincoln appointed Johntemporary governor, a son governor of Tennesstate could then consee after the state came vene a constitutional under Union occupaconvention of elected tion. In 1864, Republidelegates (chosen cans sought to appeal to only by those citizens Southern unionism and granted amnesty or Congressman THADDEUS STEVENS, picked Johnson as Linpardons). If the conDecember 18, 1865 coln’s vice presidential vention ratified the running mate. Thirteenth AmendInitially Johnson indicated he intended to deal ment, renounced secession, repudiated all Confedharshly with the South. He spoke of punishing exerate debts, and held elections for state office and Confederates for their “treason.” He also talked of Congress, Johnson would recognize the state as a the need to assist former slaves in their transition fully reconstructed member of the Union. to freedom. Radical Republicans, who shared these With Congress out of session, Johnson’s views, were thrilled. plan faced little formal opposition. By the fall But their joy was soon replaced by anger. First, of 1865, all but a few planters and high-ranking despite his harsh anti-planter rhetoric, Johnson ex-Confederates had been pardoned and had

The Conservative Vision
 of Freedom: Presidential Reconstruction

 “We have turned loose … four million slaves without a hut to shelter them or a cent in their pockets.… This Congress is bound to provide for them until they can take care of themselves.”

 What was Andrew Johnson’s primary motivation in devising his lenient Reconstruction policy?

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Federal Authority
 and Equal Rights

THE STRUGGLE TO DEFINE RECONSTRUCTION

 restored to them virtually all their lands, including the vast tracts of land that had been set aside in 40-acre plots for freedmen. In December, with all 11 former Confederate states having established new governments under his terms, Johnson announced the Union was restored, and Reconstruction was over. Johnson’s actions outraged Northern Republicans, including moderates. This political cartoon (14.7) shows Johnson accepting bags of cash from a former Confederate (depicted as the devil) in exchange for a pardon, while a “Pardoned Reconstruction Rebel” in the lower left kills “Union men and freedmen.” Three developments in the supposedly “reconstructed” South stoked Republican discontent. First, many of the state constitutional conventions had failed explicitly to ratify the Thirteenth Amendment; some even demanded financial compensation for the loss of their slaves. Second, and even more galling, in the state elections in November 1865, Southern voters elected dozens of ex-Confederate



 officials and army officers. Among them was Alexander Stephens, former vice president of the Confederacy, chosen to represent Georgia in the Senate. Third, new Southern state governments, beginning in late 1865 with Mississippi and South Carolina, passed laws known as Black Codes to limit the civil and economic rights of freedmen and create an exploitable workforce. Observing these developments less than a year after the end of the Civil War, many Northerners wondered if the great conflict had been fought in vain. Had hundreds of thousands died to defeat the Confederacy only to see its leaders quickly resume power? Had slavery been abolished only to be replaced with a similar system of unfree labor? One of the most common Black Codes (first established in Mississippi in 1865 and then replicated across the South) established the vague charge of “vagrancy”—having no regular home or employment—as a pretext for controlling freedmen. (See Competing Visions: Demanding Rights, Protecting Privilege.) Any freedman who

 14.7 Johnson’s Leniency Angers the North Johnson’s pledge to punish the South (“Treason must be made odious”) is ridiculed in this 1866 political cartoon. His sweeping pardons of ex-Confederate leaders and planters and easy terms for readmission of Southern states provoked anger in the North.

 What events in the South in 1865–1866 angered Northern Republicans?



 CHAPTER 14

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

Competing Visions
DEMANDING RIGHTS, PROTECTING PRIVILEGE
In the aftermath of the Civil War, one question dominated the minds of Americans North and South: Now that slavery was abolished, what would be the status of the freedmen? While newspaper editors, clergymen, and members of Congress debated the issue, white and black Southerners set out to answer the question themselves. As you read the following documents, one from a convention of freedmen and the other from the state legislature of Mississippi, consider the starkly contrasted visions for the future of Southern society. Why do the freedmen feel compelled to say they bear no ill will toward their “former oppressors?” Why do Mississippi legislators define vagrancy in such vague terms? “Address to the Loyal Citizens and Congress of the United States of America,” Proceedings of the Convention of the Colored People of Virginia, Held in the City of Alexandria, August 2, 3, 4, 5, 1865. We, the delegates of the colored people of the State of Virginia … solemnly declaring that we desire to live upon the most friendly and agreeable terms with all men; we feel no ill-will or prejudice toward our former oppressors; are willing and desire to forgive and forget the past, and so shape our future conduct as shall promote our happiness and the interest of the community in which we live … We must, on the other hand, be allowed to aver and assert that we believe that we have among the white people of this State many who are our most inveterate enemies; who hate us as a class, who feel no sympathy with or for us; who despise us simply because we are black, and more especially, because we have been made free by the power of the United States Government … We claim, then, as citizens of this State, the laws of the Commonwealth [of Virginia] shall give to all men equal protection; that each and every man may appeal to the law for his equal rights without regard to the color of his skin; and we believe this can only be done by extending the franchise, which we believe to be our inalienable right as freemen, and which the Declaration of Independence guarantees to all free citizens of this Government and which is the privilege of this nation. We claim the right of suffrage: 
 Mississippi legislators in December 1865 enacted the first “Black Codes” to limit the freedoms of African Americans. Defining vagrancy in such vague terms allowed white Southerners to arrest freedmen at will and to curtail their freedom of movement. These measures were quickly copied in the remaining ex-Confederate states. Section 1. All rogues and vagabonds, idle and dissipated persons, … persons who neglect their calling or employment, misspend what they earn, or do not provide for the support of themselves or their families, or dependents shall be deemed and considered vagrants, … and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not exceeding one hundred dollars, with all accruing costs, and be imprisoned … not exceeding ten days.… Section 5.… In case of any freedman, free negro or mulatto shall fail for five days after the imposition of any or forfeiture upon him or her for violation of any of the provisions of this act to pay the same, that it shall be, and is hereby, made the duty of the sheriff of the proper county to hire out said freedman, free negro or mulatto, to any person who will, for the shortest period of service, pay said fine and forfeiture and all costs … Colored Men’s Convention 1869.

 1st. Because we can see no other safeguard for our protection. 2nd. Because we are citizens of the country and natives of this State. 3rd. Because we are as well qualified to vote who shall be our rulers as many who do vote for that purpose who have no interest in us, and do not know our wants.

 What is significant about the freedmen’s use of the term citizen?

Read the Document “Address of the Colored State Convention to the
People of the State of South Carolina” (1865)


THE STRUGGLE TO DEFINE RECONSTRUCTION

 hit the road seeking new opportunities could be arrested as a vagrant and fined. If a freedman could not pay his fine, he could be hired out for a time to a local plantation owner willing to pay his fine. As this drawing (14.8) dramatically shows, in some cases the contracts for such labor were auctioned off to local planters. The artist intended to conjure in the minds of Northerners a grim scene reminiscent of a slave auction, suggesting that one of the war’s chief accomplishments, emancipation, was being undermined. Some Black Codes required that the children of “vagrant” freedmen be forced to accept apprenticeships that bound them to an employer until age 21. Others coerced blacks to sign long-term work contracts as proof of employment, a practice that left them at the mercy of employers who were not required to pay them for work performed if they quit before the contract expired. Other laws restricted freedmen to renting land only in rural areas (to keep them on plantations), prohibited ministers from preaching without a license,



 outlawed interracial marriages, and barred blacks from serving on juries.

Congressional Reconstruction
 and the Fourteenth Amendment Republicans in Congress vowed to block Johnson’s rapid and lenient Reconstruction program for both idealistic and practical reasons. Excepting emancipation, none of the Republicans’ goals for changing Southern society had been accomplished, and the former slavocracy appeared poised to resume power—a result certain to revive the Democratic Party. A slower process of Reconstruction would allow the Republican Party to take root in the South, especially if African Americans were granted the right to vote, as many Radicals like Congressman Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania demanded. The confrontation began in January 1866 when Congress reconvened. Republicans first refused

Read the Document Affidavit of Former Slave Enoch Braston (1866)


14.8 The Black
Codes in Action
Unable to pay his
 fine for “vagrancy” as defined in the Black Codes of Florida, a freedman is auctioned off. The high bidder won the right to a freedman’s labor for months or years.

 How did Black Codes calling for freedmen to sign labor contracts curtail their freedom?



 CHAPTER 14

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

14.9 Race Riot in Memphis
 White mobs, unrestrained by police, killed 46 blacks in Memphis, Tennessee on May 1–2, 1866. News of the atrocities, conveyed in images such as this one, stoked Northern opinion against Johnson’s lenient Reconstruction policies.

 to admit the senators and representatives from the former Confederate states Johnson had declared reconstructed. Next, they established the Joint Committee on Reconstruction, a body that gathered evidence and testimony from hundreds of witnesses detailing widespread lawlessness and violence against freedmen and their white allies in the South. To counteract Southern resistance and the oppression of freedmen, Congress passed two bills. The first expanded the powers of the Freedmen’s Bureau and authorized it to continue operations for two more years. The second, the Civil Rights Act, declared African Americans and all persons born in the United States (except Native Americans) citizens. It also defined the rights of all citizens regardless of race—for example, the right to sue and to make contracts. Taking direct aim at the Black Codes, the law prohibited state

 How did the Civil Rights Act promote equal rights for all Americans, regardless of race?

 governments from depriving any citizen of these “fundamental rights.” Johnson, infuriated at Congress’s rejection of his Reconstruction program and determined to thwart efforts to establish racial equality, vetoed both bills. Congress overrode the vetoes and the bills became law, but by June 1866, Republicans decided bolder action was necessary. Johnson remained opposed to freedmen’s rights, and violence against blacks was on the rise in the South. The worst incident (14.9), was a race riot in Memphis, Tennessee, on May 1–2 that left 46 blacks, many of them Union army veterans, and two whites dead. This drawing from Harper’s Weekly, a widely read publication that favored freedmen’s rights, was intended to arouse anger in the North over Southern intransigence and support for congressional action. The Civil Rights Act was an unprecedented piece of legislation,

Read the Document Charles F. Johnson and T. W. Gilbreth,
The Memphis Riot (1866)


THE STRUGGLE TO DEFINE RECONSTRUCTION

 but its supporters knew that it could easily be overturned by a future Congress. An amendment, on the other hand, became a permanent part of the Constitution. On June 13, 1866, Republicans passed the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution. Its five main provisions radically redefined the role of the federal government as the guarantor of individual civil rights. First, it declared all persons born or naturalized in the United States as citizens, a definition that necessarily included all freedmen. Second, all citizens were entitled to “equal protection of the laws” of the states where they lived. Third, states that denied adult male citizens, including African Americans, the right to vote would have their representation in Congress reduced. Fourth, all highranking former Confederates were prohibited from holding public office, unless pardoned by act of Congress. Fifth, it repudiated the Confederate debt (thus punishing those who lent money to the Confederacy) and prohibited financial compensation for ex–slave owners. Johnson greeted the unprecedented amendment with an unprecedented response: He went on the campaign trail to urge its defeat. Hoping to make the midterm state and congressional elections in November 1866 a referendum on the amendment, Johnson and his allies played on white racism, conjuring up images of racial equality and racial intermarriage to alarm Northern whites. Republicans responded in kind, portraying Johnson and the Democrats as traitors who waged war on the Union. Republicans won a sweeping victory in November. Northern voters, although still leery of racial equality, rejected Johnson’s lenient form of Reconstruction because it required too little of Southerners and restored planter rule.

Republicans Take Control
 Emboldened by their legislative and electoral success, congressional Republicans moved to take complete control of Reconstruction policy. In March 1867, Congress passed the first of four Reconstruction Acts. They divided the South (except Tennessee) into five military districts, each governed by a military commander empowered to restore peace and protect individuals, especially freedmen. As soon as order was established, the ex-Confederate states could begin a new, stricter readmission process. The act called for elections to select delegates to state constitutional conventions— elections that permitted African American men to



 vote, but barred Southerners who had served in the Confederate government and army. The new state constitutions drawn up by these conventions had to allow universal male suffrage, regardless of race. As soon as a state’s voters approved the new constitution, the state could hold elections to fill government offices. Finally, if Congress approved the state’s constitution and the state legislature ratified the Fourteenth Amendment, the state would be readmitted to the Union. Two years after the end of the Civil War, the federal government had finally adopted a clear Reconstruction plan. The delay was understandable, given Lincoln’s assassination and the lack of precedent. Yet delay granted Southerners time to recover from the war and mount an effective resistance to federal intervention.

 “The President has no power to control or influence anybody and legislation will be carried on entirely regardless of his opinion or wishes.” Republican Senator JAMES W. GRIMES, Iowa, January 1867

 President Johnson promptly vetoed the Reconstruction Acts, but the Republican Congress passed them again over his veto. Some of the more radical Republicans grew so embittered by the president’s actions and words that they attempted to remove him from office. When Johnson dismissed Secretary of War Edwin Stanton in August 1867, Republicans charged him with violating the Tenure of Office Act, a constitutionally dubious measure they had passed in March. It required the president to seek congressional approval before removing a cabinet official. The House voted to impeach the president, charging him with 11 offenses. The trial began in March 1868 and after two months of heated debate and accusation, the Senate failed—by one vote—to convict Johnson and remove him from office. Johnson was saved by some moderate Republicans who feared setting a bad precedent if a politically motivated campaign succeeded in removing a president from office. Many moderate Republicans also considered Johnson’s likely replacement, Senator Benjamin Wade, far too radical. They also knew Johnson had less than a year left in office.

View the Map Interactive Map: Congressional Reconstruction


 Why did moderate Republicans decide not to remove Johnson from office?



 CHAPTER 14

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

Implementing Reconstruction
 As Congress engaged in its impeachment struggle with President Johnson in 1867–1868, the Reconstruction Acts took effect. A coalition of African Americans, poor up-country whites, and economically ambitious merchants (many originally from the North) and white planters formed the Republican Party in the South. They seized the opportunity presented by the congressional Reconstruction program and dominated the process of electing state governments and gaining readmission to the Union. The task would not be easy, especially as their different goals conflicted with each other and with those of most white Southerners, who would clearly oppose—politically, economically, and violently—any attempt to establish what they called “Negro rule.” 14.10 The Hated Scalawag Scalawags became despised figures in the popular Southern mind. Here a scalawag is depicted as an opportunist seeking political power by manipulating the black vote.

The Republican Party
 in the South The process of remaking state governments under the Reconstruction Acts fell to the Republican Party in the South, an organization comprising three distinct and in some cases antagonistic groups: Northerners who settled in the South, white Southerners,

 Why did many Northerners move south after the Civil War?

 and former slaves. Northerners who moved south after the war were derided as carpetbaggers by white Southerners. The term suggested they were poor opportunists who carried to the South only a cheap suitcase, or carpetbag, which they intended to fill with plunder garnered from Southerners still reeling from the war. In reality most were middle class, often former Union soldiers or merchants, ministers, artisans, and professionals who viewed the South as a region of opportunity where they planned to settle permanently. Others came as idealistic relief workers, sent by Northern charitable and religious societies, intent upon aiding ex-slaves in their transition to freedom. The Republican Party in the South also contained many white Southerners. Most white Southerners referred to them derisively as scalawags and considered them traitors to their region and race, men eager to accrue riches and power by manipulating black voters (14.10). Most scalawags came from the less developed backcountry regions of the South, especially eastern Tennessee and Kentucky, northern Alabama and Georgia, and western North Carolina. Like carpetbaggers, they believed that the Republican Party offered them and their region the best chance for economic betterment. Most did not, however, embrace on the idea of racial equality. Former slaves made up the largest (about 80 percent), most significant segment of the South’s Republican Party. Empowered with the vote by the Civil Rights Act of 1866 and Reconstruction Act of 1867, African Americans turned out in huge numbers in late 1867 to vote in elections held to select delegates to state constitutional conventions. For supporters of black suffrage, this extraordinary moment—persons only recently considered property now exercising for the first time the right to vote—was captured in

IMPLEMENTING RECONSTRUCTION



 “But be sure to vote for no Southern men that was a rebel or secessionist; for, if you do, you are pulling them hemp to hang yourself with.” R. I. CROMWELL, advising his fellow freedmen, New Orleans Tribune, April 25, 1867

 this Harper’s Weekly drawing (14.11). The dignified scene depicts three voters who symbolically represent a spectrum of blacks that includes common laborers, educated blacks who were free before the war, and Union army veterans. Most African American Republican leaders came from the second group. They tended to come from the North and possessed more wealth and education than the average freedman. The three factions of the Republican Party—carpetbaggers, scalawags, and freedmen—formed an uneasy alliance as they came together to reestablish Southern state governments. Nonetheless, their combined votes in the 1867 elections for delegates to state constitutional conventions led to a sweeping Republican victory. White Republicans, even though they comprised only 20 percent of party membership, won most of the seats. But freedmen won 265 seats overall and a majority of seats in South Carolina and Louisiana.

Creating Reconstruction
Governments in the South
 Republican delegates soon drafted new constitutions for former Confederate states according to the guidelines established by the Reconstruction Acts. In a few states, notably Virginia and Texas, conservatives delayed the process for more than a year. But by the end of 1868, seven Southern states had ratified new constitutions, created new governments, and been readmitted to the Union. These Republican governments achieved remarkable results. To begin with, they represented a revolutionary advance in the status of the freedmen. Held as slaves and denied citizenship only a few years before, African Americans now enjoyed

View the Closer Look First Vote


14.11 Casting Their First Votes
 For supporters of racial equality like the Northern publication Harper’s Weekly, whose cover featured this drawing, the large turnout of black voters in the 1867 elections was exhilarating.

 the right to vote and hold office. Between 1869 and 1901, 22 African Americans would serve in Congress (20 representatives and 2 senators). More than 600 would win seats in state legislatures and to other state offices. While embittered white Southerners decried what they termed “Negro rule,” statistics show that white Republicans held a far greater share of offices than blacks. No African American was elected governor, and no state legislature ever had a black majority (the South Carolina lower house briefly had a black majority). What white Southerners really objected to was Republican rule

 How did African American voting affect the political situation in the South in 1867–1868?



 CHAPTER 14

14.12 Linking
 the Democrats to Secession and Civil War This political cartoon from a pro-Republican periodical sought to demonize Democrats Horatio Seymour and Francis Blair by reminding voters that their Democratic Party was the party of Southern secessionists.

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

 and what it stood for: African American equality and empowerment. Republican-controlled Southern state governments also achieved several significant reforms. In contrast to the tightfisted governments of the antebellum era, they funded public works projects, built hospitals and orphanages, and founded public school systems. They also enacted more equitable tax codes and passed laws to help indebted farmers keep their land. Opponents of Republican rule denounced these initiatives (and the higher taxes needed to fund them) as wasteful and poorly managed. Fundamentally, they objected to their social and racial implications, since many of the projects were designed to aid the poor and freedmen. But the charges of corruption, mismanagement, and debt lodged by the opponents of Reconstruction governments were not entirely groundless. The rapid expansion of government services and expenditures caused many states to run up large deficits. It also created opportunities for graft and bribery which some Reconstruction legislators took advantage of. Democratic opponents railed against these abuses as alleged evidence that blacks were incapable of holding office and that their white allies were

 interested only in plunder. In reality the corruption in Southern state governments paled in comparison to that found in the North. New York’s Tammany Hall political machine, for example, under William “Boss” Tweed, stole more than $20 million from 1869 to 1871. Moreover, the spending by Southern state governments on social programs looked large only compared to the paltry expenditures on education, health care, and public works before the war. Nonetheless, charges of corruption and excessive spending, coupled with increased taxes, diminished support for the Southern Republican governments and created an unfavorable impression in the North.

 “We cannot vote without all sorts of threats and intimidations. Freedmen are shot with impunity.” Report of a Republican official, 1868

The Election of 1868
 By summer 1868, there was little doubt whom the Republican Party would nominate for president. General Ulysses S. Grant enjoyed widespread popularity across the North and among Southern Republicans for defeating Robert E. Lee and ending the Civil War. Grant conveyed a tone of moderation in a time of partisan and sectional acrimony. “Let us have peace,” became his campaign slogan. Democrats, still weak in the aftermath of the war and the disenfranchisement of many exConfederates, faced an uphill battle against Grant. Note how this political cartoon (14.12) “‘Tis But A Change of Banners” from a pro-Republican journal sought to link the Democratic nominees for president Governor Horatio Seymour of New York and for vice president Francis Blair of Maryland with both secession and postwar racial violence. But as this racist Democratic campaign song makes clear (14.13), Seymour ran an aggressive campaign designed to arouse fears that the Republican Party and black suffrage threatened the rights of white Americans. Republicans, his campaign claimed, must be prevented from spreading the disastrous experiment in black political empowerment to the North. Running on a message of political moderation, fiscal responsibility, and an even-handed approach

 Why did Southerners charge that Reconstruction governments were corrupt?

IMPLEMENTING RECONSTRUCTION

14.13 The Politics of Racism
 The campaign of Democratic Party nominees Horatio Seymour and Francis Blair appealed to white voters’ racism though the nominees’ speeches, campaign literature, and songs such as this one, “The White Man’s Banner.”

 to Reconstruction, Grant won 214 electoral votes to Seymour’s 80. The popular vote, however, was much closer: 53 percent for Grant, 47 percent for Seymour (14.14). This outcome reflected three things. First, it indicated the wide appeal of Seymour’s blatantly racist message to conservative whites in both North and South. Second, it showed how vital the freedman vote was for the Republican Party. Grant received nearly 500,000 African American votes, but won by only 300,000 votes. Third, it revealed the effectiveness of violence as a weapon in electoral politics. A reign of terror unleashed by violent whites before the election, especially in Georgia and Louisiana, kept thousands of black voters away from the polls.

 on the rise, many Republicans argued that another amendment was necessary to guarantee unequivocally the right of African Americans to vote. Women’s rights activists agreed, but many also argued for universal suffrage—the vote for all adult citizens regardless of race or gender. Bitterly disappointed over the reference to only “male citizens” in the Fourteenth Amendment, feminists, such as Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony, demanded that any subsequent amendment include women. This demand was opposed by former abolitionists and Radical Republicans, including fellow feminists like Lucy Stone and Frances Harper, who argued that gaining the vote for African American men was a higher priority. Including women, they argued, would doom the amendment because the nation was not ready for such radical change. The cause of women’s suffrage could be taken up immediately after black suffrage was secured. Stanton and Anthony rejected this reasoning, leading to a twenty-year split in the women’s rights movement. Most Republicans in Congress, however, agreed with Frederick Douglass’s assertion that this was the “Negro’s Hour,” and they drafted the Fifteenth Amendment to read succinctly: “The right of citizens of the United States shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any state on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude.” Passed by Congress in late 1869 and ratified in 1870, the Fifteenth Amendment presented a striking contradiction. It established a revolutionary experiment in interracial democracy, something no other slave society, such as those in the Caribbean or 3,013,421

53%


2,706,829


 Popular vote

47%


 Electoral vote



The Fifteenth Amendment
 After the 1868 election, congressional Republicans decided that black suffrage required an explicit constitutional guarantee. Black male suffrage was implied in the Fourteenth Amendment’s phrase, “all male citizens,” but with Southern resistance



Ulysses S. Grant
(Republican)


Horatio Seymour
(Democrat)


14.14 The
Election of 1868
 Votes from nearly 500,000 recently enfranchised African Americans proved crucial to Grant’s victory in the election. (Ex-Confederate states not yet reconstructed did not participate.)

 Why did some women’s rights activists oppose ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment?



 CHAPTER 14

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

 Latin America, did so soon and so completely after emancipation. Yet its spare wording left wide open the possibility that states could devise clever ways to deny blacks the right to vote that did not directly invoke “race, color, or previous condition of servitude.”

The Rise of White Resistance


14.15 Another
Victim of the Klan
 Terrorist violence by white vigilante groups soared in the early 1870s. In this scene from Moore County, North Carolina, a freedman pleads for his life, surrounded by Klansmen in full regalia.

 The secret white terrorist organizations that first arose in 1866 and that wrought havoc in parts of the South during the 1868 election grew bolder and more violent by 1870–1871, especially during election season. Known by various names, including the White Brotherhood, Knights of the White Camelia, and especially the Ku Klux Klan, they functioned in much the same manner. As illustrated in a popular Northern newspaper (14.15), Klansmen often operated at night, wearing hoods, robes, and other regalia to hide their identities and terrify their victims. Blacks (and occasionally carpetbaggers and scalawags) targeted for “punishment” were beaten and frequently killed. Some had their crops or homes burned or their mules killed. Klansmen also targeted symbols of black self-improvement and independence, such as black churches, businesses, and schools.

 Why did groups like the Klan indulge in anti-black violence?

 Klan terrorism served many purposes. For the poor whites who made up the bulk of Klansmen, the violent suppression of African Americans provided the psychological reassurance that they were not at the bottom of the social order. For white elites who approved of and often assisted the violence, it prevented a political alliance between poor whites and blacks. It also maintained a large, exploitable workforce for plantations and industry by keeping African Americans powerless and poor. Klan violence also discouraged African American voting and thus threatened the Republican Party in the South. In response to surging violence in the South, Republicans in Congress, with strong support from the Grant administration, passed several Enforcement Acts in 1870 and 1871, outlawing “armed combinations” that deprived anyone of their civil or political rights. The Justice Department vigorously enforced these laws across the South, arresting and prosecuting thousands and weakening significantly the Klan and similar organizations by 1872. Although the Enforcement Acts demonstrated that federal authority could effectively protect the rights of freedmen, they also revealed the vulnerability of freedmen should the federal commitment to Reconstruction ever wane.

 Read the Document Hannah Irwin Describes Ku Klux Klan Ride (Late 1860s)

RECONSTRUCTION ABANDONED



Reconstruction Abandoned
 By the end of Grant’s first term in office in 1873, supporters of Reconstruction and freedmen’s rights could look with satisfaction at the many extraordinary changes that had taken place in the South. Yet ominous signs suggested Reconstruction was in trouble. Despite the crackdown on the Klan, white Southerners increasingly demonstrated their commitment to seizing power and imposing a new form of servitude on African Americans. Northerners, by contrast, seemed less and less willing to support a vigorous Reconstruction policy. Slowly, from 1872 to 1877, the extraordinary experiment in interracial democracy and progressive government in the South was dismantled in favor of oligarchy and white supremacy.

Corruption and Scandal
 A major factor in the pullback from Reconstruction was a series of corruption scandals that plagued the Grant administration. Grant himself was honest, but also politically naive and given to a hands-off style of leadership that gave officials in his administration unusual independence. Many of them took advantage of Grant’s trust to enrich themselves through illegal schemes. For example, in the 1869 “Black Friday” scandal, Wall Street titans Jay Gould and Jim Fisk conspired with Grant’s brother-in-law to corner the gold market. The plan failed but not before hundreds of innocent investors were ruined. In the Credit Mobilier scandal, Grant’s vice president and several high-ranking members of Congress took bribes from the company involved in the completion of the government-subsidized Union Pacific Railroad. In the so-called “Whiskey Ring” scandal, Treasury Secretary Orville E. Babcock made a fortune by illegally allowing whiskey distillers to avoid paying excise taxes. In yet another scandal, Secretary of War William W. Belknap accepted bribes from companies engaged in corrupt activities on Indian reservations. With so much negative publicity stirred up by corruption scandals, Grant’s administration took steps to minimize political controversies. To secure his reelection and keep the Republican Party in power, Grant adopted a more conservative approach to Reconstruction, by now a frequent source of rancor in Washington. In summer 1872, for example, Grant lobbied Congress for and then signed into law the Amnesty Act, granting a general pardon to all but a few hundred former Confederate leaders. Now eligible to vote and

 hold office, these planters and ex-Confederate army officers and officials wasted little time in reasserting their authority.

Republican Disunity
 The retreat from Reconstruction in the 1870s was also hastened by growing dissention within the Republican Party. Many Republicans, including some former Radicals, began to question the wisdom of maintaining a strong federal role in the affairs of Southern states. Some argued the fundamental goals of Reconstruction—citizenship, civil rights, and suffrage for the freedmen—had been accomplished. There was, they believed, a constitutional and moral limit to what the federal government could do for the freedmen. Now was the time for freedmen to use their new rights to elevate themselves economically, socially, and politically. Other Republicans argued for an end to Reconstruction for less idealistic reasons. Even though some of them had been abolitionists before the war and advocates of freedmen’s rights in the first years that followed, they now considered Reconstruction a failure. These Liberal Republicans, as they came to be called, had grown tired of the political strife produced by debates over freedmen’s rights.

 “It seems to me that we are drifting, drifting back under the leadership of the slaveholders. Our former masters are fast taking the reins of government.” GEORGE M. ARNOLD, African American Republican

Read the Document Credit Mobilier/Union Pacific Railroad Scandal
Testimony of C.P. Huntington (1873)


 How did the scandals of the Grant administration undermine Reconstruction?



 CHAPTER 14

3,597,132


55.6%




Ulysses S. Grant
(Republican)
 Popular vote Electoral vote

 * Greeley died before the electoral college met and therefore received no votes

14.16 The
Election of 1872
 Ulysses Grant easily won reelection when opposed by a weak candidate, Democrat Horace Greeley. Scandals and economic turmoil soon undermined his popularity and power.

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

 They also worried about the growing power of the 2,834,761 federal government. 43.8% Liberal Republicans also expressed disgust over the corruption and mismanagement of Southern Reconstruction governments. They accepted the argument of Southerners that freed0* men and their white allies were incapable of honest and effective govHorace Greeley ernment. No one embod(Democrat, Liberal Republican) ied this dramatic change of heart more than Horace Greeley, the progressive editor of the New York Tribune. Once the outspoken champion of abolition and freedmen’s rights, by the early 1870s, he advocated returning the South to white rule. Blacks, he wrote in 1870, were a “worthless race,” who would rather accept charity than help themselves. Their Reconstruction governments were based on “ignorance and degradation.” A similar transformation from a progressive to a reactionary view of Reconstruction was revealed in the political cartoons of Thomas Nast (see Images as History: Political Cartoons Reflect the Shift in Public Opinion).

The Election of 1872
 The dissatisfaction of Liberal Republicans reached full bloom in summer 1872. Disturbed by the prospect of Grant being renominated for a second term, they broke with the Republican Party and held their own convention in Cincinnati where they nominated Greeley for president. A divided Democratic Party also endorsed Greeley. But the election of 1872 proved disastrous for Greeley and his backers. The public viewed Greeley as an eccentric who during his long career in public life had supported many fringe causes such as vegetarianism, spiritualism, and utopianism. Greeley’s call for an end to Reconstruction and reconciliation between North and South also repelled many Northern voters who still associated Southerners and the Democratic Party with secession and civil war. In Grant’s sweeping victory over Greeley (14.16), Republicans had good reason to cheer. The Democrats’ and Liberal Republicans’ call for

 ending Reconstruction and returning the South to white rule had been rejected. Moreover, the Grant administration’s crackdown on the Klan had allowed African Americans unprecedented freedom to vote. Still, Northerners and Republicans in Congress were not prepared to support federal intervention in the South indefinitely. As new pressing issues emerged after 1872, support for Reconstruction rapidly eroded.

Hard Times
 The American economy had boomed after the Civil War. Hundreds of thousands of new businesses were established. These included massive factories that employed hundreds, in some cases thousands, of workers. Aiding this economic growth was the dramatic expansion of the railroad and telegraph systems and increased availability of capital through banks and stock sales. The booming economy encouraged businesses to expand and investors to take bigger risks. When these trends reached a critical point in late1873, a panic on Wall Street ensued. Some of the nation’s most prominent financial houses and banks went bankrupt. As credit became scarce, businesses began to fail. Hundreds of thousands of workers lost their jobs. By early 1874, the nation’s economy had plunged into a deep depression that lasted until 1877. The Panic of 1873 directly affected Reconstruction. As hard times set in, the fate of the freedmen became less of a concern to Northerners. Economic issues like currency reform and the tariff took precedence over civil rights and white vigilante violence against freedmen. The public, declared one Republican, is tired of hearing about Southern violence against the freedmen: “Hard times and heavy taxes make them wish the ‘everlasting nigger’ were in hell or Africa.” The public expressed its discontent in the congressional elections of 1874 by voting in a Democratic majority in the House for the first time since the war.

The Return of Terrorism
 Reconstruction was also undone by a resumption of violence waged by white terrorist groups like the Klan. As the Grant administration bowed to political pressure to reduce federal intervention in Southern affairs, advocates of white supremacy seized the opportunity. In one notorious incident in 1873, a large band of heavily armed whites overran

 Why did Liberal Republicans lose faith in Reconstruction by the early 1870s?

RECONSTRUCTION ABANDONED



Images as History
POLITICAL CARTOONS REFLECT THE SHIFT IN PUBLIC OPINION
One of the nation’s most skilled and popular political cartoonists in the Reconstruction era was Thomas Nast. An immigrant from Germany, he landed a job in 1861 at Harper’s Weekly, the nation’s leading journal of politics and society. Nast’s artistic talent, combined with Harper’s vast circulation, soon turned him into one of the most influential illustrators of his day. As a staunch Republican and Unionist, his drawings during the Civil War were as intensely patriotic and proLincoln as they were anti-Confederate. After the war, Nast’s widely distributed cartoons continued to shape Northern opinion about Reconstruction and freedmen’s rights. Cartoons like And Not This Man? (August 5, 1865) proclaimed the dignity and humanity of the freedmen and their moral right to full citizenship and suffrage. In This is a White Man’s Government (September 5, 1868), he stressed the violent intent of white Southerners to reclaim power and the necessity of federal authority in carrying out the goals of Reconstruction. Nevertheless, Nast’s cartoons eventually reflected the growing disillusionment of Northern Republicans regarding Reconstruction. While he rejected the Liberal Republican call to end Reconstruction, Nast 
 nonetheless expressed the fear that African Americans were incapable of responsible government. Note the contrast between his earlier depictions of freedmen and that in Colored Rule in a Reconstructed (?) State (March 14, 1874). “Columbia,” an early symbol of America and democracy, advocates black suffrage. The globe is actually a nineteenthcentury ballot box.

•
•
•


 By showing African Americans in Union Army uniforms, Nast sought to remind Americans that blacks had earned the right to full citizenship through their service and sacrifice (note the missing leg) in the war.

And Not This Man?
 A freedman wearing a Union Army uniform is crushed beneath an Irish immigrant (left), a white supremacist exConfederate (center), and a Northern capitalist (right). Nast saw these three groups as members of an opportunistic alliance.

•


•
 A ballot box, representing the freedman’s claim on citizenship and voting rights, has been kicked aside.

•


•


 Reflecting Nast’s disillusionment, “Columbia” chastises African American political leaders. In 1874, frustrated with what he saw as inept and selfish African American political leadership in the South, Nash changed his depiction of blacks from noble individuals worthy of citizenship to racist caricatures.

•
 This is a White Man’s Government

Colored Rule in a Reconstructed (?) State


 Why are political cartoons so popular and effective?



 CHAPTER 14

14.17 The Mississippi Plan in Action
 In much of the South, violence kept most freedmen away from the polls. Here a freedman is threatened with death unless he votes for the Democratic Party.

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

 Colfax, Louisiana and slaughtered over 100 African Americans. Just as in the late 1860s, white vigilante violence had two goals: to strip away the freedmen’s hardwon rights and prevent them from voting and holding office. This effort peaked in Mississippi in 1875 when armed groups of whites closely allied with the Democratic Party waged a campaign of terror that came to be known as the Mississippi Plan. Through threats, beatings, and killings, they delivered an unambiguous message: blacks and their white allies who dared vote Republican risked their lives. But the Grant administration rejected Governor Adelbert Ames’s request to send troops to keep the peace and protect the polls. Not surprisingly, more than 60,000 Mississippi voters—nearly all black and Republican— stayed away from the polls on Election Day. Democrats swept to victory and took control of the state legislature for the first time since the Civil War. Immediately they threatened Governor Ames with impeachment and forced him to resign. The success of the Mississippi Plan in intimidating black voters and demolishing the Republican Party is indicated in this 1876 image, Of Course He Wants to Vote the Democratic Ticket (14.17). The artist shows the ruthless character of the white supremacy movement and the vulnerability of freedmen left without federal protection. Other Southern states soon employed their own version of the Mississippi Plan. One by one the remaining Reconstruction governments

 What was the political impact of the resurgence of white vigilante violence?

 fell to a new class of political leaders known as Redeemers. As the name suggests, they cast themselves in almost biblical terms as saviors of Southern society. By 1876, only South Carolina, Louisiana, and Florida remained under Republican control—largely because of the presence of federal troops. The removal of these troops in 1877 opened the way for the complete “redemption” of the former Confederacy and the restoration of white supremacy. Defenders of Reconstruction and the rights of freedmen in Congress were appalled at the rising tide of Redeemer oppression. In response they managed one final measure to bolster the rights of freedmen, the Civil Rights Act of 1875. It required that state governments provide equal access in public facilities such as schools and allow African Americans to serve on juries. The law was largely ignored, and in 1883 the Supreme Court ruled it unconstitutional.

The End of Reconstruction
 The final blow to Reconstruction occurred as the result of the presidential election of 1876. With the Democratic Party reinvigorated by gaining a majority in the House in 1874 and control of most Southern state governments by 1876, a close election was expected. The Democrats nominated Samuel J. Tilden, governor of New York and a well-known reformer. Republicans nominated Ohio governor and Civil War veteran Rutherford B. Hayes. The issues centered on political corruption, the failed economy, and of course, Reconstruction. On Election Day Tilden received 250,000 more popular votes than Hayes (14.18). But the electoral vote—which actually determines the victor—was unclear. Voting irregularities in South Carolina, Louisiana, and Florida left both sides claiming victory—and the 19 electoral votes at stake in those states (one electoral vote was also in dispute in Oregon). Tilden needed to be declared the winner in only one of these four states to win a majority of electoral votes and thus the presidency. Hayes needed to win all three Southern states plus the Oregon vote to put him one electoral vote ahead of Tilden and into the White House. Both sides refused to budge, and a constitutional crisis loomed. Eventually they agreed

Read the Document Blanche K. Bruce, Speech in the Senate (1876)


RECONSTRUCTION ABANDONED 4,284,020

4,036,572


 Popular vote

51%


47.9%


 Electoral vote



Rutherford B. Hayes
(Republican)




Samuel J. Tilden
(Democrat)


 to abide by the decision of a bipartisan commission. The commission authorized an investigation and heard testimony. Behind the scenes members of Congress and party leaders conducted intense negotiations. On

14.18 The Election of 1876
 In one of the most controversial presidential elections in U.S. history, Samuel B. Tilden won the popular vote (4,284,020 to 4,036,572), but lost the electoral vote to Rutherford B. Hayes, 185 to 184.

 March 2, 1877, the commission issued its decision, known as the Compromise of 1877. By a vote of eight to seven, the 15-member commission awarded all 20 disputed electoral votes to Hayes, giving him a 185 to 184 electoral vote victory over Tilden. Democrats denounced the “stolen election.” Yet the result proved beneficial to the party. Hayes’s presidency was weakened by the aura of illegitimacy (detractors referred to him as “his fraudulency”). More important, as part of a behindthe-scenes deal, he oversaw the final steps in the dismantling of Reconstruction. By the end of 1877, the last federal troops were removed from the South, and as the map (14.19) indicates, the last Reconstruction governments fell to Democratic Redeemers.

14.19 The
Readmission of
Southern States
 and Return of White Rule Most former Confederate states were readmitted to the Union under the direction of Republicancontrolled state governments. But as the dates in parentheses indicate, in most cases, conservative white Democratic governments soon seized control.

NEW JERSEY

PENNSYLVANIA WYOMING IOWA

 NEBRASKA

 DELAWARE

OHIO INDIANA

D.C.
WEST VIRGINIA

ILLINOIS COLORADO MISSOURI

 KANSAS

 ARKANSAS (1874)

INDIAN TERRITORY NEW MEXICO

 KENTUCKY



 MARYLAND

SOUTH CAROLINA 1868
(1876) 
 ALABAMA (1874)

 LOUISIANA (1877)

 GEORGIA (1871)

ATL ANTIC OCEAN



Gulf of Mexico


 VIRGINIA 1 (1869)

NORTH CAROLINA 1868
(1870) 
 TENNESSEE 1866 (1869)

 MISSISSIPPI (1876) TEXAS (1873)



 FLORIDA (1877)

 Military Districts established under Reconstruction Act of 1867



 Date of readmission to the Union

(1871)


 Date of reestablishment of conservative white government

 Why is the eventual result of the election of 1876 considered the end of Reconstruction?



 CHAPTER 14

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

The New South
 The optimism with which white Southerners greeted the end of Reconstruction gave rise to the term New South. It reflected the South’s development of a new system of race relations based on segregation and white supremacy. Even more so, the New South pointed to a profound economic transformation that swept across the region, bringing with it a boom in manufacturing, railroad construction, and urbanization.

Redeemer Rule


The Lost Cause


 The Redeemer governments that took control of Southern states by 1877 represented a new ruling oligarchy. Before the war a small and powerful class of planters dominated Southern politics. Now, in the aftermath of Reconstruction, a new elite took control. Although some were planters and former planters, most were men who drew their wealth and power from a new Southern economy based on industry, finance, commerce, and railroad construction. As men of business their politics reflected the dominant conservative economic theory of the era, which argued that the best form of government was small, frugal, and pro-business. Accordingly, Redeemer governments slashed taxes and spending on social programs and public education created during Reconstruction. Redeemer politics also championed a return to white supremacy. The return of one-party (Democratic) rule in most Southern states resulted in a steady decline in office holding by African Americans and Republicans. Intimidation and violence also led to a marked decrease in black voting across the South. Despite these setbacks, however, African Americans in many Southern states managed to vote and hold office in appreciable numbers into the 1880s and 1890s. Redeemer rule did not go unchallenged. In several states anger among poor farmers coalesced into full-fledged political challenges to oligarchic rule, inequitable taxation, and cuts to social programs. These insurgents denounced the new elite as “Bourbons” (the name of the former French royal family), a derogatory term that implied aristocratic ambitions. In Virginia, for example, a coalition of Republicans and disaffected Democrats called Readjusters turned out the Redeemer government in 1879. All of these challenges to Redeemer rule, however, ultimately failed.

 Southerners after 1877 embraced not only Redeemer rule, but also an image of the prewar South as an ideal society and the Confederate bid for independence a valiant Lost Cause. Southerners clung to this image because it provided them with a psychologically soothing explanation for why they lost the war. According to the Lost Cause idea, Confederate society was more virtuous than the North and its soldiers braver, but the South lost because the Yankees possessed overwhelming advantages in population, industry, arms, and ruthlessness. Defeat, while bitter and painful, was also a glorious martyrdom for a people and a way of life. Southerners expressed this interpretation of the war as a glorious, yet ill-fated campaign in poems, plays, songs, speeches, sermons, and books. One of the most popular Lost Cause poets was Rev. Abram Ryan, a Catholic priest from Norfolk, Virginia. Many of his poems, such as “The Conquered Banner,” became required recitations among white Southern schoolchildren for decades. These works by Ryan and others stressed courage, glory, duty, sacrifice, and the need for true Southerners to honor their Confederate heroes forever. As Ryan put it in one of his poems:

 What groups constituted the political leadership of the New South?

 But their memories e’er shall remain for us, And their names, bright names, without stain for us; The glory they won shall not wane for us, In legend and lay Our heroes in Gray Shall forever live over again for us. The Lost Cause carried with it an obligation to keep alive the memory of Confederate glory. Southerners built elegant battlefield cemeteries to inter the war dead and monuments to celebrate Confederate victories. White Southern women, many widowed by the war, played a major role in these efforts,

Read the Document R. B. Buckley, Confederate Song,
 “I’m a Good Old Rebel” (1866)

THE NEW SOUTH

 founding organizations such as the Ladies Memorial Association (1867) and the United Daughters of the Confederacy (1894). Southerners also erected thousands of statues honoring Confederate soldiers, including legends like Generals Robert E. Lee, Stonewall Jackson, and Nathan Bedford Forrest. The photograph (14.20) demonstrates how enthusiasm for the Lost Cause only grew the further the Civil War receded into history. Lee had discouraged efforts to raise monuments to the Confederate cause, but soon after he died in 1870, they sprang up across the South, including this monumental rendering unveiled in Richmond in 1890. Thousands turned out for the dedication of the heroic statue by French sculptor Antonin Mercie and to hear Colonel Archer Anderson laud Lee for his “courage, will, energy …



 fortitude, hopefulness, joy in battle … [and] unconquerable soul.” Nothing that day, certainly not the speeches or Lee’s triumphant pose, recalled the fact that Lee had lost the war. But the Lost Cause legend served a second purpose beyond helping Southerners cope with their defeat in the war. It celebrated a nostalgic vision of the prewar South that supported their arguments for a resumption of white rule and African American subservience. Through literature, art, and music, Southerners (and some Northerners) fashioned romantic depictions of the “Old South” as a harmonious paradise where benevolent masters treated loyal, contented slaves with kindness, where chivalrous Southern gentlemen protected delicate, charming women, and where everyone revered tradition, family, and the Bible. Yet even as they glorified slavery, the proponents of the Lost Cause downplayed its importance as a cause of secession. The real issue, they insisted, was “states’ rights” and attempts by Northerners to run roughshod over them in the 1850s. The Lost Cause thus presented Southerners as victims of misguided and unjustified Yankee aggression who, in the wake of devastating war and humiliating Reconstruction, ought to be left alone to run their own affairs. The overt racism and self-serving depictions of slavery in Lost Cause rhetoric and imagery served to justify a resumption of white rule and the return of African Americans to the status of powerless, exploitable laborers.

The New South
Economy
 Even as Southerners revered the Lost Cause and Old South, their new leadership steered the region’s economy into an industrial future. In the 1870s and 1880s, they joined with Northern entrepreneurs who settled in the South during Reconstruction to develop a modern, market-oriented, and diversified economy. This effort entailed not simply the establishment of banks, textile mills, and railroads, but also the celebration and spreading of capitalist values, such as hard work, risk taking, thrift, and the profit motive.

 View the Image Cotton plantation, United States of America

14.20 Celebrating
 the Lost Cause As the commemorative ribbon indicates, this monument to Robert E. Lee was erected in the former Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia in 1890. It was one of thousands of monuments to the Confederacy erected across the South.

 How was the Lost Cause a useful myth for Southerners?



 CHAPTER 14

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

14.21 Celebrating the New South
 The Atlanta Exposition of 1895 offered a great opportunity for boosters of the New South to showcase the region’s newly diversified economy.

 The leading figure in this movement to establish a New South economy was Henry Grady, editor of the Atlanta Constitution. Beginning in the mid1870s, in editorials and speeches, he proclaimed industrialization as the solution to the South’s devastated postwar economy. His message inspired many Southerners, especially those who had never been part of the planter elite, to start businesses, invest, and support pro-business policies. Grady also convinced many Northerners, to invest in New South enterprises. The vast expansion of manufacturing represented the most stunning change in the New South. Drawn by low taxes, cheap labor, ample water power, proximity to cotton supplies, and the absence of unions, textile manufacturers moved their operations from New England to the South, What weaknesses limited the success of the New South economy?

 especially the Carolinas. By 1900, the South had become the nation’s leading producer of textiles. A similar transformation occurred in the tobacco industry, as the South went from merely producing raw tobacco to become the nation’s leading producer of finished tobacco products like cigarettes. Another significant aspect of the New South economy was the lumber and furniture industry. New South entrepreneurs took advantage of the region’s tremendous forest reserves and new technologies, such as rotary saws and dry kilns, and an expanded railroad system, and soon made the South the leading producer of lumber. In Mississippi alone the number of lumber mills jumped from 295 in 1880 to 608 in 1899. The furniture industry likewise boomed in the New South, especially in places like High Point, North Carolina, where a single factory opened in 1889, followed by 30 more over the next decade. Industry also flourished in the lower South. Birmingham, Alabama had only a few hundred residents when founded in 1871, but its position at the junction of two major railroads and nearby deposits of coal, iron, and limestone soon attracted iron and steel factories and the nickname, “Pittsburgh of the South.” By 1890, the South produced 20 percent of U.S. iron and steel. As this promotional poster (14.21) makes clear, the booming and increasingly diverse economy of the New South was the central theme of the 1895 Atlanta Exposition. Here “Liberty” carries in her left arm a cornucopia filled with symbols of traditional Southern products like cotton and sugar, but also steel and iron. Note the imagery at the bottom that suggests the Civil War–and all its destruction and lingering controversies—is long gone. As in the North the expansion of industry in the South relied on the existence of a large pool of cheap labor. But unlike the North, where millions of immigrants made up much of the workforce, the South relied on a rising population of poor white farming families pushed off the land by indebtedness, falling crop prices, and crop failure. In the rare

 “The growth of the iron interests of the South during the last few years has been the marvel of the age, attracting the attention of the entire business world.” New South booster, M. B. HILLYARD, 1887

THE NEW SOUTH

 instances where African Americans secured industrial employment, it was usually in the most menial, dangerous, and poorly paid jobs. Southern workers earned wages 50 percent lower than their Northern counterparts, revealing the limited success of the New South economy in overcoming the region’s poverty and social problems. Despite decades of impressive growth in industry, mining, and railroads, the South in 1900 lagged far behind the North in virtually every category of economic and social progress. Most Southern industry, for example, was small scale and focused on lowskilled labor, including growing numbers of child laborers. Per capita incomes in the South remained stagnant from 1880 to 1900. Other indications of backwardness and underdevelopment abounded. The infant mortality rate far exceeded the national average. And because Redeemer governments had slashed per pupil spending in public education to half the average in the North, the South led the nation in illiteracy; its high school graduation rate was one-third that in the Midwest.

The Rise of Sharecropping
 The limitations of the New South economy was most vividly revealed in the preponderance of Southerners engaged in agriculture. The region’s economy remained fundamentally tied to the production of cash crops, particularly tobacco, sugar, rice, and of course, cotton. Only 6 percent of the Southern workforce in 1900 was employed in manufacturing. The condition of Southern farmers, both white and black, deteriorated sharply between 1875 and 1900. While cotton production soared, the price plummeted, from 18 cents per pound in the early 1870s to 5 cents per pound in 1894. Shrinking profits forced many Southern farmers to forfeit title to their land and became tenant farmers. Some

14.22 Poverty and Independence
 Sharecropping condemned most African Americans to poverty, but it also helped to free them of immediate white control. No longer confined to slave cabins, they also worked on their own, free of white oversight and coercion.

 rented land for a set fee which left them free to grow whatever crops they desired. But most tenant farmers resorted to the sharecropping system, whereby they received the right to farm a plot of land in exchange for rent paid in the form of a share (generally one-third to one-half) of the harvest. By 1900, more than 70 percent of the South’s farmers (white and black) earned their living in this manner. Sharecropping granted African Americans a measure of independence. White landlords generally allowed their tenants to control their own time and to set their own work routines. The people in this photograph (14.22) are poor and live in a ramshackle house, but like most sharecroppers they work as families free of direct white supervision. Freedmen cherished this independence, given their experience in slavery of gang labor under the brutal control of overseers. And yet, as a closer look at this image shows, a well-dressed white man is in the background—probably the landlord who arranged for the photograph to be taken. Sharecroppers were not slaves, but as this photograph makes clear, they lived under the control of their white landlords.

 Read the Document James T. Rapier, Testimony before U.S. Senate Regarding the Agricultural Labor Force in the South (1880)



 How did sharecropping provide limited independence to freedmen?



 CHAPTER 14

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

L i tt


L i tt


 on 25- to 30-acre farms. The 1881 map also indicates the presence of two key institutions of African American Sabrina Dalton freedom—a church and Lizzie Dalton a school. Within the narFrank Maxey row limits allowed by Joe Bug Wr Wr ig ig hostile whites, freedmen Jim Reid ht ht ’s ’s Nancy enjoyed privileges they Pope an an Church School ch ch had been deprived of Cane Pope Gus Barrow under slavery. Lewis Watson Gin House Gin House Reuben Barrow Nonetheless, tenancy Tom Wright Ben Thomas exploited the freedmen. “Granny” Omy Barrow “House” Tom Thomas Landlords demanded House Handy Barrow Peter Barrow “Quarter” they grow cash crops like Old Isaac Milly Barrow Calvin Parker tobacco, wheat, and esTom Tang k k e e pecially cotton. Because e e r r ch C ch C B ra n B ra n they often needed to buy k k seed, tools, and animals r r Fo Fo ’s ’s Beckton on credit (usually on Sy l l Sy l l Barrow unfavorable terms) from Lem their landlords or local Douglas suppliers, most tenants found themselves in a condition of evermounting debt which prevented them from The transformation from the tightly controlled moving to better land or to a landlord offering bet14.23 Moving from Slavery to plantation system to the relative independence ter terms. It also exposed freedmen to economic Freedom: The of sharecropping can be seen in this map ( reprisals should they try to vote or stand up for their 14.23 ) Barrow Plantation, rights. of a Georgia plantation. The 1860 map shows the Oglethorpe County, Georgia, Barrow Family Plantation before the abolition of 1860 and 1881 slavery. Note the layout of the slave quarters—in Under slavery the tight rows clustered within sight and earshot of Barrows confined their slaves’ housing the master. Seeking maximum control over their Although life in the New South for most African to a narrow section enslaved laborers, the Barrows kept them close Americans meant poverty and exploitation as shareof the plantation. at hand. croppers, some managed to achieve a measure of Sixteen years after emancipation, Twenty-one years later, many of the Barrow’s economic success. Despite racism, poverty, and African Americans former slaves and their descendents still lived on a hostile white business community, they bought on the plantation, the plantation. But as the 1881 map indicates (see property and started small businesses. Some of these living beyond the immediate oversight 14.23), the relationship between the Barrows and endeavors blossomed into large, prosperous enterof the Barrows, their workers had changed considerably, reflecting prises. For example, in 1898 two African American established a church a sharp conflict in visions regarding the social order men in Durham founded the North Carolina Mutual and school. in the postwar South. Initially the Barrows had tried, and Provident Insurance Company. By 1907, the like so many other former slave owners, to limit the company boasted more than 100,000 policy holdfreedom of their former slaves, hiring them as wage ers. Other African Americans took advantage of the workers bound by annual labor contracts and trying many black schools and colleges established during to coerce them into accepting gang labor under an Reconstruction to enter the professions as teachers, overseer. The freedmen, however, resisted and even- professors, lawyers, doctors, nurses, and ministers. tually negotiated to work as tenant farmers. By 1881, These members of a black middle class worked almost ex-slaves lived in separate households scattered most exclusively in segregated settings providing on the former plantation, working as sharecroppers services to their fellow African Americans. le

River


River


Br


 le

Br


Jim Crow


 How did the poverty and indebtedness associated with sharecropping curtail the freedom of African Americans?

View the Map Atlas Map: The Rise of Tenancy
 in the South (1880)

THE NEW SOUTH

 These educated and relatively affluent African Americans provided leadership and direction for their communities, building social networks of churches, fraternal societies, and self-help organizations. The directors of the aforementioned North Carolina Mutual and Provident Insurance Company, for example, used their financial resources to support schools and establish a hospital, bank, and library to serve the black community of Durham. As Heroes of the Colored Race (14.24) suggests, middle-class blacks also cultivated pride in the accomplishments of African Americans after emancipation. This lithograph was published in 1881 for sale to African Americans. Note its emphasis on education and the role of African Americans in the Civil War and later as members of Congress. But in the late 1870s and early 1880s, Southern political leaders began to create a social and legal system of segregation and disenfranchisement that came to be called Jim Crow (named for a derogatory black character in a popular minstrel show). They understood that as long as some African Americans possessed civil, economic, and political rights, especially the right to vote, white supremacy was called into question. Redeemer politicians also recognized that stoking racial animosity protected their privileged status as a ruling elite by deflecting the frustration and anger of poor Southern whites away from them and onto African Americans. The Jim Crow system consisted of three main elements: segregation, disenfranchisement, and violence. The goal of segregation was to foment racial divisions by separating African Americans from as many aspects of everyday life as possible. Initial efforts focused on barring African Americans from hotels, restaurants, and railroad cars. Blacks denounced these violations of their constitutional rights-especially the Fourteenth Amendment-and challenged them in court. But a conservative Supreme Court sharply restricted the authority of the Fourteenth Amendment and its guarantee of equal protection. In Hall v. DeCuir (1878), for example, the Court

Hear the Audio The Black Laws by Bishop B.W. Arnett,
 pamphlet excerpt

 declared unconstitutional a Louisiana law prohibiting racial discrimination on steamboats because the vessel was engaged in interstate commerce (running routes between Louisiana and Mississippi), which only Congress could regulate. Five years later, in the Civil Rights Cases, the Court declared the 1875 Civil Rights Act unconstitutional, asserting that the Fourteenth Amendment did not empower Congress to outlaw racial discrimination by private individuals and organizations. The ruling cleared the way for private individuals such as hotel owners and institutions such as men’s clubs to bar African Americans, but left standing the right of Congress to prohibit discrimination by state government institutions. As explained in Choices and Consequences: Sanctioning Separation (page 434), this issue came before the Court in an 1896 case, Plessy v. Ferguson. Hand-in-hand with segregation came the effort to eradicate black political power by circumventing the Fifteenth Amendment. Violence and intimidation in the 1870s had reduced black voting and office holding significantly, but not completely. In Mississippi, for example, black voter turnout averaged 39 percent in the 1880s. But rising fears over the voting power of both blacks and disgruntled poor whites led Redeemer



14.24 Heroes of
 the Colored Race African Americans kept alive their hopes for a better future by cultivating an appreciation for their history.

 What role did the black middle class play in the Jim Crow South?



 CHAPTER 14

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

Choices and Consequences
SANCTIONING SEPARATION
In 1890, Louisiana required separate cars for black and white passengers on all railroads in the state. To challenge the law, an African American carpenter named Homer A. Plessy bought a first-class ticket on the East Louisiana Railroad and sat in the whites-only first-class car. As expected he was arrested. Plessy argued before a local judge named John H. Ferguson that the law violated the Thirteenth Amendment’s prohibition of slavery and the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection clause. Ferguson ruled in favor of the railroad, stating that separation did not violate Plessy’s rights, a decision upheld by the state’s Supreme Court. When Plessy appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, the justices considered three major options: 
Choices




 Refuse to hear the case and thus not render a judgment on the constitutionality of segregation, letting stand the Louisiana State Supreme Court decision.



 Rule in favor of Plessy and declare Louisiana’s segregation law unconstitutional.

Continuing Controversies
 How should African Americans respond to the imposition of Jim Crow laws? Black leaders in the 1890s were divided over the best strategy to oppose segregation. Booker T. Washington, the nation’s most prominent African American leader, argued that efforts to overturn segregation were doomed to failure due to black Americans’ lack of political and economic power (see Chapter 18). Instead he recommended blacks focus their energy and resources on selfimprovement, especially in education, a strategy that would one day empower them to challenge segregation. Founding member of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), W. E. B. Dubois, rejected this policy and insisted that African Americans keep up a sustained legal and political effort to end segregation. Ultimately it was Dubois’s vision and NAACP attorneys that ended legalized segregation. In Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka in 1954, the Supreme Court overturned Plessy and rejected the concept of “separate but equal.”



 Reject Plessy’s appeal and uphold Louisiana’s segregation law as constitutional.

Decision
 On May 18, 1896, the Supreme Court by a vote of 7 to 1 chose the third option and rejected Plessy’s claim that the law violated his constitutional rights. The Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments, argued the majority, were never intended to establish full social equality of the races. Furthermore, legal separation of the races, a doctrine subsequently known as “separate but equal,” was constitutional so long as states provided equal facilities. The lone dissenting justice, John Marshall Harlan, blasted the majority opinion, declaring the law a racist violation of the nation’s “color-blind” Constitution.

Consequences
 In sharply limiting the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection provisions, the court allowed state governments to establish separate schools, hospitals, parks, theaters, restaurants, and public transportation across the South. The decision also opened the way for segregation laws aimed at Mexicans in the Southwest and Asians in California. In practice “separate but equal” proved only half accurate as segregated facilities were indeed separate, but never equal in terms of funding, staffing, and supplies.

 How did the Supreme Court play a role in the imposition of segregation?

THE NEW SOUTH

 politicians to commence a program of disenfranchisement. Given the sparse and direct language of the Fifteenth Amendment, the proponents of disenfranchisement needed to devise laws that deprived African Americans of the right to vote without making specific mention of “race, color, or previous condition of servitude.” In 1889, Tennessee became the first of many Southern states to enact a poll tax, an annual tax imposed on all adult citizens in the state. Those who failed to pay it could not vote. As the image (14.25) of a Florida poll tax receipt for 1900 shows, the tax of $1 was low enough so that most white voters like Henry R. Nicks could pay it, but high enough to disenfranchise thousands of impoverished African Americans. Most states also required that all unpaid poll taxes from previous years be paid off before a citizen could vote, meaning that a black man who had fallen behind in his taxes for five years would need to pay $5 before entering a polling place. In 1890, Mississippi enacted a poll tax and an additional measure to facilitate disenfranchisement: the literacy test. It allowed state and local officials to bar from voting anyone who failed a literacy test. It usually required a potential voter to read a complicated section of the state constitution and explain its meaning—a provision aimed at excluding African Americans given their low levels of education. Most Southern states soon adopted similar tests. In the mid-1890s, Southern states added a third disenfranchisement policy, the so-called grandfather clause. It guaranteed the vote to anyone, even if they could not pass a literacy test, if their grandfather had been eligible to vote before 1867. Since no African Americans could vote before 1867, they were the only ones subject to literacy tests.

Hear the Audio A Georgia Lynch Law




 14.25 Disenfranchisement through the Poll Tax Because H. R. Nicks, a white man in Hernando County, Florida, in 1900, could pay his poll tax of $1, he was eligible to vote. Mired in poverty, many African Americans could not afford the fee and lost their right to vote.

 Adding to the effectiveness of the segregation and disenfranchisement movements was a stepped-up campaign of violence against African Americans. Vigilante groups across the South composed largely of poor whites, but often aided by local law officers and prominent citizens, launched an unprecedented wave of beatings, humiliations, and murders intended to intimidate blacks and “put them in their place.” Often an unsubstantiated accusation of rape or murder brought out a community’s lynch mob, but many killings were prompted by minor incidents of alleged disrespect such as arguing with a white man. Lynchings in the 1890s soared to an average of 187 per year, or roughly one killing every two days. By 1900, these disenfranchisement policies had reduced overall black voting in the South by 62 percent. In some states black voting was effectively eliminated. In Louisiana, for example, the number of black voters dropped from 130,334 in 1896 to 1,342 in 1904—a reduction of 99 percent. Thousands of poor whites were also disenfranchised, reducing the total white vote by 27 percent by 1900.White supremacy had triumphed.

 How did the poll tax and literacy test allow Southerners to circumvent the Fifteenth Amendment?



 CHAPTER 14

NOW THAT WE ARE FREE: RECONSTRUCTION AND THE NEW SOUTH, 1863–1890

1863–1865




1867–1868


1869–1871


The Ten Percent Plan


 Ku Klux Klan founded

The Reconstruction Acts


 Lincoln proposes moderate terms for readmission of Southern states

 Groups of armed white vigilantes wage campaign of violence to suppress freedmen’s rights

 South placed under military rule and freedmen guaranteed voting rights

Fifteenth Amendment
 (ratified 1870)

Thirteenth Amendment
(Ratified 1865)
 Abolishes slavery in every state

Fourteenth Amendment
 (ratified 1868) Defines citizenship to include African Americans and guarantees equal protection before the law

 Progressive state governments take power in South Freedmen wield their newly won right to vote and hold office

 Republicans impeach Johnson Reflects the divisive politics of Reconstruction

CHAPTER REVIEW

Review Questions
 1. Why did African Americans want land? How did they justify their claims to plantation lands? 2. Why did Reconstruction become violent? How did Congress and the Grant administration try to curb the violence?

 Establishes the right to vote for all male citizens regardless of “race, color, or previous condition of servitude”

 Enforcement Acts passed Empowers Grant administration to weaken Ku Klux Klan and like groups

 North Carolina elects first Redeemer government Signals a return to white supremacy in the South; other Southern states soon follow

 5. Why did Reconstruction end? 6. What was the Lost Cause? What purposes did it serve in the post-Reconstruction South? 7. Who were the “Bourbons” and what was their vision for the New South?

 3. How did feminists react to the Fifteenth Amendment? How did this affect the women’s rights movement?

Key Terms
 Ten Percent Plan Pardoned all Southerners (except highranking military officers and Confederate officials) who took an oath pledging loyalty to the Union and support for emancipation. As soon as 10 percent of a state’s voters took this oath, they could call a convention, establish a new state government, and apply for congressional recognition. Freedmen’s Bureau Relief agency for the war-ravaged South created by Congress in March 1865. It provided emergency services, built schools, and managed confiscated lands. Black Codes Laws designed by the ex-Confederate states to sharply limit the civil and economic rights of freedmen and create an exploitable workforce. Fourteenth Amendment Drafted by Congress in June 1866, it defined citizenship to include African Americans, guaranteed equal protection before the law, and established the federal government as the guarantor of individual civil rights. Carpetbagger White Southerners’ derogatory term for Northerners who came south after the war to settle, work, or aid the ex-slaves. It falsely suggested they were penniless adventurers who came south merely to get rich. Scalawag White Southerners’ derogatory term for fellow whites considered traitors to their region and race for joining the Republican Party and cooperating with Reconstruction policy.

 Fifteenth Amendment Constitutional amendment passed by Congress in 1869 providing an explicit constitutional guarantee for black suffrage. Mississippi Plan Campaign of violence and intimidation waged by armed groups of whites closely allied with the Democratic Party that drove Republicans from power in the Mississippi state elections of 1874. Copied by other Southern states. Redeemers Name for white Southern political leaders who successfully returned their states to white Democratic rule in the mid-1870s. The name was intended to depict these leaders as saviors of Southern society from rule by freedmen, scalawags, and carpetbaggers. Civil Rights Act of 1875 Passed by Congress in 1875, it required state governments to provide equal access in public facilities such as schools and to allow African Americans to serve on juries. In 1883 the U.S. Supreme Court ruled it unconstitutional. Compromise of 1877 Resolution of the disputed presidential election of 1876 that handed victory to Republican Rutherford B. Hayes over Democrat Samuel J. Tilden. Democrats agreed to the deal in exchange for patronage and the continued removal of federal troops from the South. New South Optimistic phrase white Southerners used to describe the post-Reconstruction South, reflecting the South’s development of a new system of race relations based on segregation and white supremacy and pointing to a profound economic transformation that swept across the region.

CHAPTER REVIEW

1872–1873


1874–1875


1876–1877


1883–1889


Amnesty Act


The Mississippi Plan


Compromise of 1877


 Pardons and restores full political rights to most ex-Confederates

 Violence by white terrorist groups keeps thousands of blacks from voting. Restores the Democratic Party to power

Republican Rutherford B. Hayes
 becomes president; Republicans promise to remove federal troops from the South. End of Reconstruction

Civil Rights Act of 1875
Declared Unconstitutional


Panic of 1873
 Begins four years of severe economic depression that weakens Northern support for Reconstruction

 Second Civil Rights Act passed Guarantees equal access to public facilities and affirms the right of blacks to serve on juries



 Clears the way for adoption of Jim Crow policies across the South

 Tennessee enacts first poll tax Sharply reduces black voting; adopted by other Southern states. Followed by literacy test and grandfather clause

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Now That We Are Free.

Questions for Analysis
 1. How did former slaves make use of their new freedoms? Read the Document Charlotte Forten, “Life on the Sea Islands”, p. 406

 2. Why did some Americans believe the federal government was obligated to assist the freedmen? View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Federal Authority and Equal Rights, p. 412

 3. What changes did Republican governments bring to Southern society? View the Closer Look First Vote, p. 419

 4. How did the system of sharecropping sharply limit the freedom of African Americans? Read the Document James T. Rapier, Testimony before

 Other Resources from This Chapter Hear the Audio File The Black Laws by Bishop B.W. Arnett, pamphlet excerpt, p. 433

Read the Document
• Carl Schurz, “Report on the Condition of the South” (1865), p. 408
• James C. Beecher, “Report on Land Reform” (1865, 1866), p. 409
• “Address of the Colored State Convention to the People of the
State of South Carolina” (1865), p. 414
• Affidavit of Former Slave Enoch Braston (1866), p. 415
• Charles F. Johnson and T. W. Gilbreth, The Memphis Riot
(1866), p. 416
 • Hannah Irwin Describes Ku Klux Klan Ride (Late 1860s), p. 422 • Credit Mobilier/Union Pacific Railroad Scandal Testimony of C.P. Huntington (1873), p. 423 • Blanche K. Bruce, Speech in the Senate (1876), p. 426 • R. B. Buckley, Confederate Song, “I’m a Good Old Rebel” (1866), p. 428

 View the Image Cotton plantation, United States of America, p. 429

U.S.
Senate Regarding the Agricultural Labor Force in the South (1880), p. 431


 5. What role did violence play in establishing white supremacy in the New South? Hear the Audio File A Georgia Lynch Law, p. 435

View the Map
• Interactive Map: Congressional Reconstruction, p. 417
• Atlas Map: The Rise of Tenancy in the South (1880), p. 432


 Watch the Video Video Lectures: The Schools that the Civil War and Reconstruction Created, p. 410

 p. 440

 Why did so many Euro-Americans settle in the trans-Mississippi West?

The Economic
Transformation of the
West p. 447


 What major economic pursuits and industries developed in the West?

Native Americans
 under Siege p. 452

 Why did the federal government pursue a policy of military confrontation and forced assimilation when dealing with Native Americans?

Resistance and
Romanticism p. 461


 How did images and myths about the American West develop and persist?

 CHAPTER

Natives and
Newcomers




