 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 20

The Great War
World War I, 1914–1918
 On May 7, 1915, Ernest Cowper was chatting with a friend aboard the Lusitania, a British passenger ship traveling from New York to the British Isles, as it passed the lush, green coast of Ireland. Looking into the water, Cowper suddenly felt a stab of terror when he spotted a German torpedo just seconds before it hit the ship. Peering through the periscope the German submarine captain watched hundreds of people jumping into the water in a desperate attempt to reach empty lifeboats. The ship sank within 18 minutes, killing 1,198 passengers, including 128 Americans. Cowper, a Toronto newsman whose vivid recollections soon appeared in American newspapers, was one of the lucky survivors. The sinking of the Lusitania was a defining moment for the United States during World War I, often also called the Great War. The nation had remained neutral when the war began nine months earlier in August 1914, refusing to chose sides among the European powers involved, led by Great Britain, France, and Russia (the Allies) on one side and Germany and Austria-Hungary (the Central Powers) on the other. When, however, the war spread to the high seas and American business initiated a lucrative arms trade with Britain and France, Americans increasingly found themselves in the line of fire. American newspapers highlighted the tragic deaths of innocent women and children on the Lusitania, stirring outrage against Germany. One U.S. news report described the corpse of a mother embracing her three-month old baby, noting that “her face wears a half smile. Her baby’s head rests against her breast. No one has tried to separate them.” This description inspired the first American war-era propaganda poster, pictured here. The image, by Fred Spear, showed a mother and her baby sinking into the depths of the sea accompanied by one word—“Enlist.” Not all Americans, however, blamed Germany for the attack. German Americans claimed that the Lusitania was secretly transporting munitions from New York to Britain. Rural Americans castigated Northeast business interests for trading primarily with the Allies, fearful that favoring Britain and its allies would draw America into the war. President Woodrow Wilson offered a competing vision of the Lusitania’s importance. Through increasingly strident diplomacy Wilson decided to defend the rights of neutrals to travel wherever they liked. This stance put the United States on a collision course with Germany that resulted in America entering the war two years later. Once America declared war, Wilson gave the country a larger purpose than defeating Germany. Introducing a new, and controversial, vision of American global leadership, he promised to achieve a lasting peace by spreading democracy worldwide. To mobilize the nation’s resources to fight the grim trench warfare underway along the Western Front, the government unfurled a far-reaching propaganda campaign, offered unprecedented support to labor unions, and raised a mass army through conscription. Americans suffered severe casualties in a short time, and their war effort helped the Allies defeat Germany by November 1918. The nation expected a peace treaty that embodied Wilson’s promise to make this conflict “the war to end all wars.” Americans held conflicting visions, however, over how to achieve this goal.

 “The world must be made safe for democracy.” President WOODROW WILSON, 1917 War Address





 CHAPTER 20

THE GREAT WAR: WORLD WAR I, 1914–1918

The Decision for War
 In the summer of 1914, Europe ignited as war swept across the continent (20.1). Instead of the easy victory that many Europeans expected, the war turned into a prolonged global struggle that took the lives of millions of men. World War I pitted the Allies, initially composed of Britain, France, Belgium, Serbia, and Russia, and eventually totaling 18 nations including Japan, Italy, and the United States, against the Central Powers of Germany and Austria-Hungary, who were joined by the Ottoman Empire and Bulgaria. Most Europeans rushed into battle without considering what a general war would mean. Americans, however, followed a completely different road to war, openly debating whether this was their war to fight. It took two and a half years for the United States to enter the war. By then few illusions remained about the horror of modern warfare. Unlike Europeans in 1914 Americans knew they were committing to total war—and that winning would require the complete economic and psychological mobilization of the home front.

The War in Europe
 On June 28, 1914, a 19-year-old Bosnian Serb named Gavrilo Princip arrived in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia, as part of a terrorist band that intended to assassinate the heir to the AustroHungarian throne, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, who was also visiting the city. Princip belonged to the Black Hand, a Slavic nationalist group based in the neighboring Kingdom of Serbia that longed to unite Bosnia, then part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, with Serbia. The group’s first attempt to assassinate the archduke failed when the bomb that one of Princip’s coconspirators threw at the archduke’s motorcade bounced off the side of his car, injuring two Austrian officers instead. Eluding the police Princip disappeared into the crowd. Later in the day the archduke made a fateful decision to visit his injured staff members. On the way to the hospital, the driver made a wrong turn down a narrow street and slowed down to put the car in reverse. Standing at the end of the street was Princip, who could barely believe his good fortune as he saw the archduke and his wife coming toward him. Seizing the opportunity he stepped forward, pulled a pistol from his pocket, and fired, killing them both. World War I began with these two deaths and ended four years later with over nine million more. In responding to the assassination, Austria-Hungary, Russia, and Germany tried to leverage the crisis to fulfill longstanding territorial ambitions. These events are summarized on the timeline, “Countdown to War, 1914” (20.2).

 What role did nationalism and imperialism play in bringing about World War I?

 “Mr. Mayor, it is perfectly outrageous! We have come to Sarajevo on a visit and have had a bomb thrown at us.” ARCHDUKE FRANZ FERDINAND after surviving the Black Hand’s first assassination attempt

 Austria-Hungary and Russia vied for control of the Balkans, which offered ready access to the Mediterranean and the Middle East. Germany hoped to become the dominant power in Europe and had recently challenged the world dominance of France and Britain by building a strong navy, acquiring colonies, and defeating France in the 1870–1871 Franco-Prussian War. Austria-Hungary held Serbia responsible for the assassination and demanded that the Serbian government make amends. In response Serbia chose appeasement over confrontation. Serbia accepted all of Austria-Hungary’s demands except the one insisting that Austro-Hungarian judges and police participate in the investigation and trials of any Black Hand terrorists captured in Serbia. In early July, German Kaiser Wilhelm II encouraged AustriaHungary to quickly invade and punish Serbia. But on July 28, when the Kaiser finally read the Serbian response, he jotted in the margins: “a great moral victory for Vienna; but with it every reason for war

Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Outbreak
 of World War I

THE DECISION FOR WAR



NORWAY SWEDEN

Petrograd
(St. Petersburg)


North
Sea
Baltic
Sea


 DENMARK

GREAT BRITAIN

Moscow
Sinking of the Lusitania
(May 7, 1915)


Convoy
 meeting place

London


NETHERLANDS
Berlin Brussels 
 BELGIUM

ATL ANTIC

R U S S I A
 GERMANY

LUXEMBOURG
Paris 
 OCEAN

 SWITZERLAND

AU ST R I AH U N GA RY

 UG

 AL

 FRANCE

Vienna


S PA I N


 IT

 PO

 RT

 ROMANIA

Sarajevo
(Bosnia)


Rome


A


 MONTENEGRO

Black Sea


SERBIA BULGARIA

 LY

Istanbul


 ALBANIA

 GREECE

OTTOMAN EMPIRE

Mediterranean Sea
 Central powers The Allies Neutral nations The Western Front, March 1914 The Eastern Front, 1914–1917 Territory lost by Russia, Treaty of Brest-Litovsk 1918 Allied blockade German unrestricted submarine warfare zone British-mined areas of the North Sea

20.1 World War I in Europe,
1914–1918
 Miscalculations led to a two-front war for Germany and the creation of the Western Front in 1914, while the war at sea eventually drew the United States into the conflict.

Countdown to War, 1914
June 28
 Gavrilo Princip assassinates the Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo June

July 25
 Serbia accepts all but one ultimatum

July


July 28
Austria-Hungary
 declares war on Serbia

August 1
 Germany orders full mobilization, declares war August 3 on Russia Germany declares war on France August

July 23
Austria-Hungary
 sends ultimatums to Serbia

July 27
 Germany urges Austria-Hungary to invade Serbia

July 30
Russia
 orders a full mobilization

August 4
 German soldiers invade Beligium, implementing Schlieffen Plan. Britain declares war on Germany. President Wilson announces U.S. neutrality

20.2 Timeline,
After the
 assassination of the Archduke Franz Ferdinand, nations made momentous choices that led to World War I.

 Why did the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand spark a global world war?



 CHAPTER 20

THE GREAT WAR: WORLD WAR I, 1914–1918

 is removed.” His comments came too late. An hour later, on July 28, 1914, Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia. As Austro-Hungarian warships on the Danube River bombarded Belgrade, Serbia’s capital city, Russia resolved to stand by Serbia and defend its own interests in the Balkans. Tsar Nicolas II ordered a general mobilization of his army on July 30, 1914. It was a momentous decision. Germany viewed Russia’s mobilization as a direct threat. Ever since the 1894 alliance between Russia and France, Germany had worried about fighting a two-front war. In 1905, the German Chief of Staff Alfred von Schlieffen developed a plan that called for Germany, in the event of war, to attack and quickly defeat France in the west, while the cumbersome Russian army mobilized in the east. The Schlieffen Plan avoided the well-defended border between France and Germany and instead sent German troops on a northward arc. Passing quickly through Belgium, German troops would enter France through its unfortified northern border and capture Paris within six weeks. Germany could then turn its full forces against the much larger Russian army. For the Schlieffen Plan to work, Germany needed to strike first. With Russia refusing to halt its mobilization, Germany declared war on Russia on August 1, 1914, and put a modified version of the Schlieffen Plan into motion. Two days later Germany declared war on France. When German troops crossed into Belgium on August 4, Britain declared war on Germany, fulfilling its 1839 pledge to guarantee Belgium independence and neutrality. The Schlieffen Plan quickly unraveled. The Germans encountered unexpected resistance from the Belgians and had difficulty resupplying a mass army on the move, giving the French and British time to mobilize. In the east Russia attacked with its partly mobilized army sooner than Germany expected, prompting German Chief of Staff Helmuth von Moltke to divert troops from France to defend East Prussia. At the Marne River, 35 miles northeast of Paris, the French and British successfully stopped the German drive toward Paris. Instead of defeating France quickly, Germany’s attack ignited a general European war. As each army dug defensive trenches in France and Belgium, the trench deadlock of the Western Front took shape. For nearly four years men would live and die in the complex system of earthworks that ran for 460 miles from the North Sea to Switzerland. To bolster their forces, Britain,

 What miscalculations stymied German expectations of a short war?

 France, and Germany began immediately enlisting men and resources from their colonies. When the Ottoman Empire (which ruled Turkey and most of the Middle East) joined the Central Powers and Japan and Italy joined the Allies, the conflict became a true world war. American society contained many first- and second-generation immigrants from both the Central Powers and the Allied nations who disagreed over which nation had started the war. In 1914, President Woodrow Wilson believed that all belligerents shared collective responsibility for the war. Wanting both to stay out of the war and prevent bitter divisions from ripping America apart, Wilson proclaimed the United States neutral.

The Perils of Neutrality
 As war engulfed Europe Wilson advised Americans to avoid “passionately taking sides” and to “remain impartial in thought, as well as action.” Neutrality, however, turned out to be a difficult concept for Americans to define and maintain. Did it mean trading with both sides selectively, or with no one? Did Americans have the right as members of a neutral nation to travel wherever they liked without coming under attack? The conflicting visions that emerged as Americans confronted these questions created strident debate as the war wore on. The dilemma was how to remain neutral without inflicting serious damage on the American economy. Since the 1890s, American foreign policy had focused on protecting American business interests abroad (see Chapter 19). Cutting off trade completely with Europe would have had severe consequences for Americans. At first Wilson tried to limit America’s financial involvement in the war by banning private American bank loans to the belligerent nations. Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan believed the ban would “hasten a conclusion to the war” by making it impossible for the warring countries to buy what they needed to continue fighting. Wilson, however, lifted the ban in 1915. The Allies were running short of cash, and Wilson feared a widespread U.S. recession if these nations stopped buying American goods. Trading with or loaning money to both sides was another possible way to stay neutral. In theory American manufacturers and banks were free to do business with both the Allies and Germany. In practice, however, the chart of U.S. Exports to Europe, 1914– 1917 (20.3) reveals that they chose primarily to help the Allies. By 1917, American banks were loaning

THE DECISION FOR WAR

U.S.
Trade with Nations at War 




1916 Figure as
 a Percentage of 1914 Figure

Britain


$594,271,863


$911,794,954


$1,526,685,102


257%


France


$159,818,924


$369,397,170


$628,851,988


393%


Italy*


$74,235,012


$184,819,688


$269,246,105


364%


Germany


$344,794,276


$28,863,354


$288,899


0.08%




U.S.
Exports  to Europe, 1914–1917 The nation’s robust trade with Britain, France, and Italy— allied nations fighting Germany—provoked debate among Americans holding conflicting visions of neutrality.

 *Italy joined the Allies in April 1915.

 Britain an average of $10 million a day. In contrast American trade with Germany had dropped to less than one percent of what it had been in 1914. Even if American manufacturers and banks had wanted to help Germany, trade became nearly impossible when Britain used its navy to blockade Germany and cut the international cable between the United States and Germany. America’s financial elite, however, had no desire to trade with both sides. Many upper-class Americans revered British culture and had warm feelings toward the French. Widespread publicity of German atrocities against Belgian civilians also fanned anti-German sentiment. Newspapers published vivid accounts of German soldiers burning homes, ransacking museums, and executing Belgian civilians in retaliation for guerilla attacks against the German army. The press embellished these stories with fabricated tales of German soldiers cutting off women’s breasts and children’s hands. Some Americans saw such reports as little more than British propaganda. America’s disproportionate aid to the Allies alarmed the sizable German American and Irish American communities (the latter hated British rule of Ireland). Midwesterners and Southerners accused Eastern banks of violating the principle of neutrality, thereby pulling the nation slowly into a war most Americans did not want to fight. These critics embraced a strict vision of neutrality and wanted the government to announce an arms embargo that would prevent American companies from trading with nations at war. When the war spread to the high seas, these conflicting visions provoked heated debate over America’s role in the war. Facing a trench stalemate

 on the Western Front, Britain used its superior navy to establish a blockade around the Central Powers that included mining the North Sea. The blockade immediately affected American trade. American ships could not sail through the North Sea to Germany without first allowing the British to search their cargo for contraband, merchandise such as guns or ammunition that Britain wanted to stop from entering Germany. Britain soon violated international law by adding cotton and food to the contraband list. In March 1915, Wilson formally protested British blockading practices. The British eventually agreed to buy enough American cotton to offset the loss of the German market. The president proved less accommodating when Germany declared the waters around Britain a war zone and threatened to attack any ship that entered the area. To combat the British blockade, Germany turned to a new weapon, its U-boat, or submarine, to launch surprise torpedo attacks against Allied merchant and naval ships. International law recognized a naval blockade as a legal weapon of war, but required that the attacking ship give the merchant vessel’s crew time to evacuate, and if necessary, take them aboard before sinking the ship and cargo. These prewar rules rendered the U-boat useless, removing the element of surprise that made it so effective. Once spotted, armed merchant vessels did not hesitate to attack fragile U-boats. On May 7, 1915, a German U-boat sunk the Lusitania, a British passenger ship sailing off the coast of Ireland. Calls for war swept through the press. “Germany must surely have gone mad,” surmised one Richmond newspaper. Wilson sent a

 What competing visions did Americans offer on the question of trading with warring European nations?



 CHAPTER 20

THE GREAT WAR: WORLD WAR I, 1914–1918

 “The American people do not want to go to war to vindicate the right of a few people to travel or work on armed vessels.” Missouri Senator WILLIAM J. STONE to President Wilson, 1916 20.4 German Warning to Travelers in the War Zone When Wilson criticized Germany for sinking the Lusitania, German Americans pointed out that the German government had published warnings like this ahead of time urging Americans to stay off ships headed to the war zone.

 series of notes demanding that Germany pay reparations and accept the right of Americans to travel on any ship they wished. The Germans defended the sinking, pointing out that they had published warnings to passengers in American newspapers (20.4) and claiming that the Lusitania was carrying munitions as part of its cargo. The Lusitania sinking was an ideological turning point for the United States. In reaction to the crisis, Wilson redefined the meaning of neutrality, thus putting the United States on a collision course with Germany. The president moved away from his initial definition of neutrality as remaining “impartial in thought, as well as action.” He now embraced neutrality as a concept that first and foremost gave neutral nations the indisputable right to trade and travel wherever they liked. Secretary of State Bryan urged Wilson to ban Americans from traveling on ships headed to the U-boat–patrolled waters around Great Britain. Wilson refused. Convinced that the president’s preoccupation with the rights of neutrals would lead to war, Bryan resigned in protest.

 Why was the sinking of the Lusitania a turning point in the neutrality debate?

 “I cannot consent to any abridgement of the rights of American citizens in any respect. The honor and self-respect of the nation is involved.” WILSON’S reply

 As the United States and Germany argued over the Lusitania, a German U-boat sunk another British passenger ship, the Arabic, in August 1915, leaving two Americans among the dead. Worried about further provoking the United States, on September 1, 1915, Germany issued the Arabic Pledge, promising not to sink passenger ships without warning. Germany renounced surprise attacks on merchant ships in May 1916 following another controversial torpedoing. For the moment these pledges averted war with the United States. The debate deepened when prominent pro-Ally political, business, and financial leaders formed the National Security League and began lobbying for universal military training to instruct all men of fighting age in drilling and marksmanship. In response Progressive reformers formed the American Union Against Militarism to denounce preparations for war. The appeal of the pacifist vision made the 1916 song “I Didn’t Raise My Son to be a Soldier” a hit. Taking stock of the preparedness versus peace debate, Congress authorized only a modest, but still controversial, expansion of the peacetime army. Recognizing the potency of antiwar sentiment, Wilson ran for reelection in 1916 on the slogan “He Kept Us Out of War.” The banners covering a Wilson reelection campaign truck (20.5) revealed the strong connections that he drew between domestic and foreign issues. Wilson reminded voters of his Progressive reform agenda, which included a Federal Reserve System that “broke the money trust” and passage of an eight-hour day for railroad workers (see Chapter 18). The slogan “Peace with Honor” referred to his success in securing pledges from Germany that respected America’s right to trade with the Allies. This overseas commerce created the prosperity that Democrats boasted about on the same sign. During the campaign Wilson noted that twice he had sent his trusted advisor

View the Closer Look Choices and Consequences: Defining
 Neutrality: America’s Path into World War I

THE DECISION FOR WAR

Colonel Edward House to
 Europe to negotiate a peace settlement, lamenting that House had returned empty-handed each time. Wilson also campaigned on the slogan of preparedness to underscore his commitment to defending the country if necessary. In contrast Wilson’s Republican challenger, former Supreme Court Justice Charles Evan Hughes, never developed an effective slogan or theme. The Hughes campaign believed that Woodrow Wilson had won the presidency in 1912 because progressive Republicans had supported Theodore Roosevelt’s run as a thirdparty Progressive candidate over the incumbent Republican President William Howard Taft (see Chapter 18). With the conservative and progressive factions of the Republican Party now reunited, Hughes tried to avoid controversy with vague calls “for law and liberty” and “undiluted Americanism.” On election night, with returns from California still uncounted, Wilson went to bed certain that he had lost. He awoke to discover that he had carried California and won reelection by only 23 electoral votes, 277–254. Foreign affairs now dominated Wilson’s thoughts. Throughout 1914–1917, German spies spent nearly $12 million to support rebel factions in Mexico, who resented the U.S. government’s intervention in Mexican domestic politics. In 1916, Francisco “Pancho” Villa raided American border towns, hoping to draw U.S. troops into Mexico and destabilize the new U.S.-backed constitutional government headed by Venustiano Carranza. Much as Villa anticipated, Wilson sent a 12,000-troop punitive expedition under the command of Brigadier General John J. Pershing into Mexico to arrest Villa. Carranza denounced the American expedition as an invasion of Mexico. Tensions between the two countries escalated dramatically after a deadly clash in Carrizal on June 21, 1916. Wilson began planning for war with Mexico until he learned that American

Watch the Video Video Lecture: American
 Entry into World War I



20.5 Wilson Campaign Slogans
 In a tight race for reelection in 1916, Woodrow Wilson emphasized his progressive legislative agenda and championed his success at keeping the nation out of the war without sacrificing national honor or economic prosperity.

 troops had attacked first at Carrizal. After months of talks between U.S. and Mexican negotiators, American troops left Mexico in January 1917. That same month Wilson tried again to negotiate a European peace settlement. On January 22, 1917, he outlined a plan for “peace without victory” based on “American principles, American policies.” Democracy, freedom of the seas, no entangling alliances, and equality of rights among nations were, Wilson asserted, “the principles and policies of forward-looking men and women everywhere, of every modern nation, of every enlightened community.” Wilson’s desire to export democracy overseas while simultaneously protecting American access to foreign markets promised to greatly expand America’s imperial reach. No longer limiting American intervention to its Pacific colonies or nearby Latin American countries (see Chapter 19), Wilson proposed remaking Europe in the image of America. His words had little effect on European leaders. Unbeknownst to the president, Germany had

 How did Wilson link domestic and foreign issues during the 1916 presidential campaign?



 CHAPTER 20

THE GREAT WAR: WORLD WAR I, 1914–1918

 already decided to resume unrestricted submarine warfare. Having staked everything on Germany’s willingness to let Americans travel unmolested in the war zone, Wilson’s neutrality policy collapsed.

 colonial possessions. Carranza had no interest in fighting the United States after the American withdrawal from Mexico, and Germany had no men or munitions to offer. In one of the war’s greatest intelligence coups, British intelligence agents intercepted and deciphered the secret telegram. When the State Department released the Zimmermann Telegram to the press on March 1, many Americans viewed it Germany expected the Allies to capitulate quickly as evidence that Germany had hostile intentions once German submarines cut off their lifeline to the against the United States. Antiwar activists deUnited States. Even if the resumption of unrestricted nounced the telegram as a forgery, but Zimmermann submarine warfare brought the United States into the war, it would take at least a year for the American gov- confessed to sending the note. With war between ernment to raise, train, and equip a force to send over- Germany and the United States growing more likely, Zimmermann wanted the United States to believe seas. By then Germany expected to have won the war. the threat was real, so it would keep troops at home In early February 1917, Wilson pondered whether German violations of American neutrality to protect the border. Despite the outcry over the Zimmermann Telewere grounds for declaring war. This cartoon, gram, Wilson hesitated. The president broke off dipLincoln’s Birthday (20.6), compares Wilson’s lomatic ties with Germany, but still did not ask for a dilemma to the one that Abraham Lincoln had declaration of war. German faced on the eve of the submarines began sinking Civil War. Wilson stares over 500,000 tons of Allied at the date of Lincoln’s shipping per month, and birth, while Lincoln’s the Allies warned Wilson ghost stands stoically that without these supholding a sheet of paper President WILSON, 1917 war address plies they were doomed. that reads: “Let us have before Congress As German submarines faith that right makes began attacking American might and in that faith let us to the end dare to do our duty as we understand merchant ships, Wilson agreed to arm these vessels. Finally, on April 2, 1917, Wilson went before Congress it. Lincoln.” Unbeknownst to Wilson, Germany to ask for a declaration of war, laying out war goals that had already taken steps to defend itself against a went far beyond simply defeating Germany. “We are potential American attack. glad, now that we see the facts,” he proclaimed “… to In mid-February fight thus for the ultimate peace of the world and for Wilson learned that the liberation of its peoples … for the rights of nations the German foreign great and small and the privilege of men everywhere to minister Arthur Zimchose their way of life and of obedience.” mermann had sent the Congress declared war with a vote of 90 to 6 in Zimmermann Telegram the Senate and 373 to 50 in the House, but a vocal to Mexico stating that in minority opposed going to war. Republican Senator the event of war with the George W. Norris from Nebraska expressed the “rich United States, Germany man’s war, poor man’s fight” sentiment that ran deep would help Mexico recover Texas, New Mexico, in rural America. Only four days into her term as the first female member of Congress, Jeannette Rankin and Arizona (territory (R-Montana) caste her maiden vote against the war. lost in the nineteenth century) if Mexico started She lost her seat in 1918, but returned to Congress in 1940. Sticking to her pacifist principles, she was a border war with the the only legislator who voted against entering World United States. ZimmerWar II after the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor. mann also asked Mexico Critics expressed their opposition freely during the to mediate between Gerdebate over declaring war, but once the nation was many and Japan, hoping officially fighting Germany, most Americans rallied to entice Japan into attacking America’s Pacific behind the flag.

America Enters the War


 “It is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful people into war.”

 20.6 Lincoln’s Birthday This cartoon suggests that Wilson, like Lincoln, faced a difficult decision of leading the country into war to defend higher principles.

 Why did the United States finally decide to fight Germany?

Read the Document The Zimmermann Telegram


THE DECISION FOR WAR



 contradictions in Wilsonian idealism. Like other world leaders Wilson advanced principles that protected the interests of his own country. Yet he also demanded sacrifices from Americans to make Wilson claimed that the United States “had no this “the war to end all wars.” Once they joined the selfish ends to serve” by going to war. Skeptical global association of nations that Wilson proposed, voices from revolutionary Russia soon prompted Americans would have to modify their traditional Wilson to defend this claim. Tsarist Russia had desire to act unilaterally in the Western Hemisphere. collapsed in February 1917. A weak parliamentary Wilson’s Fourteen Points further declared that regime replaced it, but on November 7, 1917, seven all peoples should enjoy self-determination, or a months after the United States entered the war, voice in selecting their own government. Using the Bolshevik revolutionary Vladimir Lenin seized this principle Wilson proposed redrawing the map power in Russia with promises of peace, land, and of Eastern and Central Europe along ethnic lines bread. Lenin’s Communist government immediately and even proposed extending this right to colonial published secret Allied treaties, revealing that Tsarpopulations. Robert Lansing, who replaced Bryan as ist Russia, Britain, Italy, and France had agreed to secretary of state, remained dubious. The principle enlarge their empires at the expense of Germany, of self-determination “is simply loaded with dynaAustria-Hungary, and the Ottoman Empire if they mite,” Lansing noted. “It will raise hopes which can won the war. This disclosure exposed competing never be realized.” visions on the Allied Shortly after Wilside: Wilson’s vague son issued his Fourteen promises that the war Points, another model was about democracy emerged for how the war and the now-revealed might end when Lenin territorial ambitions of negotiated a separate the Allies. (The United peace. The Treaty of States never formally Brest-Litovsk officially French Prime Minister joined the Allies. Instead ended the war between it fought on their side as Russia and the Central GEORGE CLEMENCEAU, 1918 an “associated power.”) Powers on March 3, Trying to bridge 1918. This treaty reflected this gap, Wilson outlined a broad statement of Germany’s complete victory over Russia and exposed war goals in his Fourteen Points speech to Conthe imperialist thrust of German war goals in the east. gress on January 8, 1918. The Fourteen Points Ukraine, parts of Poland, Finland, Lithuania, Estonia, envisioned a world dominated by democracy, free and Latvia became German satellite states (see 20.1). trade, disarmament, self-determination, resolved With these gains Germany intended to eliminate Rusterritorial disputes in Europe, and a league of sia as a rival and expand its empire into resource-rich nations to mediate international crises. Wilson lands in Eastern Europe. explicitly linked the spread of democracy with the The Brest-Litovsk Treaty gave the Allies an idea of expansion of capitalism, a position that gained the terms that a victorious Germany might impose on new urgency as Russian Communists began conthem. This knowledge hardened the British and French fiscating private property and promised to redisresolve to achieve total victory and inflict punitive tribute wealth to peasants and workers. Whether terms of their own. The treaty even convinced Wilson spreading democracy meant increasing political that maintaining peace in Europe would require weakrights and free trade or reallocating wealth beening Germany militarily and economically. came a cornerstone of the ideological debate beWith Russia out of the war, Germany finally had tween the United States and the new Soviet Union the opportunity to fight the one-front war it had throughout the twentieth century. sought in 1914. Now holding a clear numerical adFree trade and freedom of the seas offered more vantage, Germany prepared to strike along the Westthan an antidote to communism, however. These ern Front. As the American government raced to principles also advanced American economic intermobilize the nation’s men and industry for total war, ests at the expense of imperialist powers like Britain many in Europe feared that the United States had enand France. The Fourteen Points speech revealed tered the war too late to save the Allied side.

 Conflicting Views among the Allies on the War’s Purpose

 “God gave us his Ten Commandments and we broke them. Wilson gave us his 14 points—well, we shall see.”

 Read the Document Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points

 How did the Fourteen Points lay the foundation for future domestic and international debates?



 CHAPTER 20

THE GREAT WAR: WORLD WAR I, 1914–1918

The War at Home
 America could not mobilize, supply, and feed an army without granting new powers to the federal government. The federal government used a mix of incentives, threats, and patriotic appeals to negotiate the preexisting class, gender, and racial conflicts that threatened to make wartime cooperation difficult. Official propaganda urged unity, but Americans retained conflicting visions about regulating big business, unionizing, female suffrage, and racial equality.

Gearing Up for War


20.7 “Little
Americans Do
Your Bit!”
 This propaganda poster showing a three-year-old saluting a bowl of corn-based porridge underscored the total mobilization of American society.

 Wilson’s democratic rhetoric convinced many Progressive reformers that they could count on the president to use his wartime powers to rein in big business (see Chapter 18). The president, however, feared that the war would make corporations more powerful than ever. “We shall be dependent upon the steel, oil, and financial magnates,” Wilson privately worried. “They will run the nation.” His concerns were well-founded. Increased wages and federal protections for unions improved the lives of many workers, but the resurgent power of big business prevented Progressives from making these wartime reforms permanent. In the winter of 1917, gridlock paralyzed the railroad system. Blizzards, fuel shortages, and poor coordination among private railway companies prevented trains from delivering tons of war-related freight. Labor unrest also created havoc as skilled railway workers left in droves for better-paying factory jobs, and railway unions prepared to strike. To sort out this mess, the federal government took over management of the railroads for the

 duration of the war. The Railroad Administration met union demands for high wages, standardized equipment, and coordinated the use of tracks. To improve the flow of needed materials, the new War Industries Board (WIB) ranked industries, so that those most critical to the war effort received raw materials ahead of nonessential wartime businesses. Steel, for example, went first to manufacturers producing guns and ships, while factories making civilian cars, freezers, and corsets (they needed steel for the inner stays) had to wait. The government paid railroad companies handsomely for wartime use of their trains and track to mute their objections to government management of the railroads. When private companies regained control of railroad lines in 1920, the nation’s railroad network lay in shambles, a victim of heavy wartime traffic and the government’s failure to maintain the lines. Food Administration Director Herbert Hoover chose a different path to ensure that the country produced enough to feed civilians at home, soldiers, and refugees overseas. Congress had given the president near dictatorial powers to regulate the food and fuel industries in the 1917 Lever Food and Fuel Act. Hoover, however, opted to use high prices and patriotic appeals to control the nation’s food supply rather than rationing. To stimulate production, he had the American and Allied governments pay high prices for agricultural goods. To curb civilian demand, Hoover organized a massive propaganda campaign around the slogan “food will win the war.” Citizens signed pledge cards vowing to observe wheatless Mondays, meatless Tuesdays, and porkless Saturdays. Urging Americans to conserve wheat for shipment overseas, the Food Administration plastered the country with posters that tried to popularize cornmeal, which did not transport well, as a tasty substitute for wheat flour. The agency offered housewives cornmeal recipes and cooking classes, and even tried to enlist the cooperation of finicky toddlers (20.7) by urging them to eat cornmeal instead of oatmeal.

 What varying strategies did the government use to mobilize economic resources?

THE WAR AT HOME

 Americans responded well to Hoover’s patriotic appeals to conserve food, but whether the government could quell labor unrest for the duration of the war remained questionable. Wilson quieted industrial class conflict by throwing money at the problem. The steel, copper, petroleum, and meatpacking industries enjoyed a healthy increase in profits, once they began selling their products to the government. Wilson also offered industrialists, still bristling over Progressive-era laws that curtailed monopolies and regulated working conditions (see Chapter 18), an olive branch by giving them a role in setting the government’s wartime price, wage, and production codes. Labor also benefited during the war. The government built high wages and union protection into its wartime contracts in exchange for a no-strike pledge from labor. The National War Labor Board (made up of representatives from government, business, and labor) required industries that accepted government contracts to honor the eight-hour day and fortyhour week. These companies also had to pay a living wage, maintain high safety standards, and recognize a union’s right to recruit members at work. Not all labor groups benefited equally from the sudden government attention. Official support for collective bargaining helped the more moderate unions that formed the American Federation of Labor. Radical labor groups that continued to oppose the war suffered when the government arrested their leaders and members for sedition. Even the gains for moderate labor unions proved fleeting, however. Workers received higher wages, but after adjusting for wartime inflation, real wages only increased four percent. When the war ended and the government canceled its contracts, workers lost federal protection for organizing unions. Without the government stopping them, many manufacturers quickly returned to their old union-busting ways (see Chapter 21).



Black Migration
 Immigrants had long provided American industry with inexpensive labor. The war disrupted the flow of immigrants to the United States just when the demand for industrial goods exploded. In 1914, 1.2 million immigrants entered the country. In 1917, only 110,618 arrived. Labor-recruiting agents soon turned to white and black Southerners to fill the void. During the war over 500,000 African Americans migrated from southern farms and cities to the North, lured by high-paying industrial jobs. The African American painter Jacob Lawrence celebrated this mass exodus in a series of paintings he completed in the 1940s. His first painting showed brightly dressed streams of families preparing to board trains through doors marked “Chicago,” “New York,” and “St. Louis” (20.8). Many migrants exalted at their newfound freedom in the North. “I can quit any time I want,” one noted, without forfeiting a year’s pay as in the sharecropping system. Another man realized that in Chicago he was no longer afraid “to rub up against a white person” accidentally on the street or sit down next to one on a streetcar. In the South he had constantly feared the consequences of an unintended breach of Southern racial etiquette. Migrants also discovered, however, that despite the absence of overt segregation or intimidation, racial prejudice existed in the North.

20.8 The First Wave of the Great
Migration (1916–1919)
 “Around the time of WWI, many African Americans from the South left home and traveled to cities in the North in search of a better life,” wrote artist Jacob Lawrence to explain this 1940 painting.

View the Map Atlas Map: African American Migration


 How did workers and unions fare during the war?



 CHAPTER 20

THE GREAT WAR: WORLD WAR I, 1914–1918

 The migration of Southern blacks northward also unveiled regional and class tensions within the black community. Working through organizations like the Urban League and the Young Men’s Christian Association, paternalistic Northern middle-class blacks tried to help Southern migrants adjust to the rhythms of industrial jobs and urban life. Besides wanting to genuinely assist recent arrivals, middle-class blacks worried that migrants’ rural customs might harm the reputation of the entire Northern black community. A list of dos and don’ts published by the Chicago Defender, a newspaper serving the African American community, entreated migrants to watch their language, mind their manners, respect the law, keep their houses clean, and send their children to school. The Urban League had reason to fear that racial rioting might accompany the arrival of black workers from the South. The explosive combination of economic competition, housing shortages, and latent racial hostility triggered racial riots in Northern cities during the war. The most deadly one occurred in East St. Louis, Illinois, in July 1917. In East St. Louis companies recruited immigrants and Southern blacks to undermine union activism. Company owners knew that racial and ethnic prejudices would prevent native-born whites from allowing these new workers to join their unions, which in turn undermined the union’s ability to mount a strike. Viewing black migrants as potential strikebreakers, white workers initiated minor attacks on black workers that escalated into a full-fledged racial riot on July 2, 1917. The antilynching black crusader Ida B. Wells-Barnett interviewed over 50 black eyewitnesses for a report that she submitted to Congress. One witness recalled seeing black men exit homes with their hands raised. As they pled for their lives, mobs stoned them to death. Overall the riot left nine whites and 39 blacks dead and hundreds wounded on both sides. The subsequent Congressional investigation held white employers, labor leaders, and politicians responsible, but 6,000 African Americans left the city anyway.

Female Suffrage
 The war inadvertently provided an opportunity for women to gain suffrage and for the temperance reform movement (see Chapter 21), where women held leading roles, to build momentum. Mobilizing the home front meant securing the

 active cooperation of women. During the war, savvy female leaders successfully parlayed their newly recognized economic clout into a demand for political power. Women did the shopping and cooking in most homes, so the Food Administration needed their full support for its food conservation efforts to succeed. “Will you have a part in Victory?” queried one propaganda poster above the image of a young woman in a stars and stripes gown scattering seeds in a “victory garden” to provide vegetables for her family. Over eight million women volunteered for Red Cross work, producing surgical dressings, sweaters, socks, and mittens for soldiers and refugees. With workers in short supply, companies increasingly recruited women to fill positions in factories, and the government hired many as clerks. In desperate need of laborers, companies in Bridgeport, Connecticut, even hired airplanes to scatter leaflets throughout residential neighborhoods that urged housewives to apply for jobs in munitions factories. Overall, however, few homemakers entered the workforce. Instead, the eight million women already at work shifted positions, taking advantage of new, albeit temporary, opportunities to work at better paying and higher skilled jobs. Suffragists wanted the nation to thank women for their war work by giving them the right to vote. The vision of an engaged female citizenry working to defend the nation reduced the appeal of longstanding arguments against votes for women. In the past the close ties between female suffragists and the temperance movement had led some urban and midwestern males to resist enfranchising women, because so many women supported prohibition. The South feared that female suffrage meant extending the right to vote to black women. Other opponents argued that the male head of the household adequately represented his family’s interests in the public domain, holding fast to a vision of women as primarily domestic, not public, figures. In the 1910s, the middle- and upper-class women leading the suffragist movement had divided into radical and conservative factions (see Chapter 18), and each offered a competing vision of how to obtain the vote for women. For months members of the militant National Woman’s Party stood outside the White House with banners asking “how long must women wait for liberty?” Once the United States entered the war, militant suffragists turned Wilson’s democratic rhetoric against

 What class and regional tensions existed in the African American community?

THE WAR AT HOME

 him. They erected a sign (20.9) intended to embarrass Wilson as he greeted a delegation from the parliamentary government that ruled Russia for a short time in 1917, before Lenin seized power. Wilson hoped to convince the delegates to keep Russia in the war so democracy could triumph over autocracy in Europe. The suffragists instead focused on the recent introduction of female suffrage in Russia, urging the envoys to “help us make this nation really free” by convincing Wilson to support female suffrage. Daily scuffles broke out between outraged war supporters and the picketing suffragists, whom the press vilified as unpatriotic. After the police arrested the suffragists, the women initiated a hunger strike to protest their poor treatment in prison. When accounts of prison guards forcing feeding tubes down the throats of suffragists leaked out, Wilson pardoned them. Unbowed the female militants burned him in effigy at the White House gates. The more moderate National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA) followed a different tack. It presented the vote, not as a question of equality or democracy, but as a way to reinforce the traditional desire of women to protect their families (see Chapter 18). The NAWSA also seized on wartime prejudices against German Americans, whose loyalty many Americans increasingly questioned. “It is a risk, a danger to a country like ours to send 1,000,000 men out of the country who are loyal and not replace those men by the loyal votes of the women they have left at home,” NAWSA president Carrie Chapman Catt proclaimed. All these arguments eventually swayed Wilson. In September 1918, he became the first president to endorse national female suffrage, convinced that women’s supposedly pacifist nature could help secure his postwar goals for a lasting peace. Congress sent the Nineteenth Amendment, which granted women the right to vote, to the states on June 4, 1919, seven months after the war ended. Final ratification came on August 26, 1920.

Rallying the Public
 To control the flow of information and shape public opinion about the war, Wilson formed the Committee on Public Information (CPI). Headed by George Creel, a Progressive muckraking journalist, the CPI disseminated propaganda posters, press releases, and films. It translated its pamphlets into multiple languages to reach the nation’s huge immigrant population. The agency also recruited socalled Four-Minute Men to speak before audiences in movie halls, markets, fairs, and churches. The CPI limited each speech to four minutes to fill the time that it took to change the reels for silent films in movie theatres. Creel estimated that 75,000 FourMinute Men gave nearly seven million impassioned speeches during the war on topics such as German submarine warfare and German espionage. Hollywood helped the propaganda effort by making movies like To Hell With the Kaiser, which depicted the German leader as a depraved lunatic who receives a much-deserved punch in the mouth from the American soldier who captures him. The government also used war bond campaigns to win over hearts and minds. Rather than

 Read the Document The Struggle for Women’s Suffrage



20.9 Suffragists
Picket the White
House
 The radical wing of the suffragist movement criticized Wilson, who claimed that an Allied victory would spread democracy, for refusing to support female suffrage.

 What competing arguments and strategies did moderate and radical female suffragists offer?



 CHAPTER 20

THE GREAT WAR: WORLD WAR I, 1914–1918

 angering the public with higher taxes to pay for the war, the government financed two-thirds of the war’s costs with war bonds, short-term loans that individual citizens made to the government. Throughout the period of U.S. neutrality, German Secretary of the Treasury William G. McAdoo spies and saboteurs in the United States tried to believed that Americans who bought a $50 liberty disrupt the munitions trade with Britain and France. bond, a $5 war savings certificate, or a 25 cent Spies planted tiny egg-shaped bombs on ships thrift stamp felt personally connected to the war. carrying munitions and detonated dynamite in “Any great war must necessarily be a popular munitions factories. The most spectacular prewar movement,” McAdoo noted. Financing the war through war bonds, however, made it more expen- strike by German saboteurs occurred at Black Tom, a sive, because the government had to pay interest to munitions depot in Jersey City, New Jersey, along the Hudson River. Citizens as far away as Philadelphia each bondholder. heard the huge explosions on the morning of July 30, With the government reaching out to immi1916. Shrapnel from the blast left holes in the Statue grants from Russia, Poland, and Italy through war of Liberty, and shock waves shattered thousands of bond campaigns and military recruitment, many windows in lower Manhattan. Anxious to keep the immigrants felt American for the first time. Recent country neutral, the government labeled each inciarrivals often lived in ethnic neighborhoods and dent an accident worked alongside despite evidence of their compatriots, sabotage. circumstances Once the counthat had made astry entered the similation difficult. war, government Rather than having propaganda urged to choose between the public to stay their homelands and alert for “spies and their new country, Supreme Court Justice OLIVER WENDELL lies” and report “the t hes e immigrants HOLMES Jr., upholding the constitutionality man who spreads could openly supof the Espionage Act pessimistic stoport both during the ries, divulges—or war. “By Helping the seeks—confidential American Red Cross military informaYou are Helping Italy,” read an ad in one Italian-American newspaper. tion, cries for peace, or belittles our efforts to win the war.” The 1917 Espionage Act made it a crime to Immigrants from the Allied nations thrived obstruct military recruitment, to encourage mutiny, during the war, but for German Americans the or to aid the enemy by spreading lies. These prohibiwar years were bleak. Wartime propaganda actions had a chilling effect on speech. The Sedition centuated Americans’ sense of duty, concern Act, passed in 1918, prohibited anyone from utterfor troops in the field, and fears of a German ing, writing, or publishing “any abusive or disloyal invasion. Images as History: Propaganda Posters language” concerning the flag, constitution, governdiscusses the impact of this anti-German imagment, or armed forces. Civil liberties and antiwar ery more fully. Propaganda posters whipped up advocates challenged both laws, but the Supreme patriotic fervor and hate for the enemy to justify Court upheld the acts as constitutional. Upholding the war and motivate young Americans to fight. the Espionage Act in 1919, the Court established a To their dismay, Progressive reformers soon real“clear and present danger” test that limited the right ized that the same publicity techniques they had of free speech during wartime. Words used “to creperfected to expose corrupt business practices and spur interest in reform during the Progressive ate a clear and present danger that…will bring about the substantive evils that Congress has a right to Era (see Chapter18) could also incite war hysprevent” were not protected under the First Amendteria. Wartime propaganda ultimately served its ment, according to the majority opinion by Justice purpose. Americans bought nearly $21.4 billion Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. worth of war bonds.

German Spies and Civil
Liberties


 “When the nation is at war many things that might be said in time of peace … will not be endured so long as men fight.”

 What limitations did the government put on free speech during the war?

Read the Document Newton D. Baker, “The Treatment
 of German Americans” (1918)

THE WAR AT HOME



Images as History
PROPAGANDA POSTERS
Teaching Americans to despise anything German had negative consequences on the home front, where German Americans went from being one of the most respected immigrant groups to one of the most hated. Wartime propaganda also questioned the patriotism and masculinity of men who refused to serve. What made these wartime posters effective propaganda? 
 In his war address Wilson told the American people that “we have no quarrel with the German people.” But he also privately predicted that “a nation couldn’t put its strength into a war and keep its head level; it had never been done.” The government soon plastered the country with propaganda posters that relied on negative images of Germany and Germans to rally support for the war. This 1917 army recruiting poster depicts the Germans as savage beasts who raped, pillaged, and killed.

•


 The gorilla carries the club of culture, alerting Americans to reject the contamination of German culture. Nearly half of the states banned or restricted teaching German, and Americans renamed the hamburger a “liberty sandwich.”

•


•


 In 1939, Adolf Hitler rallied German opinion against the former Allied nations by reprinting this poster with the caption: “When they assaulted us 25 years ago, they wrote on their rotten slanderous poster: ‘Destroy this mad beast’—they meant the German people!” Europe lies in ruins behind the gorilla-like German soldier who carries his limp female victim, a ravaged Lady Liberty, as he makes his way to American soil.

•


•
 The image of Germany threatening the American coastline reminded viewers that German U-boats patrolled the Atlantic coast looking for troop and merchant ships to sink.

 The poster shows a fearful man hiding shamefully in the dark with his back turned against the bright, vibrant scene of virile men marching proudly under a large flag.

•
•


•


•


 “Destroy this Mad Brute”

 This man’s wistful look implies that he will regret his decision to stand apart from his countrymen. This loner is a man of privilege, reflecting concerns about the emasculating effect of urban life on middle- and upper-class American men.

 Cities held “slacker raids” where policemen stormed into movie theaters and arrested those who could not produce a draft registration card.

View the Closer Look Images as History:
Propaganda Posters


•


“On Which Side of the Window Are You?”


 How did visual depictions of the Germans compare to images of the Spanish during the Spanish-American War?



 CHAPTER 20

THE GREAT WAR: WORLD WAR I, 1914–1918

20.10 Tarring
 and Feathering a German American, German-American farmer John Meints from Luverne, Minnesota sued the members of the mob that tarred and feathered him, and they eventually paid him $6,000 in 1922 to settle the case.

 Some Americans took matters into their own hands, attacking German Americans and their businesses. In the war’s most infamous incident of vigilante justice, a mob murdered Robert Prager in Collinsville, Illinois, after he challenged the local mining union for expelling him because of his German descent. When the first attempt to hang Prager failed, the assailants granted his request to write a letter, expecting him to detail a plot to dynamite a mine. Instead Prager wrote to his mother and father who still lived in Germany. “Dear parents,” he wrote in German, “I must on this fourth day of April, 1918, die. Please pray for me, my dear parents.” The murder went unpunished. To protect themselves from similar assaults, many German American families changed their names, stopped teaching German to their children, and purchased war bonds. Germans Americans occasionally fought back. Responding to rumors that German-American farmer John Meints would not buy war bonds, 75 of his Luverne, Minnesota neighbors abducted him one summer evening in 1918. Driving Meints to the South Dakota border, the mob beat, whipped, and finally tarred and feathered him. Ignoring warnings to leave the state forever, a defiant Meints sued his assailants for $100,000 in 1919. He used these photos as evidence of the assault (20.10). After the presiding judge told the jury

 What challenges did German Americans and anti-war activists face during the war?

 “that the evidence was overwhelming in support of the contention that Meintz [sic] was disloyal,” the jury acquitted the defendants (even though they admitted taking part in the attack). Meints appealed, and won a new trial in 1921. Rather than risk public censure now that the war was over, his assailants paid him an out-of-court settlement of $6,000 in 1922. Besides routing out suspected spies, the Espionage and Sedition Acts also helped the federal government suppress pacifists who refused to give up opposing the war and radical political groups like the Socialist Party and Industrial Workers of the World that had long opposed capitalism. “The master class has always declared the wars; the subject class has always fought the battles,” declared Eugene Debs, the leader of the Socialist Party. During the debate over declaring war, before passage of the Espionage Act, members of Congress had uttered similar denunciations of the rich and powerful. But as punishment for uttering these words in 1918, a federal judge sentenced Debs to ten years in prison. Debs became a hero in some quarters for his steadfast opposition to the war. In 1920, two years after the war ended, Debs made his fifth and final bid for the presidency from his jail cell and received one million votes. President Warren Harding pardoned him in 1921.

Hear the Audio “The Speech That Sent Debs to Jail”


FIGHTING THE WAR



Fighting the War
 Germany had good reason to assume that it would take time for the United States to pose a threat on the Western Front. The country confronted significant challenges raising and training an army quickly. In 1917, the American armed forces numbered just over 300,000. Over the next 19 months, however, the military grew to more than four million and arrived overseas in time to prevent a German victory.

Raising an Army
 When the nation entered the war, the government faced the choice of raising its armed forces with volunteers, instituting conscription immediately, or waiting until enlistments began to flag before turning to a draft. In previous wars the government had selected the third option. Wilson, however, chose to implement conscription immediately. He knew that the United States needed to supply the Allies with troops, munitions, and food. The draft gave the government the power to decide who worked in essential wartime industries and who went into the army. Letting individuals decide might deprive industry of its best workers or leave the military understrength once the initial enthusiasm for enlisting subsided. To combat the impression that conscription forced reluctant men to fight, the government renamed the draft “selective service.” Selective service, the government repeatedly told the American public, placed men where they could best serve the war effort. To offer the public a visible demonstration of male patriotism, all men registered publicly for selective service on the same day. On June 5, 1917, ship horns, church bells, and factory whistles rang out, and crowds gathered to cheer for men filling out their draft registration cards. Three million men, or 11 percent of the draft-eligible population, refused either to register or serve. Some went to jail; others eluded authorities by changing jobs often. The Selective Service Act allowed conscientious objectors from recognized pacifist religious sects like the Quakers to apply for noncombatant duty. Those who opposed fighting for philosophical or political reasons had no legal way to stay out of fighting units. The most famous conscientious objector of the war was Sergeant Alvin C. York who, like 80 percent of drafted conscientious objectors, eventually agreed to fight. Choices and Consequences: Alvin C. York, Deciding to Serve (page 610) explores York’s decision to serve in the army. Conscripts ultimately accounted for 72 percent

Hear the Audio Over There


 of the four million men in the wartime army. Overall, 20 percent of draft-eligible males (ages 18–45) served in the wartime military, 15 percent of the total adult male population.

 “You’re in the Army Now” In makeshift training camps across the country, soldiers trained (sometimes with wooden rifles) and spoke eagerly of getting to France before the “big show” ended. The army reflected the diversity of the American population. Approximately 18 percent of the entire force, or one in five, were foreign-born. Nearly 12,000 Native Americans served, composing only a small fraction of the total military force, but representing nearly 25 percent of the Native American male population. Sixteen thousand women went overseas as nurses, telephone operators, or welfare workers working in army canteens. African Americans made up 13 percent of the military, though they were only 10 percent of the country’s population. The army remained strictly segregated. Black soldiers received few chances to demonstrate bravery or leadership, since 89 percent served as labor troops under mostly white officers. Although they received little recognition from white authorities, these troops built the roads and bridges required to keep a modern army in the field. In France many black troops discovered a more racially tolerant environment where white French had no qualms socializing with African American soldiers. “You now know that the mean contemptible spirit of race prejudice that curses this land is not the spirit of other lands,” noted the African American minister Francis J. Grimké to a group of returning black soldiers. The fear that black servicemen intended to bring the fight for democracy home provoked postwar riots and lynchings that often targeted black veterans in uniform. Determined to fight back against white supremacists, black veterans helped forge a more militant postwar civil rights movement (see Chapter 21).

 Why did the government choose to draft the wartime army?



 CHAPTER 20

THE GREAT WAR: WORLD WAR I, 1914–1918

Choices and Consequences
ALVIN C. YORK, DECIDING TO SERVE
Alvin C. York grew up poor in the Tennessee Appalachian Mountains, where he became an expert marksman hunting wild turkeys in the forests. He spent his youth carousing, gambling, and drinking. As an adult he underwent a religious conversion and joined the Church of Christ in Christian Union, a pacifist Christian sect. Drafted six months before his thirtieth birthday, York faced an agonizing decision on whether to fight. “I believed in my Bible,” he said. “And it distinctly said, ‘THOU SHALT NOT KILL.’” But, York acknowledged, “I wanted to be a good Christian and a good American too.” 
Choices




 Request noncombatant duty as a conscientious objector.



 Refuse to perform any military duty.



 Agree to serve and fight.

Decision
 Like many men claiming conscientious objector status, York faced intense pressure to fight once he entered a training camp. After conversations about the Bible with his commanding officers, York decided that the biblical

 injunction “Blessed are the peacemakers” overrode the Sixth Commandment prohibiting killing because the war promised to be “the war to end all wars.” York agreed to fight.

Consequences
 York became the most celebrated American hero of the war for his feats on the battlefield in France. On October 8, 1918, York was credited with killing 24 Germans, silencing 35 machine guns, and capturing 132 enemy soldiers during

 the Meuse-Argonne offensive. Surviving combat without a scratch reaffirmed York’s faith in God, but on his deathbed he still wondered whether God would punish him for killing men in battle.

Continuing Controversies
 What is the ultimate meaning of York’s experience? Some historians note that York’s transformation from pacifist to warrior demonstrated that Wilsonian ideals inspired many Americans to fight in World War I. With Americans divided in 1941 (before the Japanese attacked the American naval base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii) over the merits of entering World War II, the Hollywood film Sergeant York sent the message that fighting to defend the country was a citizen’s Christian and patriotic duty. Others note that York personified the poorly educated and underprivileged conscript who did the bulk of the fighting along the Western Front. Some believe that the army exaggerated York’s feats to boost morale. Rather than a

 What factors influenced York’s choice to serve?

 cause for celebration, his experience reveals the difficulty of becoming a conscientious objector during the war—an experience repeated in future conflicts, especially the Vietnam War. Sergeant Alvin C. York, with his mother in front of his home in Tennessee

FIGHTING THE WAR

 To help the army turn this polyglot force into a functioning military force, civilian psychologists administered intelligence tests to soldiers in the training camps. Quickly assessing a recruit’s intelligence could help the army immediately identify whether a man was officer material or better suited for unloading boxes of supplies off ships in France. To the psychologists’ surprise, 25 percent of the soldiers had to take the test designed for illiterates. Most native-born white soldiers had completed only seven years of school. Foreignborn men averaged 4.7 years and Southern black men 2.6 years of schooling. Psychologists claimed their exams measured native intelligence, but the questions suggest the tests primarily assessed level of education, economic background, and familiarity with mainstream American culture (20.11). Tabulated results claimed that the white American soldiers had a mental age of 13, while the average for Russians was 11.34, for Italians 11.01, for Poles 10.74, and for American-born blacks 10.41. Critics argued that the tests only showed that



 immigrants and blacks needed more comprehensive schooling. Social Darwinists, who used Charles Darwin’s ideas of survival of the fittest to establish a hierarchy of superior and inferior human races, believed these figures validated their ideas about white northern European superiority. After the war public schools began administering intelligence tests to determine the aptitude of their pupils, a trend that continues today.

On the Western Front
 The United States entered the war at a critical moment. The peace with Russia gave Germany a clear numerical advantage on the battlefield. As U-boats began sinking Allied shipping indiscriminately, the Germans transferred over one million men from the Eastern Front with Russia to the Western Front in France. In March 1918, the Germans accomplished what many had thought impossible: They broke through the trench stalemate and began marching once again toward Paris.

20.11 Intelligence Tests for Soldiers
 These questions come from an intelligence test on logic given to literate soldiers in training camps. The pictorial exam for illiterates and non-English speakers required that soldiers draw in the missing item.

 View the Image Soldiers Taking an IQ Test during WWI

 Take these intelligence tests yourself. Who would fare well on these tests and why?



 CHAPTER 20

THE GREAT WAR: WORLD WAR I, 1914–1918

 NETHERLANDS

North Sea


Ypres
Brussels


 e

R


 eu

 se

R.


26 September–11 November, 1918
 1,200,000 U.S. troops in major advance, 120,000 dead and wounded.

Cantigny
Se
 ine

R


.


Belleau Wood


 Château- MeuseArgonne Thierry

Paris


M
 a

LUXEMBOURG
Verdun 
 e rn R.

9–15 June, 1918
 27,500 U.S. troops engaged in repulsing German advance and retaking Belleau Wood.

R.


 m M

 ne

 m

.


Rhi


So


 BELGIUM

 GERMANY

St. Mihiel


12–16 September, 1918
 550,000 U.S. troops advance, 16,000 German prisoners taken.

 FRANCE 18 July–6 August, 1918 270,000 U.S. troops play major part in first Allied advance of 1918.

27 May–5 June, 1918
 U.S. troops help French to stem German advance.

SWITZERLAND
Western Front, March 1918 German offensive, spring 1918 Armistice line, Novemder 11, 1918 U.S. military activity 
20.12 American Expeditionary Forces, 1918
 U.S. troops fought hard for six months along the Western Front, winning key victories at ChâteauThierry, St. Miihiel, and during the Meuse-Argonne campaign.

 “I hope that you have not arrived too late.” The American ambassador to General JOHN J. PERSHING upon his arrival in France

 The map (20.12) reveals how much French territory the Germans captured during their spring offensives against the British and French. As in 1914, however, the pace of the offensive exhausted German troops, who quickly outran their supply lines. The arriving American Expeditionary Forces (AEF), the American soldiers who fought overseas under the command of General John J. Pershing, played a critical role in stopping the German drive toward Paris in battles at Cantigny, Belleau Wood, and Château-Thierry. In July American soldiers fought with the French in

 What was it like to fight in the trenches along the Western Front?

 a six-week counteroffensive that pushed the German army back to where it had begun the spring offensives. These campaigns initiated American soldiers to the reality of fighting along the Western Front. Men collapsed from the strain of continuous artillery bombardments and the sight of bodies blown to bits. Soldiers diagnosed with shell shock suffered from panic attacks, and some could not sleep or speak. Private Duncan Kemerer arrived at a military hospital in such poor condition that the sound of a spoon dropping sent him frantically searching for cover under his bed. American soldiers soon settled into the predictable routine of trench warfare. The three-dimensional trench shown in the feature Envisioning Evidence: Understanding the Battlefield portrays the components of a working trench. A strip of territory known as No-Man’s Land separated the Allied and German trench systems. The actual distance between the two lines averaged 250 yards. Scores of barbed wire entanglements covered this barren area, which was filled with huge craters formed by artillery shells. The U.S. Army rotated soldiers, putting them in the trenches for 21 days, with a week to recuperate in the rear before their next rotation. Each day just before sunrise, the men assembled and went on alert. If dawn passed with no enemy attack, then the men spent the day trying to stay out of sight from snipers and airplanes that strafed troops with machine gun fire. By feasting on corpses rats grew to gigantic proportions and multiplied by the thousands. Troops became infested with lice and fleas. Adding to the misery of trench life, the constant rain in northern France created a thick, gooey mud in which troops had to stand and often sleep. At night, No-Man’s Land came alive as small patrols scrambled out of the trenches to repair damaged wire or raid enemy lines for prisoners who might reveal valuable information. German artillery bombarded the Allied lines, day and night. “To be shelled is the worst thing in the world,” noted one American soldier. “It is impossible to adequately imagine it.” Troops developed an array of superstitions to try to make sense of who lived and who died in the trenches. “They claim that a man’s shell has his name on it, if it’s for him,” joked Sergeant Harry Weisburg. “But it is the part of a wise man to keep his nose out of the way of another man’s shell.” By 1918, one of

FIGHTING THE WAR



Envisioning Evidence
UNDERSTANDING THE BATTLEFIELD
The trenches along the Western Front were intricate defense systems that both protected soldiers and added to their misery in the front lines. As a straight line, the trenches ran for 460 miles from the North Sea to Switzerland. The network of trenches, however, encompassed nearly 35,000 miles, disfiguring the Belgian and French countryside. To survive, soldiers had to learn how to negotiate the complex trench network. 
 WWI airplane. Aerial photography of enemy trench lines helped commanders plan attacks. By 1918 plane crews also dropped bombs and strafed enemy lines with mounted machine guns.

 No Man’s Land. The desolate strip of land that divided opposing trench lines was covered with huge shell craters, corpes, and barbed wire.

 Support and reserve trenches. The bulk of troops remained here unless attacking.

 Listening post. Men in this trench sent up warning flares if the enemy attacked.

 Front-line trench. Men climbed “over the top” when making an attack.

 Machine gun pillbox. Concrete pillboxes protected machine gunners.

 Communication trenches. Messages, supplies, wounded men and replacement troops funneled through these passages.

Sandbags.
 Absorbed enemy bullets.

 Wooden planks. Covering the trench floor, these kept soldiers from sinking into the mud.

 Long-range artillery. Placed about 6 miles behind the lines, long-range artillery weakened front-line enemy forces before an assault and also hampered advancing enemy troops. Exploding artillery shells caused 70 percent of all U.S. casualties.

View the Closer Look Envisioning Evidence:
Understanding the Battlefield


 Dug-outs. Underground quarters protected troops from artillery shells.

 L-shaped pattern. This prevented enemy troops from breaking through and firing machine guns straight down the trench.

 What perspective does this diagram offer on the reality of trench warfare?



 CHAPTER 20

20.13 Masked
 Mailman during the 1918 Influenza Epidemic. Wearing protective masks did little to stem the spread of the microscopic influenza virus. Quarantining the sick at home or in hospitals proved more effective.

THE GREAT WAR: WORLD WAR I, 1914–1918

 every four shells fired on the Western Front contained poison gas. Troops especially feared mustard gas, which caused painful burns on exposed skin and was deadly if inhaled. Slow-moving tanks also made their first appearance on the battlefield, but the war ended before either side could exploit their full offensive potential.

Flu Epidemic


 20.14 AntiSpitting Campaign, 1918. Trying to stem the influenza epidemic, employers cooperated with public health officials by posting reminders that spitting spread germs.

 In 1918, in the midst of mounting battlefield casualties, the world suddenly encountered a new vicious killer. Without warning, a lethal strain of influenza traversed the globe. The virus became known as Spanish Influenza because the Spanish press first reported its outbreak. Biologists speculate that the influenza germ began as a mutated version of avian (bird) flu in the American Midwest in March 1918. American soldiers carried the germ to France, and the virus spread rapidly from Europe to Africa, Asia, and Central America. Nearly 25 million Americans fell ill, a quarter of the entire population, and 675,000 died. The virus also sickened over one million American soldiers, hampering the overseas military campaign. General Pershing, Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt, and

 What impact did the flu epidemic have at home and worldwide?

 President Wilson all suffered from the flu, but survived. Anecdotes of people who went to work healthy in the morning, only to die before dinnertime, illustrated how suddenly the lethal virus could strike. Influenza was usually most severe for children and the elderly, segments of the population with weak immune systems. This flu virus, however, attacked young adults especially hard—making it particularly terrifying. When the flu struck, victims first felt pain in their muscles. Within hours high fevers made them delirious. Most victims recovered after weeks of bed rest, but 25 percent developed influenza-related pneumonia. Already weakened, half of these patients suffocated to death when their lungs filled with fluid, turning healthy pink tissue into blue sodden masses almost overnight. Influenza was an airborne virus that could easily penetrate masks or screens, but scientists did not identify disease-causing viruses until the 1940s. Instead, medical experts incorrectly believed that droplets spread the disease, reasoning that sneezes, coughs, or touching contaminated objects transmitted flu germs from person to person. Physicians consequently devised useless precautionary measures to prevent transmission, such as spraying public areas with a topical disinfectant. Public officials closed movie houses, schools, churches, and office buildings in an effort to contain the epidemic. Masked mailmen ( 20.13) and police became familiar sights on city streets, and masked conductors refused to let unmasked passengers board streetcars. Posters, like this one in a naval aircraft factory in Philadelphia alerted people to the dangers of spitting ( 20.14). In mid-1919, as suddenly as it had come, the virus disappeared, having run out of susceptible human beings to infect. The Spanish Influenza pandemic had a catastrophic effect worldwide. From 1918 to 1919, the disease killed 30 million people. Nine million men died in battle from 1914–1918. The bloodiest war to date thus coincided with the deadliest influenza epidemic yet recorded.

View the Image Warning of Influenza Epidemic (1918)


FIGHTING THE WAR

The Final Campaigns
 In September 1918, the AEF attacked at St. Mihiel (see 20.12). The battle reduced a bulge in the lines (called a “salient”), thereby weakening German defenses. Two weeks later, the Allies began a massive coordinated assault along the entire Western Front. The Americans hit the Germans hard in the Meuse-Argonne region, while the British and French struck farther north and west. Advancing in heavily wooded and hilly terrain against dense German fortifications, the American effort stalled. Regrouping, the Americans began pushing the Germans back in October. Battle casualties averaged 2,550 a day, with 6,000 Americans dying each week of the 47-day Meuse-Argonne offensive, making it the most costly battle in U.S. history. “It was most assuredly the Americans who bore the heaviest brunt of the fighting on the whole battle front during the last few months of the war,” the German General Erich Ludendorff later recalled. Besides making headway on the battlefield, Allied convoys also stymied the German unrestricted submarine warfare campaign. Instead of letting individual ships take their chances at sea, British and American naval vessels began escorting groups of Allied merchant vessels through U-boat infested waters in convoys. In November, the German government requested an armistice. On the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh month of 1918, the Armistice went into effect and guns fell silent along the Western Front.



 What overall contribution did American troops make to the final victory? During the victory celebrations, American enthusiasts wildly claimed that the United States had single-handedly won the war. Allied critics contended that the British and French had dealt the final devastating blow on the battlefield. The truth lay somewhere in-between. The Americans may not have won the war for the Allies, but they certainly kept them from losing it. At key moments in the German spring offensives in 1918, American soldiers helped stop the Germans from taking Paris. American divisions provided key strength for the French-led counteroffensives over the summer, and in the Meuse-Argonne campaign, American soldiers leveled a devastating blow to the German army that helped make British and French advances to the north possible. Also important, the prospect of fighting a million more fresh American recruits in 1919 convinced Germany to seek a negotiated peace. The Allies bore a heavy cost for their victory. The numbers of war dead: France (1.3 million), Britain (722,000), and Germany (1.8 million). By comparison, the 116,516 American deaths seem slight. Other figures tell a different story. In the last six months of the war, the American death rate jumped to 820 a day as U.S. troops experienced their share of brutal fighting, fewer than the 900 Frenchmen, but more than the 457 British, who died each day. The “America at War” chart (20.15) suggests yet another way to assess the impact of the war on the United States revealing that more Americans died on the battlefield in World War I than in Korea or Vietnam, both much longer wars.

America at War
Conflict


Total Serving


Battle Deaths


Other Deaths


Wounded


Union


2,213,363


140,414


224,097


281,881


Confederate


600,000 – 1,500,000


74,524


59,297


—


World War I (1917–1918)


4,734,991


53,402


63,114


204,002


World War II (1941–1945)


16,112,566


291,557


113,842


670,846


Korean War (1950–1953)


5,720,000


33,741


2,833


103,284


Vietnam War (1964–1973)


8,744,000


47,355


10,796


153,303


Civil War (1861–1865)


20.15 Battlefield Deaths, Deaths by Disease, and Wounded
 World War I was the shortest major American war in the twentieth century, but the second deadliest.

 What role did the United States play in the Allied victory?



 CHAPTER 20

THE GREAT WAR: WORLD WAR I, 1914–1918

Peace
 The Armistice ended active fighting in Western Europe, but the peace settlement took months to negotiate. Twenty-seven nations and four British dominions sent delegates to the Paris Peace Conference. Germany expected to join the negotiations, but instead the terms of peace were determined in secret by the Big Four: Wilson, French Premier Georges Clemenceau, the British Prime Minister Lloyd George, and the Italian Premier Vittorio Orlando. The Versailles Peace Treaty (named after the palace outside Paris where the treaty was signed) required Germany to pay reparations and disarm. Germany signed the treaty under protest on June 28, 1919, the fifth anniversary of Archduke Franz Ferdinand’s assassination. In the end the flawed and controversial Versailles Peace Treaty laid the groundwork for future conflict in Europe and raised questions at home about the role America wanted to play in the world.

The Paris Peace Conference
 Woodrow Wilson enjoyed worldwide popularity on Armistice Day. Throughout the United States and Europe, his idealistic pronouncements had raised hopes that the slaughter might pave the way for a lasting peace. Wilson broke with tradition and decided to travel overseas to negotiate the peace treaty himself, rather than sending representatives to hash out the details. As he toured Paris, London, Rome, and Milan, newspapers greeted him as “The Savior of Humanity.” British and French leaders, however, knew that four years of suffering had created a deep-seated desire for revenge against Germany within their nations. The war had also hardened Wilson’s view of Germany, and he agreed to weaken postwar Germany by eliminating its navy and colonies. He disagreed, however, with the French insistence on eviscerating the German economy and military permanently. Certain that America had played a vital role in winning the war, Wilson felt confident asserting his right, along with Britain and France, to shape the terms of peace. British and French leaders, however, publicly downplayed America’s contribution to defeating Germany, hoping to limit Wilson’s say in the peace treaty. At the request of Allied leaders, the British and French press began printing disparaging reports about the American army’s inexperience and leadership. Resentful over the Allies’ apparent ingratitude for their wartime sacrifices, Americans’ postwar disillusionment grew as the treaty-making process got underway. Wilson’s domestic political problems weakened his negotiating position. In November 1918,

 the Republicans won control of Congress despite Wilson’s plea to voters to return a Democratic majority as a vote of confidence for his peace proposals. The reasons for the Republican victory were complex, a result of unease with conditions at home and concern about Wilson’s ideals. The Democrats’ loss energized opponents of the League of Nations, a Wilson-supported collective security organization whose member nations agreed to mediate future international disputes to prevent wars and work together to improve global conditions. Domestic opponents of the League worried that by joining the international organization America would lose control over its own foreign policy and invite international meddling in the Western Hemisphere. They also doubted that the League could maintain world peace. League critics divided into two camps, each offering conflicting visions of America’s role in the postwar world. Isolationists, led by Republican Senator William E. Borah from Idaho, preferred adopting an official policy of neutrality. The isolationists believed that if the United States kept out of all foreign disagreements, the country could avoid going to war in the future. By contrast the faction headed by Massachusetts Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, the Republican majority leader and chairman of the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee, favored a return to the former balance of power system in Europe. Lodge wanted the United States to help rebuild, and perhaps join, a strong alliance among democratic European nations that could contain Germany indefinitely. Eager to shore up support for the League of Nations at home, Wilson briefly sailed home to

 What opposition to his peace plan did Wilson face overseas and at home?

 PEACE

 confer with Republican leaders who were still upset that he had not invited any leading Republicans to join his negotiating team. The possibility of compromise appeared slim. Lodge detested Wilson, whom he regarded as sanctimonious. Wilson returned the distain, viewing Lodge as narrow-minded. Discussion soon stalled. On the day before Wilson returned to Paris, Lodge handed the president a pledge signed by 39 senators who vowed to reject the League covenant in its present form. Hoping to appease his Republican critics, Wilson managed to incorporate key Republican demands in the final League covenant. The covenant now stated that the League of Nations would respect the Monroe Doctrine, the 1823 American pronouncement that the Western Hemisphere was off-limits to other world powers, and allow nations to withdraw from the League. Wilson also tried outmaneuvering his domestic critics. He opted against creating two international agreements, a peace treaty and a covenant creating the League of Nations that would each require a separate Senate ratification. Instead Wilson decided to incorporate the League covenant into the peace treaty. The Senate, he gambled, would never refuse to ratify the peace treaty, even one that contained a controversial League of Nations.

 “With his mouth open and his eyes shut, I predict that he will make a Senator when he grows up.” WILSON’S joke about his infant grandson touched upon his political troubles with Republican Senators Allied leaders also pressured Wilson to compromise. To get them to accept the League, Wilson gave up his idea of peace without victory. When Supreme Commander of Allied Armies Marshal Ferdinand Foch read the harsh demands of the Peace Treaty, he accurately predicted, “this isn’t a peace, it’s a twenty year truce.” The treaty required that Germany pay reparations to French and Belgian civilians for the mines, factories, and fields its troops had destroyed during “the war imposed upon them by the aggression of Germany.” This war guilt clause held Germany alone responsible for starting World War I. The treaty also forced Germany to



 disarm. The Reparations Committee set Germany’s initial bill at $33 billion in gold, although commissions in the 1920s significantly reduced this amount. The United States accepted no reparation payments and in the 1920s even loaned Germany money to help it pay this debt. The war guilt clause and the reparations bill created tremendous resentment in Germany. In the 1930s, Adolf Hitler cultivated this anger to fuel a resurgent national fervor dedicated to restoring German economic and military strength. Other nations also left the conference feeling slighted. Italy resented the Allies for denying it more Austrian territory along the Adriatic Sea, a humiliation that the fascist leader Benito Mussolini vowed to avenge when he took power in 1922. Japan protested the failure to incorporate into the League covenant a statement protecting the rights of nonwhite nations, helping breed Japanese resentment against the West. In the Middle East, Africa, and Asia, the peace treaty transferred colonial possessions from the losers (the Ottoman and German empires) to the victors—Britain, France, Belgium, and Japan— under a mandate system. In theory the mandate system named a Western nation as a League of Nation trustee for territories in need of political instruction before they assumed the responsibilities of self-government. In reality the mandate system simply cloaked old-style imperialism in the new rhetoric of self-determination. By redrawing the map of the Middle East to expand their global influence, Britain and France set in motion political, religious, and cultural conflicts in the region that created tremendous strife throughout the twentieth century and beyond. Denying Arab nationalist demands for independence, France took control of Lebanon and Syria. Britain ruled Transjordan (present-day Jordan) and brought together three distinct groups—the Kurds and Sunni and Shiite Arabs—who had previously lived in semi-autonomous regions under the Ottomans to form the Kingdom of Iraq under a puppet monarch. When the British took over Palestine, they kept wartime promises to open up part of it to Jewish immigration, angering its Arab inhabitants. Competing claims to this territory continue to this day. The Versailles Treaty settled old territorial disputes in Europe, but the dismemberment of the Russian, German, and Austro-Hungarian empires created new sources of tension. The map of Eastern Europe was redrawn to reflect

 What complaints did critics make about the Versailles Peace Treaty?



 CHAPTER 20

THE GREAT WAR: WORLD WAR I, 1914–1918

Archangel


I C E L A ND


 ROMANIA

SOVIET UNION

 BULGARIA

Ca


Black Sea


 spi

SW ED E N NORWAY

Helsinki


Tallinn


 ic

 lt a Polish corridor

NETHERLANDS
Amsterdam 
LAT VIA

Cairo


 IRAQ

 KUWAIT

ARABIA EGYPT

P OLAN D

 New Nations after World War I

 French mandate British mandate Areas lost by Ottoman Empire, under League of Nations mandate after 1920

S OV IE T U N ION
C


 a

S S R )
 s

 ia n

Se
 a

Black Sea


Y


SER BIA

Basra


 TRANSJORDAN

 p

 AL

Suez
Canal


LIT H U AN IA
East Prussia 
Berlin
Warsaw
BELGIUM GERM ANY
Brussels Frankfurt Kiev Brest-Litovsk LUX. Prague Lorraine CZECHOSLOVAKIA Versailles Paris Alsace Vienna Budapest AUSTRIA SW ITZ. F RANCE H U N GARY R OM AN IA Milan YU GOSLAVIA Bucharest Belgrade 
 UG

Amman
Jerusalem


Moscow


BU LGAR IA
Sofia 
Rome


PERSIA (IRAN)

Baghdad
R.


 ian rs f l Gu

B


 PALESTINE

Riga


 AL

 RT

Se


 a

ESTON IA

LEBANON
Beirut Damascus Euphra 
Pe


GREAT BRITAIN

S PA I N


 SYRIA

 s

 DENMARK

Mediterranean
Sea


 IT

 PO

Cyprus


 te

Stockholm


London


Mosul


Crete


R.


 OCEAN

 IRELAND

Leningrad
(St. Petersburg)


 ris

Oslo


Nor t h
Sea


 TURKEY

FIN LAN D

Tig


AT L A N T I C

 ea an S

Istanbul


Istanbul


ALBAN IA

T U R K E Y
Ti


GR E E C E

 gr is

 PERSIA

R


.


Athens


 (IRAN) E up hr at

 e

 sR

Mediterranean Sea


.


Pe


 Areas lost by Russian Empire to Germany 1918, granted independence after World War I Areas lost by Austro-Hungarian Empire

E GYP T


 rs

 ian

Gu


 lf

 SAUDI

 Areas lost by German Empire

 ARABIA

 Wilson’s principle of self-determination, fulfilling the ambitions of ethnic groups in Czechoslovakia, Poland, Yugoslavia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia to create their own nations (20.16). But the Allies disregarded the desires of German-speaking peoples in Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the new republic of Austria to unite with Germany. These three weak independent states remained vulnerable to German and Soviet expansionist schemes. Twenty years later, Hitler justified his annexations of Austria (1938), and Czechoslovakia (1938–1939), and his joint invasion of Poland with Soviet leader Josef Stalin (1939) as a drive to unite parts of the

 What significance did the re-drawn maps of Europe and the Middle East have?

 German-speaking world separated by the terms of the Versailles Treaty (see Chapter 23).

The Treaty Fight at Home
 Wilson saw the flaws in the final treaty, but he hoped that over time the League of Nations could modify the treaty’s worst excesses. To counter the initial burst of enthusiasm for joining the League, Republicans challenged Wilson’s idealistic pronouncements promising world peace. “Are you ready to put your soldiers and your sailors at the disposition of other nations?” Senator Lodge asked the American people. The political cartoon Looking

20.16 Europe and
 the Middle East after the War. The victorious Allies dismantled the German, AustroHungarian, and Ottoman empires to create independent nations in Central Europe and colonies for themselves in the Middle East.

View the Image Blowing Bubbles (1919)


 PEACE

 a Gift Horse in the Mouth (20.17) captured the public’s mounting concern about the League. While Wilson tries to assure Uncle Sam that the League is better than nothing, the Senate carefully examines the mule. Wary of going against public opinion too strongly, Lodge did not urge outright rejection of the Versailles Treaty. He instead proposed adding 14 American reservations. The most important one required explicit Congressional approval before American troops went overseas. Wilson refused to accept modifications. Instead he tried to create a groundswell of support for the League that would force the Republicans to accept the treaty as written. To reignite public enthusiasm for the League of Nations, the president traveled 10,000 miles in three weeks by train and made 40 speeches to hundreds of thousands of people. The political cartoon Ratification Rapids (20.18) offered a sympathetic portrayal of Wilson, shown here using all his strength to steer the treaty and League



 Covenant to safety. In the cartoon a young woman clutches both documents to her breast, symbolizing both the besieged nation and innocent victims of war. Wilson dismissed Republican concerns about sending American troops throughout the world as impractical. “If you want to put out a fire in Utah, you don’t send to Oklahoma for the fire engine. If you want to put out a fire in the Balkans, if you want to stamp out the smoldering flames in some part of Central Europe, you don’t send to the United States for troops,” Wilson told an audience in Salt Lake City. Competing Visions: Joining the League of Nations (page 620) explores the debate between Wilson and Lodge. Pushing himself to the limit, an exhausted Wilson paid the price. On September 25, 1919, hours after he reminded a Pueblo, Colorado, audience that American soldiers had died to protect “the liberty of the world,” the president fell ill. His physician rushed a twitching and nauseous Wilson

20.18 Ratification Rapids
 This sympathetic portrait of Woodrow Wilson trying to steer the Versailles Treaty through the ratification process illustrates how contentious the treaty debate became.

20.17 Looking a Gift Horse in the Mouth
 This political cartoon expresses skepticism about the League of Nations. By taking a closer look, the Senate realizes that the League (represented here as a broken-down mule) is not strong enough to handle the hard work of keeping the peace.

 What competing views do these political cartoons offer on the question of ratifying the Versailles Treaty?



 CHAPTER 20

THE GREAT WAR: WORLD WAR I, 1914–1918

Competing Visions
JOINING THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS
In 1919, President Woodrow Wilson and Republican Senator Henry Cabot Lodge debated the wisdom and value of joining the League of Nations. Consider the exact wording of Article X, and then the differing interpretations of it offered by Lodge and Wilson. What changes in American foreign policy does each foresee arising from the League? Are there any points of agreement between the two about the future world role of the United States? Article X of the League Covenant ignited tremendous controversy over whether the United States should join the League of Nations. The Members of the League undertake to respect and preserve as against external aggression the territorial integrity and existing political independence of all the members of the League. In case of any such aggression or in case of any threat or danger of such aggression the Council shall advise upon the means by which this obligation shall be fulfilled. 
 Lodge contended that the League Covenant stripped Congress of its power to declare war in this August 12, 1919, congressional address. We should never permit the United States to be involved in the internal conflict in another country, except by the will of her people expressed through the Congress which represents them. With regard to wars of external aggression on a member of the league, the case is perfectly clear. There can be no genuine dispute whatever about the meaning of the first clause of article 10. In the first place, it differs from every other obligation in being individual and placed upon each nation without the intervention of the league. Each nation for itself promises to respect and preserve as against external aggression the boundaries and the political independence of every member of the league. … It is, I repeat, an individual obligation. It requires no action on the part of the league, except that in the second sentence the authorities of the league are to have the power to advise as to the means to be employed in order to fulfill the purpose of the first sentence. … We may set aside all this empty talk about isolation. Nobody expects to isolate the United States or to make it a hermit Nation, which is a sheer absurdity. But there is a wide difference between taking a suitable part and bearing a due responsibility in world affairs and plunging the United States into every controversy and conflict on the face of the globe.

 Who has the more compelling argument regarding the League of Nations, Wilson or Lodge?

 Wilson defended the League in a speech on September 25, 1919, in Pueblo, Colorado, that recalled the sacrifices of soldiers during the war, bringing many in the audience to tears. But you will say, “what is the second sentence of article 10? That is what gives very disturbing thoughts.” The second sentence is that the Council of the League shall advise what steps, if any, are necessary to carry out the guaranty of the first sentence, namely, that the members will respect and preserve the territorial integrity and political independence of the other members. I do not know of any other meaning for the word “advise” except “advise.” The Council advises, and it can not advise without the vote of the United States [as a member of the Council]. … Whether we use it wisely or unwisely, we can use the vote of the United States to make impossible drawing the United States into any enterprise that she does not care to be drawn into… My friends, on last Decoration Day I went to a beautiful hillside near Paris, where was located the cemetery of Suresnes, a cemetery given over to the burial of the American dead. … I wish some men in public life who are now opposing the settlement for which these men died could visit such a spot as that. I wish that the thought that comes out of those graves could penetrate their consciousness. I wish that they could feel the moral obligation that rests upon us not to go back on those boys, but to see the thing through, to see it through to the end and make good their redemption of the world. For nothing less depends upon this decision, nothing less than the liberation and salvation of the world.

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Joining
 the League of Nations

 PEACE

 back to Washington, D.C., where two days later he suffered a stroke. Permanently paralyzed on his left side, he spent the rest of his presidency hidden in the White House. Wilson, the British Prime Minister Lloyd George remarked, was “as much a victim of the war as any soldier who died in the trenches.” The White House kept the president’s illness a secret, issuing a vague statement that he was recovering from exhaustion. For weeks, however, Wilson only spent three hours a day out of bed and saw no one except his physician and his family. His wife, Edith Wilson, controlled all correspondence reaching the president and helped compose his replies. Critics later accused her of serving as a shadow president during Wilson’s convalescence, but she maintained that the president made every decision himself. Wilson rejected all private suggestions that he resign and still refused to accept any reservations to the Versailles Treaty. With Wilson absent from the public stage, opposition to the League of Nations spread. His refusal to compromise doomed the treaty. The Senate rejected both the original treaty and one with Lodge’s reservations attached. The Senate therefore never ratified the Versailles Treaty. It also refused to accept Armenia as a mandate, despite Wilson’s plea to become the “friends and advisors” of a people ravaged by wartime Turkish massacres and deportations. It took two more years for the war to end officially for the United



 States. In October, 1921, the Senate finally ratified separate peace treaties with Germany, Austria, and Hungary (the United States had never been at war with the Ottoman Empire or Bulgaria). Nations that ratified the Versailles Peace Treaty also agreed to join the League, with the exception of Germany, which was not allowed to join until 1926. The League remained headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, from 1920 until 1946, when the United Nations took its place. Wilson won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1919 for his efforts to establish the League of Nations, but without American membership the League became little more than a place to air grievances. Wilson never regained his health, and he died in February 1924. (Senator Lodge, his unyielding opponent, died just eight months later.) John Steuart Curry’s 1938 painting Parade to War, Allegory (20.19) captures the growing feeling by the 1930s that U.S. participation in World War I had been a mistake. In the painting uniformed men march off to war, slowly turning into corpses before the cheering crowds. The young boy running alongside them fails to notice this transformation, and instead remains mesmerized by the pageantry and excitement of war. Only the two mothers in the scene (one to the left weeping quietly and the other on the right whom a policeman stops from interfering with the parade) understand the true sorrow that war brings to families and the nation.

20.19 Parade to War, Allegory
 John Steuart Curry’s 1938 painting rejected the Wilsonian idea that war could bring about positive political change, dwelling instead on the lives lost and ruined.

 Why did Americans feel disillusioned at the end of World War I?



 CHAPTER 20

London


THE GREAT WAR: WORLD WAR I, 1914–1918

NETHERLANDS
Brussels 
 BELGIUM

 GERMANY

LUXEMBOURG
Paris 
 FRANCE

 SWITZERLAND









Archduke Franz Ferdinand
 assassinated in Sarajevo, Bosnia

 Britain mines the North Sea; German U-Boats patrol British waters

 Villa raids American bordertowns

 Germany resumes unrestricted submarine warfare; Zimmermann Telegram sent to Mexico

 Triggers breakdown of European balance of power system

 Germany invades Belgium and France

CHAPTER REVIEW

 World War I begins; Wilson declares United States neutral

 Incites domestic debate over how to stay neutral

 German U-Boat sinks Lusitania Wilson asserts rights of neutrals to travel unmolested

 U.S. troops sent to Mexico; war narrowly avoided

 Germany renounces unrestricted submarine warfare

 Congress declares war against Germany

 Wilson wins reelection, promising “peace with honor”

 Creation of nation’s first mass, drafted army

Conscription Begins


Review Questions
 1. Was any one nation primarily responsible for starting World War I or did Europe share collective responsibility? 2. How well did the government balance the need to uncover German espionage with protecting civil liberties during the war?

 4. What challenges did soldiers face in the trenches? How was fighting this war different from previous American wars such as the Civil War or SpanishAmerican War? 5. What concerns did Americans raise about the League of Nations?

 3. How did women and African Americans fare during the war? Which changes were temporary? Which were more permanent?

Key Terms
 Schlieffen Plan A military plan that called for Germany to attack and quickly defeat France while the cumbersome Russian army mobilized. Western Front Complex system of trenches and earthworks that ran for 460 miles from the North Sea to Switzerland that pitted Germany against Belgium, France, Britain, and the United States. Lusitania British passenger ship sunk by a German U-boat on May 7, 1915, an attack that killed 1,198 passengers, including 128 Americans. Zimmermann Telegram German foreign minister Arthur Zimmermann offered to help Mexico recover Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona if Mexico would start a borderland war with the United States and ask Japan to join them. Fourteen Points Speech by Woodrow Wilson to Congress on January 8, 1918, that outlined a postwar world dominated by democracy, free trade, disarmament, self-determination, resolved territorial disputes in Europe, and a league of nations to mediate future international crises. Nineteenth Amendment Constitutional amendment that granted women the right to vote; it was ratified August 26, 1920.

 Committee on Public Information Government agency that controlled the flow of information and shaped public opinion about the war with posters, Four-Minute Men, pamphlets, and films. Espionage Act (1917) Legislation that made it a crime to obstruct military recruitment, to encourage mutiny, or to aid the enemy by spreading lies. Sedition Act (1918) Legislation that went even further than the Espionage Act by prohibiting anyone from uttering, writing, or publishing “any abusive or disloyal language” concerning the flag, constitution, government, or armed forces. Spanish Influenza A lethal flu virus that killed millions worldwide in 1918. Versailles Peace Treaty The controversial treaty that ended World War I by requiring Germany to pay reparations and disarm. League of Nations An international collective security organization composed of member nations where member nations agreed to mediate future international disputes to prevent wars and work together to improve global human conditions.

CHAPTER REVIEW











 Congress passes Espionage Act

 Wilson gives Fourteen Points speech

 Wilson supports female suffrage

 Germany signs the Versailles Treaty

 Establishes democracy, free trade, and collective security as key postwar goals

 Ends picketing outside White House by suffragists

 Punitive terms create resentments Hitler will later exploit to rise to power

 Dilutes civil liberties and freedom of speech

 Race riot in East St. Louis, Illinois Racial animosities intensify as Southern blacks migrate north

 Peak of influenza pandemic

 Armistice between Allies and Germany

 Deadly flu virus kills 675,000 Americans; 30 million worldwide

 Germany capitulates before Allies cross into Germany

 Senate rejects the Versailles Treaty Ends strident debate on the merits of joining the League of Nations

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of The Great War.

Questions for Analysis
 1. How did the Lusitania crisis shape U.S. foreign policy? View the Closer Look Choices and Consequences:

 Other Resources from This Chapter Hear the Audio • “The Speech That Sent Debs to Jail”, p. 608 • Over There, p. 609

 Defining Neutrality: America’s Path into World War I, p. 598

Read the Document


 2. Did the United States overreact to the Zimmermann Telegram? Read the Document The Zimmermann Telegram, p. 600

 3. What vision of peace did Wilson outline in the Fourteen Points? Read the Document Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen

 • The Struggle for Women’s Suffrage, p. 605 • Newton D. Baker, “The Treatment of German Americans” (1918), p. 606

View the Closer Look
• Images as History: Propaganda Posters, p. 607
• Envisioning Evidence: Understanding the Battlefield, p. 613
• Competing Visions: Joining the League of Nations, p. 620


Points, p. 601


 View the Image Soldiers Taking an IQ Test during WWI, p. 611

 4. What does this poster reveal about America’s reaction to the influenza epidemic? View the Image Warning of Influenza Epidemic (1918), p. 614

View the Map Atlas Map: African American Migration, p. 603
Watch the Video
• Video Lecture: The Outbreak of World War I, p. 594


 5. What critique does this cartoon offer of the League of Nations? View the Image Blowing Bubbles (1919), p. 618

 • Video Lecture: American Entry into World War I, p. 599

 How did factory work and recreation change in the 1920s?

Cultural Unrest
 p. 632

 CHAPTER

Cars and Planes:
The Promise of the
Twenties p. 626




