 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the VideoCritical Visions, Chapter 10

Revivalism, Reform,
 and Artistic Renaissance, 1820–1850 The expansion of democracy and the changes resulting from the market revolution left Americans concerned about their lives and the nation’s future. Rising inequality and a bitter debate over slavery intensified anxieties. In this popular lithograph, The Way of Good and Evil, the artist portrays the social ills facing America, including alcoholism, prostitution, and crime. A tavern, brothel, and prison represent the path of destruction. Different buildings—a school, home, and church—anchor the center. The path to salvation leads from these institutions through college and eventually up into heaven. In the artist’s view Americans faced a clear choice: salvation or eternal damnation. Americans sought solutions for the nation’s social problems and clamored for reforms. Many turned to mainstream religion for guidance or joined religious reform movements. Secular reformers targeted education and prisons or alcohol. Some religious movements viewed the market economy as the root of America’s problems and advocated the abandonment of private property. Secular utopian movements came to similar conclusions. Still other reformers adopted a radically different critique of market society. Champions of Transcendentalism, a literary and philosophical movement, including Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau, urged Americans to reject the values of the marketplace and turn to nature or their individual consciences for inspiration. The expanding literary marketplace prompted many writers to explore contemporary ills, or use them as a backdrop for stories that probed issues as different as slavery and urbanization. The rise of a more aggressive abolitionist movement and the development of an equally fervid defense of slavery intensified the public debate over this issue. Abolitionism helped radicalize many women and gave them the opportunity to develop organizing skills. Inspired by a more radical theory of equality and equipped with their new skills, women’s rights advocates applied their critique of slavery to women’s status under American law. Reform efforts also affected architecture. Many reformers advocated transforming the American landscape itself, including the built environment, to promote social reform and spiritual renewal.

 “In the history of the world the doctrine of Reform had never such scope as at the present hour…. We are to revise the whole of our social structure, the state, the school, religion, marriage, trade, science, and explore their foundations in our own nature.” RALPH WALDO EMERSON, Man the Reformer (1841)





 CHAPTER 10

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850

Revivalism and Reform


10.1 Religious
Camp Meeting
 A contemporary artist captured the intense emotional experience of a revival meeting.

 The Cane Ridge revival in Kentucky (1801) was the first stirring of the larger revival movement that constituted America’s Second Great Awakening. (For a discussion of the First Great Awakening, see Chapter 3.) In the next four decades, this emotional style of evangelical Protestantism attracted many Americans. For those swept up in the revival, the changes transforming American society were seen as a threat to the church and the family. However, the most farsighted proponents of revival, such as Charles Grandison Finney, realized that the power of the market revolution might be turned to good ends and used to promote religion and reform. By the 1830s, Americans began to believe that the economic, political, and social changes sweeping over their society were undermining individual morality, the ability of communities to prosper, and the integrity of the family. This belief drove the push for moral reform. In many cases religious impulse inspired reformers. Finney preached that “true saints love reform” and argued that humankind could create a perfect society here on earth if all Americans made “the reformation of the whole world” their priority. Not all reformers were religiously motivated, however. Some reform efforts promoted secular goals and drew on the Enlightenment’s ideals of reason, science, and faith in humankind’s ability to improve and reshape its surroundings (see Chapters 3 and 4). Secular reform movements led to improvements in schools, care for the mentally ill, and methods of reforming criminals. Whether religious or secular, reform efforts targeted individual behavior such as drunkenness and prostitution.

Revivalism and the
Market Revolution
 One way of promoting revivalism was the camp meeting, an outdoor religious revival that lasted for days. This painting of Religious Camp Meeting (10.1) by an English artist captures the emotional intensity of these events, during which grown men and women swooned and collapsed in response to the fiery preaching of ministers. The painting shows overwrought men and women, physically exhausted from the revival, splayed across the ground and on the benches in the foreground. One observer compared the audience’s response to the fiery sermons of the camp meeting with the “swelling” of an ocean wave, an awesome spectacle of “fainting, shouting, yelling, crying, sobbing and grieving.” The tents in the background of the painting give only a small sense of the scope of these events. Camp meetings could last for a week and attract 3,000 people and 100 preachers.

What was the Second Great Awakening?


Read the Document Reverend Peter Cartwright, Cane Ridge and the “ New Lights”


REVIVALISM AND REFORM

 Revivalists faulted many mainstream ministers for their overly intellectualized preaching. Ministers also blamed America’s problems on the materialism associated with the market revolution. One minister feared that the same forces that were “increasing the business and moneyed interests in the Nation” would “by spreading vice and irreligion prove its ruin. Those very things which all regard as improvements will be our destruction.” For some, however, the new methods of communication and wealth generated by the market revolution were tools to press into the service of revivalism. No figure proved more adept at turning the tools of the market to religious purposes than Charles Grandison Finney, a lawyer turned preacher who became a leading spokesman for spreading the revivalist message of the Second Great Awakening to towns and cities. His influence was felt particularly strongly in those urban centers most closely associated with the market revolution. While walking to his law offices one day, Finney experienced a religious conversion. In a lawyerly manner he declared that from that day on he would be on a “retainer from the Lord Jesus Christ to plead his cause.” Drawing on his experience as a courtroom lawyer, he fashioned a forceful and direct style of preaching that cajoled, harangued, and pleaded with his audience to embrace salvation. Finney’s theology rejected many of the Calvinist assumptions of nonevangelical churches (see Chapter 3). Where Calvinists stressed predestination, the belief that God predetermined our individual destinies, including who will and will not be saved, Finney instead stressed free will, people’s ability to seek out salvation through their own efforts. The idea of perfectionism grew out of his emphasis on free



 will. By aiming for perfection, Finney preached, human beings could usher in the millennium. In contrast to the pessimistic message of Calvinism, which condemned most people to damnation, Finney emphasized sobriety and hard work along with his religious message. His sermons appealed to the expanding middle class and the wealthy. Finney found an especially eager audience in men and women in the cities and towns along the Erie Canal in upstate New York. A dramatic revival occurred in Rochester, New York, in 1830–1831. Finney adapted many of the new political techniques associated with Jacksonian democracy, designed to get voters involved in politics, to his revivals. Politicians, Finney noted, “get up meetings; circulate handbills and pamphlets; blaze away in the newspapers.” The goal of such actions was to stimulate “excitement and bring the people out.” Finney and other evangelicals took advantage of the opportunities provided by the market revolution, particularly the expansion of the publishing industry, to churn out tracts, Bibles, and evangelical periodicals. Organizations such as the American Bible Society and the American Tract Society led the way in marketing evangelical publications, making an effort to use high-quality wood-cut images in many of them to visually reinforce the text.

Temperance
 Rising levels of alcohol consumption spurred the growth of temperance, the reform movement that advocated abstinence from alcohol. By 1830, consumption of spirits reached an all-time high: almost seven gallons per person of pure alcohol a year (more than twice the amount that the average American drinks today). Alcohol had always been

 “We hold these truths to be self-evident; that all men are created temperate; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain natural and innocent desires; that among these are the appetite for cold water and the pursuit of happiness!” MANIFESTO OF THE WASHINGTON TOTAL ABSTINENCE SOCIETIES, 1841

 How did Finney use the tools of the market revolution to further the goals of the Second Great Awakening?



 CHAPTER 10

A
Militia Muster
 Although militia musters had always included drinking, the scene depicted here shows a militia man too drunk to stand up. Martial virtue is nowhere to be seen.

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850

 important in America. Every social class imbibed alcohol, and hardly a community function took place without alcohol consumption. Workers on the job often drank alcohol during their midmorning and mid-afternoon breaks. One commentator noted that “a house could not be raised, a field of wheat cut down, nor could there be a log rolling, a husking, a quilting, a wedding, or funeral without the aid of alcohol.” Although Western religions had always frowned on drunkenness, Christians had never deemed the consumption of alcohol a sin. The Great Awakening changed this as spokesmen for the revival fastened on intemperance as an issue. At first proponents of temperance merely sought to promote moderation, but by the mid-1820s, a more radical temperance movement sought complete abstinence from alcohol. The first national temperance organization was founded in 1826, and within three years there were 222 similar organizations. By the mid-1830s, temperance organizations had more than 1.5 million members, and more than two million Americans had taken the movement’s pledge of abstinence. Evangelical religious leaders took the lead

 What does this painting of a militia muster reveal about alcohol consumption in America?

 “I believe in the existence of a great, immortal, immutable principle of natural law … which proves the absolute right to an education of every human being that comes into the world.” HORACE MANN, 1846 in these organizations, delivering sermons with titles like: “The Nature, Occasions, Signs, Evils, and Remedy of Intemperance.” Reformers warned Americans that alcohol threatened their souls as well as their bodies. For Congregational minister Lyman Beecher, a prominent figure in the Second Great Awakening, temperance organizations were “a disciplined moral militia,” an ironic metaphor given that the real militia had become another illustration of the problem of intemperance. Although militia musters, the practice sessions of the militia, had always been festive occasions that included drinking, by the mid-nineteenth century, they had become drunken revels, as this depiction of a militia-day muster illustrates (10.2). The militiaman in the foreground is so

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Drinking and the Temperance Movement


REVIVALISM AND REFORM

 inebriated he cannot stand, and the dancing African American suggests that the atmosphere is more carnival-like than military. Temperance advocates also campaigned for prohibition laws banning the sale of alcohol, and temperance attracted other reformers such as the young Whig politician Abraham Lincoln. The Whigs helped to secure laws to promote sobriety. Maine adopted the most wide-sweeping law in 1851, prohibiting alcohol. By 1855, 13 of the nation’s 31 states had passed similar laws. The temperance movement did not banish drinking from American life, but it dramatically reduced alcohol consumption.

Schools, Prisons,
 and Asylums Alcohol consumption was hardly the only concern of reformers. They also turned their attention to education, the criminal justice system, and the treatment of the mentally ill. They founded new institutions to deal with these social problems and campaigned to change the way Americans thought about these issues. Education was central to reform efforts. Lyman Beecher wrote that “we must educate, or we must perish by our own prosperity.” Unfettered growth and materialism, according to such leaders as Beecher, would otherwise subvert America’s moral foundations. The leading spokesman for educational reform in America was the Whig politician Horace Mann. As a member of the Massachusetts legislature, he worked tirelessly to create a state board of education that would establish a uniform curriculum for Massachusetts and improve teacher training. Mann became the first head of the new state board of education. Massachusetts also became the first state to pass a compulsory school attendance law. For reformers such as Mann, the Common School—universal public education—would cure society’s ills. As Mann wrote, “let the Common School be expanded to its capabilities … and nine tenths of the crimes in the penal code would become obsolete; the long catalogue of human ills would be abridged.” Although many types of reform were “curative or remedial,” schools, according to Mann, were “preventive.” He intended his reforms, like much mainstream educational reform of the day, to

Read the Document Horace Mann, Report on the
Massachusetts Board of Education




 make good citizens and workers. This era saw the development of many features of modern schooling. The assignment of students to grades according to age and ability, the use of standardized procedures for promotion, and the notion of uniform textbooks for instruction all emerged out of the Massachusetts model that Mann helped pioneer. A new textbook, the popular McGuffey’s Reader, appeared in 1836. This text went through multiple editions for the remainder of the nineteenth century. The McGuffey readers carried a clear political message well suited to a society in which wealth was becoming less equally distributed. The readers instructed children not to envy their social betters, but rather to remind them that “it is God who makes some poor, and others rich.” A different vision of education shaped the agenda of the Working Men’s party, which saw education as an invaluable tool in the ongoing political struggle between the people and the aristocratic few. Although they shared Mann’s Whig goal of universal education, they intended education to liberate workers, not make them docile. Thus a Philadelphia Working Men’s party committee declared that “despotism” thrived when the “multitude” is consigned to ignorance, and education and knowledge reserved for the “the rich and the rulers.” Although educational reform attracted a wide range of supporters, including religious leaders, Whigs such as Mann, and the Working Men’s

 “We find in the United States two distinctly separate systems: the system of Auburn and that of Philadelphia. . . . The two systems opposed to each other on important points, have, however, a common basis, without which no penitentiary system is possible; this basis is the isolation of the prisoners.” GUSTAVE DE BEAUMONT and ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE (1833)

 How did Mann’s vision of educational reform differ from that of the Working Men’s Party?



 CHAPTER 10

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850

 party, opposition to such reforms could be equally ardent. A variety of groups feared that government involvement in education would endanger individual freedom. Democrats in Massachusetts, for example, viewed Mann’s program as a “system of centralization” that would put “power in a few hands” and undermine the “spirit of our democratic institutions.” Farmers feared that a longer school year would rob them of a valuable source of labor, and that the increased taxes to fund the new school system would fall heavily on agricultural interests. Finally Catholics feared that the country’s Protestant majority had designed the new system to impose its values on nonProtestants. In response to the Common School movement, Catholics began creating their own parochial schools. Although Mann’s utopian vision of education as a cure for society’s ills was not realized, the Common School movement did achieve notable successes. By mid-century, over half of the white children in America between ages five and nineteen were enrolled in public schools, the highest percentage in the world. Higher education also expanded dramatically. In 1815 there were 33 colleges in America; by 1835 there were 68, and 113 by 1848. The Great Awakening inspired much of this growth. Almost half these new colleges were affiliated with denominations that took a prominent role in the Awakening: Presbyterians, Methodists, and Baptists. Among the colleges and universities founded in this period were Amherst

 “I proceed, gentlemen, briefly to call your attention to the present state of insane persons confined within this Commonwealth, in cages, closets, cellars, stalls, pens! Chained, naked, beaten with rods, and lashed into obedience... ” DOROTHEA DIX, 1843

 What was a panopticon?

 and Wesleyan in New England, Earlham in the Midwest, and Emory and Duke in the South. Although these schools excluded women, whose educational opportunities lagged behind those for men, some progress occurred in this area. In 1821, Emma Willard founded the Troy Female Seminary in Troy, New York, and in 1837, Mount Holyoke Female Seminary was established in Massachusetts. Oberlin College in Ohio admitted women from its inception in 1833. A hotbed of abolitionist sentiment, Oberlin admitted its first African-American students in 1835. The state universities that date from this period of educational reform include Louisiana, Missouri, Mississippi, and Wisconsin, as do some of the nation’s leading Catholic institutions, including Fordham, Holy Cross, Notre Dame, Villanova, and Xavier in Cincinnati. The new religious emphasis on free will and commitment to moral reform also inspired new approaches to criminal justice. In place of punishment a new reform-based model of incarceration emerged: the “penitentiary,” where individuals were isolated from one another and given a chance to repent and reform. Earlier approaches to crime had cast behavior in terms of sinfulness and innate depravity and had meted out punishment accordingly. Two different models for implementing this penitential ideal emerged in prisons. The New York State system employed the first at Ossining, a prison in the Hudson River Valley. Prisoners sent “up the river” from New York City to “Sing Sing” were housed in individual cells at night but were organized in communal work details during the day. Inmates worked ten-hour days in stone quarries; eventually the prisoners manufactured goods, including barrels, boots and shoes, hats, brushes, and mattresses. Pennsylvania pioneered a different model, which it implemented in Eastern State Penitentiary. Eastern State employed solitary confinement, which isolated prisoners from all contact with other prisoners to force them to reflect on their criminality and seek repentance. The architecture of Eastern State reflected this new approach to penology. Architect John Haviland’s vision of the ideal prison combined fashionable Gothic architectural elements with

 Watch the Video Video Lecture: Who was Horace Mann and why were so many schools named after him?

REVIVALISM AND REFORM

 an Enlightenment emphasis on geometrical forms ( 10.3). Thus although the outside of the prison looked like a medieval fortress, the inside consisted of a series of radiating spokes emanating from a central watch tower. A guard in the central tower could see the prisoners, who themselves were unable to see the guard. Haviland believed his plan would facilitate “watching, convenience, economy and ventilation.” This design, which its inventor, British philosopher Jeremy Bentham, dubbed a panopticon, applied the Enlightenment’s ideals of reason to prison reform. Prisoners were potentially under surveillance at all times and could never be sure if the eyes of the state were on them. The goal was to impose discipline and have prisoners internalize it as an ideal. This vision of penal reform fit with the Enlightenment’s ideals of reason and control.



 Life for the mentally ill had always been hard, and people with mental illness were often housed with criminals. In 1841, Dorothea Dix, a schoolteacher, volunteered to provide religious instruction for women in the Massachusetts House of Correction. Shocked by the treatment of the inmates, particularly the mentally ill, who were dressed in rags, confined to one room, and often beaten, Dix sought to change the way mental illness was treated. After visiting jails and poorhouses where the mentally ill were housed, she compiled a report to the Massachusetts legislature detailing the wretched conditions in places such as the House of Correction. Dix recommended that criminals be separated from the mentally ill and argued that the latter would benefit from more humane treatment. Other reformers followed her lead, and by 1860, 28 of 33 states had public asylums for the mentally ill.

10.3 Philadelphia Penitentiary
 Architects designed prisons to accommodate the penitential model. Prisoners could be isolated for reflection while still being monitored by prison authorities. The most famous example of this new type of prison was Eastern State Penitentiary in Philadelphia. [Source: The Library Company of Philadelphia]

 What does prison architecture reveal about reform in this period?



 CHAPTER 10

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850

Abolitionism and the
Proslavery Response
 The debate over slavery heated up as abolitionists demanded an immediate end to slavery. Like revivalists abolitionists also took advantage of the new tools provided by the market revolution to bombard Southerners with their message, particularly communications technologies such as improvements in printing. The more aggressive style of abolitionism produced a fierce reaction from Southerners, who became increasingly militant in their defense of slavery. Rather than concede that slavery was a necessary evil, as Jefferson and others of the Founding generation had, Southerners now touted slavery as a positive good that reformed and uplifted slaves. The real evils in American society, they argued, were abolitionism and the factory system. By mid-century, the slavery debate created huge divisions within American politics and society.

The Rise of Immediatism
 Much of the early opposition to slavery was led by the Quakers. The ideals of the American Revolution also contributed to the rise of abolitionist sentiment, which attracted leading politicians, including prominent Federalists, such as Alexander Hamilton and John Jay. For these abolitionists slavery threatened the republican values of liberty and virtue. Racial equality or justice was not a major concern, the elimination of slavery was necessary to prevent Americans from becoming corrupted by the institution of slavery. James Madison, Henry Clay, and John Marshall championed a plan that included gradually liberating the slaves and returning them to Africa. The American Colonization Society, the organization

 “I shall strenuously contend for the immediate enfranchisement of our slave population…. I will be as harsh as truth, and as uncompromising as justice. On this subject, I do not wish to think, or speak, or write, with moderation…. I will not equivocate—I will not excuse—I will not retreat a single inch— AND I WILL BE HEARD.” WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON, The Liberator, 1831

 Why was David Walker’s Appeal so radical?

 devoted to implementing this idea, was founded in 1817. It helped to found the West African colony of Liberia and began transporting free blacks there from the United States. Yet by 1830, only 1,400 blacks had been sent to Liberia. Although gradualism and colonization had appealed to many white opponents of slavery, it never attracted much interest among African Americans, who supported a more immediate end to slavery and were committed to remaining in the United States. A convention of free blacks, speaking of the United States, proclaimed in 1831 that “this is our home, and this is our country.” In 1829 abolitionism entered a new era. David Walker, a free black who had grown up in North Carolina and moved to Boston, published an Appeal, which he addressed to the “Coloured Citizens of the World, but in Particular, and Very Expressly, to Those of the United States of America.” Walker rejected colonization and declared that “America is more our country than it is the whites—we have enriched it with our blood and tears.” He urged slaves to defend themselves, by force if necessary, against their masters. His call for slave insurrection led Southern states to enact or strengthen laws making it illegal to teach slaves to read. It also marked the end of support among many Southern intellectuals for colonization. Walker’s death in 1830 cut short his career as an abolitionist. Although Walker’s radical, insurrectionary appeal had little impact on mainstream abolitionists, his call for immediate abolition resonated with those most eager to abolish slavery. Since the Revolution mainstream abolitionist thought had adopted a gradualist approach, preferring to end

Read the Document The American Antislavery Society
Declares its Sentiments


ABOLITIONISM AND THE PROSLAVERY RESPONSE

 slavery in a piecemeal fashion. Now, abolitionists rejected gradualism in favor of immediatism, an immediate end to slavery. The most forceful spokesman for immediatism was William Lloyd Garrison, who founded the newspaper The Liberator in 1831. In its first issue, Garrison announced that he had recanted the “popular but pernicious doctrine of gradual abolition.” With other abolitionists, Garrison organized the New England Anti-Slavery Society in 1832. A year later he joined 60 other delegates, including men, women, whites, and free blacks, to create the American Anti-Slavery Society (AASS). By 1840, more than 1,350 antislavery societies had sprung up in the North with combined memberships of 250,000. The success of British abolitionists, who in 1833 had persuaded Parliament to emancipate almost all slaves in the British Empire, inspired American abolitionists. In 1835, American abolitionists, taking advantage of the new opportunities provided by the market revolution to get their antislavery message across, began to inundate Southerners with antislavery literature. Abolitionists also worked diligently in the North to raise awareness of the evils of slavery. In addition to using traditional print forms such as newspapers and pamphlets, they developed almanacs, songbooks, children’s books, and jigsaw puzzles. This children’s puzzle (10.4) includes scenes typical of abolitionist literature, including images of slaves being whipped and brutalized. Adept at publicizing their cause, abolitionists seized opportunities provided by dramatic events, such as the escape of Henry “Box” Brown, who had mailed himself from Richmond, Virginia, to Philadelphia in a wooden box (10.5). The trip took 26 hours, and Brown arrived in his box in Philadelphia shaken but unscathed. Abolitionists distributed images of his escape, and he later toured the North with a panorama, “The Mirror of Slavery” Panoramas were large pictures mounted on rollers that, when unfurled slowly, gave the viewer the feeling that the picture was moving. Often a narrator accompanied a panorama on tour. Brown’s narration complemented the panorama’s depiction of the history of slavery in America. Another event that triggered public interest in slavery was the unveiling of American artist Hiram Powers’s sculpture, The Greek Slave. Powers’s popular work depicted a beautiful Greek woman enslaved by the Ottoman Turks, who were Muslims. The image of a Christian woman



10.4 Abolitionist
Puzzle
Abolitionists
 developed a variety of ways to educate Northern children about the evils of slavery, including jigsaw puzzles.

 degraded and held captive by Muslims captivated American audiences. The nude sculpture caused a sensation in the press. Abolitionists used the attention to remind Americans of the evils of slavery. How abolitionists accomplished this— and how Southerners recast its meaning to reflect their views—is the subject of Images as History: The Greek Slave. The antislavery movement attracted a strong following in New England and among transplanted New Englanders in the Midwest, particularly evangelicals. Quakers were active abolitionists, too. A few

Read the Document David Walker, A Black Abolitionist Speaks Out


10.5 Mailed to
Freedom
 This image of Henry “Box” Brown who mailed himself to freedom was sold to help finance a speaking tour for Brown, who became a spokesman against slavery.

Who was Henry “Box” Brown?




 CHAPTER 10

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850

Images as History
THE GREEK SLAVE
The Vermont artist Hiram Powers’s statue, The Greek Slave (1844), became one of the most popular sculptures in nineteenth-century America. Powers portrayed the slave stripped naked by her Turkish captors, chained, and placed on the auction block. Religious leaders and even reviewers had denounced earlier artists who, following European conventions, had portrayed women in the nude, but Powers avoided moral censure by explaining to his audience that by depicting the dignity of the slave in the face of such cruel treatment, he had clothed her in an invisible robe of virtue. How would viewers in different parts of the nation have responded to this work of art? How would abolitionists have interpreted its message? How would defenders of slavery? Cities across America and small towns in New England and Ohio exhibited The Greek Slave. The image here shows a crowded gallery of men, 
 women, and children viewing the work in New York. Besides prompting widespread commentary in the press, Powers’s work inspired poems. A poet in the Knickerbocker Magazine described The Greek Slave as “Naked yet clothed with chastity.” Public reaction to the sculpture became entwined in the larger debate over slavery. While Southerners praised the work, focusing on the theme of Christian virtue, Northerners compared the slave’s suffering to the plight of America’s slaves. One New York correspondent wondered how an audience might be driven to tears at the sight of an “insensate piece of marble” and “yet listens unmoved to the awful story of the American slave!” Apologists for slavery mocked such appeals. Noting that many abolitionists had waxed poetic about The Greek Slave, one writer wondered why “we have not heard” of a single effort to free her from her chains. Although a nude figure would have normally been shocking, The Greek Slave attracted huge crowds, including women and children. Exhibition guides reminded viewers that the slave was clothed in Christian virtue.

•
 The Greek Slave turns away from viewers, a sign of her modesty.

•


•


 The chains around her wrists signify her status as a slave.

•


The Greek Slave


Viewing The Greek Slave


 Why did the public accept The Greek Slave’s nudity?

View the Closer Look Images as History:The Greek Slave


ABOLITIONISM AND THE PROSLAVERY RESPONSE

 prominent Southerners also joined the movement, including Angelina and Sarah Grimké, daughters of a wealthy South Carolina planter, whose conversion to Quakerism facilitated their involvement in abolitionism. The two women left the South to pursue the cause of abolitionism. The antislavery movement galvanized many women, who became the grassroots activists for abolitionism. By 1840, more than two-thirds of the signers of antislavery petitions submitted to Congress were women.

Anti-Abolitionism and
 the Abolitionist Response Proslavery rhetoric intensified as Northern opponents of slavery employed increasingly assertive tactics. Southerners held mass rallies to denounce Northern abolitionists. Garrison’s newspaper, The Liberator, was especially galling. Within a year of its first issue, the Georgia legislature proposed a $5,000 reward for anyone who would bring Garrison to Georgia for trial. Rewards were posted for bounty hunters to kidnap other prominent abolitionists and bring them to the South for trial. The wealthy New York abolitionist Arthur Tappan had a price of $50,000 on his head at one point. In July 1835, a steamship arrived in Charleston carrying thousands of antislavery tracts and newspapers addressed to Southerners. Angry residents grabbed the mailbags containing the Northern abolitionist literature; the next night 3,000 Charlestonians consigned the letters to a huge bonfire. This antislavery Northern political cartoon ridiculed Southerners’



 efforts to prevent the distribution of abolitionist materials (10.6). Southern hostility did not deter abolitionists. They began inundating Congress with petitions calling for an immediate end to slavery. Southerners reacted by passing the “gag rule,” a procedural motion that required that the House of Representatives automatically table antislavery petitions and not consider them. The gag rule passed with the support of Northern and Southern Democrats. The Senate was unable to pass its own gag rule, but it adopted a practice that produced virtually the same effect. Once the Senate had received slavery petitions, a proslavery senator would simply move to table them. Yet abolitionist petitions continued to pour into Congress, especially from women’s groups. In 1836–1837, an all-female petition from Massachusetts gathered 21,000 signatures, a record number. Southern efforts to stymie free speech and the right to petition Congress only underscored abolitionists’ belief that slavery was incompatible with liberty. To leading abolitionists interference with the U.S. mail and congressional refusal to deal with petitions made slavery a national, as opposed to a local, issue.

The Proslavery Argument
 Leading Southerners of the revolutionary era had attacked slavery even as they continued to profit from it. No member of the Founding generation was more conflicted over slavery than Thomas Jefferson, who told a friend in 1820 that “we have the wolf by the ears, and we can neither hold him, nor safely let him go. Justice is in one scale, and self-preservation in the other.” Jefferson hoped that a new generation of statesmen would eliminate slavery. Such hopes diminished, however, as “Alabama fever” swept across the South, and cotton agriculture transformed the American economy. To complicate matters, Nat Turner’s insurrection (see Chapter 9) frightened Southerners, who became convinced that Northern abolitionists were stirring up slave insurrections.

 Read the Document Thomas R. Dew’s “Defense of Slavery”

10.6 New Method
 of Sorting the Mail The abolitionist mail campaign prompted violent protest in the South. In this drawing Southerners assault the Charleston post office and burn abolitionist mail.

 What was the “gag rule”?



 CHAPTER 10

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850

 In 1832, Thomas R. Dew, a young professor at the College of William and Mary, published his Review of the Debate in the Virginia Legislature of 1831 and 1832. In the aftermath of Nat Turner’s Rebellion, the legislature had seriously debated ending slavery, but a narrow majority rejected the idea. Dew repudiated the ideas of Jefferson and others who, agonizing over slavery, considered it unjust and recommended its elimination. Dew defended the property rights of slaveholders and dismissed the impracticality of relocating emancipated slaves outside Virginia. He even claimed that slavery was a positive good, sanctioned by ancient philosophers such as Aristotle and justified by the Bible. In Southern colleges, proslavery spokesmen championed the religious, philosophical, and economic benefits of slavery, and in the South’s leading magazines they defended their new proslavery ideology. They even argued that slavery was good not only for masters but for slaves. Southern defenders of slavery cast themselves as benevolent patriarchs; slaves, they argued, were the lucky beneficiaries of this system. This selfserving vision of slavery is reflected in this lithograph appropriately entitled Slavery As It Exists In America (10.7). The two shocked Northerners depicted express their astonishment that slaves were so well treated and happy. The artist also singles out the evils of British factories for condemnation. Southerners often made similar points about Northern industry, which they argued treated its workers more brutally than Southern plantation owners treated slaves. One of the most influential apologists for Southern slavery was John C. Calhoun, an eminent South Carolina politician. He argued that the South’s “peculiar institution,” which was the term he coined for Southern slavery, was not “an evil,” a cause of shame, but rather “a good—a positive good,” to be championed.

10.7 Slavery As It Exists in America
 This proslavery cartoon portrays slaves as happy and well cared for by masters who are benign patriarchs.

 “The peculiar institution of the South—that, on the maintenance of which the very existence of the slaveholding States depends, is pronounced to be sinful and odious, in the sight of God and man; and this with a systematic design of rendering us hateful in the eyes of the world—with a view to a general crusade against us and our institutions.” JOHN C. CALHOUN, speech on abolitionist petitions, 1837

 What was the proslavery argument?

THE CULT OF TRUE WOMANHOOD, REFORM, AND WOMEN’S RIGHTS



The Cult of True Womanhood,
 Reform, and Women’s Rights Women took a leading role in reform movements. The most active reformers were members of a growing middle class. Female reformers targeted activities that threatened the family and demeaned women’s family role. Prostitution was one prominent target of reformers, but hardly the only social problem that attracted notice from female reformers. They also attacked alcoholism, crime, illiteracy, and even slavery. The social changes brought about by the market revolution, including the rise of the factory system (see Chapter 9), contributed to new ideas about the family and gender roles. A new concept of domesticity and the related notion that men’s and women’s proper roles lay in separate spheres of activity became the cornerstone of a new middle-class ideal. Society defined the public world of work and politics as male, whereas the private world of home and family became women’s domain. Female reformers defended the new ideal and attacked the social evils that threatened it.

The New Domestic Ideal
 Horace Bushnell, an influential New England minister, captured the profound change that transformed American economic and social life when he remarked that the “transition from mother-anddaughter power, to water and steam power, is a great one” and had produced a “complete revolution in domestic life.” One consequence of the rise of industry was a growing separation between home and workplace. This change facilitated the rise of a new middleclass ideology that defined women’s role as a separate sphere of domesticity. A “cult of true womanhood” emerged in which female values were defined in opposition to the aggressive and competitive marketplace. Women were identified with piety, motherhood, and sexual passivity.

 Although this ideal was largely unattainable for rural farm women, urban working-class women, and free black women—all of whom had to work to maintain even minimal economic subsistence—this middle-class ideal suffused American culture. Magazines such as Godey’s Lady’s Book, the growing body of middle-class advice literature such as Catherine Beecher’s Treatise on Domestic Economy, and the ubiquitous prints produced by Currier and Ives all celebrated the new domestic ideal. Lilly Martin Spenser, the most renowned female artist of her day, made the new domestic ideal a central theme in her paintings. Rather than depict her subjects in the formal settings, garbed in rich velvet clothing and seated in poses borrowed from paintings of royalty and aristocracy, characteristic of the family portraits favored by earlier artists, Spencer often chose intimate scenes of domestic life as her settings. In Domestic Happiness she depicts a husband and wife standing before their two sleeping children. The mother’s hand gently touches her husband, symbolizing the new domestic ideal’s emphasis on emotional intimacy between husband and wife (10.8). She also appears to be gently

Read the Document Catherine Beecher, “Treatise on Domestic Economy”


10.8 Domestic
Happiness
 Lily Martin Spencer’s painting captures the new ideal of domesticity in which women were assigned the role of instilling the values of piety, family, and sexual passivity.

 How does Domestic Happiness represent the ideal of the family?



 CHAPTER 10

10.9 Lectures to
Ladies on Anatomy
 and Physiology The image of a skeleton kneeling in prayer was carefully chosen to avoid offending the reading public. The religious pose and the absence of flesh appealed to the chaste ideals associated with the cult of true womanhood. [Source: The Library Company of Philadelphia]

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850

 restraining her husband from waking the children, a subtle reminder that in the domestic sphere, women, not men, were in charge.

Controlling Sexuality
 The new ideal of domesticity emphasized emotional control, including control of sexuality. In 1834, Lydia Finney, the wife of Charles Finney, established the New York Female Moral Reform Society to champion moral purity. By 1837, the Society had 15,000 members and branches across New England and New York State. It focused on the problem of urban prostitution. Estimates vary but in some urban areas such as New York City, prostitution was the second largest industry in the city, well ahead of publishing, brewing, and baking (see Envisioning Evidence: The Economics and Geography of Vice in MidNineteenth Century New York, Chapter 9). The members of the society even visited brothels to urge the “fallen women” to abandon their involvement in commercial sex. Sometimes reformers tried to shame the male clients of the prostitutes by publishing their names in the press. The society also lobbied to criminalize prostitution. Although they could be closed if they created a public nuisance, most brothels easily avoided legal entanglements and plied their trade without fear of prosecution. The reformer Sylvester Graham formulated a farreaching critique of sexuality. In his widely reprinted lectures on Chastity (1834), Graham advised his

 Which reform movements attracted antebellum woman?

 readers to avoid sexual overstimulation, recommending that they “Take more exercise in the open air, and use the cold bath under proper circumstances.” He also believed that diet contributed to overstimulation, producing a variety of physical and psychological ailments. His followers abandoned stimulants such as tea, coffee, and alcohol, replacing them with a bland diet built around whole-grain breads and crackers (the forerunner of Graham crackers). Followers of Graham could obtain information about bland diets from the Graham Journal of Health and Longevity, or they could attend Graham clubs at college or live in boarding houses committed to Graham’s rules. A follower of Graham’s who set off on a different path, Mary Gove became interested in women’s reproductive rights and health. She traveled across America lecturing to women about their bodies. Her Lectures to Ladies on Anatomy and Physiology (1842) included an image of a female skeleton, kneeling in prayer, on its frontispiece (10.9). Gove argued that the idea that women were passionless was a direct result of her “enslaved and unhealthy conditions.” She later married the health reformer Thomas Low Nichols, and the two promoted health reform and woman’s rights issues. Paulina Wright, another lecturer on women’s health, carried around an anatomically correct female mannequin to help demonstrate issues relevant to sexual and reproductive health. Her lectures sometimes proved shocking, causing some to faint or even “run from the room.” Interest in sexuality emerged out of a general concern to reform society and behavior. Woman’s involvement in antebellum reform led some to examine the values, institutions, and political forces that justified the oppression and exploitation of women.

 The Path toward Seneca Falls Women had already been active in political and moral reform movements, including opposition to President Jackson’s policy of Indian removal (see Chapter 8), temperance, and the crusade against prostitution. Participation in these movements had led women to organize themselves, speak out in public, and question the underlying political, legal, and social values that contributed to their oppression. Many women were drawn to the antislavery movement which further radicalized many female reformers. Of the almost 70,000 signatures on antislavery petitions submitted to Congress in 1837–1838, more than two-thirds were women’s. Organizations such as the Philadelphia Female Anti-Slavery Society (1833) provided women with unprecedented

Read the Document Lucretia Mott, “Declaration of Sentiments and Resolutions,”
 Women’s Rights Convention, Seneca Falls, New York

THE CULT OF TRUE WOMANHOOD, REFORM, AND WOMEN’S RIGHTS

 opportunities to become actors in one of the most important political dramas of the day. Involvement in the antislavery cause could be a harrowing experience. The virulent hatred abolitionists faced, even in the North, did not make exemptions for gender. In 1838, the Anti-Slavery Convention of American Women refused to exclude black women from its meetings. An antiabolitionist crowd then stormed the building and torched it. Support for abolitionism also led many women to question their legal status as women. A turning point in the relationship between antislavery and women’s rights occurred in 1840 when American reformers Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott attended an international antislavery conference in London. The female delegates were not allowed to speak at the event and were forced to sit behind an opaque screen out of view of the other delegates. Incensed by their treatment in London, Stanton and Mott saw the oppression of women as an evil requiring the same attention as the oppression of slavery. Stanton was born into a prosperous family. Her father was a prominent lawyer who became a state Supreme Court judge. She spent hours reading law books in her father’s office. What most galled Stanton was the English common law doctrine of coverture, which treated a woman as legally dead once married. American law had inherited this concept, which meant that a husband would control any property a woman might have owned before her marriage and all of the wealth gained during their marriage. In 1837, Thomas Herttell introduced a bill into the New York legislature to give married women more control over their property. Eleven years later the legislature passed a landmark married women’s property act that allowed women to retain control of their inherited property. Stanton helped win approval for this law. The law did not give married women full control of any wealth or property they gathered during marriage, but it was an important step forward. The year 1848 was a momentous one in the history of women’s rights. In the same year that New York adopted the married women’s property act, supporters of women’s rights gathered in Seneca Falls, New York, not far from Rochester, for a historic meeting. The organizers of the convention were Stanton and Mott, two veterans of moral reform and abolitionism. About 300 men and women, including noted African-American abolitionist Frederick Douglass, assembled in a church for the Seneca Falls Convention, during



 “The history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the part of man toward woman….” “Declaration of Sentiments and Resolutions” of the Seneca Falls, New York, Women’s Rights Convention (1848)

 which a women’s rights manifesto modeled on the Declaration of Independence was drafted. The Declaration of Sentiments and Resolutions declared that “all men and women are created equal.” It noted that women were denied economic opportunities, legal rights, and access to education. It also asserted that “it is the duty of women of this country to secure themselves their sacred right to the elective franchise.” Seneca Falls prompted more than two dozen other such meetings in the next 12 years. The ardent abolitionist newspaper founded by Frederick Douglass not only applauded the actions of the convention but also exhorted abolitionists to embrace women’s rights alongside their opposition to slavery. The mainstream press, however, was less sympathetic. One newspaper mistakenly concluded that the Declaration of Sentiments was a parody of the Declaration of Independence, not an attempt to appropriate its language for women. Forty percent of American newspapers printed negative accounts of Seneca Falls, but 29 percent were favorable. Although still opposed by most Americans, women’s rights had become a topic of national conversation for the first time. The Declaration of Sentiments would become a foundational text for all subsequent efforts to promote equal rights for American women. In Stanton’s view the women who gathered in upstate New York in a modest church had instigated “a rebellion such as the world had never seen before.” The women’s rights question caused a major schism in the abolitionist movement. In 1840, delegates to the American Anti-Slavery Society (AASS) debated whether women could hold office in the organization. William Lloyd Garrison, a supporter of women’s rights, outmaneuvered his opponents and emerged victorious on this question. However, abolitionists opposed to linking the cause with women’s rights responded by resigning from the AASS.

 Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Women’s Rights Movement in Nineteenth Century America

 How did Stanton’s upbringing influence her approach to women’s rights?



 CHAPTER 10

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850

Religious and Secular Utopianism
 As many mainstream religious groups preached the necessity of reform and worked to change American society, certain sectarian groups sought a radical transformation of American society. In some cases these groups were attempting to create a heaven on earth, literally preparing the way for Christ’s return. The movement for reform also spawned a variety of different secular utopian movements. Both religious and secular groups engaged in bold forms of social experimentation. Many groups abolished private property and embraced some form of socialist or communist ideals, abandoning the idea of private property. 10.10 Millerite William Miller’s prediction that the millennium would arrive in March 1843 prompted this satirical image of one of his followers preparing for the apocalypse by stocking up on cheese and crackers.

Millennialism, Perfectionism,
 and Religious Utopianism Millennialism, the belief that the millennium was imminent and that Judgment Day would soon follow, attracted many followers in the mid-nineteenth century. Some believers even named the date of Christ’s return to establish

 How did the Shakers recast the idea of the family?

 the millennium. The followers of William Miller, called Millerites, predicted that Christ would return in March 1843. When that prediction failed to come true, Miller prophesied a new date, October 22, 1844. Again the millennium failed to materialize. The movement collapsed soon after the revised prediction also proved false. Indeed, the failure of the Millerites to predict the true date for the millennium inspired humor. This satirical picture of a Millerite depicts a man prepared to lock himself in a trunk together with crackers, cheese, and plenty to drink, emergency provisions which might come in handy in the chaos that would precede the apocalypse before Judgment Day. The sardonic image captures the popular reaction to Miller’s failed predictions (10.10). But aspects of Miller’s teachings survived and were later incorporated into the Seventh Day Adventists, another nineteenthcentury religious sect, one that celebrated Saturday, not Sunday, as their day of worship. The United Society of Believers in Christ’s Second Appearing, or Shakers, created a successful religious utopia, establishing settlements across the nation and attracting

RELIGIOUS AND SECULAR UTOPIANISM

 thousands of followers. The Shaker faith was shaped by the teachings of Mother Ann Lee, an eighteenthcentury religious figure who adapted Quaker teachings in light of her own experience and revelations. The wife of an abusive husband whose four children died during infancy, she experienced a revelation that sex itself was the root of human evil. Her followers became known as Shaking Quakers or Shakers because their religious worship involved an ecstatic form of dance that one contemporary described as including “extravagant postures” and “fantastic contortions.” The sect also adopted a strict rule of celibacy. Mother Ann’s vision of Christianity not only transformed ideas about sexuality but also radically recast gender roles. She preached that God was a combination of the masculine and feminine, a radical teaching given the strongly patriarchal character of most Protestant theology in the nineteenth century. Judged by the standards of the day, the Shakers came closer to the idea of equality of the sexes than almost any other group in America. Within the Shaker community, there were only brothers and sisters—neither husbands and wives nor mothers and fathers. Abandoning procreation, the Shakers grew only by taking in orphans and converting new members. The Shakers radically reconfigured the meaning of the family unit, rejecting the ideal of domesticity and marriage itself. (See Competing Visions: Reactions to Shaker Gender Roles.) Shakers not only rejected the values of domesticity and mainstream attitudes toward family life, but they also developed a complex relationship with the growing market economy around them. Thus while Shakers participated in the expanding market economy, they did not internalize its competitive values. Within the Shaker community, there was no private property. Shaker communities practiced a form of Christian communism. To support the community they sold a variety of goods to outsiders. Shaker craftsmen developed a reputation as skilled furniture makers, and Shakers sold agricultural products, including seeds to eager consumers. The Shakers were hardly the only radical religious experiment that rejected the values of the market-place and the traditional ideal of the family. One of the most radical utopian leaders was John Humphrey Noyes. A Yale-educated Congregationalist minister, Noyes took the idea of perfectionism, a doctrine that had evolved from Methodism, in a novel direction. Earlier perfectionists had argued that one could attain a perfect state of holiness.

Read the Document John Noyes on Free Love at Oneida




 That did not mean that a person was completely free from sin, but rather that one had attained the highest level of spiritual perfection consistent with human nature. In 1840, Noyes created the Putney Association, and by 1844, the small group was practicing a form of Christian communism in which, like the Shakers, all property was commonly owned. The association included 37 people who worshiped together in a small chapel, lived in three houses, farmed, and maintained a store. In 1846, Noyes took his theory of perfectionism in a new direction. If one attained a state of religious perfection and could not sin, then he argued one could be free of many laws enacted to deal with humans’ fallen, sinful state. Marriage and monogamy were two such ideals. Noyes’s restructuring of the family and new ideas about sexuality ran afoul of the dominant views of marriage; he was indicted for adultery in Vermont, but fled to upstate New York, to Oneida. There Noyes instituted the practice of “complex marriage,” in which any man or woman who had experienced saving grace was free to engage in sexual relations with any other person of the opposite sex. Given their commitment to free love, birth control became an important concern of the community. Noyes began to preach the necessity of something he called male continence, a primitive form of natural birth control that required that men engage in sex acts without consummating them. His views mirrored those of other nineteenth-century medical reformers such as Sylvester Graham, who believed that it was important for men to conserve their bodily fluids. Eventually the Oneida community embraced a form of eugenics, a theory that advocated using selective mating to produce superior children and thereby improve humanity. At Oneida only the most spiritually perfect were allowed to consummate their sexual unions and produce children. The interior of the Oneida mansion house was organized to facilitate the idea of complex marriage by weakening notions of privacy. The “tent room” on the third floor replaced private rooms with semiprivate enclosures blocked off by cotton cloth. The “tent room” increased the “sociality” of members and reduced the “cold isolation” of traditional apartments. Although the practice of complex marriage was radically different from the celibacy practiced by the Shakers, both groups sought to reconfigure the family, sexuality, and their relationship to the market economy. Although each group

 What did the Oneida community believe?



 CHAPTER 10

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850

Competing Visions
REACTIONS TO SHAKER GENDER ROLES
The unique religious practices of the Shakers drew many comments. For Americans, nothing was more remarkable than the Shakers’ reconfiguration of traditional gender roles and the family. Travelers, including the English novelist Charles Dickens, home-grown literary figures such as Nathaniel Hawthorne, and a variety of journalists toured Shaker communities and commented on the sect’s unique practices and habitations. In The Shaker Bridal, Nathaniel Hawthorne recounts the plight of two young lovers, Martha and Adam, who give up their chance for earthly love to join the Shakers. Rather than transcend earthly suffering and reach a higher spiritual level, however, her decision to forsake conventional marriage ultimately leaves her despondent and an object of pity. 
 The following account of a visit to New York Shakers in 1829 paints a different portrait of life and love among this utopian community. This visitor did not encounter a repressed and puritanical religion, but something close to a religious utopia. The brothers and sisters, in this view, had traded the suffering of the world for their own vision of heaven on earth:

 “I have bidden you to join your hands,” said he, “not in earthly affection, for ye have cast off its chains forever; but as brother and sister in spiritual love, and helpers of one another in your allotted task. Teach unto others the faith which ye have received”…. The aged Father sank back exhausted, and the surrounding elders deemed, with good reason, that the hour was come when the new heads of the village must enter on their patriarchal duties. In their attention to Father Ephraim, their eyes were turned from Martha Pierson, who grew paler and paler, unnoticed even by Adam Colburn. He, indeed, had withdrawn his hand hers, from fr om her hers, s, and and folded fol folde ded d his his arms arms with wit with h a sense sens se nse e of satisfied ssat atis isfified ed ambition. But paler and paler grew Martha by his side, till, lilike ke a corpse cor c orps pse e in its its burial bur b uria iall clothes, clot cl othe hess, she she sank ssan ankk down down at at the the feet feet of her her early ear e arly ly lover; lov lover er;; for, forr, after fo aft after er many man m anyy trials tria tr ials ls firmly fir firml mlyy borne, born bo rne e, her her heart h hea eart rt could co uld ld endure end en dure re the tth he weight weiight ht off its itits desolate d des esollate te agony agon ag onyy no longer. lon longe gerr.

 It is impossible to describe the air of tranquility and comfort that diffuses itself over a Shaker settlement. It is no matter what the enemies of such peaceful, unoffending communities may say about them. The acute observer of human manners will testify for them that they do not live after the manner of world…. with the Shakers; the two sexes together bear the burdens, if burden it may be, of celibacy; they enliven its dullness by the amenity of their intercourse with one another…. the union of these people, their uniform kindness to each other, and the singularly benevolent and tender expression of their countenances, speak spea sp eakk a stronger stro st rong nger er language lan langu guag age e than than their the theirir profession. p pro rofe fess ssio ion. n.

 What do reactions to Shaker gender roles reveal about ninteenth-century American values?

RELIGIOUS AND SECULAR UTOPIANISM

 approached the family and sex from different perspectives, both groups embraced communal ownership of property, and, although differing in means, they both also attempted to free women from traditional gender roles. See Choices and Consequences: Mary Cragin’s Experiment in Free Love at Oneida. Joseph Smith, the founder of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter Day Saints, or Mormonism, created another model of a religious utopia. Smith grew up in western New York, where the fires of the Great Awakening burned hot. In this evangelical milieu he had a revelation on which Mormonism was based. According to the Book of Mormon, in 1823, an angel steered him to a set of golden tablets written in an ancient language. With divine help Smith deciphered the tablets, which told of the travails of a lost tribe of Israelites who had settled in America and who Mormons believed were the ancestors of Native Americans. The Book of Mormon was published in Palmyra, New York, in 1830, and this town became the site of one of the earliest Mormon communities. The belief that the Indians were actually descendants of a lost tribe of Hebrews was not unique to the Mormons. The theory attracted attention from several prominent religious authors of the time. Smith’s treasure hunting was also not that unusual, spurred on by popular stories about buried treasures gathered by ancient Indian civilizations. Smith was influenced by the widespread belief that the millennium was at hand, bringing with it an end to debt and the return of Christ and a new era of peace, happiness, and prosperity. The revelations detailed by Smith struck a resonant chord with small farmers, tradesmen, and mechanics whose experience with the expanding market economy had been largely negative. Smith’s new revelation attracted thousands of followers. Mormons set up their own community in Kirtland, Ohio, and then a larger community at Nauvoo, Illinois. The Mormons did not go as far as the Shakers or Oneidians in embracing communism, but they had a strong communal economic ethic. Smith’s 1831 law of consecration urged Mormons to deed their land to the church, which would distribute it among the faithful and retain any surplus.

Secular Utopias
 Secular utopia also attracted individuals frustrated with American society. Hostility to the market revolution provided inspiration for a variety of



 socialist utopian communities. Robert Owen’s New Harmony in Indiana was one such ambitious experiment. A successful textile mill owner who began his career in Scotland, Owen was worried about the impact of industrialization on society and hoped to create an ideal community built on a socialist model. Despite early enthusiasm his community lasted only three years. The French theorist Charles Fourier provided a more popular socialist alternative, including a utopian theory of phalanxes, ideal communities organized around socialist ideals, that gained a considerable following in the 1840s. Indeed, between 1841 and 1846, 25 of these phalanxes popped up across New England, New York, and the Midwest. Rather than accept the values of the marketplace, Fourier championed the ideas of “association” and “cooperation.” Individual communities divided the profits produced by agricultural labor or goods manufactured at the phalanx among the members according to a formula that included the amount invested, a person’s skills, and the amount of his or her physical labor. Fourier’s socialist theories also questioned traditional gender roles. In his view social progress occurred in direct “proportion to the advance of women toward liberty.” Women in Fourierist communities enjoyed equal pay and equal opportunities with men and benefited from

 “Under our system of isolated and separate households, with separate interests and separate pursuits, instead of association and combination among families, there is the most deplorable waste, which is one of the primary sources of the general poverty that exists; and discord, antagonism, selfishness, and an anti-social spirit are engendered.” ALBERT BRISBANE (American Fourierist), Concise Exposition of the Doctrine of Association, 1843

 Why did Mormon values appeal to farmers and other small producers in the era of the market revolution?



 CHAPTER 10

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850

Choices and Consequences
MARY CRAGIN’S EXPERIMENT IN FREE LOVE AT ONEIDA
Mary Cragin and her husband George were among the many Americans influenced by Charles Grandison Finney’s religious leadership in the Second Great Awakening. George worked for a reform paper in New York, the Advocate of Moral Reform, as an office manager and accountant. He showed his wife a copy of a letter written by John Humphrey Noyes, which introduced Mary to Noyes’s ideas of perfectionism. Mary and her husband were both taken with this doctrine and moved to Vermont. Noyes began his experiment in “communism in love” at Putney. As a member of his first perfectionist community at the Putney, Vermont community, Mary Cragin faced a choice: either leave the community or participate in its bold new experiment in free love. 
Choices




 Persuade her husband to leave the community with her.



 Leave regardless of her husband’s decision.



 Stay with her husband and participate in Noyes’s system of complex marriage.

Decision
 Mary chose option 3, to stay at Putney with her husband and participate in a complex marriage with Noyes and others.

Consequences
 Mary eagerly embraced Noyes’s theory and eventually traveled with her husband and others to Oneida, becoming founding members of that community. In the published comments in the “First Annual Report of Oneida Community Association” (1849), she declared that her life at Oneida brought her closer to God than anything else she had ever done. She died a year later when the boat she was traveling on capsized.

Continuing Controversies
 Why would a nineteenth-century woman be attracted to utopian movements that rejected mainstream views of the family and marriage? Modern scholars are divided over the impact of “Bible Communism” and “complex marriage” on women’s lives. Some argue that compared to the restrictive and oppressive environment most women faced in American society, Oneida provided women with more power, control over their sexual lives, and equality. Although not a feminist utopia, Oneida’s system of complex marriage was liberating in many ways for women. Others view Oneida as just another form of female oppression. The limited choices granted to women did not end male power and authority. At Oneida men continued to dominate women’s lives, controlling their sexual and reproductive choices.

 Why might a woman like Mary Cragin have been drawn to the Oneida Community?

Mary Cragin


RELIGIOUS AND SECULAR UTOPIANISM

Oneida Community
1836–1881


 e Superior Lak

Palmyra 1830
 ur

 n eO Lak

 on

Lake Michiga


 ke

H


 n

La


Amana
1843–1932




 ke La

Er


 ta r

 io

 ie

Brook Farm
1841–1846


Kirtland
1831–1838


Nauvoo
1840–1846


Independence
1831–1839
New Harmony
1824–1827


Mississippi R.


Nashoba
1825–1930


ATL A N TIC OC EA N G
ulf of M ex ico 
 Mormon migration

Mormons


Fourierists


Shakers


Owenites


Others


10.11 Utopian Communities
 The heaviest concentration of these religious and social experiments was in New England, western New York, and the Midwest.

 an egalitarian attitude toward sex that was unusual for its time. As the map (10.11) shows, utopian experiments, both secular and religious, were scattered across the United States. A host of other smaller utopian experiments were also attempted during this period. At Brook Farm, a community in Massachusetts near Boston, manual labor was supplemented by activities to encourage “intellectual improvement” and “social intercourse, calculated to refine and expand” the mind and soul. Nathaniel Hawthorne used his brief residence in the community as the basis for his novel The Blithedale Romance. Like Brook Farm, Bronson Alcott’s utopian community Fruitlands emphasized balancing manual and intellectual labor and communal ownership. But in contrast to Brook Farm,

View the Map Interactive Map: Utopian Communities
 before the Civil War

 “Although the desire of acquiring the good things of this world is the prevailing passion of the American people … here and there in the midst of American society … sects arise which endeavor to strike out extraordinary paths to eternal happiness.” ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE Democracy in America, (1835)

 dietary restrictions were an important part of this utopia. Fruitland’s members were not only vegetarian but also ate only “aspiring” vegetables—those that grew upward (reaching up for the supreme truths). Potatoes, beets, and carrots, which grew downward, were forbidden. One utopian community tried to tackle the problem of race directly. Francis Wright, a Scottish abolitionist, founded Nashoba, an interracial cooperative near Memphis, Tennessee, to demonstrate the potential for blacks and whites to live together as equals. At Nashoba slaves were to be given a formal education and allowed to earn enough to purchase their freedom. However, Wright’s more radical ideas included the abolition of the nuclear family, religion, and private property. The community lasted only four years.

 What geographical patterns are evident from this map of utopian communities?



 CHAPTER 10

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850

Literature and Popular Culture
 The danger posed by the “tyranny of the majority,” a subject explored in some detail by Alexis de Tocqueville in Democracy in America, attracted the attention of intellectuals and writers such as Ralph Waldo Emerson, a Harvard-trained minister, who rejected orthodox religion in favor of philosophical exploration. Emerson’s essays, beginning with his manifesto, “The American Scholar,” enjoined Americans to wake up, reject the latest fashions of the marketplace, and discover the deeper philosophical truths to be found in nature and selfreflection. Within two decades of Emerson’s address, Nathaniel Hawthorne published The Scarlet Letter (1850); Herman Melville, Moby-Dick (1851); Henry David Thoreau, Walden (1854); and Walt Whitman, Leaves of Grass (1855). The vigorous intellectual and poetic activity of these writers and thinkers constituted a veritable American Renaissance. Some of the best-known works of these literary giants explored the problems of American society in a fictional setting. Although a few literary figures crafted rich and sophisticated works of fiction and poetry, many now forgotten writers marketed their books to the growing mass audience of readers. Many popular works depicted lurid tales of city life, including murder and prostitution. The marketplace also adapted to the intellectual ferment of the era by creating new institutions devoted to presenting to the people lectures by leading intellectuals, including Emerson. In addition to hearing literary figures such as Emerson, one might also learn about the latest intellectual fads, including phrenology, a pseudo-science that purported to enable practitioners to discern a person’s character and intellect from the shape of his or her head. Finally, architects explored a variety of different building styles hoping that improvements in the built environment would lead to moral and spiritual uplift. In some cases, architects turned to the lessons of the past, looking to the styles of antiquity: Greek Temples or Egyptian monuments for inspiration. Those seeking a more exalted and spiritual ideal turned to the medieval period for models. These ideas influenced everything from cemetery design to country farm houses.

Literature and
Social Criticism
 Emerson’s American Scholar address marked the beginning of one of the greatest periods of American literary achievement. Emerson became the leading exponent of the philosophy of Transcendentalism, a loose set of ideas that looked to nature for inspiration and insights. The other leading literary figure associated with this movement was Henry David Thoreau. In his masterpiece Walden, Thoreau decried the impact of the market on American society. Ostensibly a tale of his effort to get back to nature, Walden asserted that “The mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation…. The greater part of what my neighbors call good I believe in my soul to be bad.” Only by rejecting the numbing conformity of American society, the tyranny of the majority, and the worldly values of the

How did Thoreau, Hawthorne, and Melville
 respond to the market revolution?

 marketplace could Americans rekindle the divine spark in each person. Other American literary figures turned a critical eye to American history and society. Nathaniel Hawthorne parodied the excesses of utopian movements in The Blithedale Romance and explored the Shakers’ views of the family in the “Shaker Bridal” (see Competing Visions: Reactions to Shaker Gender Roles). In The Celestial Railroad, he took aim at the connections between revivalism and the market revolution. In this tale, an updating of the Christian story of the religious pilgrim’s search for salvation, Hawthorne provided his spiritual seeker with a comfortable seat on a railroad coach. Rather than patiently wait until arriving at the heavenly city, the train’s final stop, most of the travelers prefer to exit at “Vanity Fair,” a glittering city that was “an epitome of whatever is brilliant, gay, and

LITERATURE AND POPULAR CULTURE

 fascinating.” Although they failed to achieve salvation, the residents of Vanity Fair were well supplied with clergy, churches, and lecturers on the latest topics of discussion, and the stores sold the most fashionable goods. Herman Melville’s epic novel Moby-Dick told the story of Captain Ahab’s pursuit of a great white whale. A rich and complex novel, Ahab’s quest provided another metaphor for the search for meaning, spiritual fulfillment, and truth by those working within an economic system that increasingly treated people as commodities. As was true for Hawthorne, Melville’s writing grappled with the alienation of Americans resulting from the economic changes wrought by the market revolution. One group Melville discussed was the new expanding middle class of clerks for whom “Ocean reveries” provided an escape from their dreary lives. Melville wrote of these cogs in the great machine of industry, “tied to counters, nailed to benches, clinched to desks.” Melville’s own experiences at sea not only provided him with details for his tale of the “Great White Whale” but also allowed him to escape the fate of those clerks trapped at their desks that he chronicled in his writing. Indeed, one of Melville’s most famous literary creations was a lowly and alienated clerk “Bartleby the Scrivener,” a man drained of all creativity and energy who symbolized how commerce could turn individuals into utterly passive victims of larger social and economic forces. Bartleby responds to every request from his employer with the same bored refrain, “I would prefer not to.”

 Susana Warner’s The Wide, Wide World (1850) sold more than 40,000 copies in its first year and was reprinted 67 times. This tale of an orphaned but resourceful child who must find her way in the wider world recast the traditional tale of the Christian pilgrim on the road to salvation in terms of the ideals of middle-class domesticity. By discovering her inner strength, the heroine demonstrates her talents and virtues. After proving her determination and character, she finds a virtuous man whom she weds, thus fulfilling the ideal of domesticity. This general plotline carries through most of the era’s works of sentimental writing and domestic fiction. Domestic fiction mirrored the same cultural values that led to the creation of the first popular board game in American history, “The Mansion of Happiness.” Ann Abbott, the daughter of a Massachusetts minister, invented the game in 1843. Players traveled along a spiral board that led to the “mansion of happiness” at the center. If they landed on such desirable spaces as “temperance,” “piety,” and “chastity,” they could move forward. Landing on a space such as “idleness” sent the player backward. Rather than use dice, which were associated with the evil of gambling, players used a numbered top to determine how many spaces to move on a turn (10.12). The game



10.12 The Mansion of Happiness
 Modern style board games were invented during the period of the market revolution and moral reform to instill values into children. This popular board game embodied many of the ideals of domestic fiction and prints. The game sets players on a journey along a path toward piety in which they must avoid sin if they hope to finally arrive at the Mansion of Happiness.

Domestic Fiction,
Board Games, and
Crime Stories
 Many popular writers of Hawthorne and Melville’s day were women, which prompted Hawthorne to lash out angrily at the “damned mob of scribbling women” whose books often sold in the hundreds of thousands, many more copies than authors of serious fiction such as Hawthorne ever sold. Indeed, women had written the top-five bestsellers by mid-century. Women favored “sentimental writing” and “domestic fiction,” which were immensely popular.

 What ideas about the family and religion are reflected in “The Mansion of Happiness”?



 CHAPTER 10

 10.13 First edition of Douglass, Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, An American Slave (1845) The eloquence of Douglass led some to suggest that his account of his own escape from slavery could not have been written by an exslave. To underscore that the book was genuine, an image of Douglass and a copy of his signature are prominently displayed alongside the title page.

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850

 shared the ideals of popular prints such as The Way of Good and Evil, which also imagined life as a journey along a path between piety and sin (see page 283). Although domestic fiction and games such as “The Mansion of Happiness” popularized the domestic values esteemed by reformers, there was also a market for stories about the very evils these works advised Americans to avoid lest they wind up in prison or the asylum. The new penny press included a host of papers such as the National Police Gazette and the New York Sun, whose pages were filled with tales of crime and moral depravity. Literature embraced the sordid as much as the spiritual, and crime fiction was especially popular. George Lippard’s The Quaker City, Or, The Monks of Monk Hall: A Romance of Philadelphia Life, Mystery and Crime (1845) spun a lurid tale that explored the evils of urban life. In contrast to Susana Warner, Lippard imbued his tale of seduction, murder, and intrigue with a subtle classconscious critique of the debauched elites who gathered in a dilapidated old mansion, Monk’s Hall, filled with secret passages and murder victims. The one writer who managed to transform such gothic tales of crime and horror into high art was Edgar Allan Poe. In stories such as “The Tell-Tale Heart” and the “Black Cat,” Poe explored the psychological dimensions of crime.

 Why did Douglass need to prove that he was the author of his autobiography?

 His taut, gripping stories were models of literary craftsmanship. Poe brought the techniques of high literature to bear on topics that were usually the province of popular writers.

Slaves Tell Their Story:
Slavery in American
Literature
 While the writers of the American Renaissance were formulating their critique of American society, other voices were also entering the expanding literary marketplace. Accounts published by runaway slaves described the brutality of slavery. The most famous and influential slave autobiography was Frederick Douglass’s Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, An American Slave published in 1845. More than 30,000 copies sold within a decade of its publication. Douglass awakened Americans to the injustice of slavery by exposing “the cruelties of it as I had myself felt them.” The accuracy of his account was a key element of its appeal, but critics questioned his book’s authenticity. Douglass thus went to great lengths to prove that it was not an abolitionist hoax. Indeed, Douglass worried that his eloquence might itself be used as proof that a former slave could not have written the book. To establish his credibility, Douglass included a daguerreotype image of himself (a forerunner of modern photography), a copy of his signature (a sign of his literacy), and two testimonials swearing that the narrative was indeed authentic (10.13). Harriet Jacobs’s Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl was published under the pen name Linda Brent. Jacobs had escaped to freedom in 1842, but it took almost another two decades for her to improve her writing to the point where she could publish an account of her ordeal under slavery. She described her purpose in writing in forceful terms: “I have not written my experiences in order to attract attention to myself, on the contrary,

LITERATURE AND POPULAR CULTURE

 it would have been more pleasant to me to have been silent about my own history.” Undaunted, she felt compelled to add my testimony to that of abler pens to convince the people of the free states what slavery really is. Jacobs’s account of her life, particularly the firsthand accounts of the sexual predations of white Southerners on black women, exposed the plight of female slaves.

Lyceums and Lectures
 Josiah Holbrook, a teacher and lecturer, began the Lyceum movement in 1826. Named after the place in ancient Athens where the philosopher Aristotle lectured to his pupils, the Lyceum movement provided a forum for public lectures and debates on intellectual issues. By 1834, more than 3,000 Lyceums appeared in towns and cities across America. As transportation improved with the rise of the railroad, the Lyceum movement created a national market for speakers on topics of general interest. An especially popular lecture topic was phrenology, a pseudoscience that focused on the relationship between the bumps and shape of the human head and character and personality. Americans could pay to have their heads analyzed by phrenologists at salons in major cities and towns. By the 1850s, the American Phrenological Journal had a circulation of more than 50,000. Phrenology became an American obsession in the mid-nineteenth century. Phrenological heads made of plaster or

 ceramic were commonplace decorations in many American homes, prompting the Boston Christian Examiner in 1834 to complain that “heads of chalk, inscribed with mystic numbers, disfigured every mantelpiece.” Few of these were as striking as this impressive folk sculpture of a young girl’s head with the different zones of the cranium colored according to phrenological theory (10.14). Phrenology also attracted the notice of many leading public figures such as Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story, the moral reformer Horace Mann, and the artist Hiram Powers. Godey’s Lady’s Book even advised women to use hats and other head coverings to hide or accentuate their phrenological character. Phrenology appealed to Americans at a time when the nation was experiencing rapid change. In particular it spoke to the fears of urban Americans who increasingly lived and worked in a world filled with strangers. The new market economy opened up countless opportunities for swindlers and rogues, prompting a new term, “confidence man,” someone who exploited a stranger’s trust to fleece him of his property or money. Although one might dress like a member of the respectable middle class, appearances were often deceiving, and the rise of the “confidence man” was symbolic of the danger posed by the anonymous world of the market. Phrenology promised to allow one to see beyond appearances into a person’s true character and thus past the masks and disguises of “confidence men.”



10.14 Phrenological Head
 This colorful folk sculpture of a young girl’s head included hand-painted zones that phrenologists believed controlled human emotion and behavior.

 Why was phrenology so popular during this period?



 CHAPTER 10

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850

 Nature’s Nation

 10.15 View from Mt. Holyoke This dramatic Cole landscape not only captures the wild power of nature, a common theme in Cole’s paintings, but it contrasts this untamed natural world with a more placid pastoral world represented by the rich agricultural lands of the Connecticut Valley.

 In honor of the opening of the Erie Canal, a young artist named Thomas Cole staged an exhibition of landscape paintings that became an immediate sensation. Organizers of the show declared that the artist’s work “had equaled those works which have been the boast of Europe.” Cole’s work would “adorn our houses with the American prospects and American skies.” While writers such as Emerson and Thoreau extolled nature in prose, painters such as Cole captured its majesty in color on canvas. The appreciation for nature influenced the design of urban parks and cemeteries. Reform also prompted Americans to embrace architectural styles that would help transform society. Cemetery designers and prison reformers turned to ancient Egypt for inspiration. Architectural reform even influenced phrenologists, who championed the octagon as the perfect housing form.

Landscape Painting
 The artist Thomas Cole became one of America’s most prominent painters. Cole’s landscapes became a symbol of America and its uniqueness. For those eager to defend American culture against its European critics, Cole’s cause became the cause of America.

 What does Cole’s painting reveal about American views of nature?

 An art critic noted that Cole’s work proved that American art need not embrace the artificial beauty depicted in so much European art: “Nature needs no fictitious charms, … the eye requires no borrowed assistance from the memory.” In 1835, in his “Essay on American Scenery,” Cole wrote that “the most distinctive, and perhaps most impressive, characteristic of American scenery is its wilderness.” Many of the themes that would become hallmarks of Cole’s work are evident in his dramatic painting, View from Mt. Holyoke (10.15) Cole contrasts a stormy natural landscape with the more placid panorama of the rich farm lands of the Connecticut River valley. Cole places himself in the midst of the wild mountain landscape nestled between two rock outcroppings to underscore his belief that nature is the true inspiration for artistic creativity.

NATURE’S NATION



 “In this age, when . . . what is sometimes called improvement in its march makes us fear that the bright and tender flowers of the imagination shall all be crushed beneath its iron tramp, it would be well to cultivate the oasis that yet remains to us, and thus preserve the germs of a future and purer system.” THOMAS COLE, Essay on American Scenary (1835–1836)

Parks and Cemeteries
 When Cole and other landscape painters were celebrating nature, America was undergoing one of its first great waves of urbanization. As agriculture became more efficient, Americans from the countryside streamed into the nation’s growing cities. While many urban homes boasted a Currier and Ives print of an idyllic rural setting, a more concrete effort was made to bring nature itself to the city. The creation of urban parks as retreats from the hustle and bustle of city life and a radically new approach to designing cemeteries were two highly visible results of the desire to preserve nature in the midst of rapid urbanization.

 New York’s Central Park (geographically at the center of Manhattan Island, but originally situated at the edge of the city) was the most ambitious and visible effort to bring the country to the city. Designed by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux in 1857 and officially opened two years later, Central Park sought to bring a varied country landscape, including meadows, rolling hills, lakes, and woodlands, to urban dwellers. To preserve the calming views, the designers sunk roadways beneath the line of sight of most strollers (10.16). For many upper- and middle-class Protestant reformers, Central Park was intended to help civilize the city’s workers and immigrants. These reformers believed that strolls through the different country

10.16 Central
Park
 To maintain its country-like setting, the roads running through Central Park were sunk below the line of sight.

 What was the rural cemetery movement?



 CHAPTER 10

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850

10.17 Mount
Auburn
 The “rural cemetery movement” aimed to bring the country to the city and honor the dead by creating places of repose and reflection. An Egyptian obelisk sits beside the pond.

 settings would spiritually uplift those whose lives were degraded by industrial life and whose private lives were confined to the squalid conditions of areas such as Five Points. Championed by New York’s elite and designed with middle-class values in mind, the land for much of the park was acquired by displacing Irish immigrants and destroying one of the city’s most long-established African-American communities. Mount Auburn Cemetery, in Cambridge, Massachusetts, just outside of Boston, reflected the new view of cemeteries. Its opening in 1831 attracted 2,000 people who were treated to orations by leading ministers and Supreme Court

 “Nothing has more to do with the morals, the civilization, and refinement of a nation, than its prevailing architecture.” OLIVER P. SMITH, The Domestic Architect (1854)

 Why did Egyptian architectural styles inspire Americans in the 1830s?

 Justice Joseph Story. In contrast to earlier graveyards or burial grounds, designers made the new cemeteries associated with the rural cemetery movement, such as Mount Auburn, places of repose for both the living and the dead. As this painting (10.17) of a couple strolling through the landscaped terrain of Mount Auburn suggests, the “repose and sacred loveliness of natural beauty” made the cemetery a destination for nearby city dwellers who wished to experience the ennobling effects of nature. It soon became a major tourist attraction, with as many as 30,000 visitors per year traveling to Boston to see Mount Auburn. Its success led to the creation of other cemeteries designed to provide urban dwellers with places of reflection and repose. The “rural cemetery movement” inspired an important architectural change. Architects looking for inspiration to represent death found it in ancient Egypt’s pyramids, other monumental structures, and its funeral practices. The image of Mount Auburn shown here (10.17) features one of the most common architectural elements borrowed

NATURE’S NATION



 “1) Fancy articles of any kind, or articles which are superfluously finished, trimmed, or ornamented, are not suitable for Believers, and may not be used or purchased. . . . 5) Believers may not in any case or circumstances, manufacture for sale, any article or articles, which are superfluously wrought, and which may have a tendency to feed the pride and vanity of man . . .” Shaker MILLENIAL LAWS, 1821 from ancient Egypt, the obelisk. Mount Auburn and other cemeteries also included EgyptianRevival entrances that borrowed architectural elements from ancient Egyptian temples, including the giant pylons that framed them. The Egyptian Revival also inspired architects working on other public buildings, mainly those with a grim purpose, including Philadelphia’s debtor’s prison and New Jersey’s state prison. New York City’s prison, officially named “The Halls of Justice,” was nicknamed “the Tombs” because of its forbidding Egyptian-Revival façade.

Revival and Reform in
American Architecture
 Egypt was not the only ancient culture that inspired American architects and designers in the 1830s. Andrew Jackson’s rise to power in 1828 had reflected and facilitated a broad democratization of society (see Chapter 8). The democratization of American life coincided with Greece’s war for independence from the Ottoman Empire that began in 1821. The Greek independence movement seemed analogous to America’s own struggle against Britain. Not surprisingly American culture developed a fascination with Greece, the birthplace of democracy. As a result Greek Revival was a popular style of architecture, interior design, and dress during the 1820s and 1830s. As a contemporary noted, “a perfect mania for the Grecian orders” pervaded American society and required that “every building from the shop of the tradesmen, to the church and the capitol, must be Grecian.” Simple farmhouses were adorned with classical columns and pediments, giving their doorways the appearance of mini-Greek temples. The rage for all things Greek also shaped the way Americans designed and decorated their homes.

 Furniture in this period was fashioned to resemble ancient Greek styles, often including decorative motifs drawn from Greece, such as urns and classical pillars. The obsession with ancient Greece literally transformed the map of the United States. Across America cities and towns sprung up with Greek names; western New York alone, along and near the Erie Canal, saw the appearance of cities named Troy, Ithaca, Utica, and Syracuse. Harriet Martineau, an English novelist who published accounts of her experiences in America, feared that America’s youth would grow up thinking that “Utica, Carthage, Athens, Palmyra, and Troy” were simply names of towns in western New York rather than the great cities of antiquity and the cradles of Western civilization. Ohio and Georgia each had its Athens. Although many Americans embraced Greek Revival, many utopian sects rejected mainstream architectural designs and the furnishings that accompanied them. No group was more self-conscious about the connection between architecture, furnishings, and reform than the Shakers. Shaker buildings were sparsely furnished, and Shaker furniture embodied their ideal of simplicity. The Millennial Law (1823) of the Shakers, a set of rules that governed Shaker communities, prescribed the styles of furniture, including permissible colors, and forbade designs that were “merely for fancy.” The Shakers’s rejection of the dominant styles of the day is evident if one contrasts the furnishing and design of a typical Shaker sitting room and a Greek Revival parlor in a prosperous home (10.18 and 10.19 on page 312). The plush cushioned furniture and intricately carved furniture of the Greek-Revival room contrast with the ascetic style of the Shaker room. Shaker furniture was devoid of ornamentation and highly functional, embodying the ideal of simplicity itself. The power of architecture to transform and uplift individuals inspired reformers to propose using architecture to mold American character and thereby

 What was the Greek revival?



 CHAPTER 10

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850 10.18
and 10.19 Greek Revival Parlor and Shaker Sitting Room The carpets, elaborate decoration, and elegant furniture in this Greek Revival parlor contrast sharply with the ascetic furnishings of this Shaker sitting room. Shaker furniture was designed to be functional, not fancy. 
 reform American society. Two of the most influential architectural reformers were Andrew Jackson Downing and Alexander Jackson Davis, who in the 1840s and 1850s helped popularize the Gothic Revival, which looked to medieval Europe for inspiration. Downing authored two popular works on architecture in the early 1840s that went through 20 editions. Downing believed that a properly designed home should serve as a spiritual sanctuary from the commercial world of the market. His Gothic Revival homes, which incorporated medieval architectural elements, such as pointed arches, were meant to uplift those who dwelled in them and inspire those who saw them by literally guiding their gaze toward heaven. The Gothic Revival also drew on renewed interest in nature that had inspired painters such as Thomas Cole and the designers of Mount Auburn Cemetery. Rather than embrace the regularity and balance of Greek classicism, enthusiasts for Gothic Revival championed a more organic and variegated style that mimicked the irregularities of nature. At one level the Gothic Revival was part of the larger reaction against the excesses of Jacksonian democracy. Its leading champions, such as Downing and Davis, also rejected the democratic values of the Greek Revival, believing that architecture should underscore social position, not seek to erase it. Davis believed that housing ought to announce one’s

 What does Shaker furniture reveal about Shaker values?

 status: villas for the upper classes, cottages for the middle class, and farmhouses for the working classes. He helped plan the nation’s first suburbs, including Llewellyn Park in Orange, New Jersey. Lyndhurst in Tarrytown, New York, was an opulent Gothic Revival villa. Compared to the symmetry of Greek Revival buildings, the irregular roofline and different shaped windows of Lyndhurst evoked the unpredictability of nature (10.20). The popular phrenologist Orson S. Fowler championed octagon-shaped houses as a cure for America’s social ills (10.21). Building on his phrenological theories, Fowler attacked box-like homes and argued that by more closely approximating a circle, the octagon encouraged harmony. Although most of these houses were built in the Northeast, octagon houses dotted the American landscape from Watertown, Wisconsin, to Natchez, Mississippi. Unlike reformers who feared progress and believed that the expansion of the market threatened American values, Fowler believed that the march of civilization was inevitable. Americans needed to accept acquisitiveness as crucial to the marketplace, while tempering it with insights gained from new areas of knowledge, such as phrenology. The octagon house, he believed, would serve both goals admirably well. The octagon fad dissipated when phrenology’s pseudoscientific doctrines were discredited.

View the Image Shaker Village, Maine (1845)


NATURE’S NATION



10.20 Lyndhurst
The Gothic Revival
 mansion, Lyndhurst, embraced elements of medieval architecture. Gothic Revival architecture’s soaring arches focused the viewers’ attention on heaven above. The angular lines were intended to mirror and evoke the awesome power of nature.

10.21 Octagon
House
Phrenologist Orson
S.
Fowler believed that a balcony on a house corresponded to the upper portion of the skull and would encourage higher mental functions. 
 Why did phrenologists favor the octagon as an architectural style?



 CHAPTER 10

REVIVALISM, REFORM, AND ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE: 1820–1850









Foundation of American
Society for the Promotion of
Temperance


Eastern State Penitentiary
 opened

 Charles Grandison Finney leads Rochester revival

 Mount Auburn Cemetery opens near Boston

 Pennsylvania’s new penitentiary becomes a model of the new approach to crime suggested by moral reformers

The Second Great Awakening
 targets the towns along the Erie Canal, including the fast-growing town of Rochester

 An expression of the rural cemetery movement’s focus on nature, Mount Auburn becomes a major tourist attraction and model for other urban cemeteries

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Reformers concerned about the dangers of alcohol organize a national movement to promote sobriety

Review Questions
 1. What values associated with the Second Great Awakening contributed to the success of the market revolution?

 4. What was phrenology? 5. How did architecture reflect the ideals of social reformers in the mid-nineteenth century?

 2. What was the cult of true womanhood? How did this ideal fit into the new notion of domesticity? 3. What role did the family play in the utopian worlds created by the Shakers, Oneidians, and Mormons? How were the reform efforts of these movements a response to social and economic conditions?

Key Terms
 Temperance A reform movement that developed in response to concern over the rising levels of alcohol consumption in America society. Penitentiary A new reform-based model of incarceration that isolated individuals from one another and gave them a chance to repent and reform. This method was a radical departure from earlier approaches to crime, which cast behavior in terms of sinfulness, innate depravity, and punishment. Immediatism Abolitionist doctrine that rejected gradualism and advocated an immediate end to slavery. Gag rule A procedural motion that required that the House of Representatives automatically table antislavery petitions and not consider them. “Peculiar institution” A term that John C. Calhoun coined to describe Southern slavery. In Calhoun’s view slavery was not “an evil” or a cause of shame but rather “a good—a positive good” to be championed.

 “Cult of true womanhood” A set of beliefs in which women’s values were defined in opposition to the aggressive and competitive values of the marketplace. Seneca Falls Convention A convention of women’s rights supporters, held in Seneca Falls, New York, whose resolves emphatically declared that “all men and women are created equal.” Complex marriage A system developed by John Humphrey Noyes’s followers at Oneida, where any man or women who had experienced saving grace was free to engage in sexual relations with any other person. Transcendentalism A loose set of philosophical and literary ideas focused on the spiritual power of the individual. Transcendentalists looked to nature for inspiration and philosophical insights.

CHAPTER REVIEW



1839–1843


1845–1847




 Thomas Cole publishes his “Essay on American Scenery”

 Joseph Smith leads the Mormons to Illinois and founds the Mormon city of Nauvoo

Publication of Frederick
 Douglass’s autobiography

Seneca Falls Convention


 Cole defends the value of nature and helps define an American vision of art

 Mormons establish a utopian settlement

 Douglass’s popular narrative of his life as a slave expose the evils of slavery



 Women’s rights advocates gather to demand legal equality for women

 Oneida Community established in New York Founding of one of the most radical utopian experiments

Millerite William Miller
 predicts the end of the world The Millerites are dispirited and the movement collapses. Elements of their belief are picked up by the Seventh Day Adventists

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Democrats and Whigs.

Questions for Analysis
 1. What do American concerns about intemperance reveal about cultural anxieties in the era of the market revolution? Watch the Video Video Lecture: Drinking and the Temperance Movement, p. 286

 2. Why did Horace Mann believe education could transform America and eliminate most social ills?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • Reverend Peter Cartwright, Cane Ridge and the “New Lights,” p. 284 • Horace Mann, Report on the Massachusetts Board of Education, p. 287 • The American Antislavery Society Declares its Sentiments, p. 290 • David Walker, A Black Abolitionist Speaks Out, p. 291

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Who was Horace Mann


 • Thomas R. Dew’s “Defense of Slavery,” p. 293

 and why were so many schools named after him?, p. 288

• Catherine Beecher, “Treatise on Domestic Economy,” p. 295


 3. What do different responses to the Greek Slave reveal about the problem of slavery in American culture? View the Closer Look Images as History: The Greek Slave, p. 292

 4. How did woman’s rights advocates apply the lessons they learned through their involvement with moral reform? Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Women’s Rights Movement in Nineteenth Century America, p. 297

 5. Why did utopian movements appeal to Americans in the era of the market revolution? View the Map Interactive Map: Utopian Communities before the Civil War, p. 303

• Lucretia Mott, “Declaration of Sentiments and Resolutions,”
 Women’s Rights Convention, Seneca Falls, New York, p. 296 • John Noyes on Free Love at Oneida, p. 299

View the Image Shaker Village, Maine (1845), p. 311


How did Manifest Destiny
 influence American ideas about the West?

American
 Expansionism into the Southwest p. 325

 Why did so many Americans oppose Texas annexation?

The Mexican
War and Its
Consequences


 p. 330

How did the Mexican War
 affect American politics?

The Wilmot Proviso
 and the Realignment of American Politics p. 334

How did President Zachery
 Taylor appeal to both Northerners and Southerners?

 CHAPTER

Manifest Destiny and
Changing Visions of
 the West p. 318



