 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 5

A
Virtuous Republic Creating a Workable Government,
1783–1789
 In 1776, Patriot leader John Adams wrote that “public virtue is the only foundation of Republics. There must be a positive passion for the public good, the public interest.” Adams echoed many Americans’ views when he wrote that republican government depended on the concept of civic virtue, which meant pursuing the public good and placing it ahead of personal interest or local attachments. Men were expected to serve in the militia, sit on juries, and, if they were truly virtuous and wise, take on the burden of public service as elected representatives. Women, too, were expected to play a major role in the political life of the new republic, assuming the role of republican mothers and wives who would instill patriotism and virtue in their children and spouses. Americans of the revolutionary generation took their cues from the lessons of history, particularly the example of the Roman Republic and its ideal of public virtue. When Dr. Joseph Warren, physician and Patriot leader, addressed Bostonians on the fifth anniversary of the Boston Massacre in 1775, he literally donned a Roman toga, the long flowing gown that symbolized a free, adult Roman man’s freedom and citizenship. Warren’s dramatic gesture, linking himself with Roman republicanism, was mirrored in the pages of nearly every American newspaper of the day, where letters and essays on political matters were signed with pen names drawn from the history of the Roman Republic, such as the senators Brutus and Cato and the general Cincinnatus. To mold a new generation of virtuous citizens, Americans looked to education, religion, and even architecture. No American was more enthusiastic about architecture’s capacity to instruct than Thomas Jefferson. Public buildings, Jefferson wrote, “should be more than things of beauty and convenience, above all they should state a creed.” Rather than emulate contemporary Georgian-style buildings such as the Pennsylvania State House (see Chapter 3), where the Declaration of Independence was drafted, Jefferson argued for a return to the “purity” of Roman architecture. In his design for the Virginia State Capitol (pictured here), Jefferson recreated the simple beauty of Roman architecture. He believed that the Capitol would inspire citizens to emulate the ideals of the ancient Roman Republic, which included an emphasis on civic participation and public virtue. In the decade following independence, Americans’ faith in their ability to create a virtuous republic was challenged. An aborted coup led by disgruntled Continental Army officers, conflicts between debtors and creditors, and an uprising in western Massachusetts drove the nation to a political crisis. The postwar period tested America’s faith in republicanism and led some leaders to abandon traditional republican theory, with its emphasis on virtue, and to embrace a new approach to constitutional government that relied on a balance of conflicting interests and a system of checks and balances. The culmination of this struggle between the two competing visions of constitutional government was the U.S. Constitution and the Bill of Rights.

 “We may look up to Armies for our Defense, but Virtue is our best Security. It is not possible that any State should long remain free, where Virtue is not supremely honored.” SAMUEL ADAMS, 1775





 CHAPTER 5

A VIRTUOUS REPUBLIC: CREATING A WORKABLE GOVERNMENT,1783–1789

Republicanism and
 the Politics of Virtue The American Revolution marked a decisive break from ideas and values that had defined British culture for centuries. Monarchy and aristocracy were swept away. America was now a republic. Republicanism placed a premium on the ideal of virtue. As the poet, playwright, and historian Mercy Otis Warren observed, Americans needed “to cherish true, genuine republican virtue.” The postwar period would test this commitment in a host of ways.

George Washington:
The American Cincinnatus
 No individual in America was more closely identified with the ideal of virtue than George Washington. A symbol of the virtuous citizen–soldier, responding to the summons of his nation and retiring to private life once his service was no longer needed—Washington was a model of civic virtue. His reputation for public virtue and ability to command the respect of his troops had helped the beleaguered Continental Army during some of its more dire campaigns. In 1783, Washington faced a different challenge. This time it was not the threat of enemy troops, but the rumors of a military coup by the Continental Army’s officers. Washington wielded his personal authority to win over disgruntled members of the corps and made an impassioned appeal to “reason and virtue,” crushing the revolt without firing a shot. Washington had learned of rumors that the army’s leadership would no longer tolerate Congress’s failure to deal with complaints about their pay and pensions. An anonymous essay had circulated among officers suggesting that the time might soon come to turn their arms against Congress itself. The officers’ anger had been simmering for some time. Frustration with the Confederation Congress was widespread; Washington was well aware of the officers’ grievances. He had complained about the inefficiency and ineffectiveness of Congress on many occasions. With no power to tax, Congress had to depend on voluntary contributions from the states. Without reliable revenue, it was difficult to wage war or conduct the routine business of governing. Faced with a possible rebellion by his own officers, Washington resolved to

 Why did Americans believe Washington was the modern Cincinnatus?

 address his men in person and persuade them of the folly of their plan. On a dark wintry day in March 1783, Washington traveled to Newburgh, New York, to address the officer corps. The assembled officers met in a makeshift building that some of them had dubbed the “Temple of Virtue.” Washington prepared to read a letter that he hoped would persuade the officers that their demands would be met. Fumbling to find a pair of glasses he had recently acquired, he paused, and then addressed the hushed crowd: “Gentlemen, you must pardon me. I have grown grey in your service, and now find myself growing blind.” The impact on his audience was dramatic. “There was something so natural, so unaffected in his appeal,” Major Samuel Shaw later wrote, “as rendered it superior to the most studied oratory, and you might see sensibility moisten every eye.” Washington’s own wartime sacrifices had already provided a powerful role model for the officer corps. Now the figure of their beloved commander growing gray and blind in the service of his country struck a resonant chord. He exhorted his men to give posterity “proof of unexampled patriotism and patient virtue.” Civic virtue had triumphed over corruption, and the Newburgh conspiracy was crushed without a shot being fired. Another event that enhanced Washington’s reputation as the embodiment of republican virtue was the public ceremony of turning over his military commission to Congress after the war. In Annapolis, Maryland, where Congress was convened, Washington addressed a room crowded with congressional delegates and a gallery packed with well-wishers. “Having now finished the work assigned me,” he informed his audience, many of whom were brought to tears, “I here offer my commission, and take

Read the Document George Washington, The Newburgh Address (1783)


REPUBLICANISM AND THE POLITICS OF VIRTUE

 my leave” of “the employments of public life.” By abandoning public life and returning to his plow, Washington was seen as placing the good of the nation ahead of personal glory. In the public’s view, Washington had transformed himself into the modern Cincinnatus, an allusion to the ancient world’s great symbol of public virtue, the Roman general Cincinnatus. After serving the Roman Republic as its supreme commander, Cincinnatus had returned to his farm. After resigning, Washington went on a triumphal tour of the nation. In Philadelphia, he was saluted by cannons and ringing bells from the city’s steeples. He sat for portraits by America’s leading painters and enjoyed listening to commemorative verses that compared him to Cincinnatus. Well schooled in the history of the ancient Roman Republic, Americans understood that a popular military leader’s decision to emulate Rome’s dictatorial



 general Julius Caesar rather than Cincinnatus would lead to despotism. Years later the Virginia legislature commissioned the French sculptor Jean-Antoine Houdon to create a life-sized statue of Washington as the modern Cincinnatus (5.1). Washington stands before a plow, the symbol of the virtuous farmer, the ideal embodied by Cincinnatus.

 “No free Government, or the blessing of liberty, can be preserved to any people but by a firm adherence to justice, moderation, temperance, frugality, and virtue . . .” Virginia Declaration of Rights, 1776

The Politics of Virtue:
 Views from the States The republican emphasis on virtue suffused American culture. The first state constitutions drafted after independence used their declarations of rights to outline the rights of citizens and also instruct citizens in the premises of republican government. In these declarations of rights, the ideal of virtue was literally written into American law. The Virginia Declaration of Rights (1776) asserted that free government could not survive without a virtuous citizenry, a point echoed by the Massachusetts Constitution four years later. Educating citizens in the importance of republican ideals became a priority for the new nation. Art, architecture, and even fashion were pressed into service to mold the character of a new generation of citizens. Jefferson’s design for the new Virginia Capitol was the most ambitious visible symbol of instilling republican values by reforming architecture. (See the chapter opening image, p. 129.) The impact of the Revolution was even seen in home furnishings. Before the Revolution, decorative elements on American furniture copied British fashions, including fanciful designs such as the scrolled pediment with rosettes on this chest of drawers

5.1 George
Washington
 as the Modern Cincinnatus George Washington is cast as the modern Cincinnatus in this sculpture. He stands in front of a plow and beside the Roman “fasces,” a bundle of rods and an ax that symbolized the legal power of magistrates. His sword rests on the “fasces” a visual reminder that in a republic military power resides with civilian leaders.

What was the Newburgh Conspiracy?




 CHAPTER 5

A VIRTUOUS REPUBLIC: CREATING A WORKABLE GOVERNMENT,1783–1789

5.2 Chippendale High Chest
 This pre-revolutionary chest reflected British styles, including the floral decorative patterns at the end of the curving swan’s neck pediment on top of the chest.

 5.3 Samuel McIntire Carving This piece of furniture made in Salem after the Revolution uses simple classical lines. Symbols of republicanism, such as the goddess of liberty, replaced purely decorative elements.

(5.2). After the Revolution
 symbols that represented the republican values of the new nation replaced some of these purely decorative elements. A beautifully crafted example of this adorns a chest of drawers made in Salem, Massachusetts (5.3). The broken pediment is a simple classical design. Gone is the fancy carving in the pediment of the late colonial chest (5.2). In its place is the goddess of liberty herself. To reinforce the ideal of Roman republicanism, the chest has two classical columns. These flank another set of carvings that illustrate the prosperity that republicanism will bring to the new nation. Education was another means of inculcating virtue. The Massachusetts Constitution expressly linked republicanism, virtue, and education. The state achieved this by providing public primary education for boys and girls. Several of the larger towns also provided secondary education for boys. Thomas Jefferson framed the most ambitious proposal to create a public system of education in 1778. In “A Bill for the more General Diffusion of Knowledge,” he proposed

 [Source: Samuel McIntire, “Chest-on-chest (detail)”; Mahogany, mahogany veneer, ebony and satinwood inlay, pine; Eighteenth-century American Arts No. 4; the M. and M. Karolik Collection of Eighteenth-Century American Arts, 41.580. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston (41.58). Photograph © 2010 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston]

 How did changes in furniture design reflect the influence of republican ideas?

 that Virginia adopt a publicly funded system of education. White children, including boys and girls, would be educated at public expense for three years. The best male students would then be selected for secondary education, and a small select group from among this cohort would later attend the College of William and Mary. Jefferson introduced his bill in the state legislature several times, although it never passed. Jefferson’s faith in education reflected his debt to the ideals of the Enlightenment, the international philosophical movement based on the notion that reason and science would improve humanity. (See Chapter 3.) Following the English philosopher John Locke, Enlightenment thinkers believed that people were born a blank slate upon which society could write its own moral code. Many American Founders, including Jefferson, were also influenced by other Enlightenment ideas. Philosophers of the Enlightenment believed that humans had an innate moral sense, akin to the five physical senses. In the same way that people see different shades of the color spectrum, so the moral sense helped people see the difference between right and wrong. One need only cultivate this inborn sense to produce enlightened citizens. Taken together, Lockean psychology and Enlightenment moral theory led many Americans to put enormous faith in education’s ability to shape morality and mold character. Inspired by Enlightenment ideals about education and the American Revolution’s faith in representative government, Americans founded new educational institutions to help create an enlightened citizenry. Ezra Stiles, the president of Yale College, wrote in 1786 that “the spirit for Academy making is vigorous.” The charter for one of these new academies in North Carolina declared that “the good education of youth has the most direct tendency to promote the virtue, increase the wealth and extend the fame of any people.” North Carolina was one of the states that founded a university. Georgia and Vermont also established public institutions of higher education. Among the new private colleges were Williams (Massachusetts), Transylvania (Kentucky), the College of Charleston (South Carolina), and Bowdoin (Maine). Educators also published new republican materials to instruct children in reading, writing, and arithmetic. Spellers and readers included patriotic lessons with illustrations that reinforced their republican message. In a book of alphabet rhymes, for example, the bald eagle from the Great Seal of

Read the Document Noah Webster, An American School Teacher
Calls for an American Language, 1789


REPUBLICANISM AND THE POLITICS OF VIRTUE

 America, the new nation’s official symbol, represented the letter “E” (5.4). The design of the great seal had gone through many versions before Congress finally approved one that included an American eagle clutching an olive branch and thirteen arrows, symbolizing the new government’s power to make war and negotiate peace. The thirteen states are represented by the same number of stars, stripes, and arrows. Charles Thomson, the secretary of Congress, observed that the eagle bore a shield to symbolize that “the United States ought to rely on their own Virtue.” The expansion of education opened up possibilities for white women. Whereas Jefferson’s plan for educational reform called for basic education for women, other reformers recommended more ambitious plans to educate the nation’s female population. Jefferson’s friend, the eminent Philadelphia physician Benjamin Rush, offered a robust statement of the importance of education in a republic, but also framed a bold call to educate women for their role as republican citizens. Women needed to be familiar with the political ideas of republicanism. As the mothers of future citizens of the republic, women had a special role to play. Rush was not alone in championing female education. The Philadelphia Young Ladies Academy (1787) was typical of the new institutions for educating women. In addition to music, dance, and needlework, these new schools taught girls subjects, such as rhetoric, oratory, and history, once exclusively taught to boys. Martha Ryan, a student at one of the new schools in North Carolina, inscribed the phrase “Liberty or Death” in her cipher book (5.5). Although influenced by republican ideas, her book also revealed the continuing importance of traditional ideas about women’s roles. Bound into the book were penmanship exercises that intoned such traditional moral injunctions as “Honour Father and Mother.” Images as History: Women’s Roles: Tradition and Change explores the effects of republican ideas on women’s roles (page 134). Supporters of Enlightenment ideas such as Rush and Jefferson believed that education would help nurture the virtue necessary for the survival of republicanism. Other Americans, however, looked to religion to foster virtue. One minister reminded his parishioners that although the “civil authority have no right to establish religion,” it was still true that “religion is connected with the morals of the people.” Another minister noted that by “instilling good sentiments into the tender minds



 5.4 Book of Children’s Verses This book of children’s verse uses America’s new national symbol, the bald eagle, taken from the Great Seal of the United States. Educational materials such as this one included republican and patriotic themes.

 5.5 Martha Ryan’s Cipher Book The cover of Martha Ryan’s cipher book proclaims liberty. Yet, the book included penmanship exercises with such traditional precepts as “Honour Father and Mother … A good girl will mind.”

 Why was education so important to the Founders of the American Republic?



 CHAPTER 5

A VIRTUOUS REPUBLIC: CREATING A WORKABLE GOVERNMENT,1783–1789

Images as History
WOMEN’S ROLES: TRADITION AND CHANGE
Although republicanism allowed some women to transform the roles assigned to them, it retained the traditional view that a woman’s primary duties were to her family. In the engraving Keep Within the Compass, the woman who stays within the compass enjoys a life of harmony and prosperity. Stepping outside it carried grave consequences. Republican ideals of womanhood were stitched into a needlework sampler prepared by a school girl, Nabby Martin of Providence, Rhode Island. Samplers were a standard part of a young woman’s education. Nabby included images of young couples, flowers, and domestic animals, common to pre-revolution samplers, but republican themes also show through. The home, the symbol of domesticity, traditionally 
 the heart and center image of a young girl’s sampler, has been replaced by the Rhode Island State House. Politics, not home, is the center of this piece. Nabby also showed her respect for the republican emphasis on education by including the College of Rhode Island (Brown University). As a female, Nabby Martin was barred from the world of the State House and the College of Rhode Island, but the inclusion of their images in her sampler is significant. Although working with an art form closely tied to women’s roles, Martin turned her gaze to the wider world both buildings represented. The republican message of the sampler is clear: Let Virtue be a Guide to Thee. How is virtue represented visually in Martin’s needlework?

 The text that accompanied this image advised: “Keep within Compass and You shall be sure to avoid many troubles which others endure.”

 The building pictured is The College of Rhode Island, the forerunner of Brown University.

•


•


•


•
•


 When a woman steps outside the compass, she faces arrest and imprisonment.

Keep Within the Compass, 1784
[Courtesy, Winterthur Museum]
Nabby Martin, Sampler, 1786


 How did republican ideas change notions about women’s roles?

 The message of the sampler is announced in the central text: Let Virtue be a Guide to Thee

Instead of a
 home, the Rhode Island State House is the central image.

REPUBLICANISM AND THE POLITICS OF VIRTUE

 of children and youth, you will teach them to stand fast in their liberty.” Post-revolutionary America remained a predominantly Protestant culture in which religious dissent was tolerated only within limits. Some states continued to bar Catholics and Jews from public office. The assumption behind such laws was that only Protestants could be counted on to have the necessary virtue to seek the public good. Although excluded from the full benefits of citizenship, religious dissenters were allowed to worship according to the dictates of conscience. Most state bills of rights and constitutions guaranteed the free exercise of religion. Revolutionary ideas of liberty and equality slowly led states to abandon the notion that only Protestants could be trusted to hold public office. Religious tests requiring potential office holders to swear a belief in the divinity of Jesus as a requirement for holding public office were abolished in Virginia (1785), Georgia (1789), Pennsylvania (1790), South Carolina (1790), Delaware (1792), and Vermont (1793). Before the Revolution, many colonies provided direct government support to religion or followed the English practice of having an official church. Spurred by Revolutionary ideals America moved toward the separation of church and state. The post-revolutionary era witnessed a move to disestablish the Anglican Church in those places where it enjoyed public funding. Two different justifications for the separation of church and state emerged. For champions of the Enlightenment, such as Jefferson, separation of church and state was inspired by the fear that religion might use the power of government to oppress citizens of different religious views or that religion might corrupt government. Dissenting Protestant sects, notably the Baptists and Methodists, opposed state support for religion for a different reason. These groups had long felt oppressed by the state-supported Anglican Church, particularly by taxation to support that church. For Virginia’s Baptists, separation of church and state was a means to protect the purity of religion from corruption by government. Evangelicals and supporters of the Enlightenment came together in Virginia in 1785 when the state legislature considered a bill for non-preferential aid for ministers of the Christian religion. Since the scheme was non-preferential, it would not establish an official state church but rather provide funds to all Protestant churches in a nondiscriminatory



 fashion. Patrick Henry and Richard Henry Lee, two of the state’s leading politicians, campaigned in favor of the bill. James Madison and Thomas Jefferson, champions of Enlightenment values, led the opposition. Madison and Jefferson outlined their case against state support for religion in The Memorial and Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments (1785). This essay not only was instrumental in defeating the bill, it also became a landmark in American church–state relations.

Democracy Triumphant?
 According to traditional republican theory, citizens were expected to defer to their betters, who were assumed to be the most virtuous members of society. Before the American Revolution, the state legislatures were dominated by men of wealth. As one legislator noted, “it is right that men of birth and fortune, in every government that is free, should be invested with power, and enjoy higher honours than the people.” Virtue, according to this view, required one to have the wealth supposedly necessary to cultivate wisdom and knowledge. One newspaper writer captured this traditional conception of virtue when he wrote that representatives “should be ABLE in ESTATE, ABLE in KNOWLEDGE AND LEARNING.” The Revolution, however, challenged this ideal, substituting a more democratic theory of virtue. A writer calling himself “Democritus” captured the essence of this new theory when he urged that citizens vote only for “a man of middling circumstances” and “common understanding,” not members of a wealthy or educated elite. In nearly every state a new type of politician emerged who embodied the more democratic version of republicanism: men such as New York’s Abraham Yates, a shoemaker, and Pennsylvania’s William Findley, a weaver. Supporters of the elitist republican view of politics mocked the humble origins of the new politicians and questioned their ability to function as legislators. One contemporary political satirist took aim at Findley’s humble origins as a weaver: “It will be more honourable for such men to stay at their looms and knot threads, than to come forward in a legislative capacity.” The post-revolutionary debate over the meaning of virtue and democracy shaped politics. When William Smith, a prosperous Baltimore

 Why did many supporters of republicanism fear democracy?



 CHAPTER 5

A VIRTUOUS REPUBLIC: CREATING A WORKABLE GOVERNMENT,1783–1789

 flour merchant, ran for office in 1789, his enemies attacked him by claiming that “Mr. Smith has distilled RICHES from the tears of the POOR; and grown FAT upon their curses.” Smith’s supporters viewed his independence as one of his main qualifications for office. In their view he was “a Man of great commercial Knowledge, of known integrity, and possessed of a Character and independent Fortune which place him above Temptation.” Smith’s support for this traditional idea of virtue

 was reflected in this portrait (5.6) painted by Charles Wilson Peale. Rather than include symbols that reflected Smith’s life as a prosperous city merchant, Peale depicted Smith as a simply dressed country gentlemen. The books that the artist included, poetical works on rural life, reinforce this notion. Peale also placed Smith in front of a Roman column, another visual cue to symbolize his virtue. The debate over what made a good representative in part reflected a process of democratization in American culture. The Revolution greatly expanded the number of white male voters eligible to participate in the political process. Most states lowered property requirements for voting, and Pennsylvania abandoned such requirements entirely. Taken together, the expansion of democratic ideas and changes in suffrage requirements changed the character of politics in America. As this graph (5.7) reveals, the impact on the composition of state legislatures was profound. After the Revolution the percentage of wealthy citizens elected to the legislature dropped, and the numbers of those of the “middling sort,” or middling classes, increased. One Boston newspaper writer complained that “since the war, blustering ignorant men” had unfortunately pushed “themselves into office.” Not everyone saw the rise of these new politicians in negative terms. For those who believed in democracy, these trends were a positive development. Now government included “a class of citizens who hither to have thought it more for their interest to be contented with a humbler walk in life.” 5.6 William Smith and His Grandson The new democratic politiIn this portrait of William Smith, the artist conjures up an image of a country cians favored policies designed gentleman who devoted himself to contemplation. References to Smith’s career as to enable ordinary citizens to a prosperous Baltimore merchant are deliberately excluded.

 Why did William Smith’s portrait cast him as a country gentleman rather than an urban merchant?

REPUBLICANISM AND THE POLITICS OF VIRTUE

Economic Status of Legislators in
New Hampshire, New York, and New Jersey
 Pre-war Moderate 17%

 Post-war Wealthy 36%

 Well-to-do 47%

 participate in government. They introduced, for example, higher salaries for elected representatives, encouraging ordinary people to serve in government. They also made efforts to relocate state capitals inland, so that travel to them would be easier for backcountry farmers.

 Debtors versus Creditors Economic issues proved particularly contentious in post-revolutionary America. Spokesmen for these new politicians favored policies to ease the burdens of farmers and artisans. “Stay laws” created generous grace periods for the recovery of debts and protected farmers from having their farms seized for nonpayment of debts. “Tender laws” allowed farmers to pay debts with goods rather than hard currency. Merchants generally opposed these policies. The lack of specie, silver and gold currency, hindered economic exchange. Spokesmen for debtors argued that government had an obligation to use paper money to ease the shortage of currency. By expanding the money supply and printing more paper currency, the government encouraged inflation. Increasing the amount of money in circulation facilitated commerce. When done cautiously, this type of inflationary policy provided a means of pumping up the economy. As long as the government did not flood the

Moderate
62%


Wealthy
12%




5.7 The Democratization of the
State Legislatures
 The number of wealthy legislators decreased and the number of men of moderate wealth increased. These changes were pronounced in parts of the mid-Atlantic and New England, and are reflected in the data regarding property holdings of legislators elected in New York, New Jersey, and New Hampshire. Adapted from Jackson Turner Main, “Government By the People: The American Revolution and the Democratization of the Legislatures,” (William and Mary Quarterly 1966)

 Well-to-do 26%

 market with paper, driving down its value, debtors and creditors could adjust their behavior to take into account the effects of modest inflation in prices for various commodities. By encouraging economic activity, paper money could provide an important tool for economic growth. Farmers were especially fond of this system because they could repay their debts with depreciated currency— money that was worth less than the amount of the original debt. This system, however, could function only if merchants did not dramatically raise prices to compensate for the declining value of paper money. A rapid rise in prices could lead inflation to spiral out of control. Most merchants, however, viewed paper money as a bad policy that hurt their interests. No state was more aggressive in using paper money to solve its financial problems than Rhode Island. Unfortunately, however, the decision to print large amounts of paper money never won the support of merchants in Providence and Newport. When presented with paper money, merchants increased prices and eventually refused to accept depreciated paper currency. In response, the state legislature imposed a steep fine on any merchant who refused to accept paper currency. One writer lampooned the situation of “Rogue Island” in verse: “Hail! realm of rogues, renow’d for fraud and guile All hail, ye knav’ries of yon little isle.”

 How did the composition of the state legislatures change after the American Revolution?



 CHAPTER 5

A VIRTUOUS REPUBLIC: CREATING A WORKABLE GOVERNMENT,1783–1789

 Life under the Articles of Confederation From the outset, the Articles of Confederation, America’s first federal constitution, was plagued by problems. Without the power to tax or coerce states to follow the treaties it had negotiated, the Confederation Congress could not resolve the nation’s economic problems and diplomatic issues. Leaders also worried that the Confederation lacked the military power to deal with rebellions or foreign foes.

 No Taxation with Representation

5.8 Continental
Paper Currency
 The value of Continental paper currency dropped precipitously as Congress printed more money, and faith in the value of the currency dwindled.

 Americans resented British efforts to tax them prior to the Revolution. Given their fears of strong government and hostility to taxation, the Articles of Confederation, the weak constitution created by the Confederation Congress, did not empower the new central government to tax Americans. Instead, the Articles relied on requisitions made to the states to fund government business. Few states bothered to comply with these requisitions in a timely manner, and the new government of the United States was plagued by shortages of funds. Although it lacked the power to tax, Congress had to fund the war. To help pay for the war effort, Congress printed almost $250 million in paper currency that was not backed by gold or silver and led to staggering inflation. By 1781, it took more than 150 Continental dollars to purchase what had cost one dollar in 1777. This dramatic drop in the value of Continental currency led to the phrase “As worthless as a Continental” to describe something with no value. As 5.8 illustrates, it would take a pile of Continentals to purchase what a single dollar might have paid for less than five years before. The Treaty of Paris (1783) formally ended hostilities between Britain and the new United States of America. Peace did not, however, solve the economic problems that the new nation faced. Indeed, the end of the war ushered in new economic

 Why did the Articles of Confederation fail to give the Confederation Congress power to tax?

 problems. Boycotts of British goods and the disruption of trade during wartime meant that consumers had been denied access to luxury items, including china, textiles, and wine. Demand for British goods surged after the war, and the new nation was flooded with imports. British merchants encouraged Americans to buy goods on credit. American merchants by contrast, now faced a host of new obstacles to trade with Britain. In particular, the loss of the lucrative trade with the British West Indies was a severe blow to the American economy. America’s trade deficit with Britain drained what little gold and silver reserves were available to the nation. American banks had to curtail loans. When merchants were forced to call in debts to satisfy their British suppliers, they included the debts individuals owed them. This constriction of credit sent the economy into a tailspin. The combination of restricted access to trade with Britain and its empire, falling agricultural prices, and mounting debt produced the new nation’s first economic depression.

Diplomacy: Frustration
 and Stalemate The new nation also faced military challenges. British troops were still garrisoned in parts of the Ohio Valley. Relations with the Indian tribes along the frontier remained tense. Farther from the nation’s borders, Americans faced different problems. Without a powerful navy to protect American commerce, ships were easy prey for pirates. Piracy was particularly rampant in the Mediterranean where the North African states of Morocco, Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli, known as the Barbary States, sanctioned it. The Barbary pirates extorted money from merchant vessels in exchange for safe passage. Failure to pay resulted in the seizure of ships and imprisonment of sailors. American sailors taken as captives by

LIFE UNDER THE ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION

Hudson
Bay
 ISH

 NEWFOUNDLAND

 NO

 RT

Claimed by
England
 and U.S.

HA ME RI C

Claimed by
England
 and U.S.

A


NOVA SCOTIA

R.


 BRIT

La


 wr

 en

 ce

Lake of
 the Woods

M


St


Fort
Michilimackinac


Fort
Niagara


 i ss ip iss pi

R.


 Barbary pirates languished in North African prisons or were sold into slavery. In July 1785, when pirates captured two American ships, Algiers demanded nearly $60,000 in ransom to release the vessels and their crews. The American navy was too weak to challenge these pirate fleets. While the loss of Claimed by trade burdened the nation’s Spain, Russia, fledgling economy, the sad and England fate of American captives became a source of national humiliation. Frustration with the inability to defend its interests on the high seas grew, but America faced even more serious problems closer to its borders. Defending the nation’s interests in the Mediterranean would have to wait while America dealt with the threats posed by PACIFIC Indians and the British OCEAN and Spanish in North America. The map (5.9) shows the British and Spanish presence along America’s England borders, a fact that increased Spain American anxiety. Russia Congress had little power United States to compel the states to live British-held forts up to the nation’s treaty obligations, including provisions requiring Americans to pay prewar debts and compensate Loyalists for property confiscated during the war. Britain used America’s failure to comply with these provisions as a pretext for retaining control of its forts in the Old Northwest, the region of the new nation bordering the Great Lakes (5.9). These outposts allowed the British to continue their lucrative fur trade with the Indians. The war against Britain had strained relations between America and its Indian neighbors. Many Indian peoples, such as the Iroquois in New York and the Creeks in Georgia, had sided with the British.



 Pte-au-Fer Oswegatchie

Boston
Oswego


Detroit
Fort Miami


New York


Yorktown


U N ITE D
STATE S

ATL ANTIC OCEAN

Charleston


Savannah


Claimed by
U.S. and Spain


S PA N IS H


SPANISH FLORIDA

Gulf of
Mexico


CUBA HISPANIOLA

A ME R ICA


Caribbean
Sea


5.9 Border Disputes in Old
Northwest and Southwest
 The British refused to abandon their forts in the Old Northwest until Congress complied with all the provisions of the Treaty of Paris. In the Old Southwest, Spain frustrated America’s efforts to secure the rights to navigate the Mississippi River.

 While British peace negotiators had sought to protect the interests of Loyalists, they did nothing to secure a just peace for their Indian allies. The leader of the Mohawks, another Indian nation that had sided with the British, pointed out that the government of

 View the Map Territorial Claims in Eastern America after the Treaty of Paris

 What diplomatic frustrations hampered the new American nation?



 CHAPTER 5

A VIRTUOUS REPUBLIC: CREATING A WORKABLE GOVERNMENT,1783–1789

 George III had “no right whatever to grant away to the States of America their rights or properties without a manifest breach of all justice and equity.” Given the absence of Indian representation in the treaty that ended hostilities between the United States and Britain, it is hardly surprising that the interests of Indian peoples were not reflected in the final terms. The Treaty of Paris ceded the entire Old Northwest territory to the United States. American diplomats were not sympathetic to the claims of Indians. Operating under a theory of conquest in which Indians were “a subdued people,” American negotiators assumed that defeated tribes had to relinquish all claims to Western lands. Rejecting this view, Indians organized to resist incursions. Rather than mark the start of an era of peace, the period after the Revolution was one of continued conflict between Indians and Americans. Those tribes that were best organized politically and militarily were better able to defend their interests against American expansionism. The Indian population east of the Mississippi numbered between 150,000 and 200,000 and was divided into 85 different nations. The white population of the new United States was approximately 2.4 million. Pressure to open up Indian lands for white settlement created conflict. Indians had no illusions about the goal of American policy. The insatiable desire for Indian land led the Creeks to bestow the name “Ecunnaunuxulgee” on Georgians: “people greedily grasping after the lands of red people.” When confronted with the determination of Indians to defend their lands, Americans were forced to negotiate more fairly. American leaders soon realized that missionary work and trade were more likely to secure harmonious relations than conquest and military confrontation. By 1787, Congress had shifted both its tone and strategy for dealing with Indian policy. In place of the theory of conquest, Congress recommended “the utmost good faith” in dealing with the Indians. The Spanish presence in the Old Southwest was another threat. Navigation of the Mississippi River was crucial for the economic development of this region. Goods traveling down the Mississippi needed to be unloaded at New Orleans and placed on ocean-bound vessels. Spain denied Americans free access to the Mississippi and New Orleans. Congress authorized Secretary of Foreign Affairs John Jay to negotiate with the Spanish. Spain proposed opening its empire to trade with America if the United States renounced its claim to navigate the

 What was the theory of conquest, and how did it influence diplomatic relations with Indian peoples?

 Mississippi. The terms would have been a boon to New England merchants, who would have benefited from new trade opportunities with Spanish America, but alienated Southerners, particularly those in the Southwest, who viewed the Mississippi as their pipeline to world markets.

Settling the Old Northwest
 The most important achievement of the Confederation period was the plan Congress devised for Western settlement. A committee chaired by Thomas Jefferson devised the initial plan for settling the West (5.10). This proposal imagined a rational mathematical scheme for carving out as many as 16 new states from the Northwest Territory. Jefferson’s plan combined republican theories of self-government with Enlightenment ideas about geography. Boundaries would be drawn along an orderly grid after being surveyed. Reflecting his debt to classical republicanism, Jefferson’s chose names for the new territories such as Polypotamia, “land of many rivers.” Republicanism guided this plan in other ways. In his Ordinance of 1784, Jefferson proposed that new territories be incorporated into the union as states on an equal footing with the original thirteen. Jefferson also sought local selfgovernment for settlers almost immediately. When the free population reached 20,000, a constitutional convention would set up a permanent state government. The plan banned slavery after the year 1800 and recommended that land be made available in parcels small enough for average Americans to purchase. Jefferson envisioned the Northwest Territory populated by white yeoman farmers. The Land Ordinance of 1785 adopted by Congress departed from Jefferson’s original proposal. It called for the creation of townships of 36 square miles. Land was to be sold for no less than one dollar an acre in hard currency. Ordinary citizens would have had trouble raising this amount of cash and therefore had little chance to purchase land directly from the government. Jefferson’s hope that Western land could be sold directly to citizens and create a republic of small independent farmers was jettisoned in favor of a plan that favored speculators. The Northwest Ordinance of 1787 was the final plan for the governance of the new territories. This act was considerably less democratic than Jefferson’s original proposal but maintained

LIFE UNDER THE ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION

 his orderly model for dividing up the territory. Governors appointed by Congress would rule the Northwest Territories. When the population reached 5,000 adult males, settlers could elect their own territorial legislatures. When the population reached 60,000 free inhabitants, including women, the territories could seek admission to the Confederation. The language of the Northwest Ordinance echoed the republican ideals of the Revolution. Congress proclaimed that “fundamental principles of civil and religious liberty” were the foundation for the new states to be created from the territories. In keeping with the republican ideas about virtue and the need for an educated citizenry, the Ordinance declared: “Religion, morality, and knowledge, being necessary to good government and the happiness of mankind, schools and the means of education shall forever be encouraged.” Most important, the Ordinance rejected slavery in the new states to be carved out of the Northwest Territories.

 Shays’s Rebellion The postwar economic downturn hit farmers in Massachusetts particularly hard. As farm foreclosures increased, and families saw their farms seized by their creditors, frustration mounted. Revolutionary War veterans marched on the town of Northampton to shut down the local courts

 and prevent further foreclosures. The armed crowd prevented the judges, dressed in formal judicial attire, long black robes and gray wigs, from entering the courthouse. The protestors, dubbed Shaysites, after their leader, Daniel Shays, believed they were protecting the “good of the commonwealth” and opposing the “tyrannical government in the Massachusetts State.” Governor James Bowdoin condemned the court closings as “fraught with the most fatal and pernicious consequences” that “must tend to subvert all law and government.” Shays’s Rebellion had begun. When angry farmers in Great Barrington, another town in western Massachusetts, closed their local court, the governor dispatched the state militia. One member of the crowd sympathetic to the Shaysites



 5.10 Jefferson’s Plan for the West Jefferson’s gridlike map for the settlement of the West was influenced by the ideas of Enlightenment thinkers. The names that Jefferson proposed for these territories were inspired by classical antiquity. Thus, one potential state was named Sylvania, “a forested region.”

 “There shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in the said territory, otherwise than in the punishment of crimes whereof the party shall have been duly convicted.” Northwest Ordinance of 1787

 View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Reactions to Shays’s Rebellion

 What republican features distinguish the Northwest Ordinance?



 CHAPTER 5

A VIRTUOUS REPUBLIC: CREATING A WORKABLE GOVERNMENT,1783–1789

 VERMONT

NEW HAMPSHIRE

Petersham
(February 4, 1787)


Concord


Massachusetts
Northampton


Boston


Bay


Worcester
Great
Barrington


Springfield


 MASSACHUSETTS

(January 25, 1787)


Sheffield
(February 27, 1787)


Taunton


 CONNECTICUT

RHODE ISLAND

 Site of courts closed by regulators, August–December, 1787 Battle Movement of Shaysite rebels Movement of state’s army

 5.11 Court Closings and Major Battles in Shays’s Rebellion Shays and his supporters closed courts in central and western Massachusetts. Forces loyal to the state routed the Shaysites in a decisive battle at the Springfield state armory.

 suggested putting the matter to a vote among the militiamen: Supporters of opening the court stood to one side of the road, while those opposed crossed the highway. Nearly 800 of 1,000 members of the militia who had been sent to protect the courts voted with their feet to join the rebels and keep the courts closed. The towns affected by the court closing are shown in the map (5.11), which also shows the location of the armed confrontations between the Shaysites and government forces. Shays and his followers were defeated in a battle near the state arsenal

 What was Shays’s Rebellion?

 in Springfield. The failure of Shays’s Rebellion, the most serious challenge to government authority in the new nation, gave additional impetus to those eager to reform the structure of the Articles of Confederation and create a more powerful central government. George Washington was among the most alarmed by events in Massachusetts. The one figure among the nation’s Patriot elite who seemed relatively unfazed by the rebellion in western Massachusetts was Thomas Jefferson who learned of the rebellion while living in Paris and serving America as a diplomat.

 Read the Document Military Reports on Shays’s Rebellion

THE MOVEMENT FOR CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM



The Movement for
Constitutional Reform
 The economic, political, and diplomatic problems faced by the Confederation government, including Shays’s Rebellion, inspired a small but talented group of politicians to advocate reform of the Articles of Confederation. As nationalists—men who believed in the need for a stronger national government—they regarded constitutional reform as imperative. Rather than continue to put their faith in virtue, nationalists sought to create a powerful central government to protect American interests abroad and deal with internal threats, such as Shays’s Rebellion. For the nationalists the postwar era was a time of crisis that demanded decisive action if America were to survive. Nationalists proposed a new model of government to protect individual liberty and promote the common good. The Federal Constitution created by this group relied on a system of checks and balances, not virtue, to protect liberty.

The Road to Philadelphia
 Delegates from Maryland and Virginia gathered at George Washington’s home in Mount Vernon (1785) to discuss economic matters. A year later in Annapolis, Maryland (1786) delegates from five states discussed the problems of the Confederation. Finally, in 1787, delegates from 12 of the 13 states gathered in Philadelphia to reform the Articles of Confederation. The 55 delegates in Philadelphia included an impressive cast of characters. Virginia sent James Madison and George Mason, two of its most esteemed political figures. Pennsylvania’s representatives included the oldest delegate, Benjamin Franklin, then aged 81, and James Wilson, the nation’s premier legal mind. New York’s delegation boasted the brilliant, but brash, Alexander Hamilton. The delegates chose George Washington to preside over the meeting. Lawyers dominated the convention, and nearly all the delegates were wealthy men. A strict rule of secrecy was imposed on the proceedings, a decision that facilitated a more frank debate among the delegates, but only intensified rumors about their activities. The rule of secrecy was stringently enforced: The windows of the Pennsylvania State House were nailed shut and a guard posted at the door. Writing from France, where he was serving as American minister, Jefferson described the assembly as a meeting of “demigods”—men of such impressive accomplishments that they seemed like the

 mythical heroes of antiquity, part human and part divine. Some contemporaries, however, were suspicious of the convention’s secrecy. One Pennsylvania newspaper warned of the “monster” being fashioned behind a “thick veil of secrecy.” Later generations of Americans have tended to echo Jefferson’s observations: that the convention was composed of extraordinarily talented politicians, a view illustrated by this mid-nineteenth-century painting by Thomas Rossiter (5.12) in which the Founders are bathed in light, not shrouded in secrecy.

 Large States versus Small States Instead of arguing over reforming the Articles of Confederation, as originally intended, the Philadelphia Convention took up a bold proposal offered by the Virginia delegation. The Virginia Plan, drafted mainly by James Madison, abandoned the federal system created by the Articles, in favor of a new

 “We have probably had too good an opinion of human nature in forming our confederation.” GEORGE WASHINGTON, 1786

 What were the main features of the Virginia Plan?



 CHAPTER 5

A VIRTUOUS REPUBLIC: CREATING A WORKABLE GOVERNMENT,1783–1789

5.12 Constitutional Convention
 Jefferson’s observation that the Framers of the Constitution were an “assembly of demigods” is captured in Thomas Rossiter’s nineteenth-century painting of the Philadelphia Convention. Rather than appearing in a dark conclave, the members of the convention are bathed in light.

 model of government that had both federal and national features. The states would retain power, but the new national government would be supreme in those areas in which it was given authority. The Virginia Plan created a new government composed of a single executive (the branch of government charged with, among other things, the execution of laws), a two-house legislature (Congress, the lawmaking body), and a separate judiciary (courts). The lower house of Congress would be directly elected by the people, and the upper house would be elected by the lower house from a list provided by the state legislatures. Under the Articles of Confederation, small states such as Maryland had the same vote as large states such as Virginia. Rather than this one-state one-vote principle, each state would have representation in proportion to its population. The new Congress would have the power “to legislate in all cases to which the separate States are incompetent” or “in which the harmony of

 Why did small states oppose the Virginia Plan?

 the United States may be interrupted by the exercise of individual [state] legislation.” Although this did not explicitly address nettlesome issues such as the power to tax, such powers were clearly within the purview of this broad grant of authority. The authors of the Virginia Plan, especially James Madison, thought that a more general grant of authority, rather than a long list of enumerated powers, would be more politically acceptable to the delegates. Representatives from the small states opposed the Virginia Plan. Two weeks after the Virginia Plan was introduced, William Patterson of New Jersey made a counterproposal, often dubbed the New Jersey Plan. It called for a modified federal system based on the existing Articles of Confederation. It proposed a single legislature in which each state would have one vote, which would maintain the parity between small and large states. In contrast to the Articles of Confederation, the new national legislature would be the supreme law

Read the Document Virginia or Randolph Plan


THE MOVEMENT FOR CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM

 of the land and would be binding on the states. The national legislature would have the power to tax and regulate interstate commerce. Although the New Jersey Plan was defeated, it had revealed the difficulty of reaching a consensus without accommodating the concerns of the small states, which feared that the new system would give larger states inordinate influence over the new government. The figure (5.13) shows the differences between the Virginia and New Jersey plans and how each differed from the Articles of Confederation. Although both of these plans would have given the new central government broad new powers, particularly over economic matters, representatives from the large and small states remained divided over how the legislature would be structured. On June 29, 1787, Oliver Ellsworth of Connecticut reintroduced an earlier compromise that he and Roger Sherman (also of Connecticut) had devised. The plan provided for equal representation for large and small states in the upper house and a lower house in which representation would be apportioned on the basis of population. On July 16, 1787, the convention adopted the Great Compromise (sometimes known as the Connecticut Compromise because of Ellsworth and Sherman’s role in framing it). The Great Compromise solved one of the most difficult issues facing the convention: the struggle over representation based on population versus equal representation among the states.

 Conflict over Slavery Although the Connecticut Compromise solved one of the most difficult problems faced by the convention, it also focused attention on another equally contentious issue: whether to count slaves in the apportionment of the new lower house. The Southern states, seeking sufficient representation in the new legislature to protect slavery, were determined that their slaves be counted. Opponents of slavery, by contrast, wished to see slaves taxed as property but did not wish to count them when calculating representation in the new lower house. The convention settled on a solution in which slaves were counted as three-fifths of a person for purposes of taxation and legislative apportionment. (The threefifths ratio had been worked out by the Confederation Congress earlier, when it faced another issue pertaining to slavery.) Conflict flared over the slave trade. One of the most intense attacks on the slave trade was voiced by Virginian George Mason, the largest slave owner in the convention, who warned his fellow delegates of the threat to the republic of the institution of slavery: “Every master of slaves is born a petty tyrant…slavery discourages arts & manufactures.” Mason recommended ending the slave trade as a first step toward eliminating slavery. Several delegates viewed Mason’s actions cynically. Virginia had an excess of slaves and would profit enormously from an internal slave trade if the external trade with Africa were abolished. South Carolinian

Articles of
Confederation


Virginia
Plan


New Jersey
Plan


Structure of the
Legislature


 Single house, one state one vote

 Two houses, both determined by population

 Single house, one state one vote

Taxation


 No power to tax

Power to tax


Power to tax


Judicial
Power


 No judicial power apart from courts to hear admiralty cases

 Federal judiciary

 Federal judiciary

 Single executive chosen by national legislature

 Single or plural executive elected by Congress

Executive
Power




 No permanent executive, a committee of the states exercises executive functions when Congress is not in session

5.13 Comparison of the Articles of Confederation, Virginia, and New Jersey Plans
 Although the Virginia and New Jersey plans differed on representation, each would have given the new government the vital power of taxation.

Watch the Video Lecture: Slavery and the Constitution


 How did the conflict over slavery shape the debates of the Constitutional Convention?



 CHAPTER 5

A VIRTUOUS REPUBLIC: CREATING A WORKABLE GOVERNMENT,1783–1789

 “The states were divided into different interests not by their difference of size but by other circumstances; the most material of which resulted partly from climate, but principally from the effects of their having or not having slaves.” JAMES MADISON, 1787

 Charles Pinckney argued that all the great republics of the ancient world had accepted the necessity of slavery. His cousin, General Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, another delegate from South Carolina, told delegates that his state would never accept the Constitution if the slave trade was banned. Again compromise held the convention together. The new Congress was denied the authority to ban the slave trade until 1808. Although the word slavery never appears in the Constitution, a number of clauses in the document protected it. Article IV, Section 2, prevented fugitive slaves, defined as any “person held to service or labour in one state,” from fleeing to another state to seek asylum and freedom. Article I, Section 8, prohibited the national government from taxing the exports of any state, a provision that prevented the products of slave labor, such as rice, indigo, tobacco, or sugar, from being singled out for sanctions by those hostile to slavery. In James Madison’s view, the greatest division in the convention was not the conflict between large states and small states, but slavery.

Filling out the
Constitutional Design
 After sorting out the structure of the legislative branch of government, the convention struggled over the executive branch. George Mason argued for a three-man executive. A plural executive, he argued, could better represent the different regional interests of the nation. Rejecting this proposal, the convention settled on a unitary executive. There was also disagreement over how to choose the executive. James Wilson wanted to see the executive elected by the people, whereas Mason argued that the people lacked the wisdom to make such a decision. Roger Sherman’s plan to have the national legislature pick

 How did the electoral college strengthen the powers of the states and further the ideals of republicanism?

 the executive was challenged as a threat to the separation of powers. Eventually the convention settled on an “electoral college” composed of men chosen by each state in a manner to be determined by the individual state legislatures. By giving the states some control over selection of the president, this system provided another way of strengthening the power of the states within the new federal system. The electoral college also reflected the ideals of republicanism held by the delegates. By creating a filtering mechanism for the selection of the president, the electoral college was designed to help ensure that the men chosen were drawn from the ranks of the leading citizens, men renowned for their knowledge and virtue. Delegates also clashed over the term of office that the executive would serve. Alexander Hamilton proposed that the executive have a life term, but this leaned too close to monarchy for most delegates. Some delegates favored a single term of as much as seven years, while others argued that a shorter term with the possibility of reelection would provide a greater check on the president. The convention ultimately settled on a four-year term with no limits on the number of terms a president might serve. The final structure of the executive branch was detailed in Article II of the Constitution. Throughout August the convention sketched the barest outline for the third branch of government, the federal judiciary. A new Supreme Court was created, and Congress was authorized to create such inferior courts as it deemed necessary. The Supreme Court’s authority extended “in all Cases, in Law and Equity, arising under the Constitution, the Laws of the United States, and Treaties made under their authority.” Although a number of delegates assumed that the courts would exercise the power of judicial review, the power to declare acts of Congress

THE MOVEMENT FOR CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM

 unconstitutional, the Constitution failed to make such power explicit. Two delegates from New York, Robert Yates and John Lansing, left before the document was completed and therefore did not sign it. Three other delegates—Edmund Randolph, George Mason, and Elbridge Gerry—refused to sign the Constitution because of their reservations about its final draft. Despite these protests, Benjamin Franklin captured the feelings of many delegates when he wrote that despite its faults, it was doubtful “whether any other convention we can obtain may be able to make a better Constitution . . . it therefore astonishes me, Sir, to find this system approaching as near to perfection as it does.” After the convention concluded its work and the text of the Constitution was made public, a woman asked Franklin, “‘Well Doctor what have we got a republic or a monarchy?’ ‘A republic,’ replied the Doctor, ‘if you can keep it.’” The Constitution reflected the give and take and the spirit of compromise that prevailed at the Convention. The new Constitution was a radical departure from the Articles of Confederation (5.14). The powerful national legislature created by the Constitution was given authority to enact all laws “necessary and proper” to carrying out responsibilities delegated by the Constitution.



 The new national legislature had two houses, a House of Representatives and a Senate. Each state had two senators. Representation in the House of Representatives was based on population, with slaves counting as three-fifths of a person. Amendments to the Constitution would require the approval of three-quarters of the states, not the unanimous consent required under the Articles. Although executive power under the Articles of Confederation had been weak, the new president could veto legislation, negotiate treaties, and issue pardons. The ill-defined powers of the new Supreme Court left some wondering if the judiciary would be the weakest of the three branches, not co-equal with the legislature and the executive. The new federal Constitution also broke with well-established precedents that had shaped the state constitutions drafted after the Revolution. Unlike the typical state constitution, the federal Constitution did not include a declaration of rights stating the basic rights and liberties retained by the people, nor did it reassert the basic republican principles upon which government rested. Most state constitutions created relatively weak executives, another marked contrast with the new Federal Constitution and its strong executive branch.

Articles of Confederation


Constitution


Structure of the
Legislature


 Single house, one state one vote

 Two houses, one determined by population, upper house equal state representation

Taxation


 No power to tax

Power to tax


Judicial
Power


 No judicial power apart from courts to hear admiralty cases

 Federal judiciary

Executive
Power


 No permanent executive, a committee of the states exercises executive functions when Congress is not in session

 Executive chosen by electors chosen by state legislators

5.14 Comparison of the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution
 As this chart shows, the new federal government created by the Constitution was far more powerful than the old government under the Articles of Confederation.

 What were the most important differences between the federal Constitution and the typical state constitutions of this period?



 CHAPTER 5

A VIRTUOUS REPUBLIC: CREATING A WORKABLE GOVERNMENT,1783–1789

The Great Debate
 The publication of the Constitution inaugurated one of the most vigorous political campaigns in American history. In taverns and town squares, Americans argued over the new Constitution. As one contemporary remarked, “the plan of a Government proposed to us by the convention—affords matter for conversation to every rank of beings from the Governor to the door keeper.” Soon two sides emerged in the debate over ratification.

 Federalists versus Anti-Federalists The supporters of the Constitution described themselves as Federalists, thus saddling their opponents with the name Anti-Federalists. Never entirely happy with this name, opponents of the Constitution complained that they were the true supporters of federalism and attacked pro-Constitutional forces as “consolidationists” who wished to consolidate the union into a single national government and rob the states of their power. Looking back on the bitter struggle over ratification, one Anti-Federalist quipped that because the issue before the nation was ratification of the Constitution, the two sides were more aptly described as “rats and anti-rats.” Citizens paraded, raised their glasses to toast, or attacked the new government. Some even rioted to express their sentiments. Anti-Federalists in Carlisle, Pennsylvania, burned an effigy of Federalist James Wilson to express their disapproval of the new Constitution. Wilson, a renowned lawyer and a recent immigrant from Scotland, was one of the most important supporters of the Constitution in Pennsylvania. He was also an easy target for ridicule, since he spoke with a thick Scottish accent that his enemies mocked. The supporters of the Constitution also took to the streets to defend it and occasionally to intimidate their opponents. A Federalist crowd wrecked the printing presses of Anti-Federalist publishers in New York City. These disturbances were the exception, however, not the rule. The debate could be heated, but Americans typically confined their passions to the printed page. Hundreds of columns of newspaper text were devoted to the debate over the merits of the Constitution, and dozens of pamphlets were written for and against it. The Federalist, for example, a sophisticated defense of the Constitution written by John Jay, Alexander Hamilton, and James Madison, was first published as newspaper essays in New York. It is now regarded by many scholars as America’s most important contribution to Western

 Why did Federalist and Anti-Federalist authors adopt names such as Publius and Brutus?

 political philosophy. Writing under the pen name Publius, a hero of the Roman Republic, the authors hoped to cloak themselves in the toga of Roman virtue. This strategy was designed to focus the public’s attention on the ideas, not the men responsible for, the essays. The Federalist not only responded to Anti-Federalist criticism, it also provided a sophisticated analysis of republican government and a point-by-point discussion of the merits of the Constitution. Although its influence on the outcome of ratification was modest, The Federalist soon became the favorite text of judges, legislators, and others interested in interpreting the meaning of the Constitution. It continues to be the text most often cited by the Supreme Court when trying to identify the original understanding of the Constitution. Anti-Federalists produced no single text comparable to The Federalist. However, the writings of Elbridge Gerry and George Mason, prominent Anti-Federalists who had participated in the Philadelphia Convention but had refused to sign the Constitution, were widely reprinted. Authors who adopted the pen names Brutus and Federal Farmer each framed sophisticated critiques of the Constitution. Brutus invoked the same ideal of Roman virtue that Publius had appropriated for the supporters of the Constitution. The name Federal Farmer traded on the association of republican ideals of simplicity associated with the ideal of the yeoman farmer. Both texts developed an alternative vision of republican government. Rather than accept the need for a powerful central government, Anti-Federalists clung to the idea of a system in which the bulk of governmental functions would continue to reside in the states. (See Competing Visions: Brutus and Publius Debate the Nature of Republicanism.) Although the struggle over ratification produced some of the most intellectually sophisticated writings in American history, in other respects it was a textbook example of negative campaigning. If Publius and Brutus provided an example of dispassionate reason, metaphorically invoking Roman ideals of virtue by their pen names, other authors, on both sides, were not above

THE GREAT DEBATE



Competing Visions
BRU BRUTUS UTUS AND AND PUBLIUS PUBLIUS S DEBATE DEBATE THE E NATURE NATURE O F REPUBLICANISM REPUB BLICANIS SM OF
One disagreement One di between n Federalists Fed Fe eralists and d Anti-Federalists Ant ntii Federalists arose arosse from fro their different differeent views v of the nature naatu ture r of republican government. gov over e nment. A number of prominent p Anti-Federalists Antti-Fe Federalists clung to the th traditional theory the heor oryy that a republican repub bli lica can government only interests gove go v rn nment could cou uld onl nlyy survive s rvvive if a nation remained su reema mained small and d the the people’s p interest stss were w re fairly homogeneous. we homo moge gene n ous. Federali list sts, s, most most notably, no otably, y Pub ubli lius us, argued it would be easier eas ea ier to protect liberty lib liber ertyy in a large and d diverse dive di v rse republic. Federalists, Publius, The Anti-Federalist author Brutus defended the traditional idea that a free republic could survive only in a small area in which the people shared the same values, culture, and history. When a republic became too large, he argued, it became contentious, and the common good was sacrificed as competing factions vied to promote their own narrow interests. In short, Brutus was confident that history demonstrated the impossibility of a nation the size of the new United States remaining a free republic without a confederation-style government. If respect is to be paid to the opinion of the greatest and wisest men who have ever thought or wrote on the science of government, we shall be constrained to conclude, that a free republic cannot succeed over a country of such immense extent, . . . as that of the whole United States. . . . History furnishes no example of a free republic, any thing like the extent of the United States. The Grecian republics were of small extent; so also was that of the Romans. . . . in a republic, the manners, sentiments, and interests of the people should be similar. If this be not the case, there will be a constant clashing of opinions; and the representatives of one part will be continually striving, against those of the other. This will retard the operations of government, and prevent such conclusions as will promote the public good. If we apply this remark to the condition of the United States, we shall be convinced that it forbids that we should be one government. 
Writing as Publius, in The Federalist, James Madison
 disputed the traditional theory of republicanism advanced by Brutus and other Anti-Federalists. By increasing the number of factions and expanding the size of the republic, Publius argued that it would be less likely for any one faction to further their agenda and dominate politics. According to this new theory, politics would become a kaleidoscope of ever-shifting alliances. Moreover, in a larger republic politics itself would act like a filter and be more likely to select leaders of skill and talents. Finally, Madison noted that the federal system would act like a fire-wall, isolating factions within individual states and preventing them from spreading their wicked agendas to other states. Men of factious tempers, of local prejudices, or of sinister designs, may, by intrigue, by corruption, or by other means, first obtain the suffrages, and then betray the interests, of the people. The question resulting is, whether small or extensive republics are more favorable to the election of proper guardians of the public . . . . The smaller the society, . . . the fewer the distinct parties and interests, the more frequently will a majority be found of the same party . . . the more easily will they concert and execute their plans of oppression. Extend the sphere, and you take in a greater variety of parties and interests; you make it less probable that a majority of the whole will have a common motive to invade the rights of other citizens; or if such a common motive exists, it will be more difficult for all who feel it to discover their own strength, and to act in unison with each other. . . . The influence of factious leaders may kindle a flame within their particular States, but will be unable to spread a general conflagration through the other States. In the extent and proper structure of the Union, therefore, we behold a republican remedy for the diseases most incident to republican government.

 Why did Brutus and Publius differ about the relationship between size and republicanism?



 CHAPTER 5

A VIRTUOUS REPUBLIC: CREATING A WORKABLE GOVERNMENT,1783–1789

 slinging mud when it served their interests. Federalists, for example, denounced their opponents as Shaysites, a charge repeated in the satirical print, The Looking Glass for 1787 (5.15). In this cartoon, Connecticut appears stuck in the mud, a cart laden with debt is dragged in opposite directions by Federalists and Anti-Federalists. The artist who created this pro-Federalist political cartoon stooped lower than most: One Anti-Federalist character has his trousers pulled down around his ankles and his bottom exposed to his Federalist opponents. Anti-Federalists charged that Federalists were part of an aristocratic elite who wished to dominate common folk. Amos Singletary from Massachusetts warned his fellow citizens that the lawyers and rich merchants who backed the Constitution favored the interests of the aristocratic few over those of the democratic many. In his view, the new Constitution would undo the democratic reforms of the Revolution, returning control to powerful economic groups. Although Anti-Federalism attracted supporters of democracy such as Singletary, it also appealed to wealthy planters such as Virginia’s George Mason, who was less concerned about the Constitution’s antidemocratic features and more worried about the centralization of power. Mason feared that liberty would be annihilated if a central government gained too much power. Although Anti-Federalists did not agree about everything, they shared important objections to the Constitution. The essential Anti-Federalist critique emerged early in the debate. At the top was the fear of consolidation, the concern that the federal government would absorb all power into its orbit. Anti-Federalists believed that there would be too few representatives in Congress to represent the diverse interests of the American people. Representatives would also live far from their constituents and lose touch with the concerns of those they served. The extensive powers of the president and the potentially vast jurisdiction of the Supreme Court also worried Anti-Federalists, who feared that the federal government would become tyrannical. The absence of a bill of rights proved to be one of the Anti-Federalists’ most effective criticisms. In their view history demonstrated that once in power even the most virtuous rulers were tempted to increase their powers at the expense of popular liberty. A written declaration stating clearly the rights and powers retained by the people was therefore an essential safeguard for liberty. Rather than accept that the omission of a bill of rights was a serious flaw in the Constitution, Federalists argued that it was unnecessary. James Wilson defended the absence of a bill of rights by noting that the new government was one of delegated power only, and hence all powers not ceded to it were retained by the

 How does The Looking Glass for 1787 portray the Anti-Federalists?

 people and the states. “It would have been superfluous and absurd,” he observed, to stipulate “that we should enjoy those privileges, of which we are not divested either by the intention or the act that brought that body into existence.” In The Federalist, Publius argued that the inclusion of a bill of rights would be dangerous. By listing exactly which rights were protected, the new government would by implication exclude other rights that it did not explicitly include among those reserved to the people. Since it would be impossible to create a list of all the rights enjoyed by the people, it was better not to list any. For an overview of disagreement between Federalists and Anti-Federalists see 5.16.

Ratification
 Federalists realized that Anti-Federalists would try to block unconditional ratification and seek prior amendments to the Constitution. Early and decisive Federalist successes in Delaware, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Georgia, and Connecticut established a momentum that Federalists capitalized on to achieve their goal of unconditional ratification. Eventually in Massachusetts Fed-

5.15 The Looking
Glass for 1787
This Federalist
 political cartoon from Connecticut portrays the state as a cart stuck in the mud and weighed down by paper money and debt. While Federalists proclaim “Comply with Congress” and pull the state toward a bright sun, the AntiFederalists exclaim “Success to Shays” and drag the cart toward a shadowy future symbolized by the dark clouds.

 “These lawyers, and men of learning, and moneyed men, that talk so finely, and gloss over matters so smoothly, to make us poor illiterate people swallow down the pill, expect to get into Congress themselves . . . and then they will swallow up all us little folks, like the great Leviathan.” AMOS SINGLETARY, 1788

Read the Document Patrick Henry Speaks Against the Constitution


THE GREAT DEBATE 5.16
Anti-Federalist versus Federalist Ideas Anti-Federalists and Federalists each believed in republican government, but they disagreed over how to structure such a government to protect liberty. 
James Madison


George Mason


Federalists


Anti-Federalists


 Support strong central government

 Oppose strong central government

 Oppose bill of rights as unnecessary and perhaps even harmful to liberty

 Favor inclusion of a bill of rights as necessary to protect liberty

 Doubt effectiveness of militia and favor federal standing army

 Favor militia and oppose federal standing army

Republicanism can
 survive only in a large and diverse republic

Republicanism can
 survive only in a small republic

 Virtue is a weak foundation for republicanism; a system of checks and balances is better suited to preserving a republican government against corruption

 Republicanism depends on a virtuous population to prevent corruption

 eralist faced a powerful Anti-Federalist opposition and conceded the need for subsequent amendment once the Constitution was adopted. Federalists’ willingness to compromise also won over moderates who might have opposed the Constitution in battleground states

 “If men were angels, no government would be necessary. If angels were to govern men, neither external nor internal controls on government would be necessary. In framing a government which is to be administered by men over men, the great difficulty lies in this: you must first enable the government to control the governed; and in the next place oblige it to control itself.” JAMES MADISON, The Federalist 1788

Read the Document Federalist No. 10




 such as Massachusetts. Had the Federalists maintained a hard-line, sticking to James Wilson’s argument that a bill of rights was unnecessary, the Constitution might never have been ratified. If states with powerful, wellorganized Anti-Federalist coalitions, such as Virginia, had held ratification conventions earlier, the Constitution might have been defeated or been radically altered by amendments. New Hampshire’s vote to ratify on June 21, 1788 gave Federalists the nine states needed to ratify the Constitution. Although the Constitution was now the new law of the land, it was vital to persuade Anti-Federalists in Virginia and New York to accept it. Despite opposition from Anti-Federalists like Patrick Henry, Virginia ratified the Constitution on June 25. That left only New York, North Carolina, and Rhode Island outside the new Union. In New York City Federalists staged a “grand federal procession” to show that the Constitution enjoyed broad support, particularly among the city’s artisans, who saw a strong government as a way to protect their economic interests from foreign competition. The parade drew members from virtually all of the city’s crafts and included dozens of floats. Printers, for example, marched alongside a printing press mounted on a horse-drawn cart which churned out an ode that praised the Constitution. A banner with the name Publius, the author of The Federalist, flew proudly above the press, and the printers sported caps with “Liberty of Press” written in large letters. Another group of artisans carried this banner (5.17), which celebrated their work with pewter, an alloy of tin and lead that was widely used to make tableware. Their banner carried the following verses: The Federal Plan Most Solid And Secure Americans Their Freedom Will Ensure All Arts Shall Flourish in Columbia’s Land And all Her Sons Join as One Social Band New York Anti-Federalists had a dilemma: Should they continue to oppose the Constitution or work within the new system of government? To understand how they made their decision, see Choices and Consequences: To Ratify or Not. New York’s ratification dashed the last hopes of opponents of the Constitution to secure prior amendments. Federalists had secured unconditional ratification of the new frame of government. Most Americans probably opposed the Constitution when it was first proposed, and the vote on ratification was close in many states. Several factors helped account for the Federalists’ victory. Supporters of the Constitution organized themselves around a well-defined goal: ratification. By contrast,

 Why did urban artisans support the Constitution?



 CHAPTER 5

A VIRTUOUS REPUBLIC: CREATING A WORKABLE GOVERNMENT,1783–1789

Choices and Consequences
TO RATIFY OR NOT
By the time New York’s ratification convention met in Poughkeepsie, nine states had already ratified the Constitution, making it the new law of the land. Could Anti-Federalists continue to oppose the Constitution and thereby place New York outside the new nation? Many Anti-Federalists considered such a prospect unrealistic, so they turned to the question of amending the Constitution. The outcome of the convention depended on the decisions of moderate Anti-Federalists, led by the merchant Melancton Smith. New York Anti-Federalists faced a momentous decision: continue to oppose the Constitution or work within the new system of government. 
Choices




 Support the Constitution with the promise that the First Congress would amend it.



Support the Constitution
 provisionally until it was amended, but consider seceding from the Union if amendments were not made.



 Block ratification and continue to oppose the Constitution.

Decision
 Smith opted for the first choice, making New York the eleventh state to ratify the Constitution on July 25, 1787. In a powerful speech in the New York convention, he reiterated

 his hope for future amendments but recognized the need to work through the “mode prescribed by the Constitution.”

Consequences
 If Smith and other swing Anti-Federalist delegates in the Convention had opposed ratification, New York would have remained outside the Union, and the new nation might have split into separate confederacies. If Smith and other moderates had insisted on amendments before ratification, Federalists would likely have stood their ground and the convention might have failed to ratify the Constitution. As it was, Smith’s decision put more pressure on Rhode Island

 and North Carolina to accept the new Constitution. It also gave impetus to the move to amend the Constitution after ratification. Federalist newspapers seized on the visual image of a Roman-style temple to represent the nation and added a new column for each state that voted to ratify the Constitution. The pillars and temple metaphor, like Jefferson’s model for the Virginia State Capitol, evoked Roman ideals of virtue and liberty.

Continuing Controversies
 Why did New York Anti-Federalists accept the Constitution and wait for amendments? Although the Anti-Federalists were defeated in 1788, many of their fears and ideals about government still resonate in American politics. Were the Anti-Federalists backward-looking politicians who failed to grasp the genius of the new Constitution, or visionaries who predicted that the growth and centralization of American government might pose a threat to liberty? Americans still argue over the legacy of Anti-Federalism.

 Why did New York Anti-Federalists compromise on the question of amendments?

 Massachusetts newspaper celebrates New York as “the eleventh pillar.”

THE GREAT DEBATE



5.17 Pewterers’ Banner
 In a New York City parade celebrating the Constitution, Federalist artisans carried a banner that included the U.S. flag and depicted artisans crafting objects of pewter. The verse at the top proclaims the bright future for America under the new Constitution.

 Anti-Federalists could not provide a clear alternative. Some favored a new convention to revise the Constitution. Others favored amending the Constitution prior to ratification, and some were content to amend the new document later. Finally, Federalists were more effective at getting their message into print. Many newspaper editors refused to print Anti-Federalist materials. The dynamics of ratification were complex. No single theory accounts for why individuals and regions supported the Constitution, but the map shows several patterns in voting (5.18). Geography, economics, and individual experiences all shaped the vote on the Constitution. Merchants and artisans in regions tied to commerce, such as seacoasts and inland areas close to navigable rivers, looked to a stronger union to protect their economic interests and became Federalists. Inhabitants of frontier regions that faced Indian threats also supported a stronger central

5.18 Geographical
Distribution of the
Vote on Ratification
Support for the
Constitution was
 strongest along coastal regions and frontiers exposed to threats from external enemies and among small states such as Delaware, Maryland, and New Jersey. Anti-Federalism was strongest in the backcountry of New England, the mid-Atlantic, and the South.

 Disputed between the United States and Great Britain

BRITISH CANADA

.


 or

 nc

 e

R


.L


 aw

 MAINE (to Mass)

St


La


 (disputed between New Hampshire and New York)

 re

 VERMONT

 n

Lake Superi


 u ro n

Lake M
 i ch i

 ga

H
 ke

L. O


NEW HAMPSHIRE

 n ta r i o NEW YORK

(June 1788)


 MASSACHUSETTS

(July 1788)


 e Lak

 e Eri

(Feb 1788)


RHODE ISLAND

 PENNSYLVANIA

(May 1790)


(Dec 1787)


 CONNECTICUT (Jan 1788)

O


 hi

 o

R.


 VIRGINIA (June 1788)

NEW JERSEY
(Dec 1787) 
 DELAWARE (Dec 1787)

NORTH CAROLINA

 MARYLAND (April 1788)

(Nov 1789)


 GEORGIA

SOUTH CAROLINA

ATL ANTIC OCEAN

(May 1788)


(Jan 1788)


 Federalist majority (for)

Gulf of Mexico


SPANISH FLORIDA

 government because of these security concerns. Except for Rhode Island, small states supported the Constitution. Officers of the Continental Army who had dealt with a weak Congress under the Articles also supported the Constitution. Anti-Federalists drew together an equally diverse coalition that opposed any effort to centralize authority and lessen the power of the states. Backcountry farmers, particularly those less closely connected to major commercial markets, opposed the Constitution. State politicians, especially the newly empowered men of moderate wealth and more humble origins who dominated politics in states such as Pennsylvania and New York, were strongly Anti-Federalist. Finally, wealthy planters in parts of the South who feared that a distant and powerful government would not represent their interests became Anti-Federalists.

The Creation of a
Loyal Opposition
 Despite the intensity of the struggle over ratification, Anti-Federalists did not continue their opposition to the Constitution once the nine states needed to ratify adopted it. Indeed, rather than choose to become an anti-Constitutional party, Anti-Federalists accepted having to work within the framework provided by the Constitution. Continued opposition to the Constitution would only have led to anarchy, which most Anti-Federalists wished to avoid as much as did their Federalist opponents. Anti-Federalists turned their attentions to campaigning for election to the First Congress and to securing amendments to the Constitution.

 Anti-Federalist majority (against) Evenly divided

View the Map Interactive Map: Ratification of the Constitution


 Why was there no anti-Constitution movement after ratification?



 CHAPTER 5

A VIRTUOUS REPUBLIC: CREATING A WORKABLE GOVERNMENT,1783–1789









 America adopts a new national symbol

Newburgh Conspiracy


Land Ordinance of 1784


 Washington prevents coup by Continental army officers

 Thomas Jefferson proposes a model for settling the Old Northwest Territory

 Thomas Jefferson appointed ambassador to France

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Six years after being proposed, America adopts a new symbol for the nation, The Great Seal of the United States, a design intended to embody the republican ideals of the nation

Treaty of Paris
 Hostilities between United States and Britain conclude and Britain recognizes American Independence

 Jefferson appointment as French ambassador insulates him from the hysteria surrounding Shays’s Rebellion

Review Questions
 1. Americans in the post-revolutionary era looked to Rome for inspiration in building a virtuous republic. How were these ideas reflected in American art and architecture in this period? 2. What were the most notable achievements and failures of the Confederation government? 3. What were the most divisive issues the Constitutional Convention faced and what

 compromises did the delegates reach to solve them? 4. Which groups in society tended to support or oppose the Constitution? 5. Anti-Federalists were alarmed by the power of the federal government. Do you think the AntiFederalist objections to the Constitution have any validity today?

Key Terms
 Articles of Confederation America’s first constitutional government in effect from 1781–1788. The articles created a weak decentralized form of government that lacked the power to tax and compel state obedience to treaties it negotiated. Old Northwest The region of the new nation bordering on the Great Lakes. Northwest Ordinance of 1787 One of several laws adopted by the Confederation Congress designed to provide a plan for the orderly settlement of the Northwest Territory (the area north of the Ohio River and west of Pennsylvania). In addition to providing for a plan for self-governance, the Ordinance also prohibited slavery from the Northwest Territory. Shays’s Rebellion Uprising in western Massachusetts in which farmers organized themselves as local militia units and closed down courts to prevent their farms from being seized by creditors. Virginia Plan A plan framed by James Madison and introduced in the Constitution Convention by Edmund Randolph that

 called on delegations to abandon the government of the Articles and create a new, strong national government. New Jersey Plan Proposal made by William Patterson of New Jersey as an alternative to the more nationalistic Virginia Plan that would have retained the principle of state equality in the legislature embodied in the Articles of Confederation. Great Compromise Compromise plan proposed by Roger Sherman and Oliver Ellsworth of Connecticut that called for equal representation of each state in the upper house and a lower house based on population. Federalists The name adopted by the supporters of the Constitution who favored a stronger centralized government. Anti-Federalists The name applied to opponents of the Constitution who insisted that they, not their opponents, were the true supporters of the ideal of federalism. Anti-Federalists opposed weakening the power of the states and feared that the Constitution yielded too much power to the new central government.

CHAPTER REVIEW



Petersham
(February 4, 1787)


Concord
Northampton


Bosto
Worcester


Great
Barrington


Springfield


 MASSACHUS

(January 25, 1787)


 effield ruary 27, 1787)

 CONNECTICUT

RHODE ISLAND









Virginia Statute for
Religious Freedom


Philadelphia Convention
 drafts Constitution

 New Hampshire becomes ninth state to ratify Constitution

University of North Carolina
 chartered

 Madison and Jefferson win approval of bill promoting religious freedom

 Delegates assemble in Philadelphia to revise Articles of Confederation

 Constitution becomes new law of the land

 Shays’s Rebellion begins

Hamilton, Madison, and Jay
 publish the first installment of The Federalist

Although the University of Georgia
 was the first public university chartered in the United States (1785), the University of North Carolina (1789) was the first public institution of higher education to admit students and offer classes

 Farmers in western Massachusetts close courts

 The most sophisticated defense of the Constitution appears in the New York press

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of A Virtuous Republic.

Questions for Analysis
 1. How did George Washington embody the ideas of republicanism? Read the Document George Washington, The Newburgh

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • Military Reports on Shays’s Rebellion, p. 142 • Virginia or Randolph Plan, p. 144

Address (1783), p. 130


View the Map


 2. What impact did republican ideals and nationalism have on American culture after the Revolution?

 • Territorial Claims in Eastern America after the Treaty of Paris, p. 139 • Interactive Map: Ratification of the Constitution, p. 153

Read the Document Noah Webster, An American
School Teacher Calls for an American Language, 1789, p. 132


 3. What does Shays’s Rebellion reveal about the problems of the Confederation government? View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Reactions to Shays’s Rebellion, p. 141

 4. Who were the Anti-Federalists and why did they oppose the Constitution? Read the Document Patrick Henry Speaks Against the Constitution, p. 150

 5. Did the ideas embodied in the Constitution mark a break with traditional republicanism and Revolutionaryera constitutionalism, or were they a logical outgrowth of them? Read the Document Federalist No. 10, p. 151

Watch the Video Lecture: Slavery and the Constitution, p. 145


 CHAPTER

Launching the New
Government p. 158




