 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 11

“To Overspread
 the Continent” Westward Expansion and Political Conflict, 1840–1848 Richard Caton Woodville’s painting, War News from Mexico (1848), captures the excitement generated by the Mexican War, the first conflict in which news traveled almost instantaneously by telegraph from the frontlines back to Americans. Woodville’s painting shows a group of white men standing on the front porch of the “American Hotel,” a symbol of the American nation. The central figure reads the latest headlines from the war front. The expressions on the men’s faces range from astonishment to concern, suggesting the diversity of opinions about the war. A white woman looking out from a window is safely inside the “American Hotel,” part of the same nation as the white men but not an active participant in their political discussion on the porch. Woodville’s painting also shows those excluded from power: A black man sits on the lowest step, and an African-American girl stands outside the building. The war had profound consequences for the issue of slavery. By facilitating westward expansion and bringing new lands into American possession, the Mexican war complicated American politics by making slavery a central issue in national life. By 1840, all the land east of the Mississippi (except the territories of Florida and Wisconsin) had been organized into new states, but Americans remained hungry for land. Many had come to believe that America was destined to conquer and settle the entire North American continent, from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific. As a result tens of thousands of Americans migrated west in search of land and opportunity. Some went along the Overland Trail to the Pacific Northwest; others came with the large Mormon migration to the Great Salt Lake. The American defeat of Mexico dramatically increased the nation’s size. The United States incorporated a huge swath of new territory, from Texas to California. The war also exacerbated the divisions between Democrats and Whigs and intensified the conflict between abolitionists and proslavery forces.

 “Our manifest destiny [is] to overspread the continent allotted by Providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions.” Newspaper Editor, JOHN L. O’SULLIVAN, 1845





 CHAPTER 11

OVERSPREAD THE CONTINENT”: WESTWARD EXPANSION AND POLITICAL CONFLICT, 1840–1848

Manifest Destiny and Changing
Visions of the West


11.1 The Trapper
 and His Family Artist Charles Deas offers a glimpse into the world of the trapper in this watercolor image. The canoe represents the multicultural world created by trappers in miniature.

 During the early nineteenth century, American fur traders had engaged in a lucrative trade with Western Indian tribes. The interactions between the traders and Indians created a “middle ground” (see Chapter 3), in which trade and cultural interaction prospered. By the early 1830s, however, this distinctive multiracial society was in decline. The fur trade declined as over-trapping decimated beaver populations and as changing tastes made consumers less eager to purchase furs. By the mid-1840s, the world of the fur trappers was gone. Americans began viewing the West as a region that had to be incorporated into an expanding democratic nation. Additional land would help preserve the ideal of a yeoman republic of honest and independent farmers that would now stretch from the Atlantic to the Pacific. Americans embraced westward expansion as both their destiny and a practical necessity given the nation’s growing population. The rights of the indigenous Indian tribes of these regions mattered little to the champions of westward expansion. Even many sympathetic to Indian civilizations believed they were doomed to extinction. The conquest and settlement of the West became an important theme for artists who helped portray the West for those Americans who did not make the trek westward. Many artists memorialized an ideal version of western expansion, helping to forge important American myths about intrepid pioneers taming a frontier wilderness.

 The Trapper’s World During the colonial era French and British traders depended on Indians to trap or help them trap fur-bearing animals. American fur traders gradually gained control over this lucrative trade, and by the

 What function did the yearly rendezvous play for fur trappers?

 1820s, they were the dominant fur traders. The key figures in the trade, the trappers, or “mountain men,” played an indispensable role in the early exploration and settlement of the West. Between 1822 and 1840, at least 3,000 white trappers and traders entered this region. In this painting of a trapper and his family, Charles Deas captures the multicultural world inhabited by the trappers. In the canoe the trapper, his Indian wife, and his mixed-race children work together to navigate the river (11.1). The economic hub of the fur trade was the yearly rendezvous, a gathering held in the Rocky Mountains in which Indians and mountain men came to exchange pelts for goods offered by traders. With alcohol pouring freely, gambling aplenty, and a relaxed attitude toward sex among the participants, the rendezvous, which could attract as many as 1,000 participants, was a carnival-like, often riotous affair.

MANIFEST DESTINY AND CHANGING VISIONS OF THE WEST



 The fur trade yielded huge prof54°4 0` its for some men. The most famous trader, John Jacob Astor, was the C A N A D A son of a German butcher who immigrated to America in 1784. Astor OR EGON became America’s first multimilC OU N TRY (Joint occupation lionaire, amassing by the time of with Britain) his death in 1848 a fortune of $20 million (more than $100 billion in Fort Vancouver Fort today’s terms). Portland Walla Walla Although such traders prosU N OR GA N IZE D pered, their trade had disastrous TE R R ITORY Fort Boise ecological consequences for otFort Hall ters and beavers. Once numerous, Independence Rock the sea otters off the California Fort Laramie Pla Council coast were nearly extinct by midtte Sutter’s Fort R. Fort Bluffs Scotts (Sacramento) Salt century. Only a shift in consumer Bluff Kearney Fort Nauvoo Chimney Lake Bridger St. Joseph Rock preferences from fur to silk as the San Francisco City Court Fort Leavenworth Alcove House Springs fashionable material for hats in the Rock Independence mid-1830s helped stave off extincINDIAN Fort Dodge tion for beavers. Relentless trapTERRITORY Santa Fé ping and shifting tastes meant that Los Angeles the world of the mountain men ME X ICA N San Diego was largely gone by the 1840s. P OS S E S S ION S The mountain men and their REPUBLIC PACIFIC OF Nacogdoches Native American allies had supEl Paso OCEAN TEXAS plied information as well as furs, (1836–45) which generated interest in the San Antonio Oregon Trail West. More information came Santa Fé Trail from expeditions sponsored by the California Trail Gulf of Landmarks and campsites federal government. Following the MEXICO Mexico tradition established with Lewis and Clark’s pioneering expedition from St. Louis to the Pacific Coast in 1804–1806 11.2 Western and watering holes and grasslands for pasturing (see Chapter 7) and Zebulon Pike’s expeditions Trails animals was essential for those who made the arduin 1806–1807, the government underwrote an exThis map shows the ous trek. The efforts of these explorers (11.2) helped main trails taken by pedition by Stephen Long in 1819 to explore the western emigrants to America physically map the West and intellectually Great Plains and the Rocky Mountains. His widely Oregon, California, comprehend its potential for the first time. reprinted map, first published in an 1822 atlas, erand Santa Fe. roneously labeled the southern Great Plains (western Kansas, eastern Colorado, and New Mexico) as the “Great American Desert.” This misleading label likely deterred many potential settlers from migrating westward in the 1820s and 1830s. By the early 1840s, information about the West, and Americans gradually developed a more favorits ever more positive impression, sparked a growable vision of the West, in part due to the exploraing interest in migration beyond the Mississippi. tions of Lieutenant John C. Fremont of the Army Momentum spiked too because of an increasingly Topographical Corps. Fremont published a popular popular notion called Manifest Destiny. First coined account (written largely by his wife, Jessie) of his in the summer 1845 issue of the Democratic Review expedition in 1845 that not only dispelled the myth by John O’Sullivan, it gave voice to the belief that of a “Great American Desert” but also provided to those considering the trek westward many invaluable God had destined America to spread westward to the Pacific. “Our manifest destiny,” wrote O’Sullivan, details. Information about weather, terrain, routes,

Manifest Destiny and the
Overland Trail


View the Map Atlas Map: National Expansion and Movement West to 1830


 How did reports of the West both impede and encourage migration?



 CHAPTER 11

11.3 Emigrants
Crossing the Plains
 In Bierstadt’s painting, a caravan passing through Indian-controlled territory on the western trek to Oregon heads toward the bright sun, symbolic of America’s bright future. [Source: Albert Bierstadt, “Emigrants Crossing the Plains”. 1867. Oil on canvas, 60 ⫻ 96 in., A.011.1T, National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum, Oklahoma City.]

OVERSPREAD THE CONTINENT”: WESTWARD EXPANSION AND POLITICAL CONFLICT, 1840–1848

 “[is] to overspread the continent allotted by Providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions.” Senator Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri echoed O’Sullivan’s vision of America’s future, explicitly framing it in both racial and religious terms: “The White race alone received the divine command, to subdue and replenish the earth! Civilization or extinction has been the fate of all people who have found themselves in the track of the advancing Whites.” Manifest Destiny combined the language of Jacksonian democracy, stressing opportunity for all white Americans, with a Protestant millennial vision that defined the nation’s future in terms of the progress of “civilization” and the triumph of Christianity over “savagery.” Few believed there was room for Native Americans in this vision of geographical expansion and white man’s democracy. Even before O’Sullivan and Benton voiced the doctrine of Manifest Destiny, word of the lush agricultural lands of Oregon had reached east by the early 1840s. The economic dislocations caused by the Panic of 1837 (see Chapter 8) and the absence of cheap land suitable for agriculture in the East and Midwest also sparked interest in western migration. Propagandists embellished their accounts of the West’s riches to help attract potential migrants to the fertile lands of Oregon. Some rhapsodic descriptions of Oregon went beyond mere exaggeration, conjuring up an image of an almost magical place in which “the pigs … [were] already cooked, with knives and forks sticking in them so that you can cut off a slice whenever you are hungry!” Drawn by these promises many joined an 1843 expedition known as the Great Migration. This 2,000-mile trek along the Overland Trail (11.2) consisted of more than 100 wagons and helped pave the way

 What were the most important ideas associated with Manifest Destiny?

 for subsequent waves of migrants. This trail soon became the main route taken by American settlers traveling from the East and Midwest to Oregon, California, and Utah. By 1845, at least 5,000 settlers had made the arduous five- to six-month-long overland journey to Oregon territory. Migration westward placed an especially heavy burden on women, whose husbands seldom consulted with them before deciding to move. Estimates are that two-thirds of women opposed the idea of relocating to the West. Mary Richardson Walker, the wife of a Protestant missionary who headed to a settlement on the Walla Walla River in what is now Washington, vented her frustration in her diary: “I find it difficult to keep up a usual degree of cheerfulness, If I were to yield to inclination I should cry half my time.” Giving up friends and family and dealing not only with their normal responsibilities of cooking, cleaning, and childcare but also the added burdens of a long and perilous journey made the prospect of moving West terrifying. During the move many women were expected to take on traditional male jobs, such as repairing wagons or helping to construct bridges, while carrying on their traditional roles as mothers and wives. In effect the workload of most women doubled during the move westward. Few Americans, male or female, were aware of this grim reality. Indeed, their impressions of the West continued to be shaped by writers, speakers, and the many artists who traveled with the migrants and painted scenes that reflected the rosy vision of Manifest Destiny. This mythic image of the West influenced artists working almost a generation later and is beautifully captured by Albert Bierstadt in his 1859 painting, Emigrants Crossing the Plains (11.3).

Read the Document John L O’Sullivan, “The Nation of Great Futurity”


MANIFEST DESTINY AND CHANGING VISIONS OF THE WEST

 Bierstadt depicts settlers pausing on their westward journey to allow their livestock to graze and drink. Above them rises a stunning Western landscape; in the foreground Bierstadt places the skeleton of a buffalo. These bones, like the Indian village barely visible in the distance, represent the West’s past, whereas the settlers symbolize its future. The sun’s location in the Western sky evokes God’s blessing and the optimistic vision of Manifest Destiny—a symbol of both the settler’s and the nation’s bright future.

The Native American
 Encounter with Manifest Destiny One danger associated with western migration that figured prominently in representations of the West, both in paintings and sensational newspaper accounts, was the threat of attack by hostile Indians. Even though such attacks were relatively rare, these representations of Indians dominated popular culture. Again, American artists helped spread a popular vision of the West. Charles Wimar’s 1856 painting, Attack on Emigrant Train (11.4), casts the Indians as bloodthirsty savages and accentuates the horror of the emigrants trying to fend off the attack. This painting became a model for later images of Indians and was even used a century later by Hollywood directors as a model for Western fight scenes between Indians and settlers. Americans had been prepared for such a view of Indians by a long tradition stretch-

View the Image Oregon Trail Marker




 “The North Americans will spread out far beyond their present bounds. They will encroach again and again upon their neighbors. New territories will be planted, declare their independence, and be annexed.” DeBow’s Commercial Review, 1848 ing back to the earliest European representations of the New World (see Chapter 1)and rendered in paintings such as The Death of Jane McCrea (see Chapter 4) and in popular literature by Crockett’s Almanac (see Chapter 8). Wimar’s painting reflected one of two radically different visions of Native Americans that were deeply rooted in American culture. From the beginning of European contact with the Americas, Indians had been depicted as either bloodthirsty savages or noble savages (see Chapter 1). The image of the noble Indian chief had been propagated by artists, such as Benjamin West in The Death of General Wolfe (see Chapter 3). Artist George Catlin borrowed from this tradition when he set out to capture the culture of Western Indians. After traveling throughout the West and living among tribes in the 1830s, Catlin organized a popular traveling exhibit of his paintings and the Indian artifacts he had gathered. Acutely aware that American expansion would likely destroy many of the Native American

11.4 Attack on
Emigrant Train
Although Indian
 attacks on western emigrants were rare, this image was so powerful that it influenced portrayals of Indians in movies made by Hollywood more than a century later.

 Why were tales of Indian attacks on immigrants so popular in American culture?



 CHAPTER 11

OVERSPREAD THE CONTINENT”: WESTWARD EXPANSION AND POLITICAL CONFLICT, 1840–1848

 societies of the West, Catlin believed that he had a responsibility to preserve a visual record of Indian culture. These themes are discussed in Images as History: George Catlin and Mah-to-toh-pa: Representing Indians for an American Audience. A few Americans rejected both the image of the Native American as a barbaric savage who ought to be exterminated and the noble savage tragically doomed to extinction. Whig and Protestant reformers expressed sympathy for Native Americans and opposed the relocation of Eastern tribes (see Chapter 8). They also opposed the racist and expansionist vision of Manifest Destiny articulated by O’Sullivan and Benton. William Ellery Channing, a Boston minister and reformer, attacked the arrogance and shortsightedness of Manifest Destiny: “We are destined (that is the word) to overspread North America; and, intoxicated with the idea, it matters little to us how we accomplish our fate.” For Channing and like-minded reformers, expansion was not an unqualified good to be obtained at any cost, but something that demanded that Americans act honestly and respectfully to Indians and do their utmost to protect them. Yet, despite the qualms of reformers American demand for Western land was insatiable. The pressure to make more Indian land available for settlement only grew as Americans streamed westward. Following the policy that had been adopted with Eastern tribes, such as the Cherokee (see Chapter 8), the federal government forced Midwestern tribes in Iowa, including the Sauk and Fox, to relocate to the Indian Territory, present-day Oklahoma, Kansas, and Nebraska, after their defeat in the Black Hawk War of 1832. By the early 1840s, the massive relocation of American Indians was nearly complete. One of the few tribes to successfully resist removal, at least temporarily, was the Seminole in Florida. The American army fought a long and costly war to force the tribe to relocate. From 1835–1842, the Seminoles fought off American forces. In the end, the American government spent ten times the amount of money allocated for all of Indian removal to relocate the Seminole. While Americans in this era generated many descriptions of westward expansion, relatively little material exists written from the Indian perspective. One rare and outstanding exception is the memoir of Sarah Winnemucca, a Paiute Indian from Nevada who became a champion of the rights of indigenous peoples (see 15.16). Her memoir recounts the full range of experiences with whites, from interactions with “good white people” who traded fairly with

 How did the Mormon immigration differ from other westward migrations?

 her family and her people to traumatic encounters with hostile settlers. In one of the more harrowing episodes, she describes an occasion when a band of white men appeared while the village men were away hunting. Winnemucca’s mother and the other women feared that the whites intended to kidnap or sexually assault their children, so she and the other women hid them, burying them in mud and covering their faces with brush. Winnemucca described her anguish— “heart throbbing and not daring to breathe”—as she lay hidden “all day” till the hostile visitors left.

The Mormon Flight to Utah
 Most western migrants went in search of economic opportunities. The members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints were an exception to this rule. Joseph Smith founded this sect, whose members were popularly known as Mormons, in New York in the early 1830s (see Chapter 10). Smith and his followers had been the victims of violent persecution wherever they settled in the East and Midwest, so the West appealed to them as a potential refuge from such hostility. The Mormon trek westward was the largest organized migration in American history. Prior to their exodus the Mormons endured a long period of internal dissension and harassment by their non-Mormon neighbors. After leaving New York, Joseph Smith established Mormon communities in Ohio and Missouri. In Ohio the Mormons experimented with communal economic arrangements. The Mormon doctrine of “consecration and stewardship” required individuals to deed their property to the church, which then provided an allotment of land whose size was tied to the size of the family unit. Mormons also created cooperative agricultural enterprises, pooling their resources and labor. (For additional discussion of the communal dimensions of Mormonism, see Chapter 10.) Non-Mormons resented the economic advantages such cooperation brought to Mormon farmers and businesses. As tensions between Mormons and nonMormons rose, Smith moved most of his followers to Nauvoo, Illinois, on the Mississippi River. The fastestgrowing town in the Midwest in the 1840s, surpassing even Chicago, Nauvoo was a boomtown shaped by a distinctive religious vision. By the end of the 1840s, the Mormon population of this booming city had soared to over 10,000. The Mormon system of tithing (required donations to the church) enabled the church to buy land and build a monumental temple

 Read the Document Black Hawk from Life of Black Hawk

MANIFEST DESTINY AND CHANGING VISIONS OF THE WEST



Images as History
GEORGE CATLIN AND MAH-TO-TOH-PA: REPRESENTING INDIANS FOR AN AMERICAN AUDIENCE
Through his paintings of Western Indians, George Catlin sought to preserve a visual record of their culture and accomplishments. He also felt obliged to portray these “doomed” peoples in a noble light. Capturing the nobility of Indians required representing them in a way that would evoke sympathy and respect from his American audience. One of the many Indians Catlin painted during his years in the West was the Mandan chief Mah-totoh-pa, also known as “Four Bears.” In his diary Catlin noted that the chief wanted to be painted in a manner that reflected the Mandan notions of beauty and masculinity. Both were closely tied to the ideal of the warrior. Accordingly Mah-to-toh-pa dressed for the painting in all the trappings of a warrior chief. Catlin noted in his journal, “His dress … was complete in all its parts, and consisted of a shirt or tunic, leggings, moccasins, head-dress, necklace, shield, bow and 
 Catlin’s journal informed his viewers that only a warrior of “extraordinary renown” was allowed to wear horns on his headdress.

 quiver, lance, tobacco-sack, and pipe; robe, belt, and knife; medicine-bag, tomahawk, and war-club.” Yet Catlin omitted most of these items, believing that they distracted from the chiefs “grace and simplicity.” The notions of beauty that shaped Catlin’s artistic decisions stretched back to antiquity and were different from those of the Mandan chief. In essence Catlin painted his subject as if he were a frontier Cincinnatus, an Indian George Washington (see Chapter Five). The resulting painting was an idealized version of how an Indian chief ought to appear to an American audience, not a representation of how a specific Indian chief wished the American people to see him. How did Catlin represent his Indian subject to his American audience? What does this tell us about American attitudes toward Indians in the early nineteenth century?

•


 By omitting the chief’s war club, tomahawk, and other objects associated with his prowess as a warrior, Catlin made him less frightening to an American audience.

 Mah-to-toh-pa

•
•


 To make Mah-to-toh-pa a great figure in the eyes of Americans, Catlin painted him as if he were a Roman general or a modern Cincinnatus like George Washington and poses him accordingly, Jean Antoine Houdon, George Washington

View the Closer Look Images as History: George Catlin
 and Mah-To-Toh-Pa

 How did Catlin represent his Mandan subject for an American audience?



 CHAPTER 11

11.5 The Nauvoo
Temple
 The Mormon temple at Nauvoo stood on the highest point of land in the new town and towered over the surrounding landscape. Its architecture includes Greek Revival elements, Masonic symbolism, and ideas inspired by Mormon theology.

OVERSPREAD THE CONTINENT”: WESTWARD EXPANSION AND POLITICAL CONFLICT, 1840–1848

 in Nauvoo. As this contemporary image shows, the temple (11.5) dominated the landscape around it. As Smith and his followers faced increasing hostility from their non-Mormon neighbors, the church also encountered internal dissent. When dissident Mormons founded an anti-Smith paper in Nauvoo, Smith, who was also the mayor of Nauvoo, ordered the city marshal and Nauvoo militia to shut down the paper and destroy its printing press. The governor of Illinois then ordered the state militia to seize Smith and bring him to Carthage, Illinois, for trial. While awaiting trial, an angry crowd burst into Smith’s jail cell and shot him to death. Smith’s successor, Brigham Young, decided to move the entire Mormon community to the West, beyond the reach of the church’s critics. Some 16,000 Mormons eventually migrated to the Salt Lake Valley of what is now Utah. Young’s organizational skills and an almost military discipline among his people helped them negotiate the difficult journey. It also helped the Mormons survive and in their new environment. During the first years of settlement, when food rationing became necessary, Young confiscated

 How did Mormon communalism affect their experiences at Nauvoo?

 food surpluses and distributed them to those in need. Mormon communalism again helped the community through a difficult time. Over time, the Mormons built an economic and religious community that combined communalism and private enterprise. Safely ensconced in the Great Salt Lake Basin, far beyond the control of the federal government, they also began openly to practice polygamy, the practice of men taking more than one wife. Brigham Young himself took over 20 wives. Polygamy shocked Americans, particularly in an era when the dominant culture venerated the conventional nuclear family and the cult of true womanhood (see Chapter 10). In remaking the conventional idea of the family, the Mormons resembled the Shakers and Oneida perfectionists, two other religious movement of the day that experimented with different models of the family and sexual practices (see Chapter 10). Mormon law required men to provide for their wives and children, which meant that most could not afford polygamy. Although the Mormon economic and religious elite practiced it, most Mormons were monogamous.

AMERICAN EXPANSIONISM INTO THE SOUTHWEST



 American Expansionism into the Southwest To stabilize and secure its territories that bordered the United States, Mexico adopted policies that transformed its northern provinces in the West and Texas. Changes were made in the way Indians were treated under the old colonial system in California and New Mexico, and Mexico opened Texas to American settlers in the 1820s. But the Americans in Texas became a source of discord for Mexico. Committed to slavery and reluctant to adopt Mexican ways, the Americans fomented an uprising of settlers that created the Republic of Texas. Despite opposition from abolitionists and some Whigs, the United States eventually annexed Texas. Rather than mark the end of expansionist sentiments, the annexation only whetted the appetite of proponents of expansionism. In 1846, the United States declared war on Mexico. The war proved unpopular with some Americans but nonetheless resulted in an American victory and seizure of northern Mexico, vastly increasing the size of the United States.

The Transformation
 of Northern Mexico Until 1800, Spain still controlled a huge swath of North America, a holding acquired in the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries (see Chapter 1) and constituting all of present-day Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California and parts of Nevada, Colorado, and Utah. The Spanish had invested most of their resources in mineral-rich areas of Peru and Mexico and the sugar islands of the Caribbean (see Chapter 2), and had neglected this northern region of their colonial empire. But by the mid-eighteenth century, the Spanish had begun to organize California into four coastal presidios (forts) at San Diego, Santa Barbara, Monterey, and San Francisco. These administrative and military jurisdictions included 21 Catholic missions run by Franciscans and extending as far north as Sonoma, California. Under this mission system thousands of Native Americans were forced to convert to Catholicism and labor for the Spanish. Held in an oppressive condition little better than slavery, they herded livestock, tended crops, and worked as skilled and unskilled laborers. Indeed, the Russian artist and explorer Louis Choris painted this view (11.6) of the Presidio of San Francisco in 1816. This image, showing Indian laborers being herded at the point of a lance by a mounted Spaniard, illustrates Choris’s belief that the Spanish treated Indians like cattle.

 When Mexico declared its independence from Spain in 1821, the economy, politics, and social structure of this region began to change. Apart from achieving internal political stability, one of the new nation’s chief concerns was securing its northern border with the United States. Mexico’s northern borderlands were underpopulated and controlled by the Comanches and Apaches. The introduction of horses and guns to the region transformed the Comanche and Apache tribes: Both tribes proved extremely adept at the use of both guns and horses and as a result they gained almost complete control of the area between Mexico City and its northern provinces. America’s westward expansion also threatened Mexico’s control of its distant provinces. Mindful of these threats Mexican officials took steps to gain greater control of the region. To speed economic development in California, Mexico abolished the mission system and released Indians from their dependent status as bound laborers. To replace the mission system, they adopted the ranchero system in California and New Mexico. Huge tracts of former mission-owned land came into the possession of a relatively few families, and poorly paid Indians performed much of the labor. In Texas, to encourage population growth and economic development, the Mexican government in 1824 offered land grants to American settlers who agreed to become Catholics and learn Spanish. By 1830 there were, almost 7,000 American Texans to 4,000 Hispanic Texans, who were known as Tejanos. The

 What was the ranchero system?



 CHAPTER 11

OVERSPREAD THE CONTINENT”: WESTWARD EXPANSION AND POLITICAL CONFLICT, 1840–1848

 “The arrival [of the caravan in Santa Fe] produced a great deal of bustle and excitement among the natives. “Los Americanos!” … “La entrada de la caravana!” [The Americans! The caravan has arrived!].” JOSIAH GREGG, Commerce of the Prairies, or the Journal of a Santa Fe Trader (1844)

11.6 View of the
San Francisco
Presidio
 This depiction of the mission system by a Russian artist captures the exploitation of the Indian population.

 American settlers were an economic boon to the region. Texans exported an estimated $500,000 worth of goods to New Orleans, mainly cotton and cattle. Additional trade networks developed elsewhere along the Mexican-American border. In California, New England merchants sought seal and sea otter pelts to sell in China. In 1821, American traders established a trade route from Missouri to Santa Fe. Far safer and less rugged than the nearly 1,700-mile journey to Mexico City, the Santa Fe Trail became a thriving trade route. American traders, whose profits on the sale of goods ranging from cloth to

 What advantages did Americans have over Mexicans in the lucrative trade with Santa Fe?

 manufactured items such as umbrellas sometimes reached 40 percent, were often paid in hard currency. Indeed, trade with Santa Fe became so crucial that the Mexican silver peso became the unofficial unit of exchange for much of the western United States.

The Clash of
Interests in Texas
 Although Mexico benefited from the increased trade with the United States, the presence of so many American settlers in Texas worried Mexican officials. Three issues were particularly troubling. First, the Americans flouted the laws requiring they learn Spanish and convert to Catholicism. Second, they brought thousands of slaves into Texas at a time when Mexico was heading toward the abolition of slavery (a goal it achieved in 1829). Third, many American settlers did little to conceal their interest in joining the United States. A small uprising in 1826 of Americans hoping to secede was easily crushed by the Mexican army. The Mexican government reacted by banning further immigration from the United States. Still Americans came, and Mexico lifted the ban in 1833. Before long there were 30,000 Americans in Texas.

View the Image Texas, Home for the Emigrant


AMERICAN EXPANSIONISM INTO THE SOUTHWEST

 A well-organized effort to separate from Mexico occurred in 1834. This time Americans took advantage of the instability of Mexican politics. In 1834, Mexican General Antonio López de Santa Anna staged a coup and assumed dictatorial powers. When American settlers in Texas revolted, demanding a restoration of the constitution, Santa Anna decided to crush the rebellion. The ensuing war between Santa Anna’s forces and the American Texans was brutal. One of the bloodiest battles occurred in early 1836 near San Antonio at the Alamo, an old Spanish mission defended by a small force of Texans, including legendary frontiersman and politician Davy Crockett and Jim Bowie (for whom the Bowie Knife was named). Historians continue to argue over the exact death toll, but few dispute that the fighting was fierce and many died that day. Images such as this woodcut of Crockett’s death inspired Americans, whose battle cry for the rest of the war against Mexico became “Remember the Alamo” (11.7). Even as Santa Anna’s forces assaulted the Alamo, American Texans declared independence from Mexico (March 2, 1836) and drafted a new constitution.



 Meanwhile his victory at the Alamo convinced Santa Anna that the Texas forces were no match for his army. Overconfident he recklessly divided his troops, leading to his defeat and capture at the Battle of San Jacinto by the Texans under Sam Houston.

The Republic of Texas and
 the Politics of Annexation The citizens of the now independent Republic of Texas expected the United States to act quickly and annex Texas into the expanding American Republic. They would have to wait nearly a decade, however, as annexation proved to be a divisive issue in American politics. Opponents of slavery feared annexation would upset the delicate balance between free and slave states. Conversely Southerners and others who favored slavery supported Texas annexation. Heated debate in 1836 and 1837 died down as both the Democrats and Whigs sought to avoid the Texas issue. For the moment the economic problems associated with the Panic of 1837 (see Chapter 8) preoccupied Americans.

11.7 Fall of the
Alamo—Death of
Crockett
 The heroism of the Alamo’s defenders is captured in this crude woodcut, which shows Crockett’s bravery in the face of battle.

 How did Anglo-Texans use their defeat at the Alamo to rally support for their cause?



 CHAPTER 11

OVERSPREAD THE CONTINENT”: WESTWARD EXPANSION AND POLITICAL CONFLICT, 1840–1848

11.8 Texas Coming In
 In this political cartoon Polk welcomes Texas, while Whigs including Henry Clay and Daniel Webster, vainly try to hold back the Lone Star Republic from joining the Union. The Whigs are dragged into the “Salt River” a contemporary political term synonymous with a political dead end, oblivion, or an insurmountable obstacle.

 Texas annexation reemerged as a major political issue in 1844, reviving sectional tensions over slavery and western expansion. It started when President John Tyler, a proslavery Whig, began touting his support for annexation to gain the support of Southern Whigs and secure the party’s presidential nomination. His strategy backfired, however, when many Whigs opposed his plans for Texas annexation, viewing it as a thinly veiled effort to expand slavery into the West. Tyler’s proslavery stance cost him the nomination when the Whigs, seeking to avoid the controversy, chose Henry Clay, perhaps the best-known Whig politician in America, as their candidate. The Democrats were also shaken by the annexation and slavery issues. Although Martin Van Buren was the leading figure in the Democratic Party, Southerners opposed him because of his abolitionist leanings. After nine ballots the Democrats finally settled on a proslavery Southerner, James K. Polk, as their candidate. Polk favored annexation of Texas. In this political cartoon from the election of 1844 (11.8), the Whigs, led by Henry Clay, attempt to hold back Texas from entering the Union. James K. Polk stands with an American flag, ready to welcome Texas into

 How did the Liberty Party affect the election of 1844?

 the Union. Texans Stephen Austin (left) and Sam Houston (right) each wave the Lone Star flag of the Texas Republic. Polk’s expansionist agenda appealed to Southerners and Northerners who hoped that westward expansion would mean more land for agriculture. Polk’s strong stance on annexation rattled the Whigs, including Clay, who feared the Democratic Party’s aggressive stance on Texas was popular enough to give it an electoral victory. Clay equivocated about opposing annexation, and his flip-flop alienated many antislavery Whigs in the North. A small third party, the newly formed Liberty Party, adopted a staunchly antislavery, anti-annexation stance and captured 62,000 votes, enough, some scholars argue, to rob Henry Clay of electoral victories in New York and Michigan, thereby handing Polk the presidency in 1844. Emboldened by Polk’s victory, Tyler, the sitting president, secured Texas annexation by a joint resolution of both Houses of Congress, which allowed him to bypass the constitutional requirement that treaties be approved by a twothirds majority in the Senate; Tyler could have never mustered enough votes to approve a treaty of annexation. This tactic bypassed the constitutional roadblock preventing the acquisition of Texas. Opponents of slavery viewed his actions as yet another example of the unscrupulous nature of proslavery forces. In 1845, Texas entered the Union as a slave state.

 Polk’s Expansionist Vision A Tennessee lawyer and a protégé of Andrew Jackson, James K. Polk earned the nickname “Young Hickory,” a reference to his mentor Andrew Jackson’s reputation as “Old Hickory” (see Chapter 8). Polk shared Jackson’s view of the importance of a strong executive and his belief in the necessity and inevitability of western expansion. He also shared Jackson’s racial views, which

Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Annexation of Texas


AMERICAN EXPANSIONISM INTO THE SOUTHWEST 11.9
Mexican War rémont Sonoma F This map depicts the major offenSan Francisco sives of the war. 


UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

Fort Leavenworth


 Frémont

El Brazito


R.


A rka n s a s
R.


DISPUTED BY TEXAS AND MEXICO
El Paso 
Kearny


San Diego


 TERRITORY

Las Vegas


Albuquerque


San Pasqual


S TAT E S


 INDIAN

Santa Fé


Los Angeles


 UNITED

Red


R.


REPUBLIC OF

 pi

Santa Barbara


 y

Mississip


Ke a r n


 Bent’s Fort

 TEXAS

Ri


 o Gra

New Orleans


 e

 f lf o

Chihuahua


Ca


N


 ue

 lif

 a

N


U.
S.


Sa


Tampico
 nta

Mexico City


Na
 vy

An
 na Scott

 ott Sc

San Luis Potosi


Gulf of
Mexico


 lor Tay

Annexed by United States in 1845
 included support for American forces slavery and disregard Mexican forces for Native American American victory rights. Indeed, former Mexican victory President John Quincy Adams, who had become a prominent Whig congressman, denounced Polk as a “slave-holding exterminator of Indians.” Polk wasted little time in acting on his expansionist vision. Polk first moved to acquire Oregon, an area that the United States and Britain had been wrangling over for decades. Polk had campaigned on the slogan, “Fifty-four Forty or Fight,” a reference to the U.S. demand that the geographical boundary separating Oregon from British Canada be fixed at the latitude 54° 40ʹ. Ultimately Polk agreed to a border further south that extended across the 49th parallel. This shrewd compromise secured the most valuable agricultural lands sought by American settlers. The Oregon settlement in 1846 enabled Polk to focus his attention on Mexico. As the ardently pro-expansion Democratic paper The New York Herald noted, “We can now thrash Mexico into decency at our leisure.” The annexation of Texas in 1845 had left open the question of the exact boundary between the United States and Mexico. Polk sent John Slidell, a lawyer and Democratic politician, to Mexico to settle the boundary question and debts that Mexicans owed to Americans. Slidell was also instructed to

Santa Anna


Mazatlan


Matamoros


Santa Anna


 ni

 EA

Buena Vista


San Lucas


Palo Alto


Monterrey


 MEXICO

La Paz
San Jose


Corpus Christi


 ces R.

Taylor


 or

 OC

 vy Na

 IC

.
U.S


 CIF

 nd

Gu


 PA

(1836–45)
San Antonio


Jalapa
Veracruz
Cerro Gordo


Puebla


 inquire about buying California and New Mexico. This aggressive negotiating posture reflected Polk’s expansionist desires. He and his advisors feared that Mexico might pay off part of its debts by ceding California to Britain, America’s chief commercial rival. By being so belligerent, Polk ensured that the negotiations would fail. Still angry over the loss of Texas, Mexicans were not interested in losing any further land. The specific issue dividing the United States and Mexico was the exact boundary between Texas and Mexico. The Mexican government claimed the southern boundary of Texas was the Nueces River, not the Rio Grande as the United States maintained (11.9). The Rio Grande would give Texas more territory at the expense of Mexico. Polk dispatched American troops under General Zachary Taylor into the disputed zone between the two rivers. When a small group of Mexican forces attacked Taylor’s troops on April 25, 1846, Polk informed Congress that “Mexico has passed the boundary of the United States, and shed American blood on American soil.” Congress formally declared war on Mexico on May 13.

View the Map Interactive Map: The Mexican War 1846–1848


 How did Polk purse his expansionist agenda?



 CHAPTER 11

OVERSPREAD THE CONTINENT”: WESTWARD EXPANSION AND POLITICAL CONFLICT, 1840–1848

The Mexican War and
Its Consequences
 The Mexican-American War lasted only two years and ended in a resounding victory for the United States. America now controlled most of northern Mexico. Although supporters of Manifest Destiny had seen geographic expansion as a panacea for the nation’s economic and social problems, few could foresee how the defeat of Mexico and acquisition of new lands would usher in more intense political conflict. The debate over whether to allow slavery in the territories gained from Mexico would strain the two-party system, splitting Whigs and Democrats into Northern and Southern wings. A third party, the Free-Soil Party, emerged during this period committed to blocking the spread of slavery.

A
Controversial War  The Mexican War divided Americans along sectional lines and split both the Democratic and Whig parties. Southern Whigs supported Polk’s efforts. “Every battle fought in Mexico,” one South Carolina paper averred, “insures the acquisition of territory which must widen the field of Southern enterprise and power in the future.” Northern Whigs, in contrast, denounced the war as an unjust conflict manufactured by Polk to secure California and New Mexico. “This war is waged against an unoffending people, without just or adequate cause,” argued one outraged Whig, “for the purposes of conquest; with the design to extend slavery.” Northern abolitionists denounced “Mr. Polk’s War.” William Lloyd Garrison went so far as to welcome “the overwhelming defeat of the American troops, and the success of the injured Mexicans.” The most profound critique of the war came from the transcendentalist philosopher Henry David Thoreau (see Chapter 10), who defended the ideal of peaceful opposition by citizens to unjust government action. See Choices and Consequences: Henry David Thoreau and Civil Disobedience. The Mexican War was the first conflict America fought primarily on foreign soil. It was also the most logistically complex war in the nation’s brief history, involving multiple fronts, long supply lines, and the coordination of ground and amphibious assaults. The Mexican War also produced two of the greatest generals in American history, Zachary Taylor and Winfield Scott. Taylor was the common soldier’s general, a man without pretensions whose reputation for bravery earned him the nickname among

 What were the most important differences between the leadership style of Generals Zachary Taylor and Winfield Scott?

 his troops, “Old Rough and Ready.” Scott was in many respects the opposite of Taylor. A brilliant tactician and strategist, “Old Fuss and Feathers” was arrogant and fond of pomp and ceremony. The Mexican War also provided a proving ground for a host of military leaders who later became important generals of the Civil War era, including Ulysses S. Grant, Robert E. Lee, Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson, George McClellan, George G. Meade, and P. G. T. Beauregard. The United States had clear military superiority over Mexico. American forces under Zachary Taylor scored an early victory in May 1846 at the battle of Palo Alto (11.9). General Stephen Kearny then opened a second front by marching from Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, to Santa Fe and then on to California, where he joined up with an army under Captain John C. Fremont. Fremont had already paved the way for the conquest of California by instigating a rebellion against Mexican authority there known as the “bear-flag revolt” for the grizzly bear emblem that decorated the rebel flag. Scott’s successful amphibious assault at the port of Vera Cruz led to an assault on Mexico City. After five more months of fierce fighting, Scott captured the Mexican capital on May 1, 1847. The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ended the war (1848). It settled the border dispute between Texas and Mexico and ceded to the United States a vast swath of new territory in the Southwest—over 500,000 square miles—comprising present-day California, New Mexico, Arizona, and parts of Texas, Utah, Colorado, and Nevada. The United States had seized 55 percent of Mexico’s territory.

Read the Document Thomas Corwin “ Against
 the Mexican War”

THE MEXICAN WAR AND ITS CONSEQUENCES



Choices and Consequences
HENRY DAVID THOREAU AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
The author Henry David Thoreau was a committed abolitionist. Opposition to the war with Mexico among abolitionists was intense and reflected their view that the war was an effort to expand slavery. In the political cartoon, “Young Texas in Repose,” an unsavory Texan sits on a prostrate slave, whose head is rendered as a bale of cotton. Abolitionist protest against the war took a variety of forms, but none have had as profound impact on subsequent history as Thoreau’s refusal to pay his poll tax. His actions landed him in jail for a night. In Thoreau’s view jail was the only place for a just man in an unjust legal and political system. Thoreau explored the reasons for his act of defiance two years later. In a lyceum lecture called “The Rights and Duties of the Individual in Relation to Government,” he sketched this theory of civil disobedience. A year later a small literary journal published a revised version of this lecture, entitled “Resistance to Civil Government.” Thoreau’s essay framed in concise terms the options available to citizens facing government action they believed to be immoral: “Unjust laws exist: shall we be content to obey them, or shall we endeavor to amend them, and obey them until we have succeeded, or shall we transgress them at once?” Here are the options Thoreau envisioned: 
Choices




 Accept the government’s decision and not criticize it.



 Obey the law but work to change it.



 Protest the law by refusing to obey it, and suffer the legal consequences for challenging it.

Decision
 Thoreau chose the third option and spent a night in the Concord, Massachusetts, jail.

Consequences
 Thoreau’s actions had almost no impact at the time, and his essay attracted little attention. However, it became one of the most influential political essays ever written. His theory of civil disobedience influenced the twentieth-century Indian leader Mohandas Gandhi’s nonviolent protests against colonial British rule in India and the campaign of Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. against racial discrimination. Protestors around the world continue to use Thoreau’s theory to advance human rights.

Continuing Controversies


Young Texas in Repose


 Is the notion of a legal right of civil disobedience a contradiction in terms? Philosophers continue to debate the morality of civil disobedience. If one condones civil disobedience, does it invariably lead to anarchy, that is, lawlessness and political disorder, or can one support the rule of law and still accept the moral legitimacy of civil disobedience? Another controversial issue that continues to divide supporters of resistance theory is the role of nonviolence. Must civil disobedience be nonviolent, or can one legitimately use violence to secure justice? Abolitionists debated this latter issue as they pondered what to do about the evil of slavery. The issue continues to divide supporters of the ideal of civil disobedience. Many affirm that the idea can only claim the moral high ground and be effective if it forswears violence.

 How significant was Thoreau’s essay when it was published?



 CHAPTER 11

OVERSPREAD THE CONTINENT”: WESTWARD EXPANSION AND POLITICAL CONFLICT, 1840–1848

 Divided at the outset of the war, Americans remained divided in its aftermath. The treaty arrived in Washington for ratification just as the city was celebrating the dedication of the cornerstone of the Washington Monument. One orator celebrated the victory over Mexico as the triumph of Manifest Destiny. Comparing American liberty to a “locomotive” that was speeding down the “track of human freedom,” he declared that “the whole civilized world resounds with American opinions and American principles.” Offsetting this ebullient optimism, however, was a sense of foreboding vividly expressed by Ralph Waldo Emerson: “Mexico will poison us.” The controversies created by the acquisition of so much land, particularly the nettlesome question of the future role of slavery in the territories, proved Emerson right.

Images of the Mexican War
 The Mexican War was the first conflict in American history that professional journalists covered and reported to the people directly almost daily. The telegraph made such instantaneous communication possible. Competing for readers, newspapers pioneered new techniques for gathering and reporting news, including sending “war correspondents” into battle. This practice freed newspapers from reliance on the military and government, allowing the press to be more independent. To be sure many papers continued to simply echo the official view of the war provided by the government. But many other editors voiced dissent. Abolitionists in particular used their antislavery newspapers to challenge the Polk administration and denounce the war. Indeed, one military officer’s complaint about the negative impact of a “thousand prying eyes and brazen tongues” was a direct result of “a free and uncontrolled press.”

 An equally significant innovation in war coverage involved the use of images by papers like The New York Herald to explain important events. The Mexican War was also the first military conflict in America to be captured on film. The daguerreotype, an early form of photography, produced images that are fuzzy by the standards of modern technology but that seemed miraculous in their day. Americans approached the new technology as if it were an actual facsimile of reality and not merely another artistic representation of it. Indeed, the Herald proclaimed that it intended its war coverage to be “daguerreotype reports,” a term meant to convey unbiased and accurate report of reality in nearly real time. Americans embraced the new pictorial art form enthusiastically. Before shipping off, a soldier might sit for a daguerreotype that he gave to family or loved ones. Soldiers might also carry daguerreotypes of loved ones into battle. Daguerreotypists even followed soldiers into Mexico, setting up temporary studios and recording battle scenes. At least one artist died recording America’s war effort. An especially haunting image produced during the war was a daguerreotype of the gravesite of Henry Clay Jr.,

 What role did images play in shaping American perceptions of the Mexican War?

THE MEXICAN WAR AND ITS CONSEQUENCES

 son of the noted Whig politician, killed at the Battle of Buena Vista (11.10). The scene is desolate: a cross, an open grave awaiting a coffin, and an adobe vault over Clay’s grave, a necessity that protected the burial site from being attacked by wolves or desecrated by grave robbers. Few people were likely to have seen such an image, but for those who did, its emotional impact would have been immense. This sober image contrasts with a heroic representation of Clay’s death in a popular print produced for a mass audience (11.11). Rather



 than capture the desolation of a grave in a distant wilderness, the lithograph shows a fallen leader urging his troops on to victory. The artist focuses on Clay’s final dramatic gesture with the pistol given to him by his father. “Take these pistols to my father,” he tells a comrade, “and tell him I have done all I can with them, and now return them to him.” Heroic images of this sort proved the most popular and influential representations of the war. Nathaniel Currier’s firm alone produced at least 85 different images of the war for an American audience eager to purchase them.

 11.10 and 11.11 Clay’s Grave and the Death of Colonel Clay These representations of the death of Henry Clay’s son capture radically different views of the war. The haunting daguerreotype (left) was a deeply personal artifact, whereas the more widely distributed lithograph was more inspirational than morbid.

 Why did the artist pose Henry Clay in the same posture as earlier artists had used for fallen leaders such as General Wolfe?



 CHAPTER 11

OVERSPREAD THE CONTINENT”: WESTWARD EXPANSION AND POLITICAL CONFLICT, 1840–1848

The Wilmot Proviso and the
Realignment of American Politics
 For a young, up-and-coming Whig from Illinois, the War with Mexico was a decisive moment. Abraham Lincoln opposed the war and viewed territorial expansion as a threat to America’s future. Whigs argued that economic development, not geographical expansion, was the key to America’s prosperity. In what would become a hallmark of his distinctive rhetoric, Lincoln translated this Whig ideal into a folksy idiom. “[Whigs] did not believe in enlarging our field,” Lincoln observed in 1848, “but in keeping our fences where they are and cultivating our present possessions, making it a garden, improving the morals and education of the people.” Supporters of slavery held a different vision: Acquiring a huge new swath of territory would be a boon for slavery. The problem of how to handle slavery in the territories gained from Mexico would strain America’s new two-party system, splitting Whigs and Democrats into Northern and Southern wings and eventually setting the stage for the emergence of a new political party, the Republicans.

The Wilmot Proviso
 In response to concerns that land seized from Mexico would lead to the spread of slavery, Congressmen David Wilmot, a Pennsylvania Democrat, introduced a measure, the Wilmot Proviso, which would have banned slavery from all territory acquired from Mexico. The bill created a firestorm. The controversy over the Wilmot Proviso heightened sectional tensions and conflict over the future of slavery. Southerners denounced it as a thinly veiled attack on slavery, whereas Northerners insisted that it left slavery untouched where it already existed. The Proviso passed in the House, where Northern representatives outnumbered Southerners, but it was defeated in the Senate, where the balance between slave and free states prevented either side from passing legislation objectionable to the other. The Wilmot Proviso shifted American political debate to the problem of slavery in the territories, splitting both parties into proslavery and free-soil factions. In response politicians tried to resolve the sectional argument over slavery. President Polk supported a proposal, modeled on the Missouri Compromise (see Chapter 7), to extend the 36° 30ʹ line across the Louisiana Purchase territories separating free states from slave states to the Pacific coast. Northerners opposed this idea because most of the land gained from Mexico lay below this line and seemed likely to enter the Union

 Why was the Wilmot Proviso so controversial?

 ultimately as slave states. Senator Lewis Cass of Michigan suggested another compromise, popular sovereignty, which would allow the people in each territory to decide for themselves whether to permit slavery. Hoping to garner both Northern and Southern supporters, he omitted a crucial detail: when this decision on slavery would be made. Most Northerners believed this decision would be made when a territorial legislature was established. Southerners, however, accepted John C. Calhoun’s interpretation that the decision over slavery would not be made until settlers wrote a state constitution, which opponents of slavery feared would allow slaveholders time to firmly establish slavery in a territory.

Sectionalism and the
Election of 1848
 The Wilmot Proviso and slavery defined the presidential election of 1848. Both the Democratic and Whig parties tried to downplay the question of slavery to attract voters in the North and South. Democrats nominated moderate Lewis Cass, champion of popular sovereignty. The Whigs had a more difficult time choosing a candidate. Henry Clay had been the clear frontrunner, but his adamant opposition to the seizure of lands from Mexico was a difficult political position to take. Clay had hoped to avoid having to take a stand on

THE WILMOT PROVISO AND THE REALIGNMENT OF AMERICAN POLITICS



11.12 The
Candidate of
Many Parties
 A phrenologist probes General Zachary Taylor’s head, looking for some sign of what the presidential candidate thought about key issues. Taylor’s campaign tried to avoid taking stands on issues such as the Wilmot Proviso that might alienate voters.

 this issue, but the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo undercut him: After the treaty, Clay’s policy of non-expansion made no sense. Americans had to decide what to do about slavery in the lands won from Mexico. Casting Clay aside the Whigs eventually settled on General Zachary Taylor, a Mexican War hero who cast himself as a “no party man” and a unifier above partisanship. Even more useful to the party, because he was a career soldier, Taylor’s views on many political issues, including the Wilmot Proviso, were unknown. This humorous political cartoon from the election of 1848 shows a phrenologist (see Chapter 10) probing the general’s skull, supposedly to find clues to his political beliefs (11.12). The title, The Candidate of Many Parties, underscores Taylor’s attempt to be all things to all people. Indeed, the Whigs ran two different campaigns in the two regions of the country. To capture Southern voters, they stressed that Taylor owned slaves, asserting that no slaveholder would betray the interests of the South. To appeal to Northerners, the Whigs emphasized Taylor’s credentials as a Mexican War hero and his support for a cardinal Whig principle: opposition to a strong executive, including the presidential veto. By stressing his belief that the veto should

View the Image Political Cartoon: Fillmore and Taylor


 be used only in exceptional cases, such as when a law was clearly unconstitutional, Taylor signaled to Northern Whigs that he would not veto a Wilmot Proviso-like law. Embracing this cherished Whig constitutional ideal not only allowed Taylor to underscore his Whig credentials to those who doubted them but also to side-step the slavery issue. Taylor’s election strategy enabled him to do the seemingly impossible: campaign as a proslavery candidate in the South and a pro-Wilmot Proviso candidate in the North. The 1848 election was further complicated by the emergence of a third party—the Free-Soil Party. This party brought together disaffected Democrats who supported the Wilmot Proviso and resented the growing influence of Southerners within their party. Led by former President Martin Van Buren, antislavery Democrats were known as “Barnburners,” a nickname that derived from an old Dutch tale about a farmer who burned down his barn to get the rats out. In 1848, the “rats” were proslavery Democrats. A political cartoon shows Van Buren setting fire to a barn. Lewis Cass, viewed as a pro-slavery Democrat by abolitionists, flees along with a bunch of rats (11.13). The Free-Soil Party also attracted “Conscience Whigs” who were unwilling to support a slaveholder

 Why does this political cartoon show a phrenologist examining Taylor’s skull?



 CHAPTER 11

11.13 Smoking
Him Out
 In this political cartoon Martin Van Buren is shown at the side of a burning barn, while proslavery Democrat Lewis Cass, is perched on the roof ready to jump, and rats flee the building. Antislavery Democrats were nicknamed “Barnburners.”

OVERSPREAD THE CONTINENT”: WESTWARD EXPANSION AND POLITICAL CONFLICT, 1840–1848

 as their party’s candidate. It also gathered abolitionist supporters of the Liberty Party (the antislavery party founded in 1840). Under the slogan “No more Slave States and no more Slave Territories,” the Free-Soil platform took the moderate position of opposing only the extension of slavery into the West. The Whig, Taylor, won the election handily, but his victory revealed the complexity the slavery issue posed for American politics. See Competing Visions, Slavery and the Election of 1848. He won eight of

 15 slave states, largely because he was a slave owner. The race was much closer in the North, but Taylor prevailed in the key states of Pennsylvania and New York. He owed his narrow margin of victory in the latter state to the Free-Soil Party, which drew votes away from the Democrats. The Free-Soil Party failed to win a single state, but it polled 300,000 votes (10 percent of the total) and elected two senators and nine representatives to Congress from states in the Northeast and Midwest.

 “Let the soil of our extensive domains be kept free for the hardy pioneers of our own land, and the oppressed and banished of other lands, seeking homes of comfort and fields of enterprise in the new world.”

 Who were the Barnburners?

Free-Soil Party Platform, 1848


THE WILMOT PROVISO AND THE REALIGNMENT OF AMERICAN POLITICS



Competing Visions
SLAVERY AND THE ELECTION OF 1848
What to do with the vast territory acquired from Mexico became a contentious issue in the election of 1848. The two-party system fractured, producing a new third party, the Free-Soil Party, which opposed the spread of slavery westward. The new party met in Buffalo, New York, as reflected in the cartoon showing Martin Van Buren, its candidate, riding a buffalo. The party platforms of the Democrats and Whig Party each adopted a different approach to slavery. The Democrat Party Platform reasserted its commitment to states’ rights and its corollary: Slavery was an issue that the Constitution had left for the individual states to decide. 
 The Whig Platform avoided mentioning slavery. Instead, it focused on the merits of the Whig candidate, Zachary Taylor who was presented as a war hero and a man who put the nation ahead of sectional interests.

 The Congress has no power under the Constitution to interfere with or control the domestic institutions of the several states, that such States are the sole and proper judges of everything appertaining to their own affairs, not prohibited by the Constitution; that all efforts of the Abolitionists or others made to induce Congress to interfere with questions of slavery … are calculated to lead to the most alarming and dangerous consequences.

 That we look on General Taylor’s administration of the Government as one conducive to Peace, Prosperity, and Union … we have a candidate whose very position as a Southwestern man, reared on the banks of the great stream whose tributaries, natural and artificial, embrace the whole Union, renders the protection of the interests of the whole country his first trust.

The Buffalo Hunt


 What were the most important differences between the strategy of the Whigs and Democrats in the election of 1848?



 CHAPTER 11

OVERSPREAD THE CONTINENT”: WESTWARD EXPANSION AND POLITICAL CONFLICT, 1840–1848

1804–1819


1821–1825


1835–1837




 Federal exploration of the West by Lewis and Clark, Zebulon Pike, and Stephan Long

 Mexico declares independence from Spain

 Texas revolts against Mexico

 City of Nauvoo founded

 Texans achieve independence

 Joseph Smith founds the city of Nauvoo which becomes the fastest growing city in the Midwest

 Americans gain accurate information about the West

 Independence ushers in a period of instability in Mexican politics

 First fur rendezvous

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Indians, traders, and trappers gather to buy, sell, and promote intercultural exchanges

Review Questions
 1. What role did ideas of race play in the theory of

Manifest Destiny?
 2. What symbolic function did Indians play in American artists’ representations of the West during the era of expansion?

 4. Who were the “Conscience Whigs”? 5. How did Zachary Taylor’s campaign in 1848 deal with the divisive issue of slavery?

 3. Why did the young Whig Abraham Lincoln oppose the annexation of Texas?

Key Terms
 Rendezvous A festive annual gathering held in the Rocky Mountains in which Indians, mountain men, and traders gathered together to exchange pelts for a variety of goods. Manifest Destiny A term coined by editor and columnist John O’Sullivan to describe his belief in America’s divine right to expand westward. Overland Trail The 2,000-mile route taken by American settlers traveling to new settlements in Oregon, California, and Utah. Liberty Party The staunchly antislavery, anti-annexation, party was short lived, but captured 62,000 votes, a small number, but enough, some historians argue, to effectively rob Henry Clay of electoral victories in New York and Michigan thereby handing Polk the presidency in 1844.

 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo This treaty formally ended the war between the United States and Mexico (1848). In addition to settling the border dispute between Texas and Mexico, the United States gained a significant swath of new territory in the Southwest. Wilmot Proviso Bill introduced by Congressman David Wilmot would have banned slavery from the territories acquired from Mexico. Popular sovereignty An approach to the question of slavery in a newly acquired territory that would have allowed the people in each territory to decide for themselves whether to permit slavery.

CHAPTER REVIEW





1844–1845






 Thousands of pioneers trek west to Oregon

 Polk elected president

 Mexican War begins

 Taylor elected president

 American government pushes Polk’s expansionist agenda

 Armed conflict with Mexico erupts over border dispute

 Whigs find a candidate able to unite the party across regional divisions

Wilmot Proviso


Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo


 Provision to ban slavery from any land gained from Mexico heats up the slavery question in American politics

 Mexican War ends

 First important wave of overland migration begins

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of “To Overspread the Continent”: Westward Expansion and Political Conflict, 1840–1848.

Questions for Analysis
 1. How did western expansion transform American life? View the Map Atlas Map: National Expansion and Movement West to 1830, p. 319

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • Black Hawk from Life of Black Hawk, p. 322 • Thomas Corwin “Against the Mexican War,” p. 330

View the Image


2. What was Manifest Destiny?
Read the Document John L O’Sullivan, “The Nation of


• Oregon Trail Marker, p. 321
• Texas, Home for the Emigrant, p. 326


Great Futurity,” p. 320


View the Map Interactive Map: The Mexican War 1846–1848,


 3. How did American artists represent the West? View the Closer Look Images as History: George Catlin and Mah-To-Toh-Pa, p. 323

 4. Why did Texas annexation arouse such intense feelings? Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Annexation of Texas, p. 328

 5. How did the Wilmot Proviso transform American politics? View the Image Political Cartoon: Fillmore and Taylor, p. 335

 p. 329

 Why did slavery emerge as a national political issue in the late 1840s?

Political
Realignment


 p. 350

 CHAPTER

The Slavery
Question in the
Territories p. 342




