 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 26

A
Nation Divided The Vietnam War, 1945–1975
 Vietnam was America’s longest war to date, a conflict that divided the nation to an extent not seen since the Civil War. For 30 years the United States invested money and then eventually soldiers in the struggle to prevent the establishment of communism in the small Southeast Asian country of Vietnam. From 1945 to 1964, the United States fought a proxy war by funneling supplies and aid to others willing to fight the Vietnamese Communists. In 1965, the conflict became an American war when President Lyndon Johnson sent U.S. ground forces to fight in Southeast Asia. By 1967, the antiwar movement had taken to the streets to protest America’s involvement in Vietnam. On October 21,1967, antiwar protesters held a peace rally before the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., after which thirty thousand demonstrators linked arms and marched to the Pentagon, the headquarters of the Department of Defense. When they arrived, soldiers advanced toward the crowd with their guns drawn. An 18-year-old actor from New York with a flair for the dramatic stepped forward holding a bouquet of pink carnations and carefully placed one into each soldier’s rifle. Washington Star news photographer Bernie Boston captured this poetic gesture in “Flower Power,” an iconic photo of the civil strife that the war triggered. Competing interpretations of this image revealed key divisions of the era. For peace advocates the photograph illustrated the stark contrast between government-sponsored violence in Vietnam and American citizens’ demand for peace. Critics of the peace movement, who accused activists of destroying respect for law and order, viewed the gesture as a ploy to distract the soldiers moments before demonstrators stormed the steps of the Pentagon and armed guards beat them back. The Vietnam War originated as an anticolonial struggle to win independence from France, and then evolved into a civil war between North and South Vietnam. At first the crucial debates about Vietnam took place behind closed doors in the White House. Over the course of the country’s 30-year engagement in Vietnam, despite being presented continuously with other viewpoints, five American presidents from Truman to Nixon chose escalation when faced with the option of pulling back or pressing forward. Viewing the Vietnamese conflict through the prism of the global Cold War, each president feared that losing all of Vietnam to communism would set off a chain reaction of communist revolutions throughout Southeast Asia. World War II had united the nation. Vietnam fractured it. The guerilla war under way in South Vietnam, in which Communist soldiers intermingled with the civilian population to avoid detection, made it particularly difficult for Americans to separate enemy combatants from civilians. When the American military tried using overwhelming force to flush Communist guerillas out of South Vietnamese villages, the civilian death toll turned many Americans against the war. The conflict ultimately tore apart both Vietnam and America before the United States finally withdrew in 1973. The war ended with a Communist victory in 1975.

 “We will not be defeated. We will not grow tired. We will not withdraw.” President LYNDON B. JOHNSON in 1965





 CHAPTER 26

A NATION DIVIDED: THE VIETNAM WAR, 1945–1975

The Long Road to War
 From 1945 to 1965, America gradually shifted its Cold War focus from Europe to Asia. The United States first supported French efforts to recover Vietnam as a colony, and then sustained an independent anti-communist South Vietnam with financial aid. At home some American policymakers envisioned the war as part of the worldwide struggle between democracy and communism. In Vietnam, however, Americans confronted a country torn apart by a civil war that reflected its long-standing religious and political divisions. No American president sought a war in Vietnam, and key advisors offered competing assessments of America’s chances for victory. Yet at critical moments when the intractable political and military situation called for a response, each president chose to bolster the American commitment rather than turn back.

The Escalating Importance
 of Vietnam America first became involved in Vietnam during World War II, when Japan took over the French colony of Indochina (present-day Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam). In 1945, U.S. intelligence operatives worked with Ho Chi Minh, the leader of an underground Vietnamese communist resistance movement that launched guerilla attacks against the Japanese occupiers. When the war ended Ho Chi Minh and his rebel force formed a provisional government in Hanoi and declared independence from France. Eager to reestablish its position as a world power after the humiliating occupation by Germany in World War II, France sent in troops to crush the Vietnamese independence movement. In search of international support for Vietnamese independence, the Western-educated Ho Chi Minh turned to the United States. Ho Chi Minh had previously tried to interest the United States in Vietnamese independence by submitting a petition to the American delegation at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 after World War I that called for democratic reforms in French Indochina. The American delegation ignored his request, mindful that his proposal would anger the French, whose support President Woodrow Wilson needed to create the League of Nations (see Chapter 20). After the rebuff in Paris, Ho Chi Minh became a communist, attracted by communism’s revolutionary promise to free colonized peoples. “It was patriotism, not communism, that inspired me,” he later claimed. In 1941, after nearly three decades abroad working as a Soviet spy, Ho

 Who was Ho Chi Minh to his supporters and foes?

 Chi Minh returned to Vietnam to help organize communist resistance to the Japanese occupation. Despite this revolutionary background he hoped that the United States would support Vietnamese independence when Japan withdrew in 1945. His communist credentials, however, tainted him in the eyes of President Harry S. Truman, who remained unmoved by Ho Chi Minh’s truthful assurances that the Soviet Union did not control or finance him. In the 1940s, the Americans saw Ho Chi Minh as a communist puppet doing Moscow’s bidding. His Vietnamese followers, however, viewed him as a charismatic leader ignited with a patriotic desire to free his nation from French colonial control. As one disciple recalled, the 55-year-old “Uncle Ho” spoke with an “ardent and idealistic nationalism” that encouraged many Vietnamese to join the Vietminh, the term used initially to describe all Vietnamese communists, and after 1954 solely for North Vietnamese communists. This photograph (26.1) of Ho Chi Minh sitting with children reinforced his reputation in Vietnam as a beloved, wise elder. The image tapped into prevailing Confucian ideals, including filial piety (respect toward living and dead relatives), loyalty, and humane treatment of others. Ho Chi Minh broadened his appeal by eschewing personal luxuries and living simply in a small cottage. By the time American troops arrived in the late 1960s, an ailing Ho Chi Minh played almost no official role in the conflict. He nonetheless remained the face of Vietnamese communism for supporters and opponents throughout the war. Cold War geopolitics consistently influenced how Americans reacted to the Vietnamese Communist revolt. As the emerging Cold War with the

Read the Document Declaration of Independence
 for Vietnam (1945)

THE LONG ROAD TO WAR

 Soviet Union in the 1940s made containing communism in Europe a national obsession, Vietnam took on new political significance. The United States needed help from a vigorous and cooperative France to defend Western Europe from Soviet incursion. To rebuild the French economy and establish goodwill, the United States gave France arms and funds beginning in 1947 (see Chapter 24). The French government used some of this aid to finance the war in Vietnam. The United States also agreed to support French efforts to regain control of its Vietnamese colony. In 1950, the strategic importance of Vietnam for the United States changed dramatically. The fall of China to communism in 1949 and the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950 when Communist-led North Korea invaded the anti-communist South Korea created fears that all of Asia might fall to communism. The “who lost China” debate hurt Truman politically, and no subsequent president wanted to be the one



 blamed for Vietnam falling to communism. Containing communism in both Europe and Asia became cornerstones of American foreign policy from this point on, requiring the United States to maintain military bases throughout Western Europe and along a string of Pacific islands from Japan to the Philippines. As the Cold War spread to Asia, key presidential advisors saw the hand of the Soviet Union behind every communist victory. By the early 1950s, National Security Council Report 68, or NSC-68, a document that described a global communist monolith, set the tone for U.S. foreign policy (see Chapter 24). Any more territory “under the domination of the Kremlin,” the National Security Council warned, would make the Soviet Union invincible in a future military conflict. The threat would deepen if the Soviets gained control of resource-rich Southeast Asia, whose rubber, rice, tin, and oil were important economically to the United States. These resources were even more vital for Japan, now a key American ally in the struggle against communism, and the United States wanted to ensure Japanese access to these materials by preventing them from falling into unfriendly communist hands. Hardliners in the Truman and Eisenhower administrations embraced the domino theory, the fear that a communist Vietnam would open the door to a complete communist takeover of Southeast Asia, with communists repeating Japan’s conquest of the region in World War II. Announcing the domino theory President Dwight D. Eisenhower explained in a 1954 press conference: “You have a row of dominos set up, you knock over the first one, and what will happen to the last one is the certainty that it will go over very quickly. So you could have a beginning of a disintegration that would have the most profound influences.” Events in the 1950s gave credence to these fears. Josef Stalin’s success in pressuring China and North Korea to accept an armistice to end the Korean War strengthened the American conviction that the Soviet Union could start or stop 26.1 Ho Chi Minh Poses with Children, 1954 Ho Chi Minh’s followers revered him as a wise elder who loved his nation.

 What political and strategic importance did Vietnam assume in U.S. foreign policy by the mid-1950s?



 CHAPTER 26

A NATION DIVIDED: THE VIETNAM WAR, 1945–1975

 Taking Over from the French

26.2 How About
 the Other Buttons? This 1953 illustration shows Soviet leader Josef Stalin pressing his finger on a button labeled “Korea” to end the Korean War. This cartoon suggested that Stalin could stop other conflicts that he had initiated, including the war in Indochina.

 communist insurgencies around the globe. This political cartoon (26.2) by Marcus Edwin showed Stalin pressing the stop button for Korea, and suggested that he could also stop the conflict in Indochina (Vietnam) if he wished. Indeed, Stalin had encouraged the Chinese leader Mao Zedong to take charge of promoting communist revolution throughout Asia. The immediate influx of Communist Chinese advisors to train Vietminh officers, plus mountains of Chinese-manufactured vehicles, arms, and ammunition, seemingly confirmed that the Vietminh were part of an international communist conspiracy masterminded in Moscow. American policymakers failed to appreciate, however, that a shared belief in communism did not override the nationalistic ambitions of the Soviet Union, China, or Vietnam. Ho Chi Minh accepted help from the Chinese, but remembering China’s ancient colonization of Vietnam; he remained suspicious of their ulterior motives and had no intention of turning Vietnam over to them. “It is better to sniff French dung for a while than eat China’s all our life,” warned Ho Chi Minh. In an American worldview that saw every communist revolution as part of the Soviet Union’s master plan, the specific grievances or goals of the Vietminh became irrelevant.

 What key choices did Eisenhower make in 1954 that increased U.S. involvement in Vietnam?

 To hold the line in Vietnam, the American government was willing to foot the bill but wanted the French to do the actual fighting. The United States upheld its end of the bargain. By 1954, the United States was paying for 80 percent of the war’s costs, money used to both purchase arms and fund humanitarian projects including free health clinics, food for refugees, and seeds for farmers. Increasingly, however, the United States doubted, in the words of Truman’s outgoing secretary of state Dean Acheson, the “French will to carry on.” As Acheson anticipated, the incoming Eisenhower administration soon faced a crisis in Vietnam. In 1954, the Vietminh defeated the French at Dien Bien Phu, in the northwest corner of the country, prompting the French to seek an international agreement with the Vietminh. The resulting Geneva Accords (1954) called for a temporary partition of Vietnam along the seventeenth parallel, with the Vietminh in the north and the French in the south, and a general election in two years to reunify the country under one government. Refusing to sign the Geneva Accords, the Eisenhower administration instead resolved to use the two-year period to ease the French out of South Vietnam and create a new government capable of raising and training a strong military to resist communist aggression. To head the new South Vietnamese government, the United States selected Ngo Dinh Diem, a wealthy Catholic who had served as minister of the interior in the French colonial administration before resigning, when the French refused to enact reforms he proposed. A staunch nationalist, Diem moved to the United States, where he became well known to American policymakers. Neither Diem nor the United States intended to let the scheduled election take place, certain that Ho Chi Minh’s authoritarian government would use force and fraud to ensure victory in the North and perhaps in the South as well. Instead the United States tried to destabilize Ho Chi Minh’s fledgling Communist government by creating political turmoil in North Vietnam. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) operatives destroyed government printing presses, contaminated the oil used in bus engines, sabotaged railway tracks, and planted rumors of Chinese troops raping North Vietnamese women. Eisenhower supported the creation of an anticommunist South Vietnam to stem the tide of communism in Southeast Asia. As an additional defense

Read the Document Dwight D. Eisenhower,
Dien Bien Phu (1954)


THE LONG ROAD TO WAR

 against communism, the United States formed the Southeast Asian Treaty Organization (SEATO) in 1954. Through SEATO the United States, Britain, France, Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, Pakistan and the Philippines (granted independence by the United States in 1946) pledged to “meet common danger” in Southeast Asia together. A separate agreement identified Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia as areas that would endanger the “peace and security” of SEATO members, if any of these three nations came under attack. Unlike the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), which guaranteed the mutual defense of member nations in Europe, the SEATO treaty left each nation’s exact commitment vague. Secretary of State John Foster Dulles wanted it that way, reluctant to overextend American military responsibilities around the world by guaranteeing the borders of SEATO members. Even if this loosely worded pact failed to deter communist aggression, Dulles reasoned, it would provide a justification for direct American involvement in Vietnam to protect SEATO members, if the United States decided to escalate its involvement in the future. An important development in America’s ever-increasing involvement in Vietnam, SEATO illustrated how completely the United States linked the civil war in Vietnam to the global crusade against communism. With the United States poised to embark on a major campaign to create an independent South Vietnam, dissenting voices within the government urged the president to pull back. Secretary of Defense Charles E. Wilson warned that he could “see nothing but grief in store for us if we remained.” The Joint Chiefs of Staff complained it would be impossible to build a capable South Vietnamese army without a “reasonably strong, stable civil government in control.” This “chicken and egg” argument over which needed to come first, a strong South Vietnamese government or a strong military, divided American policymakers for the next 15 years. With Diem the United States got neither. A short, stocky man who always dressed in white, Diem’s stiff and privileged appearance contrasted poorly with the plain dress and manners of Ho Chi Minh. The Eisenhower administration recognized Diem’s shortcomings, but Secretary of State Dulles accepted the American ambassador’s conclusion “that there is no one to take his place who would serve U.S. interests better.” The United States quickly realized that Diem intended to build a dictatorial regime in South Vietnam.



 Diem modeled his rule on nineteenth-century Vietnamese emperors, issuing decrees and refusing to abide criticism. “I know what is best for my people,” he declared in one interview. The secret police, headed by Diem’s brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, arrested, tortured, and executed thousands of South Vietnamese accused of opposing his rule. Most Vietminh had relocated to North Vietnam when the country split into two, but remnants of the communist guerilla force still existed in the south. They found ample discontent with Diem among peasants, students, Buddhists, and even South Vietnamese soldiers. To destabilize the Diem regime, the Communists unleashed a wave of assassinations targeting wealthy landlords and rural officials who worked for the regime. Diem tried to cut off guerilla fighters from their supply base. He moved peasants off their ancestral lands and into “strategic hamlets” protected by moats and walls and imprisoned thousands of civilians suspected of aiding the rebels. Enraged over the forced removals, the peasants were like a “mound of straw ready to be ignited,” claimed one Vietnamese Communist. The U.S. government and press revealed none of Diem’s internal difficulties to the American people. When Diem visited the United States in 1957, the American press praised him as the “tough little miracle man” who had brought stability to South Vietnam. “We can take pride in our support,” Newsweek trumpeted. In the mid-1950s, Ho Chi Minh offered southern Communists little support. He was instead preoccupied with subduing the widespread protests that greeted his forced land redistribution in North Vietnam, a campaign that sent armed posses into the countryside to confiscate land. These “land reforms” left thousands of property owners dead, destroyed communities, and created famine. By 1960, however, the North Vietnamese government was sending soldiers and supplies to southern Communists, unleashing a terror campaign to pave the way for a Communist takeover of South Vietnam. In 1960, the southern Communists formed the National Liberation Front (NLF) to unite the factions in South Vietnamese society opposed to the Diem regime into a fighting coalition. Diem derogatorily called South Vietnamese Communists Vietcong, slang meaning “Vietnamese Commies.” The name stuck. From this point on Americans called all Communists from South Vietnam “Vietcong” and Communists from North Vietnam “Vietminh.”

 Why did the civil war in Vietnam reignite in the late 1950s and early 1960s?



 CHAPTER 26

A NATION DIVIDED: THE VIETNAM WAR, 1945–1975

 Debates within the Kennedy Administration John F. Kennedy became president in 1961 having proclaimed Vietnam the “cornerstone of the free world in Southeast Asia.” Kennedy understood the negative political consequences of “losing” a nation to communism. As a congressman he had joined the chorus criticizing Truman when China succumbed to communism. In 1961, Kennedy suffered two setbacks of his own in the global war against communism with the botched Cuban Bay of Pigs invasion and his inability to stop the Soviets from constructing the Berlin Wall (see Chapter 24). His leadership during the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962, however, redeemed his reputation as a Cold War warrior. Kennedy did not intend to let the conflict in Vietnam bring his administration down. Faced with a worsening political and military situation in Vietnam, Kennedy received conflicting recommendations from his advisors. One group envisioned escalating the American commitment by sending in combat troops. Another wanted to seek a diplomatic resolution to the conflict. Faced with these divided opinions, Kennedy chose a middle path. Instead of infantry troops he sent more financial aid and increased the number of American military “advisors” in South Vietnam from one thousand to sixteen thousand. Officially these advisors helped train the South Vietnamese Army. In actuality many “advisors” were Green Berets, the army’s special-force troops who organized South Vietnamese attacks on Vietcong supply lines, flew planes when South Vietnamese pilots were unavailable, and picked up casualties in helicopters after skirmishes. When word of these activities leaked out, Kennedy publicly denied that Americans were participating in active combat operations in Vietnam. “Supporting the Diem regime while applying pressure for reform appears to be the only practicable alternative at this time,” the Joint Chiefs convinced Kennedy, cautioning that “any reversal of U.S. policy could have disastrous effects” throughout Southeast Asia. As South Vietnamese anger against his rule intensified, Diem privately voiced his own mounting frustration with the growing American presence in South Vietnam. “All these soldiers,” he fumed, referring to the Green Berets and military advisors. “I never asked them to come here.” To rid South Vietnam of Americans, Diem and his police chief brother Nhu decided to seek a negotiated settlement with North Vietnam in 1963. Upset with Diem’s overture to North Vietnam,

 What conflicting recommendations did Kennedy receive from his advisors about Vietnam?

 the turning point for the Kennedy administration came in June, when a Buddhist monk set himself on fire in a busy street in Saigon, the capital of South Vietnam. The Catholic Diem had long discriminated against Buddhists. Thousands of North Vietnamese Catholics fled to the south when the Communists took over in 1954, and Diem rewarded them with land and governmental positions. In May 1963, Nhu refused to let the Buddhists fly a multicolored flag honoring Buddha on his birthday. Widespread street protests ensued, which Nhu suppressed with soldiers who used water hoses, tear gas, and on one occasion bullets, killing a woman and eight children. On June 10, 1963, a Buddhist monk invited Associated Press photographer Malcolm Browne to witness “something important” the next morning. Browne arrived at the designated street crossing and watched monks take a canister of gasoline out of the white car shown in this picture (26.3) and place a brown mat in the middle of the street. Moments later a Buddhist monk, Thich Quang Duc, sat down on the mat in the lotus position. After another monk poured gasoline over him, Duc struck a match. Flames instantaneously engulfed his body. “His eyes were closed, but his features were twisted in apparent pain,” Browne recalled. As Browne snapped this memorable photo, a monk shouted into a microphone in Vietnamese and English: “A Buddhist priest burns himself to death. A Buddhist priest becomes a martyr.” Monks (seen in the background) lined the streets to prevent anyone from trying to save Duc. Immediately proclaimed a Buddhist saint, Duc’s ashes were distributed to pagodas, towering Buddhist temples, throughout South Vietnam. Duc carefully staged his suicide to gain maximum exposure for the Buddhists’ political protest, using the Western press to help rally opposition to Diem within South Vietnam and the United States. The burning monk image shocked but also bewildered Americans. The American government and press had continually praised Diem as a valiant Cold War ally, but this photo suggested strong opposition to his rule at home. Students, Buddhist priests, and soldiers in South Vietnam responded to the suicide as a call to action. Street protests erupted, the military began planning a coup, and six other monks set themselves on fire in front of Western journalists. With a framed copy of Browne’s burning monk image on his desk, Kennedy secretly agreed to support a military coup to overthrow the Diem regime.

THE LONG ROAD TO WAR

 his presidential reelection bid, Kennedy was visiting Dallas to shore up his fading popularity among Texans angered by his support for the Civil Rights Movement (see Chapter 27). This was the first trip that Jackie Kennedy had taken with her husband since the death of their two-day-old son Patrick three months Photographer MALCOLM BROWNE, before. Kennedy decided to ride in an on photographing Thich Quang Duc’s open-air convertible, rejecting the sugself-immolation in 1963 gestion from his Secret Service guards that he sit within a bulletproof clear glass bubble for the ride past the crowds. An amateur movie by Abraham Zapruder, a Russian immigrant The military coup supported by President Kennedy and Kennedy supporter, gave the nation its most enled to the murder of Diem and Nhu, but Americans during images of this killing, film stills that provoked had little time to reflect on these events. Three weeks countless controversies over who killed the president. later, on November 22, 1963, Lee Harvey Oswald In its investigation of the assassination, the Warren shot and killed President Kennedy in Dallas, Texas, Commission cited the Zapruder film as evidence that as Kennedy waved to onlookers from an open Oswald acted alone, claiming that the film footage convertible with his wife by his side. In the midst of showed bullets entering the president’s body from

 “I must say that during the monk episode, I had no impulse to try to go in and save him. I knew for one thing that he intended it this way.”



26.3 Burning
Monk
Thich Quang Duc
 wanted the Western press to photograph his 1963 suicide to publicize the Buddhist protest against the corrupt Diem regime.

The Kennedy Assassination


 What insights does the story behind this 1963 photo offer into the Vietnam War?



 CHAPTER 26

26.4 Jackie
Kennedy
On November 22,
1963, the day
President John F.
Kennedy was
 assassinated in Dallas, Texas, the First Lady’s personal tragedy became enveloped in political symbolism. Here she stands by as the new president, Lyndon B. Johnson, takes the oath of office to visibly assure the nation that she supported the smooth transition of power.

A NATION DIVIDED: THE VIETNAM WAR, 1945–1975

 only one direction. Counterclaims that the assassination was the result of a wider conspiracy involving other gunmen, the mafia, Cuban dictator Fidel Castro, and the CIA continue to this day. Vice President Lyndon Baines Johnson (LBJ) was riding two cars behind Kennedy in the Dallas motorcade. When Kennedy died within hours of the shooting, Johnson, who was next in line to assume the presidency, insisted on taking the oath of office before Judge Sarah Hughes with Jackie Kennedy on one side and his wife on the other before the presidential airplane Air Force One left Dallas. The presence of the slain president’s widow would, Johnson felt, immediately legitimatize the transfer of power in the eyes of the American people. Already on board the plane, which was carrying her husband’s body back to Washington, D.C., Jackie Kennedy complied with Johnson’s request, but had no chance to change her clothes. In this portrait (26.4) of Johnson’s swearing in, photographer Cecil Stoughton carefully framed out Jackie Kennedy’s skirt, which was stained with her husband’s blood. Her pale and drawn expression nonetheless reflected the day’s ordeal. A wealthy Massachusetts-born Catholic, Kennedy had selected Johnson, a powerful Texan politician, as his vice presidential running mate to help broaden his appeal in the South. Johnson grew

 How did images both provoke and quell controversy surrounding the Kennedy assassination?

 up poor and worked as a teacher before entering national politics as an avid supporter of the New Deal in 1937. Johnson relied heavily on his superior political instincts and outgoing personality to rise to prominence. In the Senate, he became the most powerful majority leader in history. A larger-thanlife figure, his brashness contrasted sharply with the slain president’s debonair manner. Johnson’s most legendary gaff came in 1965, when he lifted his shirt during a press conference to show reporters his 12-inch scar from recent gallbladder surgery. Johnson wanted to reassure the nation about his recovery, but critics lampooned the act as crude and undignified.

The Gulf of Tonkin
 Lyndon Baines Johnson inherited a rapidly deteriorating situation in Vietnam after the Diem assassination. Like his predecessors he faced the choice of pulling back or escalating the American commitment, which at this point consisted of sixteen thousand military advisors and Green Berets and substantial financial aid to South Vietnam. After the Diem assassination, South Vietnam slipped into perpetual political instability as a succession of rulers failed to gain the support of the people. The shifting geopolitical situation also prompted a reappraisal of the American assumption that the Soviet Union was controlling the movements of communists throughout the world. The previous American conception of a global communist conspiracy became harder to maintain in the face of the open split between the Soviet Union and China in 1964. The Sino-Soviet alliance fell apart, when the Soviets suggested that the two countries scale back their support of worldwide Communist insurgencies to improve relations with the United States. Mao refused. Once again elected officials and policymakers differed behind closed doors on the best course of action. National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy told Johnson that “the right course is to continue to strengthen our struggle against the Communist terror (which is exactly what this is).” Senator Richard Russell, a close confidant of the president, disagreed with those who claimed that “we’ll lose everything in Southeast Asia if we lose Vietnam.” Johnson himself feared that

 Read the Document George Ball’s Dissenting Opinion on Vietnam (1965)

THE LONG ROAD TO WAR

