 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 6

Did the Washington
Administration and the
 first Congress neutralize or exacerbate Anti-Federalist fears?

The New Republic


 Hamilton’s Ambitious Program p. 160

An Age of Political Passion, 1789–1800


 What were the main features of Hamilton’s economic program?

 Partisanship without Parties p. 166

 How did the press encourage partisanship?

Conflicts at Home
 and Abroad p. 168

 How did the French Revolution influence American politics?

Cultural Politics in a
Passionate Age p. 175


 Why did reading novels seem so threatening in the 1790s?

The Stormy Presidency
 of John Adams p. 179

 Why did Federalists enact the Sedition Act and was it constitutional?

 The adoption of the Constitution did little to lessen the divisions in America that had arisen during ratification. The Federalist supporters of the Constitution splintered into two opposing groups. One side rallied around Alexander Hamilton, who became the chief theorist and driving force for an ambitious Federalist agenda. For Hamilton and his allies, the adoption of the Constitution was simply the first step in creating a powerful central government. These Federalists envisioned America as a great commercial empire that would, inspired by Britain’s lead, develop a strong military and pursue economic development aggressively. Opposing this bold agenda was a group that coalesced around Thomas Jefferson, who, with his friend James Madison, a former ally of Hamilton, helped define the core of the Republican opposition. This movement, although lacking the coherence and formal organization of a modern political party, battled its Federalist opponents over political, economic, and constitutional issues. Republicans sought to limit the powers of the new federal government and opposed the creation of a powerful financial and military state. The radicalism of the French Revolution further polarized American political life, and political passions intensified during the turbulent 1790s. Federalists denounced the excesses of revolutionary France even as Republicans affirmed their support for France. By the end of the 1790s, the partisan animosities had grown intense, as reflected in this pro-Federalist political cartoon, The Times, A Political Portrait. A group of American volunteers rides out to confront an invading French Army. As they march forward, they trample a Republican printer, while a dog urinates on his newspaper. The artist shows Republican James Madison attempting to block the progress of America’s troops with a giant pen, while Republicans Albert Gallatin and Thomas Jefferson work from behind to achieve the same goal. The text at the bottom announces the triumph of American government and warns traitors that they will receive their just punishments. After a decade of Federalist domination, Americans in 1800 turned to Thomas Jefferson, head of the Republican opposition, as their leader. In a close election, power was peacefully transferred from the Federalists to their opponents, and Jefferson became the nation’s third president.

 “Party spirit is the fashion of the Times . . . Party spirit makes the worst of everything that opposes her folly.” Newark Centinel of Freedom, 1799





 CHAPTER 6

THE NEW REPUBLIC: AN AGE OF POLITICAL PASSION, 1789–1800

Launching the New Government
 Although intense partisanship had characterized American politics during the colonial and revolutionary eras, the republican ideas championed during the Revolution stressed the need for a virtuous citizenry. The Constitution created a system designed to check the dangers of factionalism. Leaders were expected to put the good of the nation above any factional interest. Fortunately for America, the nation’s first president, George Washington, was such a figure, a leader who tried to remain above partisanship. Appointing Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson to his cabinet demonstrated his commitment to this ideal. These were men whose views on government were almost at opposite extremes, and from them, Washington sought policy alternatives to deal with the pressing issues facing the new nation.

Choosing the First President


6.1 Triumphal
Arch Near Trenton,
New Jersey
 At Trenton women erected a 20-foot 20 foot arch made of evergreens and laurels. On the right, Washington W ashing ash ington ton rides rides toward the arch.

 The Constitution had created an electoral college, a group of electors appointed by the states who had the responsibility of picking the president. On February 4, 1789, electors from all the states that had ratified the Constitution met in their state capitals and unanimously selected George Washington to be the nation’s first president. John Adams, another prominent revolutionary leader, received half that number of votes, becoming the first vice president. The remaining votes were split among ten other candidates. The nation celebrated Washington’s election in a grand style. He traveled from his home at Mount Vernon in Virginia to the site of his inaugural in New York City, feted along the way. Many towns erected triumphal arches, such as this one near Trenton (6.1). Although leading men in the community typically greeted Washington, giving him a military salute, in Trenton he met the local women who had erected the arch and who serenaded him. A placard on the arch proudly proclaimed that “The Defender of the Mothers will also Defend the Daughters.”

The First Federal Elections:
Completing the Constitution
 Although there had been little doubt that Washington would be America’s first president, the divisions

 Why did Madison shift his views on the need for a Bill of Rights?

 between Federalists and Anti-Federalists influenced the first congressional elections. The issue of constitutional amendments was among the most contentious issues debated in the first federal elections. Federalists were eager to have James Madison run for Congress. Madison agreed to run, but he balked at actively campaigning for a seat, believing that behaving in such a partisan fashion was inconsistent with republican ideals. Fortunately, Madison’s supporters persuaded him that if he did not take his case directly to the people, Virginia would send an Anti-Federalist–dominated delegation to Congress. Madison set aside his reluctance to appeal for votes, and won election to Congress. One group critical to Madison’s success were the Baptists, who were eager to obtain explicit protection for freedom of religion in the Constitution. The task of shaping a set of amendments thus fell to Federalist James Madison. Madison recognized that if properly framed, amendments might go a long way to eliminating lingering Anti-Federalist suspicions of the new federal government. Thus, although he had originally opposed Anti-Federalist calls for amendments during the struggle over ratification, Madison now recognized their political necessity. He accepted what he described as “the nauseous project of amendments,” knowing that the process would be deeply politicized and that the few ardent Anti-Federalists in Congress would agitate for weakening the federal government. Still, Madison pared down the

 View the Image George Washington’s Arrival in New York City (1789)

LAUNCHING THE NEW GOVERNMENT

 dozens of amendments proposed by the state ratification conventions to seventeen. The Senate then whittled these down to twelve provisions and sent them to the states to ratify. The states did not adopt the first two proposed amendments, which dealt with legislative apportionment and congressional salaries. (More than 200 years later, the states finally adopted what became the Twenty-Seventh Amendment, which prohibits raises for Congress from taking effect until a new House of Representatives has taken office, a restraint that makes it more difficult for Congress to vote itself frequent salary increases.) The first ten of the original twelve amendments to the Constitution, eventually became known as the Bill of Rights, and included protections for both basic individual liberties and for the states. The First Amendment protected freedom of the press and religion. The Second Amendment guaranteed that the people would have a right to keep and bear arms in a well-regulated militia. (This right has since been expanded to include private arms used for individual self-defense within the home.) The Third Amendment forbade the government to quarter troops in the homes of private citizens. Several amendments protected the procedural rights associated with jury trial. The Ninth Amendment declared that enumeration of some rights did not mean the denial of others retained by the people. Finally, lest the new government try to expand its powers by exploiting the vague clauses of the Constitution, the Tenth Amendment stated that those powers not delegated to the federal government were reserved to the states and the people. These amendments assuaged the concerns of most moderate Anti-Federalists even if they did not placate the most ardent opponents of federal power who wished to restrict the powers of the new central government to those expressly delegated by the text of the new Constitution. Their adoption resolved the most important issue remaining from the struggle between Federalists and Anti-Federalists, clearing the way for new issues to come to the fore.

Filling Out the Branches
 of Government The Constitution created a blueprint for the new federal government, but Congress and the president still had to work out important details, including the structure of the executive and the judiciary departments. Congress took almost six months to work out a structure for the new federal courts. Lingering fears about the power of the federal government complicated drafting legislation to set up the federal courts. Senator William Maclay of Pennsylvania warned, for example, that the federal



 courts would “swallow all the State Constitutions by degree.” Eventually Congress created a three-tier system of district courts, circuit courts, and the Supreme Court. Each state would have at least one district court. “Circuit courts” composed of a district court judge and two members of the Supreme Court were supposed to “ride circuit” (travel) to hear appeals from the district courts and to have primary jurisdiction in certain types of cases, such as those between citizens of different states. For the executive branch, Congress created new cabinet positions for a secretary of state to advise the president on foreign affairs, a secretary of the treasury for economic policy, a secretary of war to oversee the army, and an attorney general to be the chief legal advisor to government. For his cabinet Washington assembled an impressive group of leaders who had distinguished themselves in American public life. Henry Knox, the secretary of war, was a leading general; Edmund Randolph, the new attorney general, had introduced the Virginia Plan in the constitutional convention; Thomas Jefferson, the secretary of state, had been the primary author of the Declaration of Independence; and the first American minister to France; the first secretary of the treasury, Alexander Hamilton, had been one of the co-authors of The Federalist along with John Jay, who became the first chief justice of the Supreme Court. Although none of these men had been Anti-Federalists, Washington’s choices cut across a wide section of the political spectrum, with Hamilton representing the extreme nationalist position and Jefferson far more sympathetic to state power. During ratification Anti-Federalists had expressed fear that the Constitution would create a large, expensive government with a vast bureaucracy. In reality the federal government was far less imposing. Scattered among buildings near New York City’s Wall Street, the temporary home of the new government, the government offices bore slight resemblance to the nightmare that Anti-Federalists had predicted. The scale of the new government was modest, and its bureaucracy small, about 350 officers. Jefferson’s State Department employed two clerks, two assistants, and a part-time translator. (The modern State Department employs 8,000 people in Washington, D.C., and 11,000 overseas.) The largest department was Hamilton’s Treasury. Within a year of its creation, it boasted nearly ten times the number of employees of the Department of State. Its budget was more than triple the combined budgets of the State and War Departments. Apart from his close relationship to Washington, his role as secretary of the Treasury ensured that Hamilton was a figure to be reckoned with in the new government. Why were some ardent Anti-Federalists not satisfied with the Madison’s proposed amendments?



 CHAPTER 6

THE NEW REPUBLIC: AN AGE OF POLITICAL PASSION, 1789–1800

 Hamilton’s Ambitious Program In 1789, Congress requested that Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton issue a report on the new nation’s economy. Between 1790 and 1791, Hamilton responded with a series of reports, each corresponding to a major part of his overall plan to bolster America’s economy. These included reports on public credit, a national bank, the establishment of a mint to coin money, and manufactures. Hamilton saw a strong national government as a necessity to promote American prosperity and protect the young nation’s economic interests against foreign threats. In his view the Constitution had created a central government with considerable power over the economy. In his reports he urged Congress and the president to use this authority to encourage economic growth. To accomplish this, Hamilton looked to Britain as a model. With a robust manufacturing and financial section, and the powerful Bank of England to energize its economy, Britain had the most diverse and sophisticated economy in Europe.

 Hamilton’s Vision for the New Republic Alexander Hamilton envisioned America as a powerful nation with a strong government and a vigorous commercial economy. Before he could implement his ambitious program to realize this vision, however, Hamilton would have to overcome opponents at nearly every turn. Hamilton’s bold program not only frightened former AntiFederalists but also alarmed strong supporters of the Constitution, notably James Madison, who did

 “In place of that noble love of liberty and republican government which carried us triumphantly through the war, [a pro-British] monarchical aristocratical party has sprung up, whose avowed object is to draw over us the substance, as they have already done the forms, of the British government.” THOMAS JEFFERSON, 1796

 Why did Hamilton believe that America needed to create a national bank?

 not wish to see the new government become a powerful state modeled on that of Britain. Hamilton’s economic vision also clashed with Thomas Jefferson’s vision of a nation of small farmers. The new opposition to Federalist efforts to create a powerful centralized government, who called themselves Republicans, united former Anti-Federalists and those Federalists who shared the concerns of Madison and Jefferson. Republicans believed that liberty could flourish only if the states remained powerful enough to protect their citizens from the new federal government. The leader who conceived this audacious Federalist agenda, a vision that would transform America, was a self-made man who lacked the aristocratic upbringing of his chief opponents, Virginians Jefferson and Madison. Hamilton came from a modest background. Born in the West Indies, the illegitimate son of a Scottish merchant and a planter’s daughter, Hamilton was orphaned at an early age but became an apprentice clerk in a merchant firm. At age 14, he wrote “my Ambition is so prevalent that” he loathed the “Grov’ling condition of a Clerk or the like, to which my Fortune etc. condemns me, and would willingly risk my life, tho not my Character, to exalt my station.” Hamilton was talented, ambitious, and hard working. The proprietor of the merchant firm recognized his talent and helped him finance his education. Hamilton attended Kings College (now Columbia University) in New York City. During the American Revolution, he rose rapidly through the ranks of the Continental Army to become

Read the Document Alexander Hamilton, Opposing Visions for the New Nation


HAMILTON’S AMBITIOUS PROGRAM



 “In almost all the questions, great and small, which have arisen since the first session of Congress, Mr. Jefferson and Mr. Madison have been found among those who are disposed to narrow the federal authority . . .” ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 1792

 Washington’s personal aide. Marrying into a prominent New York family, he became an important political figure in that state. A successful lawyer, he had many friends and allies within New York’s merchant community. New York merchants commissioned this portrait (6.2) of Alexander Hamilton to honor his contribution to their prosperity. It provides one measure of his power and influence, particularly within the new nation’s financial world. Yet the painting is as notable for what the artist omitted as for what he included. Hamilton insisted that no references to his important political accomplishments be included, something that commissioners of the portrait had requested. Realizing that his political life was controversial, Hamilton directed the artist to avoid such references. Rather than depicting the complex, often contentious quality of his life, the painting presents the image of a disinterested republican statesman and writer. Hamilton was an unabashed American nationalist and an elitist who viewed democracy with suspicion. He believed that there would always be class divisions. To survive and prosper, the new nation had to win the allegiance of the rich and powerful, binding their interests to those of the new federal government.

The Assumption of
State Debts
 Hamilton’s “Report on Public Credit” addressed the war debt of the states and the federal government. The new nation and the states had incurred

6.2 Alexander Hamilton
 New York City’s merchants commissioned a portrait of Hamilton in 1792. Hamilton decided against having the painting represent his political career, which was steeped in controversy; he chose instead to have himself painted in a plain brown suit standing beside a table with an inkwell and quill.

 considerable debt financing the American Revolution. This debt consisted of many different types of paper currency and securities that the Confederation government and the individual states had issued. The new nation owed $75 million, a figure that alarmed some, but not Hamilton, who saw the debt as a means of bringing America into the modern era in which debt was an essential tool of state finance.

 How does Hamilton’s own life help explain his vision for America’s future?



 CHAPTER 6

THE NEW REPUBLIC: AN AGE OF POLITICAL PASSION, 1789–1800

 Hamilton proposed consolidating the debt of the individual states and the federal government. His scheme called for the assumption of the state debts, by which the federal government would fund any outstanding debts that the states owed. Creditors who held state paper would exchange it for a new type of paper that promised to pay interest until the bearer redeemed the original value of the note. Hamilton’s “Second Report on Public Credit” focused on financing this scheme and included a plan for taxing whiskey. He envisioned a permanently funded national debt in which income from taxes would service the interest, allowing the federal government to pay its other expenses. The most controversial feature of Hamilton’s plan dealt with the problem posed by speculation in these paper notes. The value of state- and

 would become a potential source of corruption. Republicans favored paying the full value of the debt to the original holders but not to the speculators. The Republicans would have given speculators a reasonable return on their investment, but not a huge profit. Hamilton argued that this policy would violate the sanctity of contracts and undermine the credit of the new government. Eventually he defeated his opponents, and state debt certificates would be exchanged for federal ones at full face value.

 Madison’s Opposition Hamilton was shocked to find his former ally James Madison leading the opposition to his policies. During ratification Madison had sided with Hamilton and together with John Jay wrote

 “In an agricultural country like this, therefore, to erect and concentrate and perpetuate a large moneyed interest . . . must . . . produce one or other of two evils: the prostration of agriculture at the feet of commerce, or a change in the present form of Federal Government fatal to the existence of American liberty.” Virginia’s remonstrance against the assumption of state debts, 16 December 1790 Confederation-issued paper had declined steadily by the 1790s as the hard-pressed states and the fledgling national government simply printed more paper to pay their debts. After the adoption of the Constitution, a few financial speculators had purchased large amounts of this devalued paper, hoping that the new government would redeem it at face value and net them a huge profit. Believing it was vital for the new nation to maintain excellent credit with investors, Hamilton insisted that government had an obligation to honor the debt at full face value. Republicans feared that Hamilton’s funding scheme would give a windfall to speculators. Besides being unjust, they argued, such a plan would create a powerful financial interest that

 Why did Virginians, including Madison and Jefferson, oppose Hamilton’s economic program?

 The Federalist. Madison had also supported Hamilton’s efforts to create an effective Treasury Department under the Articles of Confederation. Why did Madison change his position and oppose Hamilton in 1789? Madison was motivated by his desire to preserve the constitutional system he had labored so hard to create. The speculative frenzy caused by Hamilton’s policy of assumption shocked Madison, who came to believe that Hamilton’s program would undermine the republican values that the Constitution was designed to protect. Although Hamilton dreamed of a powerful state that might rival Britain, Madison was more interested in preserving his constitutional vision. In Madison’s view, Hamilton’s system would create vast

HAMILTON’S AMBITIOUS PROGRAM

 inequalities of wealth, encourage corruption, and undermine republican government. Hamilton believed that Madison had been unduly influenced by Jefferson; indeed, Madison had always shared with his fellow Virginian a similar republican vision of an agrarian republic. Hamilton, by contrast, the product of New York’s commercial ethos, believed that America’s future depended on creating a powerful fiscal-military state. The split between Hamilton and Madison reflected a profound shift in American political life. A few years before, Madison had decried faction in Federalist No. 10. Now faced with the rise of Hamilton’s Federalist agenda, Madison revised his thinking about factions and politics. In an essay in the National Gazette, “A Candid State of Parties,” he conceded that America had become divided into a Republican party and an anti-Republican party (the Federalists). Opposition to his plan of assumption took a personal toll on Hamilton. Indeed, Jefferson described him as “somb[er], haggard, and



 dejected beyond comparison.” Jefferson invited Hamilton to dinner with Madison, where the three worked out a deal to break the impasse over assumption. In exchange for support for his economic program, Hamilton agreed to move the new capital of the United States from New York City to a site on the Potomac River. Southerners such as Jefferson and Madison feared that keeping the nation’s capital in New York City invited domination by commercial and financial interests. Although Hamilton might gain in the short run, Madison and Jefferson believed that the bargain they struck would lessen the influence of financial interests over the government. Meanwhile, the government temporarily relocated to Philadelphia. This cartoon (6.3), which shows Congress embarked on the ship Constitution as it sails to its eventual home on the Potomac, captures the Republicans’ association of urban commercial centers with corruption. The devil lures the ship to its clear doom on the rocky falls leading to Philadelphia.

6.3 Congress Embarked on the Ship Constitution
 Jefferson and Madison hoped that by relocating the capital to the Potomac, they would reduce the dangers of federal corruption. In this cartoon the devil lures Congress to its temporary home in Philadelphia.

 What did Madison and Jefferson gain by moving the location of the new capital to what is now Washington, D.C.?



 CHAPTER 6

THE NEW REPUBLIC: AN AGE OF POLITICAL PASSION, 1789–1800

The Bank, the Mint, and the
Report on Manufactures
 In his “Report on a National Bank,” Hamilton recommended that the federal government charter a national bank. The Bank of the United States would serve as a depository for government funds, bolster confidence in government securities, make loans, and provide the nation with a stable national currency. The government would own part of the stock in the new bank, but would allow private investors to buy the majority of stock. At the time of his proposal, there were only three private banks in the United States. A national bank would help stabilize the economy of the new nation and link the interests of the wealthy to the prosperity of the new nation. Again Madison opposed Hamilton’s plan. Much of the debate on this proposal focused on its constitutionality. Madison wanted to see the Constitution interpreted according to the original understanding of the states that ratified it in 1788. Arguing for the narrow interpretation of congressional power, he denied that the Constitution authorized Congress to charter a national bank. Ultimately, however, Hamilton’s ideas prevailed, and the Federalist-controlled Congress chartered the Bank of the United States. Republicans then hoped for a presidential veto. Washington sought advice from his cabinet about the constitutionality of the bank. Attorney General Edmund Randolph and Thomas Jefferson both agreed with Madison. Jefferson took advantage of the occasion to articulate his own views on how to interpret the new Constitution. He acknowledged that the Constitution empowered Congress to enact laws that were “necessary and proper.” However, although the creation of a bank was convenient and useful, it was not in his view necessary for Congress to fulfill its obligations to raise revenues. This theory of strict construction approached the text of the Constitution in an almost literal manner. If the Constitution did not grant a power, then, according to the theory of strict construction, the Tenth Amendment reserved that power to the states and the people. Madison and Jefferson designed their slightly different theories of constitutional interpretation to protect the rights of the people and the powers of the states against encroachment by the federal government. With the weight of Randolph, Madison, and Jefferson’s opinions weighing heavily in favor of a veto, Hamilton set out to refute his critics and

 How did Hamilton and Jefferson differ in their interpretations of the phrase “necessary and proper?”

 in the process frame his own alternative theory of how to interpret the Constitution. Hamilton’s theory of loose construction interpreted the language of the Constitution broadly. Hamilton believed the federal government enjoyed enormous latitude in determining the appropriate means for accomplishing any legitimate constitutional end. Even if a specific power was not listed, such as the power to charter a bank, Hamilton believed the Constitution implied such a power. Hamilton argued that Jefferson’s reasoning would restrict the powers of Congress to enact only those laws that were absolutely “necessary and proper.” In response to Madison and Jefferson’s suggestion of consulting the original intent of the state ratification conventions, Hamilton argued that “the intention is to be sought in the instrument itself.” Interpreters of the Constitution should follow well-established legal rules for understanding statutes and apply them to the Constitution. In other words, the actual text of the Constitution, not the arguments of Federalists, Anti-Federalists, or state ratification conventions, ought to be given primary consideration in constitutional interpretation. The struggle over the proper way of interpreting the Constitution had emerged as a major political battlefield in the new republic. Indeed, the proper interpretation of the Constitution is still controversial and arguments over its original meaning are as contentious today as they were more than 200 years ago. As he would throughout his first term in office, Washington sided with Hamilton against Madison and Jefferson. The chartering of the Bank of the United States was Hamilton’s second major victory in the struggle to define the character of the new republic. Hamilton’s report on the necessity of a federal mint was the one part of his program that Jefferson enthusiastically endorsed. Hamilton proposed a currency that would include a variety of coins in different denominations emblazoned with patriotic symbols. Jefferson not only recognized the need for a federal currency, but as a part-time inventor, he was also fascinated by the mechanics of minting money. Hamilton’s “Report on Manufactures” detailed the remaining part of his plan to reshape the American economy. He called for a comprehensive program to encourage domestic industry by providing incentives for industrial development and tariffs to help American industry compete against imported foreign goods, which were cheaper. Congress refused

HAMILTON’S AMBITIOUS PROGRAM



6.4 Political
Views: Hamilton
 versus Jefferson

Hamilton


Jefferson


Commercial Republic


Agrarian Republic


Broad Construction


Strict Construction


Standing Army


Militia


Pro-British


Pro-French


 to follow Hamilton’s recommendation to raise these tariffs sharply. Hamilton’s more grandiose scheme to encourage industrial development generated little interest in Congress. Congress did enact new taxes, including one on whiskey. In the struggle to shape the new nation’s economy, Hamilton’s Federalists had defeated Jefferson, Madison, and the Republican opposition at nearly every turn. Hamilton was largely successful at implementing his visionary economic program.

Jefferson and Hamilton:
Contrasting Visions of
 the Republic Jefferson and Hamilton were a study in contrasts. Their backgrounds varied greatly: Jefferson was a southern slave owner; Hamilton, a northerner with abolitionist sympathies. Jefferson grew up a Virginia aristocrat, with every advantage; Hamilton was a self-made man who confessed that he was determined to escape his humble origins at almost any cost. Over several of the most important issues facing the new American nation, the two men found themselves in separate camps, as summarized in the table (6.4). In general, Hamilton sought to endow the national government with additional powers;

 Jefferson sought to limit the powers of the federal government and protect state authority. The two men also approached the economy from radically different philosophies. Hamilton’s idea of a thriving commercial republic was diametrically opposed to Jefferson’s vision of a nation of independent yeoman farmers. “While we have land to labour,” Jefferson wrote, “let us never wish to see our citizens occupied at a work bench.” Hamilton believed that America needed to emulate the powerful, diversified economy of Britain and foster commerce and manufacture. A gulf separated the two men over constitutional law as well. Hamilton believed in a broad, or loose, construction of the Constitution: The federal government had to have wide latitude to choose whatever means was best suited to accomplish its legitimate objects. Jefferson, by contrast, believed in a strict construction of the Constitution, so that the powers of the new government would be limited to those clearly established by the Constitution. In foreign affairs the two men also opposed one another. Hamilton was an Anglophile who believed that Britain’s path to economic power ought to guide America. Jefferson savored all things French, from wine to pastry. He thought America’s interests were better served by supporting France.

Read the Document Thomas Jefferson, Notes on Virginia


 What were the most important points of disagreement between Hamilton and Jefferson?



 CHAPTER 6

THE NEW REPUBLIC: AN AGE OF POLITICAL PASSION, 1789–1800

 Partisanship without Parties The idea of political parties was inimical to the republican values of the post-Revolutionary era. In the struggle over ratification in 1788, Madison had written in Federalist No. 10 that “the public good is disregarded in the conflicts of rival parties.” The partisan struggles that dominated American politics after ratification forced Madison to rethink his view of parties. In 1792, Madison conceded that in “every political society, parties are unavoidable.” Although Americans increasingly used terms like party to describe the bitter conflicts of the 1790s, the partisan alignments they described had not yet achieved the organized structure of modern political parties. Political conflict in the 1790s was a transitional phase in the evolution of a modern two-party system. Some historians describe this period as that of the first party system, but many characterize it as a proto-party system that set the stage for the later developments of modern parties. Indeed, although Americans were deeply divided politically, neither Federalists nor Republicans functioned as disciplined modern political parties. Neither group organized loyal supporters around well-defined messages at a national level. Nor did either side create permanent political structures that brought local and state politics under the umbrella of a coherent national organization. The partisan conflicts of this era produced two proto-parties, the Federalists and the Republicans.

A
New Type of Politician  Although the aristocratic Thomas Jefferson and James Madison dominated the Republican movement, its success owed much to a new type of politician whose expertise lay in mobilizing voters and creating effective political organizations. The most influential of these new politicians was Virginia’s John Beckley. In contrast to Jefferson and Madison, who were connected to the gentry elite that dominated political life in Virginia, Beckley rose from the status of an indentured servant to become the clerk of the U.S. House of Representatives. He became indispensable in advancing the Republican cause. Indeed, although aristocratic politicians such as Jefferson and Madison continued to view themselves as members of a virtuous elite who were not motivated by party spite, Beckley and others of this new class of professional politicians immersed themselves in the sometimes sordid task of coordinating campaigns and attacking their opponents. Beckley and other Republicans who did much of the grassroots organizing were more at home in taverns and coffee houses than they were in the elegant dinner parties that Jefferson and Madison attended. Having worked as a clerk, Beckley felt a kindred spirit with the artisans and merchants of New York

 What role did the partisan press play in the politics of the 1790s?

 City and Philadelphia. He felt a particular kinship with other self-made men, many of whom joined the Republican movement. Beckley’s life more closely resembled Hamilton’s than Jefferson’s. Yet Beckley threw himself into promoting Jefferson’s fortunes and attacking Hamilton. Gossip became one means of political warfare that Beckley developed to a fine art. He leaked information about an adulterous affair Hamilton was having with the wife of a shady financier. When the press reported rumors that Hamilton had provided sensitive financial information to his lover’s husband, Republican politicians pounced on Hamilton, who was forced to admit the affair but denied any financial improprieties. Beckley’s efforts weakened Hamilton but did not destroy the New Yorker’s influence among Federalists.

The Growth of the
Partisan Press
 The expansion of the press facilitated the rise of partisan politics. The number of newspapers increased, from around 100 in 1788 to well over 200 in 1800. While eastern ports still supported the majority of papers, many interior market towns also boasted papers by the 1790s. Many of these papers aligned

PARTISANSHIP WITHOUT PARTIES

 themselves with one or the other main political movements in the country. John Fenno’s Gazette of the United States, which he established “to endear the General Government to the people,” articulated the Federalist point of view. To combat Fenno’s influence, Jefferson and Madison persuaded the poet Philip Freneau to found the National Gazette, which rallied opposition to Hamilton and the Federalists. The resulting battle of words between the two publications intensified the already charged political atmosphere. Federalists and Republicans recognized that political success meant managing public opinion. “All power,” Madison noted, “has been traced to public opinion.” A free government, therefore, calls for “a circulation of newspapers through the entire body of the people.” Partisan rancor in the press grew during the 1790s. No person was sharper in his attacks than Federalist William Cobbett, who often wrote under the pen name Peter Porcupine, a choice that reflected his prickly personality and barbed writing. Jefferson lamented that “a single sentence got hold of by the ‘Porcupines,’ will suffice to abuse and persecute me in their papers for months.” Cobbett lambasted the Republicans as atheists and radical democrats who sought to destroy government. He compared the leading Republican newspaper, the Aurora, to “a lewd and common strumpet” whose illegitimate offspring were falsehood and slander. The Republicans replied with their own stinging attacks. This Republican political cartoon (6.5) casts Cobbett, literally represented as Peter Porcupine,” doing the devil’s work as he is encouraged by Great Britain, represented as a lion.



 Society asserted that public opinion “is the foundation of all our liberties, and constitutes the only solid groundwork for all our Rights.” In addition to publishing their sentiments about political issues, the societies staged celebrations, gave festive dinners, and sponsored public orations. Republicans viewed the societies as a way to improve understanding of political issues and refine public opinion. Federalists denounced these “self-created societies” for sowing the “seeds of jealousy and distrust of the government.” For Federalists, the societies not only sapped the people’s confidence in their government but also fomented radical ideas. Federalists viewed the role of elected representatives differently from Republicans. Federalists supported a more traditional republican ideal of virtue in which citizens deferred to the wisdom of their leaders once they had been placed in office. Republicans embraced a more democratic ideal in which the voice of the people could be brought to bear on public questions through organizations such as the Democratic-Republican Societies. 6.5 Peter Porcupine Liberty sits forlorn, while Federalist William Cobbett, “Peter Porcupine,” scribbles attacks and insults. The devil and the British lion (wearing a monarch’s crown) urge on the Porcupine. A Jay bird, symbolic of Jay’s Treaty, perches on the lion.

 The DemocraticRepublican Societies The emergence of a new type of political organization helped transform the political life of the new nation. Between 1793 and 1794, 35 Democratic-Republican Societies sprouted up across America. Although not official organs of the Republican movement, most of the societies had close ties to local Republican organizations. Their goal was to influence public opinion. The New York Democratic-Republican

 Why did the Federalists oppose the Democratic-Republican Societies?



 CHAPTER 6

THE NEW REPUBLIC: AN AGE OF POLITICAL PASSION, 1789–1800

Conflicts at Home and Abroad
 The French Revolution, the bloody toppling of the monarchy followed by the rise of a radical republican government, shocked Europe and profoundly affected American politics. Republicans supported the Revolution. Federalists quickly came to see it as the embodiment of evil and denounced its excesses. Revolutionary France soon became embroiled in conflict with Britain, and the two nations went to war with one another in 1793. Although Republicans and Federalists continued to support Washington, the contest over the vice presidency in 1792 demonstrated how divided America had become. Federalist John Adams defeated his Republican rival, the former Anti-Federalist George Clinton, but the Republicans carried the entire South. The line separating foreign affairs and domestic matters in the new Republic was often thin. America still needed to secure its borders against potentially hostile European powers. The British continued to occupy forts in the Old Northwest (the modern states of Ohio, Indiana, and Michigan) and engaged in trade with Indians, including the sale of firearms. The Spanish presence in Florida and Louisiana gave them control of the Mississippi, a vital artery for Western trade. American shipping no longer enjoyed the protection of the British Navy. In the Mediterranean pirates based in North Africa harassed American ships and captured American sailors and cargoes. Resistance to Hamilton’s economic program erupted into violence in western Pennsylvania and Kentucky. Angry over the tax on whiskey, farmers turned to violence to vent their frustration. Washington felt compelled to call out the militia to quell the rebellion. The new federal government had survived its most serious test, but the repression of the rebellion did little to heal the divisions in American political life. 6.6 Revolutionary plate. This gruesome plate captures the excesses of the French Revolution. The guillotine pictured at the center became a symbol of the violence of the Revolution. The plate also shows the head of King Louis XVI which is proudly displayed by one of his executioners as a trophy.

 mankind.” Republican James Madison added that events in France were “so glorious to this country, because it has grown as it were out of the American Revolution.” Pro-French Republicans began addressing each other as “citizen,” a custom borrowed from revolutionary France. Republican women followed suit, some using the term citizen and others citizeness or citess among themselves. When the French Revolution turned more radical and violent, however, many Americans began to re-examine their support for it. The execution of King Louis XVI and Queen Marie Antoinette in 1793 outraged Federalists. This commemorative plate (6.6) showing the execution of the king captures the zeal of the French

The French
Revolution
 in America In 1789, a financial crisis in France precipitated a revolution that transformed a powerful European monarchy into a republic. At first, American support for the French Revolution cut across partisan allegiances. Even the arch-Federalist Gazette of the United States described the Revolution as “one of the most glorious objects that can arrest the attention of

 Did the French Revolution fullfill or betray the ideals of the American Revolution?

 View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Jefferson and Hamilton’s Reactions to the French Revolution

CONFLICTS AT HOME AND ABROAD

 Revolution. The hand-painted plate prominently features the guillotine, a new device for executions developed in revolutionary France that used a heavy blade to decapitate its victims. The executioner proudly displays the king’s lifeless head as a trophy, a chilling reminder of the French Revolution’s radicalism. The French Revolution became a symbol for both Republicans and Federalists. The former championed the democratic ideals of the Revolution and excused its violence as a small price to pay for liberty. The latter decried its violence and radicalism. France’s new minister to the United States Edmund Genêt arrived two days after word of the execution of Louis XVI reached the U.S. in the spring of 1793. Philadelphia’s Republican women turned out in red, white, and blue to welcome him. Although Republican men wore the tricolor red-white-and blue cockade, a small rosette-like decoration, on their hats, women attached tricolor pins to their chests to affirm support for France. One sarcastic Federalist commentator described “these fiery frenchified dames” as “monsters in human shape.” (For additional discussion see Competing Visions: Jefferson’s and Hamilton’s Reactions to the French Revolution, page 171.) Federalists not only opposed the French Revolution, but events in France intensified their desire to align America with Britain. When revolutionary France declared war on Britain in 1793, Americans found themselves reluctantly drawn into European affairs. Attitudes toward France became a political lightning rod, concentrating and focusing political feelings for both Republicans and Federalists. The French Revolution came to symbolize many of the hopes and fears of Americans struggling to come to terms with their own revolutionary heritage. Republicans defined the Revolution by its ideals of liberty, equality, and fraternity; Federalists focused on the Revolution’s bloody policies and saw it as confirmation of the danger of taking liberty and equality too far.

 Adams versus Clinton: A Contest for Vice President By 1792, Washington feared that partisan conflict might tear apart the political fabric of the nation. Although Hamilton and Jefferson’s mutual antagonism had hardened, both men agreed that Washington was the one figure who could



 rise above partisan squabbles and unite the nation. Hamilton implored Washington “to make a further sacrifice of your tranquility and happiness to the public good.” Although Republicans did not wish to challenge Washington directly, they decided to run the popular former Anti-Federalist Governor of New York, George Clinton, against John Adams for vice president. Republican newspapers praised Washington but charged that Adams was an avowed supporter of monarchy and aristocracy. Invoking recent events in France, one radical newspaper editor even suggested that the time had arrived in America to “lop off every unfruitful branch, and root out of the soil of freedom all of the noxious weeds of aristocracy.” Although Adams defeated Clinton by a comfortable margin, the sectional character of politics was evident in the electoral college. Clinton carried the entire South, the most solidly Republican region.

Diplomatic Controversies
 and Triumphs The new American nation had many diplomatic challenges, some arising from the French Revolution, but others stemming from unresolved issues with Britain. American ships no longer enjoyed the protection of the British navy. Closer to home, the British retained control of their forts in the Northwest, defying the Treaty of Paris (1783), which required them to relinquish them. Spain’s control of the Mississippi River and New Orleans, both of which were vital to the prosperity of the old Southwest (modern Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, and Mississippi), was another concern (6.7). War between France and Britain opened opportunities for American merchants, who traded with both sides. Although Britain remained America’s chief trading partner, trade with France was increasingly important. Britain hoped to use its naval advantage to cut off trade between France and other nations, including America. The British navy impounded more than 250 ships and cargoes of American merchants who violated the British blockade against France. Angry Republicans proposed an embargo on trade with the British. Federalists, however, argued that American economic wellbeing depended on good relations with Britain, not with France. President Washington appointed

 Why did Federalists become such ardent critics of the French Revolution?



 CHAPTER 6

THE NEW REPUBLIC: AN AGE OF POLITICAL PASSION, 1789–1800

R.


6.7 Map of
Spanish Interests
 in the Southwest Spanish control of the Mississippi River and New Orleans was a source of concern to Americans. The Mississippi River was a vital conduit for goods, which were then shipped to New Orleans.

Oh


 o

 i

VIRGINIA
St. Louis 
KENTUCKY NORTH CAROLINA

R.


 TENNESSEE

SPANISH LOUISIANA

Missis


 sip

 pi

SOUTH
Fort San Fernando 
 CAROLINA

 GEORGIA

 ATLANTIC

Fort Nogales


 OCEAN

Natchez


St. Augustine
Pensacola
New Orleans


Gulf of Mexico
 Boundary claimed by Spain after 1783 Boundary set by Pinckney’s Treaty, 1795 Area disputed by U.S. and Spain Spanish fort Spanish settlement

 the respected Federalist from New York and chief justice of the Supreme Court, John Jay, as a special envoy to travel to London to negotiate a settlement. In 1783, Jay had helped negotiate the Treaty of Paris, ending conflict between America and Britain. Now in 1794, he negotiated a treaty (called Jay’s Treaty) by which Britain agreed to compensate America for cargoes seized in 1793–1794 and to vacate forts in the Northwest Territory. However, the British refused to accept the right of neutral nations to trade freely with belligerents. When the details of Jay’s Treaty were leaked to the press, Republicans were outraged, finding the treaty too generous to the British. Across the mid-Atlantic and South where Republican sympathies were strongest, protesters burned effigies of Jay and copies of the treaty. The treaty also provoked a fierce debate in Congress over the role of the House of Representatives in foreign affairs. Republican Congressmen demanded to see Jay’s negotiating instructions, believing that Federalists had never intended to exact major concessions from the British. The House

 How did French ideas influence American political culture?

 SPANISH

 even threatened to withhold funding to implement the treaty until the instructions were published. Federalists denounced this as an unconstitutional intrusion on the treaty-making powers of the president and the senate. Jay had negotiated with Britain from a position of weakness, but the American envoy charged with obtaining concessions from Spain was in a stronger position. The U.S. minister to Britain, Federalist Thomas Pinckney, traveled to Spain to begin negotiations about American access to the Mississippi and New Orleans. The result was Pinckney’s Treaty (1795), which secured America’s right to navigate the Mississippi River and use New Orleans. It also settled the boundary between America and Spanish Florida. Spain had feared that America might try to acquire Florida and Louisiana by force, so it was more than willing to cede favorable terms over trade and negotiate the boundary dispute between the two nations. FLORIDA

 Violence along the Frontier Securing the Western frontier—an area that included the Northwest Territory, the Tennessee frontier, and the Mississippi Territory—meant not only negotiating with Britain and Spain but also

Read the Document The Jay Treaty


CONFLICTS AT HOME AND ABROAD



Competing Visions
JEFFERSON’S AND HAMILTON’S REACTIONS TO THE FRENCH REVOLUTION
Thomas Jefferson and his Republican allies embraced the cause of the French Revolution. At the outset, even Alexander Hamilton, saw the Revolution as a victory for American ideals of liberty. The radical turn of the Revolution, however, particularly its zealous embrace of violence, caused Hamilton and other Federalists to abandon their support. Despite the increasingly bloody turn of events in France, Jefferson retained his faith in the essential justice of the Revolution’s goals. He believed that the Revolution’s accomplishments—the destruction of the old regime and of the institutions of aristocracy and monarchy—were worth the cost in blood. Federalists not only denounced France, but they took great pains to contrast Anglo-American concepts of ordered liberty with the licentiousness of the French Revolution. 
 For Jefferson, the Revolution’s contribution to the destruction of tyranny justified whatever means were necessary to accomplish its worthy ends. He compared the innocent victims of “revolutionary justice” to the casualties of war. What does Jefferson’s dogged support for the French Revolution reveal about his vision of politics?

 Hamilton’s revulsion at the excesses of the French Revolution was typical of Federalists. What does Hamilton’s view of the French Revolution reveal about his vision of politics?

Thomas Jefferson to William Short, Philadelphia Jan. 3. 1793


 In the early periods of the French Revolution, a warm zeal for its success was in this Country a sentiment truly universal. The love of Liberty is here the ruling passion of the Citizens of the United States pervading every class animating every bosom. As long therefore as the Revolution of France bore the marks of being the cause of liberty it united all hearts and centered all opinions. But this unanimity of approbation has been for a considerable time decreasing. The excesses which have constantly multiplied, with greater and greater aggravations have successively though slowly detached reflecting men from their partiality for an object which has appeared less and less to merit their regard.

DEAR SIR
The tone of your letters had for some time given me pain, on account of the extreme warmth with which they censured the proceedings of the Jacobins of France.... In the struggle which was necessary, many guilty persons fell without the forms of trial, and with them some innocent. These I deplore as much as any body, and shall deplore some of them to the day of my death. But I deplore them as I should have done had they fallen in battle. It was necessary to use the arm of the people, a machine not quite so blind as balls and bombs, but blind to a certain degree. A few of their cordial friends met at their hands, the fate of enemies. But time and truth will rescue and embalm their memories, while their posterity will be enjoying that very liberty for which they would never have hesitated to offer up their lives. The liberty of the whole earth was depending on the issue of the contest, and was ever such a prize won with so little innocent blood? My own affections have been deeply wounded by some of the martyrs to this cause, but rather than it should have failed, I would have seen half the earth desolated [and].... an Adam and an Eve left in every country, and left free.... 
Alexander Hamilton Unpublished Thoughts on the French
Revolution [Philadelphia, 1794]


 The tricolor French flag was adopted after the French Revolution and became the official flag of the new French republic in 1794.

 Why did Republicans oppose Jay’s Treaty?



 CHAPTER 6

THE NEW REPUBLIC: AN AGE OF POLITICAL PASSION, 1789–1800

 dealing with the Indian nations that occupied much of this land. The government also faced resentments from farmers over federal taxation of locally distilled whiskey. Settlers streamed into Western territories, invariably resulting in conflicts with the indigenous populations. In the Old Northwest, the Shawnee, Delaware, and Miami confederated to defend their lands against settlers’ incursions. In 1790, Little

 Turtle, a war chief of the Miami, led a pan-Indian force of twelve different tribes that defeated an American army led by General Josiah Harmar in Ohio. A year later Indians in Ohio dealt an even more crushing blow to an army led by General Arthur St. Clair. More than 900 American soldiers were killed or wounded, and St. Clair barely escaped with his life. These demoralizing defeats prompted a reorganization of the War Department. In 1794, a new, more professional army under General Anthony Wayne decisively defeated Ohio’s Indian tribes at the Battle of Fallen Timbers. In 1795, the Treaty of Greenville stipulated that the twelve Ohio tribes relinquish their claims on most of Ohio. In Indian cultures the signing of treaties was a ceremonial occasion in which certain rituals were observed, including the exchange of gifts. Indians gave this wampum belt (6.8), an important ceremonial item, to American negotiators at the Treaty of Greenville ceremony. Chippewa Chief Mash-i-pi-nash-i-wish explained the meaning of this gift: “When I show you this belt, I point out to you your children at one end of it, and mine at the other. . . . Remember, we have taken the Great Spirit to witness our present actions; we will make a new world, and leave nothing on it to incommode our children.” Wayne and the other American negotiators, however, did not understand the gift of wampum in the same way as the Chippewa did. For Americans, Indians had joined the American family as dependents, not equals. The most serious test of the new Republic’s ability to govern came in 1794, when anger over Hamilton’s economic policies turned violent. Resentment against the hated whiskey tax had festered since its enactment in 1791. The Whiskey Rebellion erupted when farmers from Pennsylvania and Kentucky took up arms to protest the whiskey excise tax. Distilling had long been important economically in western Pennsylvania and Kentucky, where farmers distilled grain into whiskey. Farmers could transport the alcohol more cheaply than the bulky and heavy grains from which it was produced. Whiskey also

6.8 Wampum Belt
 Beads, usually made from seashells, were strung together in a wampum belt. This belt, given during the Treaty of Greenville ceremony, symbolized the Indian belief that they would now join with the United States in one great family. The American negotiators interpreted the gift as a sign of Indian submission.

 How did American and Indian views of the Treaty of Greenville differ?

CONFLICTS AT HOME AND ABROAD



6.9 Political Cartoon, Whiskey Rebellion
 In this cartoon, which denounces the hated whiskey tax, two distillers threaten to tar and feather an excise man (tax collector). Meanwhile, a demon hooks the tax collector by the nose and leads him to the gallows.

 sold at a higher price than grain, so Western farmers could earn a higher profit on their crops. Protest against the whiskey tax began peacefully. Opponents of Federalist policy sought repeal of the law, and attacked it in the local press. As anger intensified, angry farmers drew on the rich traditions of protest that Americans had used during the Revolution, such as the one depicted in this contemporary cartoon (6.9). The scene shows angry tax protesters who have executed and burned in effigy a local tax collector. By July 1794, frustration turned violent. Five hundred western Pennsylvania farmers, many armed with muskets, marched on the home of a tax collector, John Neville, to intimidate him. Two protestors were killed in the attack and Neville’s house was burned to the ground. Two weeks later 6,000 armed men threatened to attack

 Pittsburgh if the government did not repeal the tax. Federalists and Republicans differed over the causes of the rebellion and how to respond to it. Federalists blamed the Democratic-Republican Societies for fomenting discord and favored a swift and decisive military response. Republicans faulted Hamilton’s economic program and counseled moderation and patience. For an analysis of Washington’s decision in dealing with this rebellion, see Choices and Consequences: Washington’s Decision to Crush the Whiskey Rebellion. After negotiations failed, Washington dispatched the militia and resistance to government authority crumbled. One hundred and fifty people were arrested, and two obscure figures were convicted of treason. Rather than see them become martyrs, however, Washington pardoned them.

Read the Document Whiskey Rebellion Address, George
 Washington’s 6th Annual Address to Congress

 Why did the Whiskey Rebellion present such a problem for Republicans?



 CHAPTER 6

THE NEW REPUBLIC: AN AGE OF POLITICAL PASSION, 1789–1800

Choices and Consequences
WASHINGTON’S DECISION TO CRUSH THE WHISKEY REBELLION
The armed resistance of Western farmers to the detested whiskey tax posed a serious dilemma for Washington. Should the president negotiate with the rebels or use force to put down the rebellion? Washington’s cabinet members differed over the best course of action. The Whiskey Rebellion tested the new government created by the Constitution. The situation was complicated by uncertainty over the militia. Even if Washington wished to use it, it was not clear if the militia would respond. During Shays’s Rebellion (Chapter 5), the militia had refused to fire on other citizens and sided with the rebels. Washington had to consider this issue and the larger question of how the new government ought to respond to a direct challenge to its authority. Washington had three choices: 
Choices




 Call up the militia and dispatch them to western Pennsylvania and crush the rebellion swiftly.



 Adopt a conciliatory posture, make concessions to the rebels, including repealing the tax, and thereby avoid an armed response.



 Offer the rebels a chance to end their protest; mobilize the militia and have it ready to march if the offer was rejected.

Decision
 Republican leaders outside the administration had hoped Washington would adopt a conciliatory posture and recognize that since an unjust tax was the root of the problem, it would make sense to accede to the rebels’ demands. Hamilton and other Federalists counseled a decisive show of force. Washington opted instead for the

 third choice. After efforts to peacefully persuade the rebels to stand down failed, he acted decisively to put down the rebellion. Concerns that the militias of neighboring states might side with the rebels proved unfounded. The rebels were no match for the militia, and the rebellion fizzled once troops marched westward.

Consequences
 Washington’s decision to put down the rebellion ended it in western Pennsylvania. In other parts of the nation, however, such as Kentucky, where support for tax resistance was more pervasive, resistance proved effective. In Kentucky few citizens were willing to act as tax collectors and juries were unlikely to

 convict people who refused to pay the taxes. One consequence of the rebellion was the undermining of the authority of the Democratic-Republican Societies, who were blamed for stirring up opposition to the government and fanning the resentments of the Whiskey Rebels.

Continuing Controversies
 Why were some Federalists reluctant to use force to put down the Whiskey Rebellion? Washington’s decision to use force has prompted controversy. Supporters of his actions argue that he wisely sought to demonstrate that armed resistance to government authority was not an affirmation of liberty, but threatened to undermine liberty and the rule of law. Detractors of Washington’s actions argue that Pennsylvania’s own government felt that it was unnecessary to mobilize the militia and that a peaceful resolution to the crisis was possible. Washington Reviews the Militia

 Why did Federalist enforcement of the whiskey tax fail in Kentucky?

CULTURAL POLITICS IN A PASSIONATE AGE



Cultural Politics in a Passionate Age
 Politics seeped into every aspect of popular culture after the adoption of the Constitution. Even fashion became a political battleground, so much so that sporting the wrong color badge could lead to violence. The bitter political disputes of the day were also woven into the fabric of a new literary art form, the novel. Novels were particularly important to women, who were among the main readers of novels. In a few exceptional cases women even became successful authors of novels. The way the nation confronted race and slavery were influenced by the political conflicts of the era. The slave uprising in the French Caribbean colony of Saint-Domingue (modern Haiti) focused renewed attention on abolitionism and slavery.

Political Fashions and
Fashionable Politics
 Nearly every aspect of American culture was swept up in the political passions of the age. In the politically charged 1790s, political debates spilled over into the new nation’s streets and town squares. Ordinary citizens read newspapers or attended political meetings to keep abreast of the latest developments. They also used taverns to host political meetings where Federalists and their Republican opponents toasted everything from the militia to the French Revolution. Even the simple act of hoisting a glass of ale could become a political gesture, particularly when the press reported the accompanying toasts. Citizens marched in parades and even rioted to express their frustrations with political developments. Even fashion was swept up into the political conflicts. Americans signaled their political allegiances and foreign policy preferences by adopting the latest Paris or London styles. Republican supporters of the French Revolution adorned their hats with a tricolor cockade. Federalists favored a black cockade, a decoration soldiers had used during the American Revolution. By the end of the decade, sporting the “wrong” type of ornament on one’s hat in the streets of Philadelphia could easily trigger a riot.

Literature, Education,
 and Gender By the 1790s, Americans could choose from a staggering range of printed materials. In addition to the expansion of newspapers, books, magazines, broadsides, and pamphlets proliferated. The market for books increased dramatically in the 30 years between

 View the Image Lady’s Magazine

 the American Revolution and 1800. The number of booksellers in Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Charleston almost quadrupled in that time. In the 1790s, 266 new lending libraries opened across America. The new libraries were not restricted to prosperous coastal cities, but as one contemporary noted, “in our inland towns of consequence, social libraries have been instituted composed of books designed to amuse rather than to instruct.” Although the cost of books may have been beyond those of modest means, a subscription to one of these libraries was often not. Americans could also turn to magazines for education and amusement. The titles of new magazines suggested an effort to appeal to both men and women. For example, The Gentlemen and Ladies Town and Country Magazine began publishing in 1789. The Lady’s Magazine and Repository of Entertaining Knowledge, founded in 1791 in Philadelphia, targeted the growing audience of female readers. The rise of a new literary form, the novel, in eighteenth-century England and France helped to spur the enormous expansion in America’s publishing industry. Some novelists wove political themes prominently into their tales. Americans eagerly consumed imported novels, and new works written by American authors also appeared. Women became an important audience for the novel; they also wrote many of the most successful early novels. Susanna Rowson’s Charlotte Temple, first published in England (1791), was reprinted in America in 1794, where the first edition quickly sold out. The story’s American setting made it particularly popular in the new republic. The moral of the novel was unmistakable. The heroine, Charlotte Temple, foolishly leaves England for America, where she elopes with a knave who reneges on his promise to marry her.

 How did fashion become politicized in the 1790s?



 CHAPTER 6

6.10 Allegory of
Female Education
 In this needlework, young Maria Crowninshield, a student at the Ladies Academy in Dorchester, Massachusetts, depicts a young student receiving instruction from a female teacher.

THE NEW REPUBLIC: AN AGE OF POLITICAL PASSION, 1789–1800

 Charlotte is abandoned, suffers physical and mental depredations, and dies soon after giving birth to a child out of wedlock. Immigrating to America in 1793, Rowson fared much better than Charlotte. After a brief career as an actress, Rowson established the Young Ladies’ Academy, in Boston (1797). Her curriculum included reading, writing, arithmetic, and needlework. Another female author, Judith Sargent Murray, became an outspoken advocate of equality and education for women. Her essay “On the Equality of the Sexes,” published in the Massachusetts Magazine in 1790 under the pen name “Constantia,” argued that women’s intellectual abilities were equal to those of men and that if properly educated women could equal men in accomplishment. Murray also used the novel to spread her ideals about the equality of the sexes. Her novel, The Story of Margaretta (1798), recast the conventions of sentimental novels such as Charlotte Temple to reflect her views of female education. Rather than fall prey to seduction, abandonment, and ruin, a fate typical of many female

 characters in popular novels, Margaretta uses her intelligence and superior education to avoid these perils. Murray helped found the Dorchester Ladies Academy in Massachusetts. A 15-year-old student at the academy, Maria Crowninshield, produced this allegory of female education (6.10). Although at one level this fine needlework conformed to the traditional ideas of female education, which included sewing skills, the subject matter signals the artist’s commitment to a modern expansive conception of female education. The young girl depicted is reading a copy of English author Hannah Moore’s Strictures on the Modern System of Female Education (1799). Moore’s book, which advocated an expansion of educational opportunities for women, was one of many tracts defending women’s education. The most radical voice demanding changes in women’s roles was Mary Wollstonecraft, an English writer whose A Vindication of the Rights of Women (1792) sparked a lively debate on both sides of the Atlantic in the 1790s about the need for equality of education for men and women.

Federalists, Republicans,
 and the Politics of Race The political passions and divisions of the age also extended to the politics of race. This became a major concern as a result of events in the Caribbean, where slaves in Saint-Domingue (modern Haiti) rose up against their French masters and seized control of the colony in 1791. Federalists and Republicans were divided over how to respond to events there. Toussaint L’Ouverture, a former slave, forged an all-black fighting force that routed the planters. America was forced to decide between supporting this slave revolution and siding with France which sought to repress it. At first the Washington administration supported the ruling white elite, but as L’Ouverture’s forces solidified their hold over Saint-Domingue, the American government accepted the need to establish stable relations with the new government. Indeed, as relations with France worsened, many Federalists began to urge Washington to strengthen relations with SaintDomingue, hoping to renew the lucrative trade with the former French colony. However, whereas Federalists supported recognition of SaintDomingue, Republicans in Congress opposed it.

 How is virtue represented in Maria Crowninshield’s allegory of female education?

 Read the Document “James Wilson on Woman’s Legal Disabilities” in James Wilson, An Introductory Lecture to a Course of Law Lectures (1791)

CULTURAL POLITICS IN A PASSIONATE AGE

 Their opposition was motivated in part by their loyalty to France, which was eager to recapture the colony, but also reflected the party’s commitment to protecting slavery. Republicans feared that American slaves might emulate their oppressed brethren in the Caribbean. Saint-Domingue conjured up a nightmare for slave owners, such as the depiction of bloodletting during the revolution produced by a German engraver (6.11). Although fears of slave insurrection were most keen in the South, Northern Republicans also voiced concerns.



Congressman Albert Gallatin of Pennsylvania
 warned that supporters of L’Ouverture’s ideas might “spread their views among the Negro people there [in America] and excite dangerous insurrections among them.” Even among those most opposed to slavery, few were willing to support racial equality. Racist attitudes were found among ardent supporters of abolitionism. Images as History: Liberty Displaying the Arts and Sciences explores the tensions within early abolitionist thought.

6.11 Saint-Domingue Revolution
 For Republicans, particularly in the South, images such as this conjured up their worst nightmare—a bloody slave insurrection.

 Why did Republicans oppose normalizing relations with Saint-Domingue?



 CHAPTER 6

THE NEW REPUBLIC: AN AGE OF POLITICAL PASSION, 1789–1800

Images as History
LIBERTY DISPLAYING THE ARTS AND SCIENCES
In the 1790s, the Library Company of Philadelphia, a premier cultural institution founded in 1731 by Benjamin Franklin, commissioned Samuel Jennings’s painting Liberty Displaying the Arts and Sciences. The painting was to represent the ideals of the new American nation. What symbols does the artist include to show the cultural achievements of the new nation? How does he portray African Americans? The Library Company directors asked Jennings to include the goddess of liberty along with “Symbols of Painting, Architecture, Mechanics, Astronomy,” including a broken chain at the feet of the goddess, a symbol of the painting’s abolitionist sentiments. Although Jennings added his own ideas, he followed the directors’ suggestions. The painting reflected the influence of the classical world, including copies of the writings of Homer and Virgil, two of its greatest authors, but 
 The goddess of liberty holds a liberty pole topped by a liberty cap.

 Jennings did not slight the intellectual and cultural achievements of the modern world. He used books by John Milton and Shakespeare to represent modern literary achievements, at least of the English-speaking world. A telescope, symbol of the advancement of science, appears in the lower righthand corner. Finally, as instructed by his patrons, Jennings included the goddess of liberty with a liberty pole and cap, two symbols linked with the American Revolution. Jennings included a “Group of Negroes, who are paying Homage to Liberty, for the boundless Blessings they receive through her.” Cast in the subservient pose of bowing to liberty, the African Americans do not appear as masters of their own destinies. Nor does Jennings’s treatment suggest that African Americans created any of the cultural achievements of the new nation. Although abolitionist in sympathy, the painting does not endorse racial equality.

•
 A group of African Americans bows before liberty.

•


 The broken chains symbolize the abolition of slavery.

•


Liberty Displaying the Arts and Sciences [Source: The Library Company of Philadelphia]


 What symbols does the artist use to represent the achievements of the arts and science in the new American nation?

•


 The telescope symbolizes the advancements of modern science.

THE STORMY PRESIDENCY OF JOHN ADAMS



The Stormy Presidency of
John Adams
 George Washington did not seek a third term, a decision that set a precedent for subsequent presidents. (The unofficial two-term limit that Washington established bound presidents until 1940 when Franklin Delano Roosevelt won a third term.) In the election of 1796, the Federalist congressional caucus selected John Adams and Thomas Pinckney as candidates, while Republicans put forward Thomas Jefferson and Aaron Burr. Party discipline, however, was lax. When the electoral college met and voted for president and vice president, 52 of the 136 electors voted for men not selected by either the Federalist or Republican congressional caucuses. Adams won the most votes and became president, and Jefferson polled the next most votes and became vice president. Although Adams defeated Jefferson, the bitter electoral contest intensified the partisan divisions within America. Conflict in Europe only exacerbated these tensions. Events in Europe threatened to drag America into war. Fearful that America was threatened from abroad and concerned that domestic radicals were undermining American interests, Federalists passed repressive measures that prompted Republicans to intensify their opposition to Federalist power and rally around their leader, Thomas Jefferson. In 1800, Jefferson again faced Adams in a presidential election. This time Jefferson won, but the election resulted in a tie between Jefferson and his vice-presidential running mate, Aaron Burr. The Constitution provided that under these circumstances, the House of Representative would determine the outcome. After a flurry of politicking, Federalists agreed to select Jefferson, who became president. In Richmond, Virginia, the debate over liberty inspired a slave named Gabriel to lead a rebellion to liberate Virginia’s slaves. Although the rebellion failed, it highlighted the inescapable conflict between American ideals of liberty and the realities of racial slavery.

 Washington’s Farewell Address Washington never wavered in his belief that he acted above party, but by the middle of his second term in office he had adopted most of Hamilton’s Federalist agenda, which prompted the most outspoken Republican editors to attack Washington. Rather than respond to these attacks directly, Washington used his Farewell Address, a written statement widely printed in newspapers across the nation in September 1796, to reiterate his political ideals. In his Farewell Address Washington attacked the growing factionalism, partisanship, and regional tensions in American politics. He warned the nation “in the most solemn manner against the baneful effects of the Spirit of Party, generally.” Recognizing

 that foreign policy disputes had been particularly divisive, he advised that America “steer clear of permanent alliances, with any portion of the foreign world.” Washington was not counseling strict isolation, but rather suggesting that America enter only into temporary alliances that served its interests. Above all, he wished to see America pursue a policy free of irrational hatreds or allegiances to foreign nations. The address sought to fuse idealism and realism into a workable approach to foreign policy. In this famous portrait of Washington done at the end of his presidency (1796), Gilbert Stuart created a painting filled with symbolism that captured the central role of Washington’s presidency in launching the new nation (6.12). When the painting was first displayed publicly, the announcement noted that Washington was “surrounded with allegorical emblems of his public life in the service of his country,

 Read the Document George Washington’s Farewell Address

 What advice did Washington offer in his Farewell Address?



 CHAPTER 6

THE NEW REPUBLIC: AN AGE OF POLITICAL PASSION, 1789–1800

 “Thomas Jefferson is a firm Republican, —John Adams is an avowed Monarchist. . . . Will you, by your votes, contribute to make the avowed friend of monarchy President?” Election statement in favor of Jefferson (1796)

 which are highly illustrative of the great and tremendous storms which have frequently prevailed” but made clear that “these storms have abated, and the appearance of the rainbow is introduced in the background as a sign” of America’s bright future. Although Stuart’s portrait suggested that the nation had weathered its worst storms, the period after Washington’s retirement from politics was even more contentious. The election of 1796 was closely fought and bitterly divisive. John Adams defeated Thomas Jefferson by only three electoral votes. Intrigue had marred the election. Alexander Hamilton sought to undermine Adams’s candidacy by backing Thomas Pinckney, who was running with Adams. When Adams learned of Hamilton’s plan, he arranged to have his supporters in New England divert votes from Pinckney. The Constitution did not anticipate the rise of parties, nor did it envision the idea of presidential tickets with a designated candidate for president and vice president running together. The Founders’ system was simpler: The president was the candidate with the most votes, and the vice president was the runner up. In accordance with republican theory, this system would ensure that the executive contained the two men best qualified to lead the nation. When Federalist plots diverted votes from Pinckney, Jefferson received the second most votes and hence became the new vice president. The most obvious pattern in the election

6.12 Portrait of President George Washington
 Gilbert Stuart’s painting included allegorical elements. The passing storm and the rainbow symbolized the new nation’s stormy beginnings and bright future.

 How does the artist represent the future of America in this portrait of George Washington?

THE STORMY PRESIDENCY OF JOHN ADAMS



9 4


















6.13 Electoral Map 1796
 This map of the electoral votes in the presidential election of 1796 shows the regional basis of American politics at that time. The strength of Thomas Jefferson, the Republican candidate, was concentrated in the South and Pennsylvania. John Adams, the Federalist candidate, was strongest in New England, New York, New Jersey, and Delaware.





 Electoral vote by state John Adams (Federalist)

Electoral Vote (%)
71 (51)


Thomas Jefferson
(Democratic-Republican)


68 (49)


Thomas Pinckney
(Federalist)


59 (43)


Aaron Burr
(Democratic-Republican)


30 (22)


Maryland
 (Electors split) Others (Various)

7 for Adams
4 for Jefferson
48 (35)


 was regional. John Adams carried New England and most of the mid-Atlantic. Jefferson took the entire South and Pennsylvania (6.13).

The XYZ Affair and
 Quasi-War with France Adams, pictured in 6.14, assumed the presidency just as a crisis with France was coming to a head. In 1796, the French government, still angry over what it viewed as a pro-British tilt in American foreign policy, had recalled its diplomatic envoy. France began seizing American ships trading with Britain. Hoping to avert war, Adams sent three American envoys to France to negotiate a settlement: Charles Cotesworth Pinckney of South Carolina, John Marshall of Virginia, and Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts. At first, the French Directory, the revolutionary committee that ruled France from 1795 to 1799, snubbed the American delegation. When three French officials, identi-

 fied simply as “X,” “Y,” and “Z,” demanded a bribe from America’s diplomats as the price of beginning negotiations, public furor erupted over what was dubbed the XYZ Affair. These officials Popular Vote sought a bribe of $250,000 for Unknown themselves, a loan of over $10 million to France, and an ofUnknown ficial apology from President Adams for unflattering remarks Unknown he had made about the French government. In a contemporary Unknown political cartoon (6.15) the fiveheaded “monster” of the French Directory (it had five members) demands a bribe from America’s Unknown ambassadors. The XYZ Affair galvanized Americans, who united behind Adams’s decision to prepare for war by increasing allocations for the military. “Millions for defense, but not one cent for tribute,” became the rallying cry. Hamilton’s allies among the Federalists sought a declaration of war against France, but Adams resisted them. Instead an undeclared naval war broke out between France and America. This QuasiWar lasted almost two

6.14 John Adams
 John Adams was elected president in 1796 in the first truly partisan presidential campaign in the new nation’s brief history.

 How did the XYZ Affair affect American politics?



 CHAPTER 6

THE NEW REPUBLIC: AN AGE OF POLITICAL PASSION, 1789–1800

6.15 The Paris Monster
 This cartoon ridicules French corruption and depravity in the XYZ Affair. The “Many Headed Monster,” the symbol of French government, wields a dagger while he solicits a bribe from the American delegation. The American envoys respond, “We will not give you six pence.”

 years from 1798 to 1800. In addition to creating a new Department of the Navy, Congress tripled the size of the regular army and created a special provisional army numbering 50,000 men. Washington reluctantly agreed to head the provisional army if Hamilton were appointed his second in command, a request that would have given Hamilton authority over many military leaders more experienced than he. Hamilton’s bold effort to elevate himself above so many other qualified officers angered many Federalists who aligned themselves with Adams. Federalists were now divided into Adams and Hamilton factions.

 Why did the Federalists believe it was vital to American security to restrict immigration?

The Alien and Sedition Acts
 Federalists enacted a broad program to deal with the threats posed by the Quasi-War. To pay for the enormous expansion of the military, the Federalistcontrolled Congress passed a new property tax on land, slaves, and buildings. Federalists in Congress then proposed laws, the Alien and Sedition Acts, to protect America from foreign and domestic subversion. The Alien Acts, which included three separate laws, made it more difficult to become a citizen and gave the government far-reaching powers to

Read the Document The Alien and Sedition Acts


THE STORMY PRESIDENCY OF JOHN ADAMS

 deport resident aliens. The Sedition Act made it a crime to “combine or conspire together with the intent to oppose any measure or measures of the government of the United States.” The act criminalized any attempt to “write, print, utter, or publish” statements “false, scandalous, or malicious” against “the government of the United States, or either house of Congress of the United States, or the President.” Conspicuously absent were penalties for attacking Republican Vice President Thomas Jefferson. The Federalist press was free to hurl whatever invectives it chose at Jefferson with impunity. Federalists used the Sedition Act to prosecute 25 people, all Republican sympathizers, including printers, outspoken politicians, and other prominent figures. Federalists even prosecuted one drunken Republican for declaring that he did not care if a cannon salute to President Adams “fired thro’ his a—.” The harshest sentence, a $400 fine and an 18-month prison sentence, went to David Brown, an itinerant preacher and political agitator who had raised a liberty pole in Dedham, Massachusetts, with a placard that read “No Stamp Act, No Sedition, no Alien Bills, no Land Tax: downfall to the Tyrants of America, peace and retirement to the President, long live the Vice-President.” Republicans had tried to use every constitutional means at their disposal to protest the Sedition Act. They first sought to petition Congress to repeal it and then tried to use the courts to challenge its constitutionality. When both of these means failed, Republicans cast about for a new strategy. In 1798, Madison and Jefferson articulated such a strategy in two separate documents, the Virginia Resolution (by Madison) and the Kentucky Resolution (by Jefferson) Both documents defended the rights of the states to judge the constitutionality of federal laws and if necessary to protect their citizens against the federal government. Republicans based this idea on the notion that the Constitution was a compact among the people of the states who not only retained all powers not delegated to the new government but also retained a right to judge when acts of the federal government violated the Constitution. Neither Madison nor Jefferson took the next logical step and asserted a right of the states to actively nullify an unconstitutional act of the federal government. Both men hoped that the states would use persuasion, not force, to challenge an unconstitutional exercise of federal power. In keeping with this notion, Virginia

 and Kentucky distributed their resolutions to the other state legislatures hoping that other states would also rally against the Sedition Act. However, legislatures in the Federalist-dominated New England states attacked the resolutions as dangerous and unconstitutional assertions of state power. Federalists argued that the final arbiter of the constitutionality of acts of Congress ought to be the federal courts, not the state legislatures. Angered by the northern Federalist legislatures’ reactions, Jefferson authored a second set of Kentucky Resolutions (1799). In these, he introduced the constitutional doctrine of nullification, which asserted that states could nullify unconstitutional laws. Jefferson did not explain how a state would accomplish the goal of constitutional nullification. The Virginia and Kentucky resolutions became the foundation for subsequent arguments about states’ rights, the theory that the Constitution was a compact among the states and that the individual states retained the right to judge when the federal government’s actions were unconstitutional. The Alien and Sedition crisis also led to the development of a new theory of freedom of the press. This new theory, the basis for modern theories of freedom of the press, argued that political opinions were not subject to government control. Rather than try to limit dissenting ideas, the new view embraced the idea of a marketplace of ideas. More speech, not less, was the antidote to the threat posed by dangerous ideas.

The Disputed
Election of 1800
 The Quasi-War with France, which was winding down by 1800, had split Federalists into two factions. Although Adams supported a military build up, he never abandoned hope of a negotiated settlement. Hamilton, by contrast, believed that war with France provided an opportunity to crush domestic opposition and forge an alliance with Britain. Adams had little interest in such grandiose schemes, which may have included vague plans for a joint Anglo-American conquest of Spanish America. The president also resented Hamilton’s meddling in his administration. Changes in the French government now made a peaceful solution likely. The radical phase of the French Revolution ended when Napoleon

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Congressional Debates
 over the Sedition Act



 What strategies were used to challenge the Sedition Act?



 CHAPTER 6

6.16 Anti-Jefferson
Political Cartoon
 Jefferson’s opponents portrayed him as an atheist who drew radical ideas from the French Revolution. In this image the American eagle tries to prevent Jefferson from throwing the Constitution into the flames emanating from the altar of Gallic (French) despotism.

THE NEW REPUBLIC: AN AGE OF POLITICAL PASSION, 1789–1800

 Bonaparte, an ambitious general, seized control of France in 1799. Eager to gain U.S. support for his military campaigns against Spain and Britain, Napoleon negotiated a treaty with Adams that ended the naval conflict. However, Adams’s statesmanlike effort to seek peace angered Hamiltonians. Adams also privately attacked Hamilton’s “British faction.” In turn, believing that Adams lacked the resolve to deal with France or the Republicans, Hamilton published a pamphlet denouncing the president. The split among Federalists could hardly have come at a worse time: The election of 1800 loomed. The election of 1800 presented a clear choice between Federalist Adams and Republican Jefferson. Each party indulged in more rancorous campaigning than either side had experienced in previous elections. Federalists attacked Jefferson as an atheist and radical supporter of the French Revolution, themes captured in this political cartoon (6.16), which shows Jefferson in league with the devil. One Connecticut minister declared, “I do not believe that the Most High will permit a howling atheist to sit at the head of this nation.” Republicans, in

 Why did the Federalist political cartoon show Jefferson about to burn the Constitution?

 turn, prayed for deliverance from “Tories; from Aristocrats.” Despite dire predictions about the dangers of electing Jefferson—some New Englanders hid their family Bibles, fearing that President Jefferson might confiscate them—Republicans garnered enough votes to win. Still, the election was close. As the map (6.17) shows, support for Adams was strongest in New England, while Jefferson carried the South and parts of the mid-Atlantic. Only eight votes marked the margin of victory between the two sides. The Republican victory triggered a constitutional crisis that few would have predicted. The actual vote in the electoral college had produced a tie between Jefferson and the Republican candidate for vice president, Aaron Burr. The Constitution did not direct electors to cast separate ballots for president and vice president. A tie meant that the sitting House of Representatives, dominated by Federalists, would decide the election. The new Republican-dominated House would not take its seats until March 1801. The political situation was tense. Rumors of deals and conspiracies circulated widely. Pennsylvania and Virginia both mobilized their militias, a clear message that they would not sit by while scheming politicians in Congress cast aside the will of the people. The politicians indeed schemed and negotiated, thus making resolution of the deadlock time consuming. Many Federalists believed that Jefferson was a fanatic, viewing Burr as a safer alternative. Alexander Hamilton, however, who had been Burr’s rival in New York politics for more than a decade, disagreed. Rather than see Burr win, Hamilton persuaded Federalists that Jefferson was the lesser of the two evils. Jefferson had also assured Federalists, including Hamilton, that he would not undermine all hard-won Federalist policies of the previous decade. With Hamilton’s support and assurances from Jefferson, a deal was finally struck. It took five days and 35 ballots before the House finally elected Jefferson. Jefferson’s victory averted another constitutional crisis. Despite the mobilization of the Virginia and Pennsylvania militias while the House was voting, the election of 1800 peacefully transferred power from Federalists to Republicans, a notable achievement given the tense political atmosphere of the 1790s. To avert future deadlock in presidential elections, the Twelfth Amendment, adopted in 1804, required that electors cast separate ballots for president and vice president.

THE STORMY PRESIDENCY OF JOHN ADAMS





9 4






6.17 Electoral Map of 1800
 Adams’s support in the election of 1800 was concentrated chiefly in New England. Jefferson drew support from the South and the mid-Atlantic.

10 3




 Gabriel, the slave leader of the rebellion, was trained as a blacksmith and enjoyed consider4 able mobility. His master allowed Gabriel to hire himself out to others and keep part of his earnings for himself. Gabriel used his mobility to make contact with other slaves and free blacks and together with them formulated Electoral vote by state Popular Vote Electoral Vote (%) a bold plan to seize the state ar73 (53) Unknown Thomas Jefferson (Democratic-Republican) senal and arm Virginia’s slaves. (53) Unknown Gabriel not only knew about the Aaron Burr (Democratic-Republican) slave uprising in Saint-Domingue John Adams 65 (47) Unknown and the French Revolution but (Federalist) (Incumbent) was also keenly aware of the ideas Charles C. Pinckney 64 (46) Unknown of the American Revolution. He (Federalist) planned to march under a banMaryland, North Carolina, ner emblazoned with the words Pennsylvania electors split votes for (Federalist) and “death or liberty.” Gabriel had (Democratic-Republican) taken Patrick Henry’s famous candidates words, reversed them, and transformed them into the rallying cry for a slave rebellion. But the state militia easily crushed the rebellion. To deal with the rebels, a special court tried slaves without the The French Revolution and the struggles between benefit of a jury. Twenty-six of those put on trial Federalists and Republicans leading up to the elecwere convicted and sentenced to death. Although tion of 1800 helped spread ideas about liberty throughout American society, including among slave Virginia showed little concern for the rights of the accused slaves, it had to pay close to $9,000 communities in the South. The most dramatic ilto the owners of the condemned slaves, who were lustration of this came in Virginia in 1800. Gabriel’s legally entitled to be compensated for the loss of Rebellion, a slave insurrection, united free blacks their property. and slaves in a plot to liberate Richmond’s slaves.





 Gabriel’s Rebellion

 “Mr. Jefferson, though too revolutionary in his notions, is yet a lover of liberty and will be desirous of something like orderly Government. Mr. Burr loves nothing but himself . . . and will be content with nothing short of permanent power in his own hands.” ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 1800

 Read the Document A Virginia Slave Explains Gabriel’s Rebellion

 What events in the 1790s helped inspire Gabriel’s Rebellion?



 CHAPTER 6

THE NEW REPUBLIC: AN AGE OF POLITICAL PASSION, 1789–1800



1790–1791


1793–1794




 Washington inaugurated

 Hamilton’s “Report on Public Credit”

Whiskey Rebellion


 Jay’s Treaty

 Farmers in western Pennsylvania protest the whiskey excise tax

 Senate ratifies Jay’s Treaty with Great Britain. Republicans oppose treaty

 Washington becomes America’s first president

 Federalist economic program implemented

 Bill of Rights ratified

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Constitution amended to protect individual liberty and include additional structural supports for federalism

Review Questions
 1. Were Anti-Federalist fears vindicated by the events of the 1790s?

 4. Did Republican opposition to the Sedition Act owe more to states’ rights or individual rights?

 2. How did the French Revolution affect domestic American politics?

 5. How did Federalists view Jefferson in the election of 1800?

 3. How did the novel reflect and influence ideas about women’s roles in the new republic?

Key Terms
 Electoral college A group of electors appointed by each state who had the responsibility of picking the president. Republicans Movement led by Jefferson and Madison that opposed Federalists’ efforts to create a more powerful centralized government. Assumption of the state debts Hamilton’s scheme for the federal government to take over any outstanding state debts. Bank of the United States A bank chartered by the federal government. The bank served as a depository for government funds, helped bolster confidence in government securities, made loans, and provided the nation with a stable national currency. Democratic-Republican Societies A new type of political organization informally allied with the Republicans whose function was to help collect, channel, and influence public opinion. Jay’s Treaty Diplomatic treaty negotiated by Federalist John Jay in 1794. According to the terms of the treaty, Britain agreed to compensate America for cargoes seized from 1793 to 1794 and promised to vacate forts in the Northwest Territory. However, America failed to win acceptance of the right of neutral nations to trade with belligerents without harassment.

 Whiskey Rebellion The armed uprising of western Pennsylvania farmers protesting the whiskey excise in 1794 was the most serious test of the new federal government’s authority since ratification of the Constitution. XYZ Affair The furor created when Americans learned that three French officials, identified in diplomatic correspondence as “X,” “Y,” and “Z,” demanded a bribe from America’s diplomats as the price of beginning negotiations. Alien and Sedition Acts Four laws designed to protect America from the danger of foreign and domestic subversion. The first three, the Alien laws, dealt with immigration and naturalization. The Sedition Act criminalized criticism of the federal government. States’ rights The theory that the Constitution was a compact among the states and that the individual states retained the right to judge when the federal government’s actions were unconstitutional. Gabriel’s Rebellion A slave insurrection in Richmond, Virginia, that drew together free blacks and slaves in a plot to seize the Richmond arsenal and foment a slave rebellion.

CHAPTER REVIEW









 John Adams elected president

Alien and Sedition Acts


Second Kentucky Resolution


 Jefferson elected president

 Washington declines to serve a third term and is succeeded by Federalist John Adams

 Congress enacts a series of new acts to control aliens and punish attacks on the government

 Jefferson introduces concept of nullification in his second Kentucky Resolutions

 Peaceful transfer of power from Federalists to Republicans



Virginia and Kentucky
Resolutions
 Madison and Jefferson draft resolutions protesting the Sedition Act and asserting the right of the states to check unconstitutional acts of the federal government

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of The New Republic.

Questions for Analysis
 1. What was Hamilton’s vision for the New Republic? Read the Document Alexander Hamilton, Opposing Visions for the New Nation, p. 160

 2. What was Jefferson’s vision for the New Republic?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • The Jay Treaty, p. 170 • Whiskey Rebellion Address, George Washington’s 6th Annual Address to Congress, p. 173 • “James Wilson on Woman’s Legal Disabilities” in James Wilson, An Introductory Lecture to a Course of Law Lectures (1791), p. 176

Read the Document Thomas Jefferson, Notes on Virginia,


 • George Washington’s Farewell Address, p. 179

 p. 165

• The Alien and Sedition Acts, p. 182


 3. Did Jefferson’s statements about the French Revolution justify Federalist charges that he was a dangerous radical? View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Jefferson and Hamilton’s Reactions to the French Revolution, p. 168

 4. What does the Alien and Sedition Crisis reveal about political tensions in the New Republic? View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Congressional Debates over the Sedition Act, p. 183

 5. Explain the meaning and significance of Gabriel’s Rebellion. Read the Document A Virginia Slave Explains Gabriel’s Rebellion, p. 185

View the Image
 • George Washington’s Arrival in New York City (1789), p. 158 • Lady’s Magazine, p. 175

C HAPTER

Politics in
Jeffersonian
America p. 190


What was the Jeffersonian
 vision of government?

An Expanding Empire
 of Liberty p. 194 M is s ou

 ri R.

Mandan
Crow
Shoshone
Cheyenne


Arapaho


Mandan Villages
 (winter quarters 1804–05)

Sioux


 INDIANA

Pawnee


TERRITORY
St. Louis KEN 
ANISH R ITO RY

Osage


 How did Jefferson’s policy toward Indians fit into his vision of America?

Dissension at
Home p. 200


 Was Jefferson’s response to the Federalist judiciary consistent with his political and constitutional beliefs?

America Confronts a
World at War p. 201


 What was peaceable coercion and why did it fail to avert war?

The Republic Reborn:
Consequences of the
War of 1812 p. 208


How did the War of 1812
 change American society?

Crises and the
Collapse of the
National Republican
Consensus p. 213


What did the Missouri Crisis
 reveal about the tensions in American society?



