 CHAPTER 4

REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION, 1764–1783

Tightening the Reins of Empire
 The British victory in the French and Indian War in 1763 secured North America against French attack. It also forced the British government to chart a new direction for dealing with America. A cornerstone of the new policy was the Proclamation of 1763, which prohibited settlement in lands west of the Appalachian Mountains (see Chapter 3). Having just fought an expensive war against the French, the British were keen to prevent colonists and Indians from starting a new war. Britain also felt a renewed urgency to raise funds to pay off the war debt and cover the costs of administering the colonies.

 Taxation without Representation In 1763, George Grenville, the new prime minister, ordered a detailed investigation of colonial revenues and was unhappy to discover that American customs’ duties produced less than £2,000 a year. The lucrative trade in molasses between British North America and the Caribbean islands alone should have yielded approximately £200,000 a year, apart from all of the other goods traded between North America and Britain, which should also have generated customs duties. To make the colonies pay their share of taxes, Grenville was determined to enforce existing laws and enact new taxes to bring in additional revenue. As the figures in Envisioning Evidence: A Comparison of Annual Per Capita Tax Rates in Britain and the Colonies in 1765 show, compared to the inhabitants of Britain and Ireland, the tax burden on the American colonists in the 1760s was low. Americans and Britons had come to view taxation differently and these different visions of the morality and legality of Britain’s new policies put the two on a collision course.

 “The very act of taxing exercised over those who are not represented appears to me to be depriving them of one of their most essential rights as freemen.” JAMES OTIS, The Rights of the British Colonies Asserted and Proved (1764)

 Why is the scale in the cartoon, The Great Financier, out of balance?

 The first step in Grenville’s new program was the Revenue Act (1764), popularly known as the Sugar Act. It lowered the duties colonists had to pay on molasses, but taxed sugar and other goods imported to the colonies and increased penalties for smuggling. It also created new ways for enforcing compliance with these laws. Violators could be prosecuted in British vice-admiralty courts, which operated without jury trials. For some Americans the Sugar Act violated two longheld beliefs: the idea that colonists could not be taxed without their consent and the equally sacred notion that Englishmen were entitled to a trial by a jury of their peers. The Massachusetts lawyer James Otis attacked the Sugar Act as a violation of the rights of Englishmen. Otis had already achieved notoriety for his opposition to the use of writs of assistance by customs officials. Otis insisted that under British law, a court could issue a search warrant only for a specific place where there was probable cause to suspect illegal activity. Rather than require that officials designate where they intended to search, the new general writs allowed customs officials to search any private property without first demonstrating probable cause or seeking the approval of a magistrate. In his pamphlet attacking the Sugar Act, The Rights of the British Colonies Asserted and Proved, Otis denied that the British had the authority to tax the colonists without their consent. But Otis stopped short of recommending active resistance to the Sugar Act. Instead he counseled patience, reminding his readers that we “must and ought to yield obedience to an act of Parliament, though erroneous, till repealed.” Whereas Americans viewed the new tax on sugar and other imports as a burden and a

View the Closer Look Tea-Tax Tempest


TIGHTENING THE REINS OF EMPIRE



Envisioning Evidence
A COMPARISON OF ANNUAL PER CAPITA TAX RATES IN BRITAIN AND THE COLONIES IN 1765*
Given the stridency of colonial opposition to British taxation, one might think that Americans were the most heavily taxed people in the British Empire. In fact, however, they were the least heavily taxed part of the empire. Americans were also generally wealthier than their countrymen across the Atlantic. American grievances were less about the levels of taxation than about the constitutional and political issues taxation raised. Policy makers in Britain had trouble understanding this distinction, which had profound consequences for relations with the colonies. 
Britain
(England &
Scotland)
 26 shillings

Ireland
 6 shillings, 8 pence

 1 shilling =

Massachusetts
 1 shilling

 12 pence

Pennsylvania
 1 shilling

Maryland
 1 shilling

New York
 8 pence

Connecticut
 7 pence

Virginia
 5 pence

 *Until 1970, British currency was denominated in pounds, shillings, and pence: £, s, d. There were 20 shillings to a pound and 12 pence to a shilling. In the 1760s, the daily wage for a skilled worker in London was 2/s 2/d and a beef dinner with a pint of beer cost 1/s. In British North America, wages and prices varied from colony to colony, but free white American males enjoyed a higher standard of living than comparable workers did in Britain. In 1760, a Philadelphia laborer earned just under £60 a year and a merchant £180.

 Source: Adapted from R. R. Palmer, The Age of Democratic Revolution: A Political History of Europe and America, 1760–1800 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1959)

 Which parts of the British empire were most heavily taxed?



 CHAPTER 4

REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION, 1764–1783 4.1
The Great Financier Prime Minister George Grenville holds a balance in which “Debts” far outweigh “Savings.” Britannia, symbol of Great Britain, sits off to the right, forlorn. An Indian “princess,” symbol of the American colonies, kneels with a yoke around her neck. The writing on the yoke declares “Taxed without representation.” 
 violation of their rights, for the British, the taxes were a modest imposition necessary to pay for the cost of eliminating the French from North America and administering the colonies. This political cartoon (4.1), which portrays Grenville holding a balance in which “debts” clearly outweigh “savings,” illustrates Britain’s financial predicament. The British cartoonist who drew it obviously sympathized with Americans. He shows a Native American “princess,” the most common symbol of the colonies in British cartoons, carrying a sack of money and bearing a heavy yoke around her neck. Inscribed on the yoke is the colonists’ complaint: “Taxed without representation.”

St


.L


 aw

 re

 nc

 eR .

Halifax


Portsmouth
Salem
Marblehead
Boston
Plymouth
Pomfret


Windham
Lebanon


Lak


 k La

 e

Er


 ie

 n eO

 ta r

 io

 io

R.


Elk Ridge Landing


Oh


Albany


Hartford
Wethersfield
Wallingford
Stratford
Fairfield
Elizabeth Town
Piscataway
Arnwell Twp.


Newport
Norwich
New London
Lyme
New Haven
West Haven
Milford
New York
Woodbridge
Brunswick


Philadelphia


Salem
Baltimore
Frederick Town
Lewes
Annapolis
Talbot
Dumfries
Leeds Rappahannock
Williamsburg
Norfolk


AT L ANT IC OCE AN

New Bern


Duplin
Cross Creek
Brunswick


Wilmington
Fort Johnson


Charleston
Savannah


 How did colonists react to the Stamp Act?

4.2 Stamp Act
Protests
 This map shows the scope of opposition to the detested Stamp Act. Protest was most intense in the seaports.

The Stamp Act Crisis
 Britain reacted to the colonists’ resistance to the Sugar Act by imposing another, harsher tax, the Stamp Act, which required colonists to purchase special stamps and place them on everything from newspapers to playing cards. A similar tax existed in Britain, and Parliament believed that requiring colonists to pay such a tax at a lower rate than their brethren in Britain was entirely reasonable. Many colonists, however, rejected this notion. For them, taxation without consent was a violation of their rights. Opposition was most intense in the seaports; the map (4.2) shows how widespread anger against this latest tax was. Stamps had to be affixed to virtually all legal transactions and most printed documents, so the new tax act alienated more Americans than had any previous parliamentary tax. The British could hardly have picked a worse target for their new scheme of taxation. Among those most burdened by the tax were lawyers and printers, two of the most vocal and influential groups in the colonies. Protests against the Stamp Act filled colonial newspapers and produced a spate of pamphlets defending colonial rights. The Massachusetts House of Representatives called on other colonial assemblies to send delegates to New York to frame a response to the Stamp Act crisis. Nine of the thirteen colonies

View the Image Stamp Act


TIGHTENING THE REINS OF EMPIRE

 sent a representative to the Stamp Act Congress, and although framed in respectful terms, the “Declaration of the Rights and Grievances of the Colonies” was an important step toward articulating a common response to British policy, forcing representatives from different colonies to work together for a common goal. Protest against this latest attack on American liberty was not limited to newspapers or legislative chambers. Opposition to the Stamp Act spilled out of doors into the streets of American cities and towns. Angry crowds attacked tax collectors and officials. In a few cases crowds also attacked the homes of British officials, including the home of the lieutenant governor of Massachusetts, Thomas Hutchinson. George III dismissed George Grenville in 1765, leaving the task of responding to the American crisis to a young English nobleman, Charles Wentworth, Marquess of Rockingham, the new prime minister. Rockingham shepherded two key pieces of legislation through Parliament to deal with the crisis created by the Stamp Act. The Declaratory Act affirmed Parliament’s authority to “make laws and statutes” binding on the colonies “in all cases whatsoever.” The second piece of legislation repealed the hated Stamp Act. Britain believed that it had reasserted its authority over the colonies, while removing the main cause of colonial protest. British officials misjudged the reaction of colonists opposed to recent policy. For critics of British policy, it appeared that Parliament had embarked on a path that would lead inevitably to the destruction of the colonists’ liberty. Colonial politics had moved from the margins to the center of British politics. The issue of what to do about the colonies would define British politics for the next decade. In the colonies the conflict over British policy also transformed American politics, bringing to the fore a group of Patriots, aggressive supporters of American rights, including the Sons of Liberty, a group devoted to opposing British policy and defending American rights.

An Assault on Liberty
 The resolution of the Stamp Act crisis did not eliminate Britain’s pressing financial need for colonial revenue, nor did it reduce colonial determination to resist further efforts to tax Americans. What good will the repeal of the Stamp Act generated, Britain quickly squandered as it renewed



 its efforts to impose new taxes on the colonies. The Townshend Acts (1767), named for Charles Townshend, an ambitious British finance minister, levied new taxes on glass, paint, paper, and tea imported into the colonies. Townshend misinterpreted the Stamp Act protests. He believed that colonists opposed internal taxes targeted at commerce within the colonies, but that Americans would accept external taxes such as customs duties that affected trade between the colonies and other parts of the British Empire. Again, many Americans saw things differently. The Townshend Acts prompted Americans to clarify their views about taxation. Pennsylvania lawyer John Dickinson’s pamphlet Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania (1767–1768) was an important statement of American views. Dickinson disputed Parliament’s right to tax the colonists at all. Parliament could regulate trade among different parts of the empire, he acknowledged, but only the people’s representatives could enact taxes designed primarily to raise revenues. Since Americans had no representation in Parliament, that institution could not tax them. In response to the Townshend Acts, Americans began a nonimportation movement, an organized boycott against the purchase of any imported British goods. Women took an active role in the boycott, urging that instead of imported fabrics, Americans wear only clothes made from domestic homespun fabrics. The nonimportation movement offered American women a chance to contribute actively to the defense of American rights. It also raised women’s political consciousness. As thirteen-year-old, Anna Green Winslow, wrote in her journal regarding the decision to abandon imported fabrics, “I am (as we say) a daughter of liberty, I chuse to wear as much of our manufactory as possible.” Another import, tea, had become the basis of an important social ritual in colonial society. Amid the growing frustration with British policy, tea drinking took on new political significance. In 1774, Penelope Barker and a group of women in Edenton, North Carolina, organized a tea boycott. Word of the Edenton protest eventually reached England, where a British cartoonist lampooned its support for the American cause (4.3 on page 102). This satire casts the Edenton women as a motley assortment of hags and harlots, whose unfeminine actions and neglect of their proper duties as women demonstrate their lack of virtue. The tea boycott even inspired nine-year-old Susan Boudinot, the daughter of a wealthy Philadelphia family, to demonstrate her solidarity with the

 Read the Document John Dickinson, Letters from Farmer in Pennsylvania

 How did nonimportation transform women’s political role in the colonies?



 CHAPTER 4

REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION, 1764–1783

 “A Lady’s Adieu To Her Tea Table,” No more shall I dish out the once lov’d Liquor, Though now detestable, Because I’m taught (and I believe it true) Its Use will fasten slavish Chains upon my Country, And LIBERTY’s the Goddess I would choose To reign triumphant in AMERICA. 4.3 Patriotic Ladies of Edenton This sarcastic British cartoon lampoons the efforts of American women to participate in the boycott of British imports. The caricature shows the women as unfeminine and neglectful of their proper subordinate roles as wives and mothers.

VIRGINIA GAZETTE,
January 20, 1774 
 colonial cause in her own way. When invited to tea at the home of the royal governor of New Jersey, Susan curtsied respectfully, raised her teacup to her lips, and then tossed the contents out of a window. The new duties imposed by the British were only one part of a more aggressive policy toward the colonies. Between 1765 and 1768, the British transferred the bulk of their military forces in America from the frontier to the major seaports, sites of the most violent opposition to the Stamp Act. This increased the already tense situation in these localities. In 1768, the simmering tensions between colonists and the British government came to a head when British customs officials in Boston seized merchant John Hancock’s ship Liberty. Customs officials had long suspected Hancock of smuggling and thought that seizing the Liberty would give them the proof to prosecute him. The decision proved to be a serious blunder. The symbolic significance of the British assault on a ship named Liberty was not lost on Bostonians, who saw this as an assault on the idea of liberty itself. In response to the seizure of the Liberty, Bostonians rioted, driving customs officials from the town. To quell unrest in Boston, the British dispatched additional troops and warships to the area. By 1769, the British had stationed almost 4,000 troops, dubbed redcoats because of their red uniforms, in a city with a population of roughly 15,000.

 How does Revere stage the events of the Boston Massacre to evoke sympathy for the colonists’ cause?

 Relations between Bostonians and the occupying forces were tense. On March 5, 1770, a group of citizens taunted a patrol of soldiers and pelted them with snowballs. In the melee that followed, some of the soldiers fired on the crowd, killing five civilians. The Boston silversmith and engraver Paul Revere published a popular engraving of the Boston Massacre, as the confrontation came to be called, in which he portrayed the British as having deliberately fired on the unarmed crowd (4.4). Revere aligns the soldiers in a formal military pose, and portrays the commanders as giving an order to fire. When the soldiers responsible for the shootings were indicted for murder, John Adams, a vocal critic of British policy, volunteered to defend them. Adams sought to demonstrate to the British that the Americans were not a lawless mob, but a law-abiding people. A gifted lawyer, he secured acquittals for all those accused except for two soldiers, who were convicted of the lesser crime of manslaughter. The evidence presented at the trial revealed that Revere’s version of the event, while excellent propaganda, was not an accurate rendering of the circumstances. The new taxes and pressure for compliance had stiffened the colonists’ resistance. So although Parliament repealed most of the Townshend Acts in 1770, relations between the colonies and Britain remained strained. Colonists continued to demand the traditional rights of Englishmen, such as trial by jury, but American protests had moved in a new

View the Closer Look Images as History: The
Hanging of Absalom


TIGHTENING THE REINS OF EMPIRE

4.4 Boston Massacre
 Paul Revere’s influential engraving of the Boston Massacre takes liberties with the facts to portray the British in the worst possible light. The orderly arrangement of the troops and the stance of the officer at their side suggest that they acted under orders. Behind the troops, Revere has renamed the shop “Butcher’s Hall.”

 though it made tea cheaper, and merchants resented the monopoly it gave to the East India Company. Others saw the act as a subtle way of reasserting Britain’s right to tax the colonies. One group of angry colonists in Philadelphia, calling themselves The Tar and Feathering Committee, warned that they would tar and feather any ship’s captain who landed with British tea. The British found the colonists’ actions thuggish. In this hostile British cartoon, Bostonians Pay the Excise-Man (4.5), a cruel-looking bunch of colonists force a British customs official, covered in tar and feathers, to drink tea until he becomes sick. A form of public humiliation, tarring and feathering involved pouring hot tar onto the victim’s skin and then attaching a coat of feathers. Scraping off the resulting mess was painful and laborious.



4.5 Bostonians
 Paying the ExciseMan In this pro-British cartoon, Bostonians are cruel thugs who have tarred and feathered the custom’s official and are forcing tea down his throat.

 direction, including the view that taxation without representation was a violation of fundamental rights. Resistance to British policy was also becoming more organized. The Sons of Liberty, created during the Stamp Act crisis, continued their criticism and intensified their efforts to coordinate and enforce protests against Parliament's policies. After the repeal of the Townshend Acts, Americans enjoyed a brief respite from Parliament’s attentions, as Britain turned its focus elsewhere in its far-flung empire, especially to India. However, colonists soon faced another effort to tax them.

The Intolerable Acts and
 the First Continental Congress In 1773, Parliament decided to help the flagging East India Company increase its tea sales to the colonies. Many members of Parliament had sizable investments in the company. The new law lowered the price of tea to Americans, but kept the tax on tea, and also gave the East India Company a monopoly on the tea trade with the colonies. Again, British authorities miscalculated American reactions. Colonists resented the new law, even Why did British policy seem to strike at the essence of colonists’ liberty?

View the Closer Look The Bloody Massacre




 CHAPTER 4

REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION, 1764–1783

4.6 The Able Doctor,
 or America Swallowing the Bitter Draught Paul Revere’s engraving presents America as a partially clad Indian princess. Lord Chief Justice Mansfield, a symbol of British law, holds America down. The prime minister, Lord North, shown with a copy of the Boston Port Bill, one of the Intolerable Acts, protruding from his pocket, forces tea down her throat.

 The most dramatic response to the tea act occurred in December 1773, when Bostonians, dressed as Indians, boarded a British ship and tossed over 340 chests of tea into the harbor in what came to be known as the Boston Tea Party. To punish the colonists responsible for this act of what the British considered vandalism, Parliament passed the Coercive Acts, known to colonists as the Intolerable Acts. This legislation closed the Port of Boston, annulled the Massachusetts colonial charter, dissolved or severely restricted that colony’s political institutions, and allowed the British to quarter (house) troops in private homes. (A generation later Americans adopted the Third Amendment to the Bill of Rights, which forbade quartering troops in civilian homes, a direct response to this detested British practice.) The acts also allowed British officials charged with capital crimes to be tried outside the colonies. Some colonists called the last provision the “Murder Act,” since they feared it would allow soldiers charged with murder to avoid prosecution. Americans were divided over how to respond to the Intolerable Acts. Some saw the Bostonians who dumped tea into the harbor as radicals whose actions besmirched Americans’ reputation as lawabiding subjects of the king. Others expressed outrage at the British policy that had forced Bostonians

 What is the symbolic significance Lord Chief Justice Mansfield’s actions in this political cartoon?

 to resort to such a dramatic protest. This cartoon, The Able Doctor, Or America Swallowing the Bitter Draught (4.6), gives a different view of Bostonians from the lawless ruffians depicted in Bostonians Paying the Excise-Man (4.5). Here the British prime minister, Lord North, brutally accosts America, a half-clad Indian princess, forcing tea down her throat, while Lord Chief Justice Lord Mansfield, the symbol of British law, pins her arms down. The most important consequence of the Intolerable Acts was the decision by the colonies to convene a Continental Congress in Philadelphia in late 1774. All the colonies except Georgia sent representatives. Among the colonial leaders who attended were Patrick Henry, John Adams, and George Washington. Congress endorsed the Resolves of Suffolk County, Massachusetts, which denounced the Intolerable Acts and asserted the intention of colonists to nullify such a manifest violation of their “rights and liberties.” The Congress also recommended that every town, county, and city create a committee to enforce the boycott of British goods. The informal network of committees that had opposed British policy now acquired a quasi-legal status from Congress. Although many Americans hoped that a peaceful solution to the deepening crisis was possible, in March 1774, the brilliant Virginia orator Patrick Henry urged his fellow delegates in the

Read the Document Patrick Henry, “Give me
Liberty or Give me Death”


TIGHTENING THE REINS OF EMPIRE

 Virginia legislature to prepare for the inevitable conflict that loomed between the colonies and Britain. Although no contemporaneous copy of his dramatic speech exists, Henry’s words were recounted many years later, assuming almost legendary status in American culture. In response to British assaults, Henry declared, “Give me liberty—or give me death!” Between the passage of the Sugar Act in 1764 and the meeting of the First Continental Congress in 1774, relations between Britain and America had steadily deteriorated. As the chart (4.7) shows, Britain had tried various revenue measures to raise funds from the colonies. Americans, however, remained opposed to taxation without representation. Rather than subdue the colonies, British policy only strengthened the resolve of Americans to defend their rights.



Lexington, Concord,
 and Lord Dunmore’s Proclamation Living on the edge of the British Empire, colonists had come to depend on their own militias as their primary means of public defense. The laws of the individual colonies regulated these organizations of citizen soldiers. During the colonial period the militia was more than just a force available to protect the colonists from hostile Indians or attacks from the French or Spanish. In an era before police forces, the militia also helped enforce public order, putting down riots, rebellions, and other civil disturbances. In January 1775, Virginia’s George Mason called on the colonists to put their militia in good order.

Date


Act


Policy




Proclamation
 of 1763

 Prohibits colonists from moving westward

 Intensifies problem of land scarcity in colonies



Sugar Act


 Reduces duty on molasses, but provides for more vigorous methods of enforcement

 Colonials articulate theory that taxation without representation is a violation of “their most essential rights as freemen”



Stamp Act


 Documents and printed materials, including legal documents, newspapers, and playing cards must use special stamped paper

 Riots in major urban areas, harassment of revenue officers, colonial representatives meet for Stamp Act Congress



Quartering Act


 Colonists must supply British troops with housing and firewood

 Colonial Assemblies protest, New York punished for failure to comply with law



Declaratory
Act/Repeal of
Stamp Act


 Britain asserts its right to legislate for colonies in all cases/ Stamp Act repealed

 Britain reasserts its authority, while removing the obnoxious provisions of the Stamp Act



 Townshend Acts New duties placed on glass, lead, paper, paint



Tea Act




Coercive Acts
 Port of Boston closed, town (Intolerable Acts) meetings restricted



Prohibitory Act


 Parliament gives East India Company monopoly, but provides a subsidy to East India Company that decreases the price of tea for Americans

 Britain declares intention to coerce Americans into submission

Consequences


4.7 British Policies
 and their Consequences for Relations with the American Colonies

 Non-importation movement gains ground 90,000 pounds of tea tossed into Boston harbor

 First Continental Congress meets and other colonies express support for Bostonians Continental Congress adopts a Declaration of Rights asserting American rights

 What was the impact of Lord Dunmore’s Proclamation on southern colonists?



 CHAPTER 4

REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION, 1764–1783

 “If we view the whole of the conduct of the [British] ministry and parliament, I do not see how any one can doubt but that there is a settled fix’d plan for inslaving the colonies, or bringing them under arbitrary government. ” Connecticut Minister, the Reverend EBENEZER BALDWIN, 1774

 Mason declared that “a well regulated Militia, composed of gentlemen freeholders, and other free-man, is the natural strength and only stable security of a free Government.” The British, too, understood the importance of the militia to colonial resistance. Not only did they pose a military threat, but they were also indispensable to helping mobilize Americans and organizing their opposition to British policy. Disarming the militias became a priority for the British. Their first target was Massachusetts, which had become a hotbed of resistance; the British dispatched troops to Concord in April 1775 to seize gunpowder and other military supplies. Paul Revere, an outspoken member of the Sons of Liberty, was charged with riding from Boston to Lexington and Concord to warn citizens that British troops were on the march. Revere got as far as Lexington before a British patrol captured him. Fortunately for Revere he had already encountered another member of the Sons of Liberty that night, Dr. Samuel Prescott, who was returning from the home of his fiancée. Prescott agreed to carry word that British troops were marching from Boston. The alarm spread throughout the countryside. When the 700 British regulars finally arrived at Lexington’s town green, they faced 60–70 militiamen. Although the militia agreed to disperse, someone, it is not clear who, fired a shot, and the two sides exchanged fire. The Battle of Lexington marked the first military conflict between Britain and America, and the colonists had demonstrated their mettle. The British then marched to Concord, where they confronted a larger and better organized militia detachment at the North Bridge. The militia stood their ground and exchanged fire with the British

 Why did British regulars choose Concord as their military objective?

 regulars, who were forced to retreat. While the British retreated back to Boston, colonial reinforcements poured into Concord and the surrounding countryside. The British column was an easy target for militiamen, who took up positions along the roadside and in the adjacent woods. A Rhode Island newspaper captured the views of Patriots when it commented that British aggression marked the start of a “War which shall hereafter fill an important page in history.” Although the British had mounted a direct assault on the Massachusetts militia, they opted for a stealthier plan for disarming the Virginia militia. Under cover of darkness a detachment of Royal Marines entered Virginia’s capital of Williamsburg, seized the gun powder, and destroyed the firing mechanisms on the muskets stored in the militia’s magazine (storehouse). When citizens of Williamsburg learned of the assault, they marched on the governor’s mansion to protest. As word of the British raid spread through the colony, militia led by Patrick Henry planned to march on Williamsburg. Lord Dunmore, the royal governor, warned that if the militia entered Williamsburg he would “declare freedom to slaves and reduce the city of Williamsburg to ashes.” At the last moment a compromise was worked out, and the governor made restitution for the stolen powder and damaged guns. Still Dunmore’s threat to free Virginia’s slaves had shocked the colony. Two weeks later colonists learned of Lord Dunmore’s Proclamation. Dunmore offered freedom to any slave who joined the British forces in putting down the American rebellion. Within a month 300 slaves had joined “Dunmore’s Ethiopian Regiment,” whose ranks would swell to 800 or more. The uniforms of this unit included a sash emblazoned with the motto “Liberty To Slaves.” Virginians complained that the British were “using every Art to seduce the Negroes,” while others viewed Dunmore’s decision as “diabolical.” Many Virginians who were wavering on the issue of American independence now concluded that a break with Britain was inevitable, even desirable. Some Virginians recognized that Virginia’s slaves were seeking the same liberty that colonists claimed. For example Lund Washington, who managed his cousin George’s Mount Vernon estate, including his slaves, observed that “there is not a man of them but would leave us, if they could make their escape.”

PATRIOTS VERSUS LOYALISTS



 Patriots versus Loyalists By 1775, the rift between Britain and the colonies had grown precipitously large. Indeed, it was not just colonists who believed that if Britain continued on its present course it would end in disaster. A satirical British cartoon, The Political Cartoon for the Year 1775 (4.8), published in London, vividly captured this view. It depicts King George III riding in a coach heading straight over a cliff. Lord Chief Justice Mansfield holds the reins of the carriage of state, which rides roughshod over the Magna Carta—a legal text closely linked with the Rights of Englishmen—and the British Constitution, another symbol of liberty. The cartoonist’s symbolism suggested a view that was becoming increasingly popular in the colonies: Americans could no longer expect the political and legal system of Britain to protect their liberty. Although some Americans were persuaded that Britain was intent on trampling their liberty, other colonists remained loyal to the crown. For Patriots it was becoming increasingly clear that they could no longer count on the legal protections that had safeguarded their liberty for generations. Loyalists, by contrast, disputed this claim. For those loyal to George III, liberty could be maintained only by upholding English law. Loyalists viewed Patriots’ actions as lawlessness, not affirmations of liberty.

The Battle of Bunker Hill
 Two months after Lexington and Concord, the two sides clashed again in Charlestown, across the Charles River from Boston. American forces had dug in at Bunker Hill and nearby Breed’s Hill, prepared to hold off the British in Boston. The main fighting actually took place at Breed’s Hill, which was closer to the harbor. The British underestimated the colonists’ resolve to hold their ground. Although the British took Bunker and Breed’s Hills, they had purchased their victory at a steep cost in dead and wounded. Even more important, Americans had shown the British that

 they were not the “untrained rabble” the British had portrayed and that they could become a formidable fighting force. The painter John Trumbull immortalized the battle in his painting The Death of General Warren at the Battle of Bunker Hill. For a discussion of this painting and how it reflected the realities of a battle in which neither side won a clear victor, see Images as History: Trumbull’s The Death of General Warren at the Battle of Bunker Hill (page 108). Despite the armed confrontations at Lexington, Concord, and Bunker Hill, the Continental Congress had not abandoned hope of reconciliation with King George III. In July 1775, Congress drafted the

4.8 The Political
Cartoon for the
Year 1775
 George III rides next to Lord Chief Judge Mansfield in a carriage heading toward the edge of a cliff. The carriage crushes the Magna Carta and the British Constitution, symbols of the rule of law, while flames engulf Boston in the background.

 What does The Political Cartoon for the Year 1775 reveal about the nature of relations between the colonies and Britain?



 CHAPTER 4

REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION, 1764–1783

Images as History
TRUMBULL’S THE DEATH OF GENERAL WARREN AT THE BATTLE OF BUNKER HILL
American John Trumbull’s painting The Death of General Warren at the Battle of Bunker Hill (1786), painted eleven years after the battle, captured an important moment in the American war for independence. Like Benjamin West’s The Death of General Wolfe (see page 90),Trumbull’s painting depicts the heroic death of a military figure, but the two paintings differ in a number of fascinating ways. While The Death of General Wolfe portrayed a clear victory for the British, The Death of General Warren showed a more complex event in which neither side was completely victorious.While the Americans lost the battle, they proved themselves an effective fighting force and exacted a high price from the British for their victory. How did Trumbull’s composition reflect the realities of this battle, a struggle in which neither side won a clear victory? Trumbull’spainting The Death of General Warren was part of a series of paintings he began to commemorate the “great events of our country’s revolution.” The artist intended to use his painting as the basis for a set of engravings that he could sell as cheap prints to a popular market on both sides of the Atlantic. With this in mind Trumbull captured the chaotic horror of a battle scene in which both armies displayed heroism and nobility. The American General Warren lies mortally wounded, cradled in the arms of one of his troops, in the same pose in which Benjamin West portrayed British General Wolfe. One element of the painting meant to appeal to British viewers is the depiction of British Major John Small in the center ofthe composition near Warren. Small stays the hand of one of his infantryman poised to bayonet the dying Warren. By placing these two noble gestures—Warren’s sacrifice and Small’s humanitarian intervention—at the center of the painting, Trumbull shifts attention away from the actual outcome of the battle to the idea that virtuous men on both sides performed noble deeds. This 
 decision enhanced the moral complexity of the events while also making it and later engravings based on it attractive to British and American customers— effectively doubling the size of his potential market. Trumbull’s canvas also advanced the democratization of art begun by Benjamin West. In this painting virtue resides neither in one nation nor in any particular class of men. Trumbull portrays a broad range of soldiers heroically— from a gentlemanly British officer to a barefoot colonial soldier. Indeed Abigail Adams, an outspoken supporter of American independence and the wife of the prominent politician John Adams, noted that Trumbull “teaches mankind that it is not rank nor titles, but character alone, which interests posterity.” Trumbull all but ignored African Americans, consigning the two he did include to minor roles in the painting. Trumbull described the African American standing in the lower right corner behind an injured colonial The Death of General Warren at the Battle of Bunker Hill

 How did Trumbull craft his painting so it would appeal to both an American and British audience?

PATRIOTS VERSUS LOYALISTS

 officer as a “faithful negro.”At least fourteen African Americans were among the troops defending Breeds Hill and Bunker Hill. The African American Peter Salem played an important role in the actual battle, perhaps firing the shot that killed Major Pitcairn, the British figure collapsing near the center of the painting. The painting’s slighting of that role probably

 General Warren’s pose evokes the image of Jesus being cradled in the arms of Mary.

•


 reflected Trumbull’s own racial ideas and those of his audience, who were not used to seeing African Americans depicted in anything but a subservient role. For the moment the democratization of art was restricted to those of European descent. African Americans’ treatment in American art mirrored their marginalization in the larger society.

 Trumbull highlights the idea of virtue and honor as universal values by showing a British officer preventing a soldier from bayoneting the dying Warren.

•




 Rather than portray an African American as heroic, Warren marginalizes this figure, literally placing him in the shadow of a white officer at the end of the canvas.

Major Pitcairn, who led
 the British assault on Concord, is mortally wounded in this battle.

•


•


 What does Trumbull’s portrayal of African Americans tell us about his views and those of his likely audiences?



 CHAPTER 4

REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION, 1764–1783

 “Olive Branch” petition, asking George III to intervene on their behalf. The king rejected the American appeal. With that rejection the time for reconciliation passed, and the supporters of American independence in the Continental Congress gained momentum. The push for independence opened a division within colonial society between colonists who supported independence and those who remained loyal to the British.

Common Sense and the
Declaration of Independence
 In January 1776, Thomas Paine, a recent immigrant to America from England, wrote a pamphlet that argued forcefully for American independence. In Common Sense, Paine not only attacked recent British policy, he framed a stinging indictment of monarchy and defended a democratic theory of representative government. After stating the “simple facts, plain arguments, and common sense” of the matter, Paine concluded that separation from Britain was the only action that made sense for America. Paine’s work was printed in a cheap format that allowed artisans, farmers, and others with little money to purchase a copy. He wrote in plain, forceful prose, avoiding literary and classical allusions that would have required knowledge of Latin. The book was a phenomenal publishing success. Common Sense did more than simply fuel Americans’ desire for independence; it helped change the framework in which Americans thought about politics itself. Before Paine’s pamphlet most Americans, even those who believed that reconciliation with Britain was impossible, still maintained a respectful attitude toward George III. Most Americans had grown up in a culture that venerated constitutional monarchy, but Paine’s savage critique of this institution had a liberating impact. Paine called monarchy “ridiculous.” After demonstrating that history proved that monarchy was incompatible with liberty, Paine turned to the current British monarch George III, whom he equated with savagery itself. He denounced the king for his assaults on American liberty, noting that “even brutes do not devour their young.” Those who supported reconciliation with Britain found Paine’s scathing attacks on George III appalling. Paine also gave a voice to many who wished to radically transform American political life. He was unabashedly democratic at a time when many, including those most eager to separate from Britain, viewed democracy as a danger to be avoided What arguments did Paine’s Common Sense present?

 at all cost. Common Sense became a blueprint for those who wished to experiment with democratic government, although not everyone who ardently supported American independence appreciated Paine’s ideas.

 “There is something absurd in supposing a Continent to be perpetually governed by an island.” THOMAS PAINE, Common Sense 1776

 In July 1775, a month after Congress drafted the “Olive Branch Petition,” pleading with George III to abandon the “cruel” policies of his ministers and “such statutes” as “immediately distress” the colonists, the king declared that the American colonists were “in open and avowed rebellion.” The Prohibitory Act, which the British Parliament enacted into law in December 1775, banned all trade with the thirteen colonies. Word of the ban arrived in America in February 1776. Coming on the heels of Paine’s indictment of British tyranny, the policy further inflamed American resentments against Britain. After the adoption of the Prohibitory Act, support for independence gained ground. In May Congress instructed the individual colonies “to adopt such Government as shall, in the Opinion of the Representatives of the People, best conduce to the Happiness and Safety of their Constituents.” Congress added a preamble five days later that affirmed “the exercise of every kind of authority under the said crown should be totally suppressed.” Although Congress had not formally declared independence, it had effectively asserted that the colonies had become independent states no longer under the authority of Parliament or the king. Richard Henry Lee of Virginia introduced a resolution that “these United Colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independent states.” Congress then debated the Lee resolution and on June 11, 1776, appointed a committee to draft a formal declaration of independence. With John Adams (Massachusetts) as its chair, the committee included Robert Livingston (New York), Thomas Jefferson (Virginia), Read the Document Thomas Paine, Common Sense

PATRIOTS VERSUS LOYALISTS

Roger Sherman (Connecticut), and Benjamin
 Franklin (Pennsylvania). Adams designated Jefferson to take the lead in drafting the formal resolution. On June 28, the committee presented the congressional delegates with the draft. Congress cut about a quarter of the text and made some other revisions to the document. On July 4, 1776, Congress approved the final text of the Declaration of Independence, a public defense of America’s decision to declare independence from Britain that was to be printed and sent to the individual states. Copies of the declaration were then widely distributed. Thomas Jefferson admitted that his text reflected the “sentiments of the day, whether expressed in conversation or letters, printed essays.” The introductory paragraph explained the reasons for separating from Britain. The second paragraph provided a powerful defense of the liberty and



 equality and affirmed that “all men are created Equal” and therefore entitled to “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.” A long list of grievances against George III took up the bulk of the text. Printed as a single broadside, the indented list of charges against George III was immediately recognizable (4.9). The drafters of the Declaration of Independence aimed it at both a domestic and a foreign audience. It made the case for independence to the American people and announced to the British government the reasons for taking up arms. The declaration also sought to help American diplomacy. If America were to fight the most powerful nation on earth, it would need help from other European powers, such as Holland, Spain, and especially of Britain’s long-time rival, France. Because a powerful monarch then ruled France, the declaration refrained from using the inflammatory antimonarchical rhetoric favored by Thomas Paine in Common Sense. George III’s misdeeds, not monarchy itself, were to blame for America’s demand for independence.

The Plight of
 the Loyalists The division between Patriots, colonists who supported American independence, and Loyalists, those wishing to remain loyal to the king, drove a deep wedge in colonial society. John Adams speculated that Americans were evenly divided among Patriots, Loyalists, and those striving to remain neutral. Although it is difficult to establish hard figures for how colonists divided over

4.9 The Declaration
 of Independence The Declaration of Independence was printed as a broadside. This single-sheet format made it easy to post in public places. The layout of the Declaration—the typography and paragraphing—guides the reader through the main parts of its argument.

 What audiences did the Declaration of Independence address?



 CHAPTER 4

REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION, 1764–1783

 “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness.” Declaration of Independence, 1776

4.10 Magna
Britannia Her
Colonies Reduced
 This image created by Benjamin Franklin plays on the dismemberment of the empire as fatal to both the colonies and the mother country. Franklin used this image early in America’s opposition to British policy. Loyalists later used the dismemberment metaphor to persuade Americans to oppose independence.

 independence, historians estimate that Patriots constituted about 40 percent of the white population, neutrals another 40 percent, and Loyalists probably about 20 percent. Many prominent Loyalists had opposed British policy toward the colonies, but refused to accept the decision for independence. Minister Samuel Seabury captured the view of many Loyalists when he wrote: “To talk of a colony independent of the mothercountry, is no better sense than to talk of a limb independent of the body to which it belongs.” The image of the dismemberment of the empire was a powerful one in the minds of colonials and Britons alike. In the 1760s, supporters of American rights had used such images to persuade Britain to change its policy toward the colonies. At the time Benjamin Franklin was a colonial lobbyist in London, working to repeal British taxes. He designed an engraving, Magna Britannia Her Colonies Reduced, to appeal to Parliament, evoking the horror of a possible separation between the colonists and the mother country (4.10).

 How did the metaphor of dismemberment influence Loyalist thought?

 Seabury’s reassertion of the horrors that would follow from the dismemberment of the empire tapped into powerful fears and anxieties among Americans unsure about independence. Loyalists suffered hardships during the struggle for independence. In some places where Patriot feelings were strongest, individuals could be ostracized for refusing to support the Patriot cause. Legal disabilities were also imposed on individuals who refused to take a loyalty oath, including exclusion from service on juries and disarmament. Many states passed laws seizing Loyalist property. A complicated issue arising from these laws was how to deal with women married to Loyalists. Some women brought property from their own family into their marriage. Was this property also liable to confiscation? The story of Grace Growden Galloway illustrates the rapid reversal of fortune that could befall anyone who opposed the Patriots’ side in the American Revolution. See Choices and Consequences: A Loyalist Wife’s Dilemma. The Loyalist cause appealed to many Americans, not just wealthy men and women like Grace and Joseph Galloway. New York boasted a sizeable Loyalist population, as did parts of the backcountry in the Carolinas. Some religious sects, particularly groups such as the Quakers who were pacifists, opposed the violence of war. Beginning with Lord Dunmore’s Proclamation, many slaves had sensed that a British victory, not independence, offered them the best chance for freedom. As many as 100,000 slaves freed themselves by running away during the dislocation created by the war.

 View the Image Tory's Day of Judgment

PATRIOTS VERSUS LOYALISTS



Choices and Consequences
A LOYALIST WIFE’S DILEMMA
Before the struggle for independence, Grace Growden Galloway stood at the apex of Philadelphia society. Her husband, Joseph Galloway, was wealthy and influential in Pennsylvania politics. Throughout the escalating conflict with Britain, Joseph Galloway supported reconciliation, and when war broke out, he became a Loyalist. Realizing that he could no longer count on the goodwill of his former friends and neighbors to protect him, Galloway and his daughter fled Philadelphia—perhaps the most ardent Patriot city outside New England—for British-controlled New York in 1776. The government of Pennsylvania confiscated Galloway’s property, but Grace Galloway was determined to protect the property she had inherited from her own family and had brought into her marriage. She faced a difficult set of choices concerning her property: 
Choices




 Follow her husband and daughter into exile, accepting that neither she nor her husband would probably ever recover their property.

Continuing
Controversies
 What does Grace Growden Galloway’s plight reveal about the situation of Loyalists during the American Revolution? The legal status of the property of a woman married to a Loyalist was complicated. This issue came before American courts in Martin v. Commonwealth (1805). Building on a new conception of women as independent political actors, Massachusetts claimed that a woman’s choice to stay or flee was hers alone. The Massachusetts high court, however, disagreed with this new view of women’s legal autonomy. The court held that the woman’s decision to leave the state had been her husband’s, not her own, and therefore the state did not have the right to seize her land. Although a defeat for women’s rights, the outcome of the case would have certainly pleased Grace Growden Galloway.



 Follow her husband and daughter into exile and use every legal means available to prevent the confiscation of her own property and fight an uphill battle to protect it from afar.



Stay in Philadelphia and use
 every legal option to protect the properties that she had brought into her marriage.

Decision
 Grace chose to stay and fight. She hoped that by remaining in her home she could avoid eviction. She also concluded that the chances of defending her own property against confiscation would be easier if she stayed in Philadelphia.

Consequences
 Grace endured great hardship while defending her rights but was ultimately evicted. Snubbed and shunned by many of her former friends and acquaintances, and driven from her home, she lived in a modest set of rented rooms. In her diary Grace recounts her struggles and the indignities she suffered, including the time she “saw My own Chariot standing at my door for the Use of others while I am forced to Walk.” She never rejoined her family and died alone in 1781. Although evicted from her home, she was more successful at protecting the property she had brought into the marriage, which eventually passed on to her descendents.

 Eighteenth-century coach

 What does Martin v. Commonwealth reveal about women’s roles in Revolutionary-era America?



 CHAPTER 4

REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION, 1764–1783

America at War
 The British had reason to be confident when they contemplated their military advantages over the colonies at the start of the war. Britain’s navy was the most powerful in the world and its army was formidable. The population of the British Isles was more than four times greater than that of the colonies. America began the war with only a citizen’s militia. Fighting a powerful army meant that America would have to create a professional force. Congress appointed George Washington the commander of the new Continental Army. Although Britain’s population was much larger than that of the colonies, the relative size of the two armies in the field was not that lopsided. At the start of the conflict British General Howe enjoyed something like a two to one advantage over General Washington. Numbers alone do not tell the whole story. British supply lines were stretched thin and American forces were supplemented by militia forces which not only increased the size of the Patriot forces, but forced the British to deal with fighting both a conventional army and a nonconventional one as well. Even if the British were able to defeat the American armed forces in the field and gain control of America’s cities, conquering and pacifying all thirteen colonies would be virtually impossible. The British also never grasped that they were fighting a new type of war: not a struggle against another European power, but a battle against a decentralized independence movement.

The War in the North
 Stiff resistance at Breed’s Hill and Bunker Hill had convinced the British military that the colonial militias were not an undisciplined rabble that would retreat if confronted by a well-trained professional army. The creation of a Continental Army under

 To place any dependance upon Militia, is, assuredly, resting upon a broken staff . . . . Men accustomed to unbounded freedom, and no controul, cannot brook the Restraint which is indispensably necessary to the good order and Government of an Army; without which, licentiousness, and every kind of disorder triumphantly reign. To bring Men to a proper degree of Subordination, is not the work of a day, a Month or even a year GEORGE WASHINGTON to the President of Congress, September 24, 1776

 the leadership of George Washington underscored this fact and led the British to change their tactics. Rather than employing the army to subdue a rebel population, the British prepared for a sustained military conflict. Realizing that Patriot sympathies in New England were strong, the British retreated to New York, a colony with many Loyalists. New York not only provided a safer base of operations, but the British also believed that if they could hold New York they would cut New England off from the rest of America. Although determined to defend New York, Washington suffered a major defeat at Brooklyn Heights in August 1776. Washington then retreated to Manhattan, but British Major General Sir William Howe soon drove the Americans from New York. Retreating south through New Jersey, Washington eventually crossed the Delaware River into Pennsylvania. During the winter, however, Washington’s ranks dwindled as many militiamen returned home. These citizen soldiers had repulsed the immediate threat. They would also protect the countryside and prevent Loyalist pockets from forming outside of British-controlled territory, but they were ill suited to sustained battle. Washington lamented their unpredictable coming and going: “come in, you cannot tell how” and “go, you cannot tell when, and act you cannot tell where.” The militia’s lack of discipline

 Why did Washington have Paine’s The American Crisis read to the troops before he crossed the Delaware to attack British and German mercenaries?

AMERICA AT WAR



 “The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot, will in this crisis, shrink from the service of his country; but he that stands it NOW deserves the love and thanks of men and women.” THOMAS PAINE, The American Crisis (1776)

 and long-term commitment to fight was a constant source of frustration to Washington and American military leaders. Still the militia remained vital, contributing both to the military and political success of the war effort. Believing that he had decisively defeated Washington, an overconfident Howe established his base camp in New York City and planned to enjoy the winter holidays. Realizing that America desperately needed a victory, Washington launched a surprise attack on Christmas night 1776. He ordered that Thomas Paine’s inspirational essay The American Crisis be read to his troops. Paine enjoined Americans not to abandon hope. Leading his soldiers across the partially frozen Delaware River under cover of darkness, Washington overwhelmed an outpost manned by German mercenaries at Trenton. A week later, Washington won another daring victory at Princeton. Howe had squandered his advantage and allowed Washington to regroup and score two important victories. Washington shrewdly abandoned his early strategy of fighting a conventional war. He now realized that his primary goal was to wear down his opponents and avoid a decisive defeat. Such a strategy played to America’s natural advantages and would eventually force the British to accept that they could not conquer America. To commemorate Washington’s victory at Princeton, the trustees of Princeton College commissioned the eminent American painter Charles Wilson Peale to paint Washington at the Battle of Princeton (4.11). The portrait replaced a painting of George III, damaged during the battle when a cannonball removed the king’s head. British strategy shifted in 1777. Howe decided to make more effective use of British naval power.

 A key element of this plan was a coordinated effort to capture American cities, including the rebellion’s political center, Philadelphia, which fell in September. The British also sought to isolate ardently Patriot New England from the rest of the nation.

4.11 Washington at the Battle of Princeton
 In this painting the officer behind Washington is posed in the same position as General Wolfe in Benjamin West’s painting, The Death of General Wolfe. In this painting, Washington, by contrast, stands firm, a symbol of the virtuous new republic that rises from the noble sacrifice depicted in the background. [Source: Princeton University, commissioned by the Trustees. (PP222) photo: Bruce M. White]

View the Closer Look “Washington at the Battle of Princeton”


 How does Peale’s painting of Washington differ from Trumbull’s The Death of General Warren?

 CHAPTER 4

REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION, 1764–1783
Quebec Qu Que Q uebec c 
4.12 Northern Campaigns
Although the British won
 important victories around New York City, Washington’s triumphs at Trenton and Princeton helped restore American morale. The turning point in the war in the North, however, was the defeat of the British at Saratoga, which helped persuade the French to increase their support for the American cause.

Montreal


K e n n e b e c R.




Lake
Champlain


Connect


 icut

R.


Ft. Ticonderoga


Castine


Lake O nta r i o
Ft. Stanwix


Saratoga


Ft. Niagara


M o h aw


 k R.

Bennington


Cherry Valley 6
Albany


Boston


D


 e

 law

 ar e

Wyoming
Valley


West
Point
R


.


Hudson R.


Newtown


Morristown
Easton
Princeton
Germantown
Valley Forge
Brandywine


New York




ATL ANTIC

Monmouth
Trenton
Philadelphia


OCEAN
British Patriots British victories Patriot victories 
A
British army under General John Burgoyne marched south from Canada. Burgoyne hoped to join forces with Howe moving up the Hudson River from New York City. But Howe moved against Philadelphia instead, and an American force under General Horatio Gates defeated Burgoyne at Saratoga, in upstate New York (4.12). In addition to providing Americans with an important victory and morale boost, the British defeat at Saratoga persuaded the French to commit troops and naval forces to aid the colonists. Despite this impressive victory, the Americans had failed to retake Philadelphia, and the beleaguered Continental Army took up quarters at Valley Forge, Pennsylvania in the winter of 1777–1778. 
 What role did the French navy play in the victory at Yorktown?



 William Howe withdraws from Boston to Halifax, 1776



 Howe brothers capture New York, 1776 Washington retreats, then re-crosses the Delaware, 1776–1777 –1777 William Howe sails from New York, moves on Philadelphia, a, 1777 Washington meets Howe at Brandywine and Germantown, wn, 1777 Gates forces Burgoyne’s surrender at Saratoga, 1777

 The active entry of France in March 1778 changed the dynamics of the conflict. Rather than simply providing money and munitions, France was now at war with Britain and committed to helping America win independence. In 1778, France and America signed a treaty promising to fight until American independence was secured. Spain soon joined France as an opponent of Britain and attacked British outposts in the Mississippi valley and Florida. Within two years Britain declared war on Holland, which had become an important source of supplies for the American war effort. The great Western European powers were now at war. What had begun as a colonial war for independence fought exclusively in North America had

AMERICA AT WAR





Charlottesville
 m Ja

 es

R.


British


Williamsburg


Patriots


Yorktown


 British victories Patriot victories

Da
 n R

.


Sycamore
Shoals
Guilford
Courthouse








 Clinton and Cornwallis force surrender of Charleston, May 1780



 Cornwallis bests Gates at Camden and moves north, August 1780 Morgan meets British at Cowpens, defeats Tarleton, January 1781



C
 r a p e Fe a

 King’s Mountain Charlotte 3 Fishing Creek Cowpens

 Moore’s Creek Bridge, 1776

R.






 Cornwallis pursues Greene’s army across the Dan River, February 1781



 Greene confronts Cornwallis at Guilford Courthouse, March 1781



 After a retreat to Wilmington, Cornwallis moves to Virginia, April 1781



 Washington moves south, pins Cornwallis at Yorktown, August 1781



 French Admiral De Grasse from West Indies, defeats the British fleet, September 1781

Wilmington
Camden


S
 av

 an

ATL ANTIC

 n ah

R.




 OCEAN

Charleston


Savannah


4.13 Southern Campaigns
 Although the British scored impressive victories in the South in 1780, especially at Charleston and Savannah, American forces recovered and forced Cornwallis to move to Virginia in 1781. This proved to be a strategic error, since it allowed the French fleet to cut off Cornwallis and enabled Washington to trap the British at Yorktown.

 mushroomed into a global conflict involving the Mediterranean, Africa, India, and the Caribbean. France attacked Britain’s wealthy Caribbean sugar islands and captured some of them. In the Mediterranean a joint French and Spanish force besieged the British fortress of Gibraltar. Britain had to divert resources from North America to protect these possessions. Fighting a war on multiple fronts drained British resources.

The Southern Campaigns and
Final Victory at Yorktown
 In 1779–1780, the British shifted their attention to the South where there was considerable Loyalist sympathy. They also saw the South, with its cash

 crops of tobacco, indigo, and rice, as more valuable economically than the North. Initially the British strategy seemed to pay off. In 1780, British troops scored impressive victories at Savannah (Georgia), Charleston (South Carolina), and Camden (South Carolina). But they could not consolidate their power in the region. The colonial militias harassed Loyalists and sustained the Patriot cause. The British were especially vulnerable to hit-and-run operations by commanders such as South Carolina’s Francis Marion. Nicknamed the “Swamp Fox,” Marion would attack out of nowhere and then disappear into the swamps before the British could retaliate. The war in the South changed dramatically in 1781 when General Daniel Morgan defeated the British forces at Cowpens (South Carolina). American forces also inflicted heavy losses on the British at Guilford Court House (North Carolina). Although the British still controlled Savannah and Charleston, the British commander, Lord Cornwallis, then moved to Virginia and established a well-fortified base at Yorktown in the winter of 1781 (4.13). Cornwallis’s retreat to Yorktown proved to be a strategic blunder for the British that Washington turned to America’s advantage. Before Saratoga,

 What role did the French navy play in the American victory at Yorktown?



 CHAPTER 4

REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION, 1764–1783

 the large French navy had not played a significant part in the war, and America’s own small navy was no match for the superior British fleet. With their naval superiority the British were confident that establishing a base at Yorktown made sense. With the guns of the British navy at their disposal, and new supplies coming from New York and London, Yorktown seemed like a strategic location to regroup. But things went awry for the British when, early in the fall of 1781, the French dispatched a formidable fleet under the command of Admiral Paul de Grasse from the Caribbean to North America. With the arrival of the French navy, the balance of power at sea shifted, giving the Americans a naval advantage. Washington seized the opportunity, asking the large French army in the North under the Comte de Rochambeau to join American troops in an assault on Yorktown. When de Grasse’s fleet forced a British squadron that was supposed to help

 Cornwallis to withdraw, the Americans and French trapped him in Yorktown. Although French support was indispensable, this fanciful French image of the victory at Yorktown, portrays this historic moment as though the Americans hardly figured in it (4.14). Outnumbered and with his land and sea escapes cut off, Cornwallis surrendered in October 1781. Washington then appointed General Benjamin Lincoln to receive the British surrender, offered by a subordinate of Cornwallis. The British defeat at Yorktown provided American diplomats with a strong bargaining position in negotiating a peace treaty with Britain. The Treaty of Paris (1783) officially ended the war between the newly created United States and Britain. The treaty recognized American independence, acknowledged America’s border with Canada, and recognized American fishing rights off Newfoundland.

4.14 Defeat of Cornwallis at Yorktown
A
French artist’s fanciful depiction of the American and French victory at Yorktown focused entirely on the French navy and army. A medieval-looking walled city in the background also signifies his lack of familiarity with the events. 
What was the Treaty of Paris?


THE RADICALISM OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION



The Radicalism of
 the American Revolution The American Revolution encompassed two interrelated struggles. The Revolution was both a colonial war for independence and a revolutionary struggle to change American government and society. Thus the war was both a struggle for home rule—the right of Americans to govern themselves— and a war for who should rule at home, a contest to determine the nature of American government and the structure of society. The American Revolution set in motion a social and political transformation that affected nearly every aspect of American society. The Declaration of Independence had articulated the twin ideals of equality and liberty. Some Americans took the Declaration’s bold affirmation of liberty and equality to be an endorsement of more than colonial independence. For them these words were revolutionary. The Declaration inspired them to undertake a radical transformation of American politics and society. The first constitutions drafted by the states in 1776 included language that echoed the Declaration’s affirmation of liberty and equality. Few Americans doubted the importance of this affirmation; how far to take it, however, proved controversial. The Pennsylvania Constitution went further than any other state constitution in embracing a democratic conception of equality—at least for white men. Not every group in America benefited equally from the promise of the Revolution. African slaves, Indians, and women were either excluded from or not included fully in the Revolution’s promise of equality and liberty. Although the promise of the Revolution remained unfilled for many in America, oppressed groups throughout American history would use it to seek the full rights of citizenship.

Popular Politics in the
Revolutionary Era
 British taxation was not the only set of policies that produced violent resistance during the Revolutionary era. Colonists also opposed unfair taxes imposed by their own colonial governments. The colonial elites who dominated government also came under attack. In the Carolinas, a movement sought reform of colonial government. The Regulators, as their name implied, sought to regulate society by eliminating corruption and bringing the rule of law to places that lacked it. The Regulators resented planters and merchants who lived near the coast and were eager to tax western farmers, but were not willing to share political power with them. Thus in backcountry North Carolina, Regulators opposed taxes, including those enacted to pay for a lavish new palace for the royal governor. Some Regulators, such as Herman Husband, combined religious themes with democratic ideas to attack corruption and inequality in North Carolina. Husband fused his religious rhetoric with

 a class-conscious critique of the eastern elites who dominated state politics. He noted that “obedience to just laws, and subjection to slavery” were not the same. Resistance to unjust authority was legitimate because “God gave all men a knowledge of their privileges, and a true zeal to maintain them.” In contrast with Husband’s views, the royal governor and his supporters among the clergy asserted that “subjection to lawful authority,” not resistance, was the “plain and principal doctrine of Christianity.” In 1770, 1,000 Regulators marched on the courthouse in Hillsborough. The protesters not only shut down the court but also publicly whipped a court official who was notorious for charging excessive fees to process legal documents. The angry crowd also punished lawyers whose high fees angered backcountry residents. Such fees fell heavily on poor folk and blocked their access to the courts. The protests prompted the governor to dispatch the militia, which defeated the Regulators and restored order. Although the Regulators were not victorious, their class-conscious rhetoric and critique of power and corruption resonated in the Carolina backcountry. Who were the Regulators?



 CHAPTER 4

4.15 Timothy
Matlack
 To symbolize Matlack’s role in drafting the Pennsylvania Constitution of 1776, the painter included several items in the background, including law books, the great seal of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Constitution, and a powder horn and musket. [Source: Gift in memory of Martha Legg McPheeters, and M. Theresa B. Hopkins Fund, Emily L. Ainsley Fund, Juliana Cheney Edwards Collection, and A. Shuman Collection. Photograph ©2010 Musem of Fine Arts, Boston.]

REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION, 1764–1783

Constitutional Experiments:
Testing the Limits
 of Democracy When the Continental Congress directed the states to draft new constitutions, they became laboratories for constitutional experimentation. Different visions of constitutional government were set against one another in this vibrant public debate. Virginia broke new ground by framing a detailed Declaration of Rights that became a model for other states. By contrast virtually every other state apart from Vermont rejected Pennsylvania’s radical democratic experiment. Massachusetts, like Virginia, also became a model for other states, pioneering constitutional developments that became essential features of American constitutionalism, particularly in the separation of powers and checks and balances between the different branches of government. In June 1776, the new state of Virginia drafted a Declaration of Rights and a Constitution. The chief architect of the Declaration of Rights was George Mason, an influential Patriot leader. The Declaration

 What made Pennsylvania’s Constitution so radical for its day?

 asserted that life, liberty, and property were fundamental rights and that “all men are by nature equally free and independent.” Some Virginians worried that this language might encourage slaves to revolt. Another delegate calmed these fears by pointing out that the militia would be more than adequate to protect Virginia from its slaves. Indeed, the Declaration of Rights also affirmed “That a well regulated militia, composed of the body of the people, trained to arms, is the proper, natural, and safe defense of a free state; that standing armies, in time of peace, should be avoided as dangerous to liberty; and that, in all cases, the military should be under strict subordination to, and be governed by, the civil power.” The Declaration also protected other basic liberties: trial by jury, freedom of the press, and freedom of religion. Pennsylvania drafted its constitution not long after Virginia’s. While members of a slave-owning planter elite drafted Virginia’s Declaration of Rights and Constitution, a more democratic coalition that included urban artisans influenced by the ideas of Thomas Paine and backcountry farmers resentful of the old eastern colonial elites, and similar to the Regulators, drafted Pennsylvania’s constitution. Echoing Paine’s Common Sense, the Pennsylvania Constitution created a form of representative government with a single legislature, a system known as unicameralism. Responding to the frustration of frontier settlers, who had sought the creation of a state militia to protect them from Indian attack, and the necessities of fighting Britain, the Pennsylvania Constitution also created a citizens’ militia and became the first state constitution to expressly protect the right of citizens to bear arms “in defense of themselves and the state.” In keeping with Paine’s democratic ideas, the constitution rejected property requirements for voting. Any male taxpayer who resided in the state for a year could vote. Timothy Matlack, who had helped write this radical constitution, commissioned a portrait that reflected its diverse influences (4.15). A powder horn and musket appear in the background. The Pennsylvania Constitution and important British legal texts rest on the table behind him. The Revolution prompted a public debate over how far to take the idea of democracy. Although Pennsylvania went further than most in implementing these ideas, similar debates occurred in the press in other states. The traditional Whig theory of representation assumed that only property owners could exercise the independent judgment necessary to vote. Individuals without property would be at the mercy of the rich and powerful who could influence their votes on election day. Whig theory also viewed

Read the Document Pennsylvania Constitution of 1776


THE RADICALISM OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION

 the possession of property as an essential way of demonstrating that one had a permanent stake in society. According to the Whigs only men with such an interest could act in the long-term interests of society. The Revolution nurtured a far more democratic vision of government. The anonymous author of the pamphlet The People the Best Governors asserted that “the people know best their own wants and necessities, and therefore are best able to rule themselves.” According to this view, a propertied elite was not needed to act as a check on the people. Those who rejected the radical notion of equality implicit in democracy ridiculed the new, more democratic theories. The Reverend Charles Bullman of South Carolina, for example, suggested that if these ideas were not checked, “Every silly clown and illiterate mechanic will take upon him to censure the conduct of his Prince or Governor.” Among the Patriot elite no figure expressed greater reservations about the dangers of too much democracy, and of unicameralism, than John Adams who reluctantly conceded that Paine had helped rally Americans to the idea of independence, but also feared that Paine’s work had “a better hand at pulling down than building” up governments. Indeed, Adams worried that Paine’s “feeble” ideas about government would mislead Americans when the time came to draft new state constitutions. Adams incorporated his own views on the matter into his short, but influential Thoughts on Government, which he wrote in response to a request from North Carolina’s Provincial Congress, the body responsible for framing its new constitution. Most states were unwilling to follow Pennsylvania’s radical model, opting to retain a property requirement for voting and office holding. In general, however, the new property requirements the states adopted were lower than they had been during the colonial period, so on balance, the pool of eligible voters increased. Although not a resounding victory for those who shared the democratic views of Thomas Paine and the author of The People the Best Government, the Revolution clearly led to a greater democratization of politics. Although not the most democratic experiment in government, the Massachusetts Constitution produced interesting innovations. John Adams played a leading role in helping to draft it. Adopted in 1780, it remains the oldest continuously functioning written constitution in the world. Setting the terms for nearly all subsequent constitution-making in America, Massachusetts took revolutionary-era constitutional ideas in new directions. Massachusetts saw a constitution as the supreme law that had to rest on the express consent of the people. Legislative bodies



 had drafted earlier state constitutions, but a special convention drafted the Massachusetts constitution, which it then submitted directly to the people for ratification. Massachusetts also took the unprecedented step of eliminating property requirements for this special ratification process. Thus even those white men who would not meet the property requirements for voting for the legislature under the proposed constitution could vote on the Constitution. The notion that a constitution had to be submitted to the people directly for ratification was a radical innovation that quickly JOHN ADAMS to James Sullivan, became an accepted May 1776 feature of American constitutional life. The Massachusetts Constitution was also the first to implement an effective system of checks and balances. While all the early state governments supported the principle of separation of powers, making the powers of the legislative, executive, and judicial functions of government distinct, these constitutions had not built in the checks and balances that would make this ideal a practical reality. To make separation of powers effective, the different branches of government had to be able to check one another’s power. Massachusetts went further than any other state in achieving this goal. The Massachusetts governor had considerable power, including the right to veto acts of the legislature. This enabled the executive to check the legislature. The legislature could check the governor through its ability to override a veto by a two-thirds vote. Finally, Massachusetts made the governor an office directly elected by the people, not appointed by the legislature as many other states had opted to do. Another important experiment in constitutional government was the Articles of Confederation, the constitution that Congress framed for the new United States of America. Although Congress drafted the Articles in 1777, the states did not ratify them for another four years. The Articles did not create a national government, but rather “a firm league of friendship” among the sovereign states. Thus Article II affirmed that “Each state retains its sovereignty, freedom, and independence, and every power, jurisdiction, and right, which is not by this Confederation expressly delegated to the United

 “Shall We Say, that every Individual of the Community, old and young, male and female, as well as rich and poor, must consent, expressly to every Act of Legislation?”

 Why did the traditional Whig view of representation oppose democracy?



 CHAPTER 4

REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION, 1764–1783

 States, in Congress assembled.” Because fighting the British was the top priority, Congress cobbled together the Articles of Confederation without providing many features that the individual states had included in their constitutions. Fear of British-style government also shaped the minds of Congress. Having just cast off a powerful central government with a king, the Articles abandoned the idea of a single unified executive to enforce the law. Nor did Congress have the power to tax, another power that the British had abused. The Articles created a weak government whose ability to raise revenue, engage in military actions, and conduct diplomacy depended entirely on the goodwill of the states.

African Americans
Struggle for Freedom
 The great English literary figure Dr. Samuel Johnson pointed out the hypocrisy of Americans claiming to be champions of liberty while enslaving Africans. Some slaves invoked the ideas of the Revolution explicitly, whereas others voted with their feet and freed themselves. The dislocations associated with America’s Dr. SAMUEL JOHNSON, 1775 war for independence provided opportunities for African Americans to escape bondage. For some, fleeing to the British provided the best chance for freedom. Other slaves seized on the ideas nurtured by the broader revolutionary changes that accompanied the war for independence. The ideas of liberty and equality intensified the burgeoning movement for the abolition of slavery. Although the Revolution did not eradicate slavery, it did put it on the road to extinction in New England and the mid-Atlantic regions. Slaves, eager to cast off their own shackles, appropriated the Revolution’s language of liberty. During the Stamp Act protests in South Carolina (1765), slaves staged their own parade chanting “liberty.” White South Carolinians viewed such activities as evidence of a plan for rebellion. To thwart the imagined threat, they mobilized the militia, which also served as slave patrols. Blacks in New England fared better when they invoked the Revolution’s ideals than did blacks in the South. In 1773, 1774, and 1777, slaves petitioned the government of Massachusetts for their freedom using the language of the Declaration of Independence, including the idea of natural rights and the notion that government rested

 “How is it that we hear the loudest yelps for liberty among the drivers of negroes?”

 What was the impact of the American Revolution on the institution of slavery?

 on the consent of the governed. They asserted: “We have in common with all other men a naturel right to our freedoms without Being depriv’d of them by our fellow men.” Less than a decade later, another slave, Mum Bett, successfully sued for her freedom. A jury in western Massachusetts based its verdict on the language of the state’s Declaration of Rights, which stated that “All men are born free and equal, and have certain natural, essential, and unalienable rights; among which may be reckoned the right of enjoying and defending their lives and liberties.” Mum Bett changed her name to Elizabeth Freeman, worked as a housekeeper for the lawyer who defended her, and became a respected midwife and nurse. Citing this precedent, the state’s highest court abolished slavery in Massachusetts in the 1780s. New England went further than any other region in its support for the abolition of slavery. Vermont’s 1777 Constitution expressly prohibited slavery, the first constitution in the nation to take such a step. In the mid-Atlantic, Pennsylvania and New York adopted gradual emancipation laws.

The American Revolution
 in Indian Country The struggle between Britain and the American colonies had enormous consequences for American Indians. Although neutrality appealed to many Indians, avoiding entanglement in the conflict between Britain and America became impossible. Faced with the need to make a choice, many Indian nations sided with Britain, whose colonial policies, including the Proclamation of 1763, had blocked American westward expansion. An American victory would mean more settlers streaming into Indian country and destruction of the habitats that Indians depended on for their survival. The Declaration of Independence had underscored America’s deep-seated fear and hostility toward Indians. Among the complaints Jefferson leveled against the king was: “He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavoured to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian Savages, whose known rule of warfare, is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and conditions.” Jefferson’s description of Indians as “savages” engaged in acts of barbarism rallied Americans against the British. One event that whipped up anti-Indian feelings among Americans was the murder of Jane McCrea

Read the Document Slave Petition to the Governor of Massachusetts, 1774


THE RADICALISM OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION

 in upstate New York by Mohawk Indians. Jane was traveling to meet her fiancé, a British soldier, when proBritish Mohawks attacked her. McCrea’s political sympathies did not prevent her from becoming a martyr for the Patriot cause. Colonial newspapers lamented her fate, which was also memorialized in poetry. In 1780, a novel about her demise appeared, and the painter John Trumbull made several sketches of McCrea’s murder for a possible painting before moving on to other projects. Joel Barlow, a close friend of Jefferson and important literary figure in early America, memorialized the event in one of his poems, and John Vanderlyn portrayed the event in this dramatic painting (4.16), which was displayed in 1804. Vanderlyn’s representation of the light-skinned McCrea and the dark-skinned Indians underscores the role of the painting as a morality tale between good and evil. The Indians are depicted as cruel savages about to murder McCrea. Pro-British tribes scored notable victories on the western frontier during 1782. After these successes, many Indians were stunned to learn that the British had surrendered at Yorktown. Indians were excluded from the negotiations that ended the war. Many viewed the Treaty of Paris (1783), which ceded Indian country between the Appalachians and the Mississippi River to America, as a betrayal.

 and virtuous American Patriots, whose names, Brutus and Honestus, signified their commitment to ancient Roman republican virtue. Women also served in the war effort. When mustered into service, the militia often depended on support from women. An eyewitness to such a mobilization in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1774 noted that women “surpassed the Men for Eagerness & Spirit in the Defense of Liberty by Arms.” Women not only provided moral support, “animating their Husbands & Sons to fight for their liberties,” but also helped “making Cartridges.” Some women became “Molly Pitchers,” who hauled water and carried supplies to soldiers. Deborah Sampson, disguised herself as a man and served in the Continental Army. A physician discovered Sampson while treating her for fever. The Continental Army also had camp followers—women, including the wives of soldiers, who washed, cooked, nursed, and tended to other needs of soldiers. The Revolution’s emphasis on liberty and equality boosted notions of gender equality. Abigail Adams, wife of John Adams, demanded that her husband “remember the ladies” and work toward greater legal equality for women (see Competing



4.16 Death of
 Jane McCrea John Vanderlyn painted this scene decades after the event occurred. He took liberties with history. McCrea’s fiancé, the military figure rushing to rescue her (circled in red), wears the blue uniform of a Continental soldier. In reality McCrea was a Loyalist and her fiancé a British regular.

 Liberty’s Daughters: Women and the Revolutionary Movement Women took an active role in the revolutionary cause. One of the most outspoken female Patriots was Mercy Otis Warren, wife of Patriot leader James Warren and sister of James Otis. Warren’s gifts as a poet, playwright, and eventually historian allowed her to champion the American cause in literary endeavors. Her satirical plays mocked British policy and leading British politicians and military figures. The fictional names of the characters in her plays communicated Warren’s disdain for the British. Her scathing satire mocked the actions of General Hateall, Secretary of State Dupe, and Governor Rapatio. These sinister plotters against American liberty were matched by talented

 Why did so many Indians side with the British during the American Revolution?



 CHAPTER 4

4.17 Issac
Winslow and His
Family by Joseph
Blackburn, 1755
 This portrait of the Winslow family done two decades before the American Revolution captures the more patriarchal view of the family. The father stands aloof from his family. [Source: Joseph Blackburn, American (born in England), active in North America 1753– 1763 Isaac Winslow and His Family, 1755 Oil on canvas 138.43 x 201.29 cm (54 1/2 x 79 1/4 in.) Museum of Fine Arts, Boston A. Shuman Collection—Abraham Shuman Fund, 42.684 Photograph ©2011 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.]

 4.18 (right) Cadwalader Family Charles Wilson Peale’s portrait of the Cadwalader family evokes the ideal of companionate marriage, in which husbands and wives enjoyed an intimate and egalitarian relationship within marriage.

REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION, 1764–1783

 Visions: Remember the Ladies). A few women even demanded a measure of political equality, at least for women who owned property. One supporter of this idea was Hannah Corbin, sister of Patriot leader Richard Henry Lee. While Abigail Adams was a model of female propriety, Corbin’s unconventional lifestyle made her acutely aware of the inferior legal status of women. After her husband died at age 35, Corbin managed their plantation. Her husband’s will stipulated that if she ever remarried, Corbin would lose control of the estate. Corbin was unwilling to accept the choice of remaining a widow or losing control of her property. Rejecting contemporary moral codes, she began a common-law relationship with another man (living together as husband and wife without being legally married). The fact that they were not legally married allowed her to preserve control of her estate. The defiant and independent Corbin later asked her brother why women who owned property were prohibited from voting. Lee could provide no reasonable response. He even conceded that in theory, allowing such women to vote was plausible, but noted that “it has never been the practice either here or in England” and speculated that “Perhaps ‘twas thought rather out of character for women to press into those tumultuous assemblages of men.” Every state, except New Jersey, limited suffrage to men. It is not clear if New Jersey’s omission was deliberate or accidental. Still New Jersey women who fulfilled the state’s property requirements took full advantage of this omission and voted in elections until the state legislature revoked this right in 1807.

 Was Hannah Corbin’s argument for women’s suffrage consistent with Whig theory?

 Although the Revolution did not usher in the legal or political changes sought by Adams and Corbin, the ideas of equality espoused by the Revolution did influence marriage and family life. Lucy Knox, wife of General Henry Knox, told her husband a year after the Declaration of Independence to “not consider yourself as commander in chief of your own house,” but recognize that “there is such a thing as equal command.” She viewed marriage as an egalitarian relationship between husband and wife in which the two lived together as companions. Scholars describe this as companionate marriage. The Revolution not only altered ideas about marriage but also changed attitudes about patriarchal authority, a fact reflected in the portraiture of the day. These changes are evident if one compares the pre-revolutionary-era painting of the Winslow Family (4.17) and the Revolutionaryera portrait of the Cadwalader Family (4.18). In his painting of the Cadwalader family, Charles Wilson Peale gives a model of a companionate marriage. A comparison of the portraits shows how ideas of family relations, including the relationship between husband and wife, and parents and children, had changed. In Peale’s painting John and Elizabeth Cadwalader look directly at one another. His hand rests on hers, and their young child reaches for the peach held by her father. The intimacy of the family is evidenced in the physical closeness of its members. By contrast the portrait of the Winslow family reveals little of this closeness. The husband has no physical contact with his wife or his children.

 Read the Document Adams Family Correspondence between Abigail and John (March–April 1776)

THE RADICALISM OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION



Competing Visions
REMEMBER THE LADIES A
strong supporter of independence, and an articulate and forceful personality, Abigail Adams believed that the American Revolution provided an opportunity for women to gain much-needed legal reform. This was particularly needed in property law, where women were considered legally dead once they married. In this spirited letter written shortly before Congress declared independence from Britain, Abigail made her displeasure with the inferior legal status of women clear to her husband. 
 In a dismissive reply, Adams nevertheless revealed how the Revolution’s ideas about equality permeated American society.

Abigail Adams to John Adams, 31 Mar. 1776
 I desire you would Remember the Ladies, and be more generous and favourable to them than your ancestors. Do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the Husbands. Remember all Men would be tyrants if they could. If particular care and attention is not paid to the Ladies we are determined to foment a Rebellion, and will not hold ourselves bound by any Laws in which we have no voice, or Representation.

John Adams to Abigail Adams, 14 Apr. 1776
 As to your extraordinary Code of Laws, I cannot but laugh. We have been told that our Struggle has loosened the bands of Government every where. That Children and Apprentices were disobedient—that schools and Colleges were grown turbulent—that Indians slighted their Guardians and Negroes grew insolent to their Masters. But your Letter was the first Intimation that another Tribe more numerous and powerful than all the rest were grown discontented.— This is rather too coarse a Compliment but you are so saucy, I wont blot it out. Depend upon it, We know better than to repeal our Masculine systems.

Abigail Adams


John Adams


 Was Abigail Adams’s demand for women’s rights consistent with the Revolution’s ideals?



 CHAPTER 4

REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: CHANGE AND TRANSFORMATION, 1764–1783

Lak


La


 ke

Er


 ie

 n eO

 ta r

 io

Newport
Norwich
New London
Lyme
New Haven
West Haven
Milford
New York
Woodbridge
Brunswick


Philadelphia
Salem
Baltimore
Frederick Town
Lewes
Annapolis
Talbot
Dumfries
Leeds Rappahannock


 io

R.


Elk Ridge Landing


Oh


Boston
Plymouth
Pomfret


Albany


Hartford
Wethersfield
Wallingford
Stratford
Fairfield
Elizabeth Town
Piscataway
Arnwell Twp.


Williamsburg
Norfolk


ATL A NTI C OCE A N

Duplin


New Bern


Cross
 s Creek Wi Wilmington







1773–1775


Sugar Act


Stamp Act


Boston Massacre


Boston Tea Party


 British tax molasses, sugar, and other items. Colonies protest being taxed without their consent.

 Colonial protest intensifies against Britain’s new policies

 British troops fire on crowd in Boston

 Sons of Liberty toss tea into Boston Harbor

Concord and Lexington
 These early battles demonstrated the colonists’ capacity to use military force to protect their rights.

CHAPTER REVIEW

Olive Branch Petition
 Congress makes final attempt to persuade the king to address American grievances

Review Questions
 1. What arguments did colonists use to oppose the Stamp Act? 2. How did Paul Revere’s representation of the Boston Massacre in his famous engraving stir up resentment against the British? How did Revere manipulate the events to present them in the worst possible light?

 3. How did Jefferson’s argument for independence in the Declaration differ from Paine’s argument in Common Sense? 4. How did the Massachusetts Constitution depart from the earlier models of Virginia and Pennsylvania? 5. Did the Revolution’s ideals of liberty and equality significantly affect the lives of blacks, women, and American Indians?

Key Terms
 Stamp Act Legislation that required colonists to purchase special stamps and place them on all legal documents. Newspapers and playing cards had to be printed on special stamped paper. Nonimportation movement A boycott against the purchase of any imported British goods. Intolerable Acts Legislation passed by Parliament to punish Bostonians for the Boston Tea Party. It closed the Port of Boston; annulled the Massachusetts colonial charter and dissolved or severely restricted that colony’s political institutions; and allowed British officials charged with capital crimes to be tried outside the colonies. Lord Dunmore’s Proclamation Official announcement issued by Lord Dunmore, royal governor of Virginia. It offered freedom to any slave who joined the British forces in putting down the American rebellion.

 Common Sense Thomas Paine’s influential pamphlet that forcefully argued for American independence, attacked the institution of monarchy, and defended a democratic theory of representative government. Declaration of Independence On July 4, 1776, Congress approved the final text of the Declaration of Independence, a public defense of America’s decision to declare independence from Britain that was to be printed and sent to the individual states. Patriots Colonists who supported American independence. Loyalists Colonists who remained loyal to the king and Britain. Treaty of Paris (1783) Treaty between the newly created United States of America and Britain that officially ended the war between the two and formally recognized American independence.

CHAPTER REVIEW









 Thomas Paine publishes Common Sense

 Jane McCrea murdered by Mohawk Indians

Massachusetts Constitution


Defeat of Cornwallis
 at Yorktown

 Paine states the case for American independence in a pamphlet that becomes an instant best seller

 The murder becomes a rallying cry for Americans against British treachery

 Massachusetts introduces a range of legal innovations including the idea of special ratification conventions to approve its constitution

 American and French forces defeat British army at Yorktown, ending the Revolutionary War

Declaration of Independence
 American colonies declare independence

Pennsylvania Declaration of
Rights and Constitution
 Pennsylvania Constitution adopts simple democratic scheme of government

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Revolutionary America.

Questions for Analysis
 1. Why did colonists' believe Parliament could regulate trade, but not tax them without representation?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • Patrick Henry, “Give me Liberty or Give me Death”, p. 104

 Read the Document John Dickinson, Letters from a

• Thomas Paine, Common Sense, p. 110


Farmer in Pennsylvania, p. 101


• Pennsylvania Constitution of 1776, p. 120


 2. What ideas and images helped persuade Americans to support the Patriot cause? View the Closer Look The Bloody Massacre, p. 103

View the Closer Look
• Tea-Tax Tempest, p. 98
• Images as History: The Hanging of Absalom, p. 102


View the Image


 3. What military advantages did the Americans possess and how did their strategy shift to take better advantage of these realities? View the Closer Look “Washington at the Battle of Princeton,” p. 115

 4. What impact did the Revolution have on the institution of slavery? Read the Document Slave Petition to the Governor of Massachusetts, 1774, p. 122

 5. How did the Revolution impact gender roles? Read the Document Adams Family Correspondence between Abigail and John (March-April 1776), p. 124

• Stamp Act, p. 100
 • Tory’s Day of Judgment, p. 112



 What role did the concept of virtue play in American politics after the Revolution?

 Life under the Articles of Confederation p. 138

 What major problems did America face during the Confederation period?

The Movement
 for Constitutional Reform p. 143

 What were the main differences between the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution?

The Great Debate
 p. 148

 What were the AntiFederalists’ major objections to the Constitution?

 CHAPTER

Republicanism
 and the Politics of Virtue p. 130



