 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 3

Growth, Slavery,
 and Conflict Colonial America, 1710–1763

 What were some of the main ideas of the Enlightenment?

African Americans in
 the Colonial Era p. 77

 What forces contributed to the growth of the African American population of colonial America?

Immigration,
Regional Economies,
 and Inequality p. 83

 What role did economic forces play in the emergence of distinctive regional cultures in eighteenthcentury America?

War and the Contest
 over Empire p. 87

How did the French and
 Indian War transform the map of North America?

 Life in the seventeenth-century American colonies, even for the wealthiest, was crude and primitive. Beginning in the eighteenth century, however, a more cosmopolitan and refined culture began to emerge. Prosperous colonists sought out the latest British and European consumer goods, such as finely woven Turkish or English carpets, tea sets, and pattern books of English architectural and furniture styles. Captain Archibald Macpheadris, a fur trader in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, built an elegant new house in 1716, complete with beautifully executed wall murals, signifying his wealth and refinement. One of the most striking murals depicted two Mohawk Indian chiefs. The unknown painter copied these images from an engraving of a group of Indians who had traveled to London to meet with Queen Anne (r. 1703–1714). The engraver and the painter included authentic elements, such as the tomahawk wielded by the Indian on the right. Yet the image of the Indians also reflected the conventions of European painting: The position of the Mohawk “Indian Kings’ ” hands at their hip resembled a common aristocratic pose found in English portraits from this period. Books, newspapers, and letters all were part of the expanding commerce of the Atlantic world, This economy included a lively exchange of ideas on a wide array of subjects, including architecture, fashion, politics, religion, science, and philosophy. One highly influential set of ideas was associated with the Enlightenment and its ideals of reason and social progress. These ideas fostered new social experiments, such as the founding of the colony of Georgia. Religious ideas also crossed the Atlantic. The English evangelical minister George Whitefield crisscrossed the colonies from New Hampshire to Georgia. His tour helped spread the ideas of the religious revival movement known as the Great Awakening. Enlightenment ideals of liberty, human dignity, and progress and new religious ideas led some Americans to question the institution of slavery, despite its growing importance to the colonial economy. The stark contrast between the wealthy planters and wretchedly housed slaves was not the only divide in American life. As the overall wealth of the colonies increased, so did the disparity between the wealthy and the poor. Land itself became scarce by the mid-eighteenth century. Expansion westward was hampered by the Appalachian Mountains, and the French and a host of Indian tribes controlled the rich lands of what is now America’s Midwest. Ultimately the balance of power in North America was decided by the French and Indian War.

 “In 1740, I don’t remember [seeing] such a thing as a [Turkish] carpet in the country. . . . Now nothing are so common as [Turkish] or [English] Carpets, the whole furniture of the Roomes Elegant & every appearance of opulence.” JOHN WAYLES, future father-in-law of Thomas Jefferson, 1766





 CHAPTER 3

GROWTH, SLAVERY, AND CONFLICT: COLONIAL AMERICA, 1710–1763

Culture and Society in
 the Eighteenth Century As trade expanded with Britain, colonists strove to emulate the culture and sophistication of the mother country. New and grander houses, filled with the latest European-style furnishings, testified to the growing sophistication of the colonies. Yet while the colonies were striving to become more British, they were also developing their own distinctly American political culture and institutions. A native-born elite emerged, an American gentry class whose wealth, confidence, and education inspired them to become leaders in the colonial assemblies. A distinctive American style of politics had begun to take shape.

The Refinement of America
 At the end of the seventeenth century, even the homes of the most prosperous families in colonial America had few imported luxury goods. The sparse furnishing of the Hart Room (3.1), now in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City, capture the primitive nature of late seventeenth-century American homes. Thomas Hart, a landowner in Ipswich, Massachusetts, built his house in 1639 and furnished it in the ensuing decades. This parlor, the best room in the house, usually served as both a bedroom and a communal living space. Information from probates, a list of goods assembled as part of a will, suggests that homeowners furnished even the best parlor rooms sparsely, with simple tables and cupboards. The furniture’s simplicity and boxy look reflected prevailing styles and the scarcity of skilled craftsmen in the colonies at the time. The walls were generally whitewashed, with no ornamentation; the post and beams used to support the walls and the roof were clearly visible. Colonial culture began to change with the expansion of commerce at the start of the eighteenth century. America became more

3.1 The Hart Room, Metropolitan Museum of Art
 The simple whitewashed walls and exposed beams in this prosperous seventeenth-century room and the simple boxy style of its furniture were typical of the lack of ornamentation in this era.

 Define Anglicization and give an example of an aspect of colonial life transformed by this process.

 fully integrated into the Atlantic economy, a huge triangle that stretched from Scotland to Africa to the interior of the British mainland colonies (3.2). Trade in the Atlantic world involved a staggering array of goods. Scottish merchants purchased Virginia tobacco, which was sold throughout Europe. Another side of the triangle tied New England merchants to West Indian sugar planters. West Indian sugar was distilled into rum by New Englanders. Some of this alcohol was traded to Indians in the lucrative beaver trade in upstate New York. These beaver furs were often used in hats and sometimes ended up in London or on the European continent. By the early eighteenth century, expanding trade with the British Empire increased the number of wealthy colonists and brought a flood of new luxury goods into affluent American homes.

CULTURE AND SOCIETY IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY



 u G o fa od ctu s r

 ed

 Acquiring such goods allowed individuals and British families to demonstrate that they were not simple Isles provincials; they were part of a wider cosmopolitan u re d EURO PE world. Rather than eat with simple earthenware u fa c t Man Goods ceramics, as their forebears had, the wealthiest N ORTH Americans now aspired to dine on fine porcelain A ME R ICA s ial imported from England or Holland. Refined taste te r a M an w was proof of gentility, a term that became synonyM Ra mous with the attributes associated with wealth and sophistication. American society underwent A F R I C A ATLANTIC a process of Anglicization as colonists emulated English society, including its tastes in furniture, OCEAN foods, clothing, and customs. Sla Nothing better captured the rise of gentility and ve s the increasing Anglicization of colonial America than the rage for imported tea. As the consumption of tea increased dramatically between the end S OU TH PACIFIC of the seventeenth century and the dawn of the A ME R ICA OCEAN eighteenth, the rituals of serving tea became more refined and complicated. Serving tea to one’s guests became essential. Although tea drinking started among the wealthy, it gradually spread to all levels of American society. By the mid-eighteenth cenmany specialized pieces of furniture likely to have 3.2 The Triangle Trade tury, tea drinking had evolved from a luxury to a adorned a prosperous home in the mid-eighteenth The Atlantic necessity, so much so that inmates in the Philadelcentury. The Verplanks, Coldens, and other genteel economy can be phia poorhouse demanded that their meager rafamilies would each have owned an imported china visualized as a triangle. Goods from tions include tea. set and tea table as well. were sold or The Verplank Room (3.3) in the Metropolitan Changes in furnishing provide insights into deeper Europe traded in America Museum of Art contains furniture from the New changes in colonial society. The rising popularity of or Africa. Raw materials from the York City townhouse of Samuel Verplank and the writing desks and drop-leaf bookcases with writing Americas were sold country house of Cadwallader Colden Jr. in Orange, surfaces (see detail in 3.3) reflected the expansion in Europe. European New York. In contrast to the simple whitewashed of trade networks in the British Empire. Merchants goods were sold or traded for African walls of the seventeenth-century Hart Room, the needed to keep better track of a variety of written slaves who were Verplank Room has painted wood paneling. The documents as they broadened the range of their then shipped to elegant card table in the Verplank Room is one of correspondence on business and political matters. the Americas.

3.3 The Verplank Room,
Metropolitan Museum of Art
 The highly specialized furniture reflected the growing wealth of many colonists and the Anglicization of colonial culture. In the inset image of a secretary bookcase, note the dropleaf writing surface and cubbyholes that made this piece of furniture well adapted to the needs of merchants.

View the Closer Look Images as History: A Portrait of
Colonial Aspiration


 Why did new pieces of furniture like drop-leaf bookcases become popular in the eighteenth century?



 CHAPTER 3

 3.4 Eliza Pinckney’s Dress Silk produced on Pinckney’s plantation was sent to England to be spun into fine fabric, dyed, and sewn into a dress that reflected the latest London fashions. 3.5 Westover Plantation The doorway of Byrd’s mansion was crafted in England and included the latest architectural details. Note the carved pineapple above the door.

GROWTH, SLAVERY, AND CONFLICT: COLONIAL AMERICA, 1710–1763

 An insight into the range of this far-flung commerce comes from the extensive correspondence of Charleston merchant Robert Pringle with business associates throughout the Atlantic world, from Lisbon, Portugal to London and Barbados to Boston. The entrepreneurial Pringle experimented with a variety of desirable agricultural imports, including pistachios, Seville oranges, and olives, hoping that they might be produced in the Carolinas. None of these imports took hold, but South Carolina did provide Europe with two important products, rice and indigo. For wealthy colonists nothing was more effective at communicating one’s riches and gentility than a formal portrait in the latest English style. Following the conventions of European portraits, men and women struck standard aristocratic poses; elegant ladies dressed in flowing gowns, mimicking the style of their monarch, Queen Anne. Men and even young boys were painted wearing elegant outfits that reflected their wealth, status, and power. The portrait of the young Henry Darnall III, one of the earliest done in the American South, testifies to the growing wealth and refinement of the colonial elite (see Images as History: A Portrait of Colonial Aspirations). Eliza Lucas Pinckney, an affluent South Carolinian, exemplified the new ideal of refined female gentility. Born into a prosperous family of rice planters, Eliza helped introduce the profitable dye plant, indigo, into South Carolina (1738–

•


 1744), which became the colonies’ second most important export crop in the eighteenth century. She eagerly consumed British fashions and ideas, and aspired to create a lifestyle that a visitor from London would have easily recognized. She studied French, was conversant in the ideas of the English philosopher John Locke, and participated in the management of her family’s plantation. Her social life was equally busy. She regularly attended teas, dances, and concerts. Eliza’s beautiful gold silk dress (3.4) was woven from silk produced on her own plantation. After the silk was harvested, she sent it to England to be dyed and woven into a fabric suitable for a gown that might be worn to the most elegant party in either London or Charleston. For women the new customs of gentility were a mixed blessing. A wealthy woman might have servants or slaves to help her entertain in a suitable style, but it took additional time and effort to supervise these activities. Most women did not enjoy the luxury of additional help and had to handle these new responsibilities themselves.

More English,
Yet More American
 The exteriors of American houses also underwent a process of Anglicization. English-style manor houses such as William Byrd’s Westover (1730–1734) (3.5), borrowed ideas from English pattern books (architectural guidebooks of the latest styles) (3.6). The main entrance of this elegant red brick mansion took guests through an impressive doorway that Byrd imported from England. The model for the door and its frame came from a London design. The classical columns and the swan-shaped broken pediment at the top of the doorframe include a carved pineapple. This exotic West Indian fruit created a sensation among the wealthy on both sides of the Atlantic, as both a culinary delicacy and a symbol of affluent hospitality. The pineapple soon became a common architectural motif in the mansions of wealthy Americans.

3.6 English Pattern Book
 Byrd used this picture from an influential London design book when selecting a style for his doorway.

 How does did the Westover Pennsylvania Plantation Stateillustrate House reflect the the Anglicization of the colonies?William Byrd II, Diary: An American Gentleman (1709) Read the Document growing wealth of the colonies?

CULTURE AND SOCIETY IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY



Images as History
A PORTRAIT OF COLONIAL ASPIRATIONS
Justus Engelhardt Kühn’s portrait of the young Henry Darnall III (1710) reveals how the aspirations of colonists continued to exceed the bounds of the possible. Although the Darnalls lived a life of luxury compared with most colonists, surrounding themselves with goods that earlier generations of colonists would have envied, they did not quite live up to the standards of the typical British aristocrat. The scene behind Darnall is pure fantasy. An elegant stone balustrade overlooking an elaborate formal garden projects an image of wealth, refinement, and power. Yet neither the fancy garden nor the stone 
 balcony would have existed anywhere in the colonies at the time. Kühn’s decision to include these imaginary elements in the background reflected the aspirations rather than the realities of life in the colonies. The picture symbolized the wealth, power, and gentility that the Darnalls sought to achieve, not their actual condition. The work is also the first known painting of an African American in the colonies. Darnall’s slave wears a silver yoke around his neck, a symbol of his inferior status. Although much younger, Darnall towers over his slave.

 The imaginary garden in the background represents the Darnalls’ desires, but this level of grandeur was not yet attainable in the colonies. The slave, silver shackle around his neck, is situated below his master and looks up at him adoringly. The image of the docile slave clearly reflected the slave owner’s point of view, not the slave’s.

•
•
•


 Darnall’s elegant suit testifies to his family’s wealth and cosmopolitan taste.

Henry Darnall III as
 a Child by Justus Engelhardt Kühn

 How is slavery represented in this portrait?



 CHAPTER 3

3.7 Pennsylvania
State House
The new
Pennsylvania State
 House reflected the Anglicization of American tastes and the growing wealth of colonial Pennsylvania.

GROWTH, SLAVERY, AND CONFLICT: COLONIAL AMERICA, 1710–1763

 Anglicization transformed churches and public architecture as well. Some of the grandest buildings erected in the colonies during the first half of the eighteenth century were public structures such as the Pennsylvania State House in Philadelphia, where Pennsylvania’s assembly met. Constructed between 1732 and 1756, the State House’s twoand-half-story red brick structure dominated the Philadelphia skyline. Built in the Palladian style (also known as Georgian, in honor of the British monarch, King George I (r. 1714–1727)), the Pennsylvania State House captured two seemingly opposing trends in the evolution of American society in the eighteenth century. Its architecture testified to the powerful influence of Anglicization. With its beautiful windows and impressive red brick exterior, the State House visibly symbolized the colonists’ esteem for and knowledge of the latest English architectural styles (3.7). The actions inside the State House, however, the debates and votes of the Pennsylvania assembly, were emblematic of the growing power and assertiveness of an American-born colonial elite. The building was later renamed Independence Hall, reflecting its close association with the signing of the Declaration of Independence and the drafting of the U.S. Constitution.

 What does the design of the Pennsylvania State House reveal about colonial society?

Strong Assemblies and
Weak Governors
 The Pennsylvania State House was a potent visual reminder of the power of the colonial assembly. The assemblies had become the preeminent political institutions in the colonies. American ideas about legislative power drew support from seventeenth-century English Whig ideas that triumphed during England’s Glorious Revolution in 1688 (see Chapter 2). Several developments in American colonial history helped reinforce the growth of legislative power. Although voting in America remained restricted to adult white male landholders, the percentage of such individuals in the colonies was larger than it was in Britain. The larger voting population meant that a higher percentage of Americans were politically active than Britons. Additionally none of the colonies had anything like an upper house comparable to Parliament’s House of Lords. The governors’ councils, the closest thing to a colonial upper house, had little power. America’s nativeborn elites were not a titled British aristocracy, with a distinct legislative body, the House of Lords, to guard their privileges and powers. Ambitious young Americans from good families, like the young Thomas Jefferson, expected to enter politics by election to the lower house of the colonial assembly, not by inheriting a place in an aristocratic upper house.

CULTURE AND SOCIETY IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

 In part the actions of colonial assemblies filled a void that the structure of the empire had created. In an age in which a letter could take months to travel from London to the colonies, it was imperative that local assemblies have the authority to deal with a host of governmental responsibilities, from organizing the militia to providing for the poor. Although colonists had gained the right to legislate on local matters, they were also part of the larger British Empire. Most colonies had agents who represented their interests in London and lobbied Parliament. Apart from these agents the colonies had no actual representation in Parliament: No member of Parliament was elected from the colonies or watched over their interests. In this regard the American colonies were no worse off than were other British colonies, including Barbados and Jamaica. Even within Britain newer cities such as Manchester and Birmingham had no representation in Parliament, and at least one town, Dunwich, continued to send two members to Parliament even though the town



 to take a more active role in managing the empire and collecting greater revenues in the 1760s, the colonial practices and British theory collided. Royal governors repeatedly complained that the colonial assemblies had exercised authority that did not belong to them and frustrated their plans. The royal governors’ dependence on the assemblies for their salaries weakened their position with regard to the legislature. By controlling the power of the purse, colonial assemblies were able to frustrate the plans of the most ambitious royal governors: If they wished to collect their salaries, the governors dared not anger the assemblies. Colonial assemblies came to act like and think of themselves as mini-parliaments, with full legislative power over local matters. In 1728 the Massachusetts legislature reminded the governor that it was “the undoubted Right of all English men . . . to raise and dispose of Moneys for the publick Service of their own free accord without any Compulsion.”

 “My Lord Cornbury has and dos still make use of an unfortunate Custom of dressing himself in Womens Cloaths and of exposing himself in that Garb upon the Ramparts to the view of the public; in that dress he draws a World of Spectators about him and consequently as many Censures.” Letter spreading rumors of Lord Cornbury’s cross-dressing, 1709 had literally crumbled into the North Sea. To cast their votes “legal residents” of Dunwich had to row out to the location of the former town hall, which was submerged. According to traditional Whig political theory, members of Parliament were expected to represent the whole nation, not a particular locality. Rather than speak for any local interest, representatives were supposed to act in the larger public good. By the 1760s, the differences between American and British practices had become so great that they prompted a new theoretical defense. Thus, champions of the traditional British practice argued that all Britons, including the colonists, had virtual representation in Parliament, even if they had no actual representatives to guard their interests. As long as Parliament did not meddle much in colonial affairs, a policy of “salutary neglect,” this theory caused few problems. When Parliament began

 Colonial politics could be nasty, and most royal governors lacked the power to tame their legislatures. No governor was more ineffective and despised than Lord Cornbury, Royal Governor of New York and New Jersey (the two colonies shared the same royal governor until 1738). Enemies of Cornbury accused him of parading around the ramparts of New York’s forts in women’s clothing and used these rumors to undermine his authority, a strategy that was extremely effective. Sir Danvers Osborne, another New York governor, became so despondent over dealings with the colonial assembly that he hanged himself. To avoid the fate of Cornbury or Osborne, savvy royal governors understood the necessity of making strategic alliances with members of the assembly. The give-and-take between the governors and the assembly defined colonial politics for much of the eighteenth century.

 Why were colonial governors so weak?



 CHAPTER 3

GROWTH, SLAVERY, AND CONFLICT: COLONIAL AMERICA, 1710–1763

Enlightenment and Awakenings


3.8 The Gaols
Committee of
 the House of Commons In William Hogarth’s painting, members of Parliament involved in prison reform, including James Oglethorpe (second from the left), examine a prisoner. His tattered clothes and shackles reveal the inhumanity of Britain’s prisons.

 By mid-century a British traveler to Philadelphia, the largest city in America, would have been impressed by the fine houses, elegant coaches, and other signs of America’s refinement and gentility. The visitor would also have been struck by the signs of Enlightenment in the city: a fine lending library, the American Philosophical Society, and a new college. The city hosted scientists of international renown, such as Benjamin Franklin, the man who had tamed lightning. A visitor to the colonies might also have encountered the great evangelist George Whitefield, on one of his tours. Even if one missed hearing the “peddler in divinity,” one could read about his exploits in the expanding press. The religious revival movement, known as the Great Awakening attacked traditional styles of worship in favor of a more emotional style of devotion. Communities across America were divided into those who favored the new style of religion and those opposed to it.

 How did Georgia reflect Enlightenment ideals?

ENLIGHTENMENT AND AWAKENINGS

 Georgia’s Utopian Experiment One of the most ambitious Enlightenment endeavors was the new colony of Georgia, founded as an experiment to reform criminals and the poor by transplanting them from England to a more wholesome environment in America. James Oglethorpe, a spokesman in Parliament for humanitarian causes, secured parliamentary support for his plan to use colonization as an alternative to imprisonment. Georgia, named for King George II (r. 1727–1760), was strategically located as a buffer between the Carolinas and Spanish Florida. Life in British prisons in the eighteenth century was harsh. At least half of the prisoners were debtors, whose crime was failing to pay their bills. Oglethorpe became a leading champion for prison reform and was appointed to a parliamentary committee charged with investigating the nation’s jails. The committee’s work attracted the interest of artist and social critic William Hogarth. In this painting of Oglethorpe’s committee, Hogarth presents a stark contrast between the elegantly dressed members of Parliament and a prisoner in rags who was “clamped in irons,” a painful form of physical restraint commonly used in British prisons (3.8). For Oglethorpe, removing prisoners from debtors’ prison and sending them to a colony in America meshed perfectly with his vision for dealing with crime and poverty in Britain. In America the poor would have a fresh opportunity to earn a living and avoid the impoverishment they faced in England. Oglethorpe’s vision for Georgia reflected the views of Enlightenment thinkers such as John Locke, who rejected the notion that humans were born depraved and could not be rehabilitated if placed in a healthier environment. The 1732 charter granted Oglethorpe and the trustees of the colony of Georgia enormous power. To prevent the colony from becoming just another slave society in which a few enjoyed great wealth and the majority were poor, the trustees banned slavery. To promote sobriety, the trustees also prohibited the importation of rum. Oglethorpe and the trustees soon confronted the same types of problems that earlier proprietary colonies had experienced (see Chapter 2). Settlers demanded a greater say in their affairs, including the right to import slaves. By 1738, the colony had abandoned much of its original vision,



 including its ban on importing both slaves and rum. Having begun as something of a utopian experiment, Georgia became another slave society in the lower South. Although Enlightenment ideals helped shape the early history of Georgia, defense was never far from Oglethorpe’s mind. His plan for the city of Savannah drew on the ideals of Renaissance city planning that had inspired the design of many other towns in the Americas (see Chapter 1). Reflecting the city’s position on the frontier of Spanish America, the plan looked like a design for a military encampment, a model stretching back to ancient Rome (3.9). Oglethorpe had dreamed of using Georgia as the launching point for the conquest of Spanish America, but his attack on the Spanish town of St. Augustine in Florida in 1740 failed. Two years later when the Spanish retaliated, Oglethorpe repelled them. Georgia did not become a staging ground to root out the Spanish, but it was an effective barrier, protecting the colonies from Spanish attack.

American Champions of
 the Enlightenment The Enlightenment championed the work of Sir Isaac Newton, the great English scientist and mathematician who explored the laws of motion, optics, and gravity. The Newtonian universe was radically different from the world that had produced the Salem witchcraft accusations (see Chapter 2). Rather than looking primarily to the invisible world of the supernatural, Newtonianism

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Slavery and Georgia


3.9 Savannah,
Georgia
 The layout of Savannah resembled a Roman military garrison, reflecting its strategic importance as a frontier outpost protecting the British colonies from Spanish America.

 military function didof Georgia serve? What What was the Newtonian view the universe?



 CHAPTER 3

3.10 Benjamin
Franklin and
Electricity
 This contemporary painting of Franklin links him with his work on electricity. In the background, lightning destroys one building while another, to which Franklin’s lightning rod is attached, survives a strike.

GROWTH, SLAVERY, AND CONFLICT: COLONIAL AMERICA, 1710–1763

 focused on the visible world of nature, which functioned according to the rules discerned by observation and interpreted by reason. Newtonianism was not antithetical to religion, but the God of the Newtonian universe was different from the traditional Christian notion of God as a patriarch or king. In the Newtonian vision God was the great clockmaker who fashioned the universe to run according to predictable natural laws. In contrast to Newton’s grand theorizing, the Enlightenment in America took a distinctly practical approach. No figure in America more closely approximated this ideal than Benjamin Franklin. Printer, scientist, reformer, and statesman, Franklin became a symbol of the American Enlightenment on both sides of the Atlantic. His international fame derived from his scientific experiments with lightning and electricity, which he published in 1751. Franklin coined the terms positive and negative to describe the nature of

 How does this portrait of Franklin reflect his reputation as a champion of the Enlightenment?

 electrical current and theorized the possibility of creating a battery to store an electrical charge. Franklin also demonstrated that lightning was a form of electrical discharge. This insight led the practical-minded Franklin to develop the lightning rod. The device was designed to attract lightning and then conduct the current safely away from a building. American homes were generally built of wood, a plentiful material in most parts of the colonies that was extremely susceptible to damage by lightning. In a tribute to Franklin, John Adams wrote, “Nothing, perhaps, that ever occurred upon this earth was so well calculated to give any man an extensive and universal celebrity as the discovery of . . . lightning rods.” Franklin’s close association with electricity in general and the lightning rod in particular was captured in this 1762 painting (3.10), which depicts Franklin at his desk with a lightning storm raging in the background and a lightning rod prominently positioned on a building visible through a window. Franklin helped found the American Philosophical Society (1743), a learned society committed to the advancement of knowledge; the College of Philadelphia (1751) (later the University of Pennsylvania); and the Library Company, a private lending library. In addition to these institutions that reflected the Enlightenment’s emphasis on education and the spread of knowledge, Franklin helped found organizations dedicated to improving the lives of Philadelphians, including a fire company and the first public hospital in the colonies. Although Franklin owned slaves, as did many in Philadelphia, he eventually came to regard slavery as a great evil and vigorously opposed it.

Awakening, Revivalism,
 and American Society From 1730 to 1770, the colonies experienced a series of religious revivals that historians group together as the Great Awakening. The resulting religious conflict divided families, split churches, and fragmented communities, forever altering the religious landscape of colonial America. One of the early leaders of the revival movement, Gilbert Tennent, a New Jersey minister, attacked ministers for preaching an empty, “dead form of religion.” Only by accepting the reality of sin and opening one’s heart to grace could one hope to achieve salvation. Tennent also took aim

Read the Document Profiles: Benjamin Franklin


ENLIGHTENMENT AND AWAKENINGS

 at America’s expanding consumer society and the “covetousness” that society had encouraged. The leading intellectual champion of the Awakening was New England minister Jonathan Edwards, who captured the spirit of this movement when he wrote that “Our people do not so much need to have their heads” filled, as much as “have their hearts touched.” Edwards’s fiery sermon, “Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God” (1741), offered his parishioners a vision of the eternal fires of hell that awaited the unconverted. To shake his parishioners out of their complacency and remind them of the necessity of grace for salvation, Edwards compared their fate to that of a spider dangling above the pit of eternal damnation, with only God’s mercy preventing them from falling in. In 1757, Edwards became the president of the College of New Jersey (which became Princeton University), one of several new colleges founded by supporters of the Awakening to train a new generation of ministers. Princeton, allied to the Presbyterian Church, also had close ties to Scottish universities that were leading centers of Enlightenment thought. Rhode Island College (Brown University) was founded by the Baptists in 1764; Queens College (later Rutgers), by the Dutch Reformed Church in 1766. Dartmouth College was founded by the Congregationalist Eleazar Wheelock in 1769, originally as an Indian mission school. Edwards’s account of his own Massachusetts revival inspired the English Anglican minister George Whitefield to take his evangelical crusade to the colonies. Whitefield’s 1739–1740 tour was America’s first genuinely inter-colonial event. The energetic English preacher traversed most of the eastern seaboard from New Hampshire to Georgia. His tour took advantage of improved roads and the expansion of inter-colonial shipping routes. He traveled the same routes as the merchants who hawked the latest English wares, and his gift for selling the gospel prompted one critic to describe him and other evangelical ministers as “Peddlers in Divinity.” Whitefield attracted such large crowds that much of his preaching was outdoors because few churches were big enough to hold his audience. The Great Awakening changed American society. The evangelical methods employed by gifted preachers implicitly challenged the hierarchical assumptions of colonial society about gender, race, and social status. Individuals exercised greater choice, many choosing to leave their own congregations and find one that better suited their spiritual needs. For some the Awakening provided



 opportunities to step forward as lay preachers. For the first time in American religious history, ordinary people were given a significant public voice. For those whose voices were seldom heard in public— women, blacks, artisans, or poor folk—the opportunity to testify about their spiritual life, often to mixed crowds that included people like themselves or even their social betters, challenged traditional ideas about hierarchy. Mary Cooper, a resident of Long Island, noted in her diary that she heard an astonishing assortment of individuals preach, including a Quaker woman, a “Black man,” and even two Indian preachers. By giving a voice to many groups previously excluded from traditional preaching, the Great Awakening contributed to the growth of a more democratic culture.

 “The God that holds you over the pit of hell, much as one holds a spider, or some loathsome insect, over the fire, abhors you, and is dreadfully provoked; his wrath towards you burns like fire; he looks upon you as worthy of nothing else, but to be cast into the fire.” JONATHAN EDWARDS, 1741

 In a few cases women touched by the spirit began preaching, an action that prompted their own ministers to denounce them for flouting the accepted roles assigned to women in colonial society. Testifying to one’s religious experiences was one thing, but assuming the role of preacher, a role traditionally reserved for men, was simply too radical. After Bathsheba Kingsley stole a horse and rode from community to community preaching the gospel, Jonathan Edwards denounced her for perverting the spirit of revival. Edwards, wed to traditional ideas about women’s roles, was horrified that Kingsley interpreted the Awakening’s message as an invitation to become a gospel preacher. Not all ministers approved of the ideas and methods of the revivalist preachers. Opponents of the revival, dubbed Old Lights, attacked the revivalists, or New Lights, for their excessive emotionalism. Old Light ministers ridiculed the revivalists for telling their congregants that “they were damned! damned! damned!” Rather than

Read the Document Benjamin Franklin on George Whitefield


 What aspects of the Great Awakening encouraged democratization?



 CHAPTER 3

3.11 Lamentation,
Moravian Painting
 of Christ Depictions of the “blood of the savior” in images such as this, made them highly effective tools for Moravian missionaries. Here the artist highlights physical pain and stoic endurance, two traits that appealed strongly to American Indian men.

GROWTH, SLAVERY, AND CONFLICT: COLONIAL AMERICA, 1710–1763

 adopt the new, more emotional style, Old Lights continued to favor sermons based on learned explications of biblical texts. In response to this backlash against the Awakening, Gilbert Tennent accused his opponents of lacking “the Courage, or Honesty, to thrust the Nail of Terror into sleeping Souls.” One New Light preacher, James Davenport, took the emphasis on emotionalism to an extreme, urging that books and sermons written by Old Light ministers be burned. As congregations divided between New Lights and Old Lights, many communities were pulled apart.

Indian Revivals
 The Great Awakening also spilled over into Indian country. Indians won over by evangelical efforts often served as cultural mediators between their communities and the colonists. The Moravians, German-speaking evangelical Protestants, were particularly effective at evangelizing among Indian tribes. In 1740, many German Moravians migrated to Pennsylvania, where they settled in a town they named Bethlehem. Moravians also established communities in the Carolinas and Georgia. Unlike the Calvinist faith of many English colonists, which shunned the use of images in their churches, the Moravians were Lutherans and

 Why was Moravian art so helpful to missionaries interested in converting American Indians?

 embraced art as a means of promoting the gospels (see Chapters 1 and 2). In particular Moravians focused on the redemptive power of Christ’s suffering as the foundation for religious salvation. Their most renowned artist in America, John Valentine Haidt, was well schooled in European styles of religious painting and used these techniques to translate the Moravians’ Christian vision into visually rich images (3.11). The idea of Christ’s suffering resonated with Indian converts, and the Moravians displayed images of the crucifixion to bring the gospel to the Indians. After viewing such pictures in the home of a Moravian missionary, two visiting Indians commented on “how many wounds he has, how much blood flows forth!” For American Indians Moravian religious imagery of Jesus suggested a brave spiritual warrior, an ideal that resonated in the minds of young male Indians, whose conception of masculinity was based on a martial ideal of physical strength, bravery, and the endurance of pain and suffering. Although the Great Awakening touched a small but influential group of Indians, a different type of native religious renewal movement had an even greater impact on American Indians. As early as 1737, reports began filtering back from Indian country, the broad swath of territory from western Pennsylvania to French-controlled land in Illinois, that Indian religious leaders were preaching the need for a return to traditional ways and a complete separation from colonists. The alcohol that Europeans traded with Indians had contributed to rising levels of alcoholism among Indians. In the 1760s, the Delaware Indian prophet Neolin championed the revival of traditional beliefs and the rejection of European influences. He urged his people to “learn to live without any Trade or Connections with White people.” In place of dependency and trade, he counseled “Clothing and Supporting themselves as their forefathers did.” Neolin and other prophets of Indian revitalization traveled as itinerants through Indian territory preaching their message. Indian revivalists attacked Indian involvement with and dependence on the world of trade and commerce with Europeans.

AFRICAN AMERICANS IN THE COLONIAL ERA



African Americans
 in the Colonial Era By the eighteenth century, racial slavery had become a central feature of the Atlantic world, with firm roots in British North America. The greatest demand for slaves came from the sugar-producing regions of Brazil and the Caribbean. An additional 300,000 slaves arrived in the British mainland colonies, with the greatest demand for their labor in the upper and lower South. The highest proportion of slaves lived in the lower South, where Africans actually outnumbered Europeans. Slavery in British North America was not an exclusively southern phenomenon. Slaves were an important part of urban life in New York, Philadelphia, and Boston. Slavery was also significant in the economies of the mid-Atlantic and New England. Slavery was a brutal and exploitative labor system, but the experience of individual slaves varied greatly from region to region. Regardless of where they were and under what circumstances they lived, slaves found ways to resist their masters’ domination. Occasionally they turned to violent resistance, but more often they used economic sabotage—pretending sickness, destroying tools, mutilating livestock, or running away—to undermine the profitability of slavery. Perhaps even more significant were the slaves’ attempts to assert their humanity and create lives beyond the reach of the master’s dominion. Establishing families despite the ever-present threat of being torn from one’s loved ones and sold, building a viable community, and practicing their own religion gave slaves the cultural resources to survive and denied their masters complete control over their lives.

The Atlantic Slave Trade
 Slaves had been traded internally within Africa for centuries; indeed, it took hundreds of years for the Atlantic slave trade to surpass the internal African slave trade. The demand for agricultural labor in the Atlantic world created a strong market for African slaves and led to a dramatic increase in the transAtlantic slave trade in the late 1600s. The leading participants in the international slave trade in the seventeenth century had been Spain, Portugal, and Holland, but by the eighteenth century, Britain had become the preeminent slave-trading nation in the Atlantic world. As the graphs and figures presented in Envisioning Evidence: The Eighteenth-Century Atlantic Slave Trade show, most slaves in the Atlantic trade ended up in one of the sugar colonies. Portuguese sugar production was centered in Brazil, while Dutch, French, and British sugar production was centered in the Caribbean. Less than 10 percent of the slaves imported from Africa were transported to the American colonies, but the significance of slavery to the British mainland American colonies was enormous.

 The brutality of slavery began far from the Atlantic coast of Africa in the inland regions, where slave catchers acquired most slaves. The captive slaves were then bound by ropes or wooden yokes and marched to the coast, where they were housed in pens. To prevent communication among captives and reduce the chances of slaves organizing themselves to escape or challenge their captors, the slave catchers often separated individuals from the same ethnic or language groups. They also routinely separated family

 “The stench of the hold . . . became pestilential. The closeness of the place, and the heat of the climate, added to the number in the ship, which was so crowded that each had scarcely room to turn himself, almost suffocated us.” OLAUDAH EQUIANO, The Life of Olaudah Equiano (London, 1789)

 Which regions of the Atlantic world imported the greatest number of slaves?



 CHAPTER 3

GROWTH, SLAVERY, AND CONFLICT: COLONIAL AMERICA, 1710–1763

Envisioning Evidence
THE EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY ATLANTIC SLAVE TRADE
In the eighteenth century, the slave trade was the economic cornerstone of the Atlantic economy. It supplied indispensable labor necessary to produce plantation cash crops such as sugar and tobacco in the New World, and transporting slaves provided huge profits for those engaged in the brutal, forced migration of Africans to the Americas. The data presented in this map and the accompanying graph bring into focus an important fact about the Atlantic slave trade: Most of the slaves transported to the Americas ended up in the sugar islands of the Caribbean or in Brazil. Less than 10 percent of the slaves went to British North America. The experience of the Middle Passage was horrific, a fact underscored by the mortality rates depicted in the pie chart above. Where did most slaves end up and how high were mortality rates during the Middle Passage? 
14%


86%


E UROP E

Mortality Rates for Atlantic
Slave Trade, 1701-1800


N O RT H
AMER I CA

 Percent of slaves who died en route to the Americas 14% Percent of slaves who disembarked in the Americas 86%

Ca


A F R I C A


 ribbean

BRAZIL
West Central Africa 
SOUTH AM E RICA

PAC I FI C

AT L ANT I C OCEAN

O C EAN


Destinations of Slaves Imported to the New World, 1701–1800
68,608


Danish Caribbean
Dutch Americas


295,215


British North America


295,482


French Caribbean


995,133


Spanish America


145,533


Portuguese Brazil


1,989,017


British Caribbean


1,813,323


500,000


1,000,000


1,500,000


2,000,000


Number of Slaves


 Source: Adapted from estimates in Voyages: The Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database, available at http://www.slavevoyages.org

 Which European nations were most heavily involved in the international slave trade?

View the Closer Look African Slave Trade, 1451–1870


AFRICAN AMERICANS IN THE COLONIAL ERA

 members. Slaves might remain housed in these inhumane conditions for months before being boarded on slave ships bound for the Americas. The voyage across the Atlantic from Africa to the Americas, known as the middle passage, was horrific. The cramped conditions on these voyages depicted in this antislavery petition barely convey the ordeal (3.12). Typically their captors forced the slaves to remain in shackles during the voyage. Slaves endured meager rations and unsanitary conditions, a situation that led those who preferred “death to such a life of misery” to drown themselves. Mortality rates during the middle passage exceeded 10 percent. In the seventeenth century most slaves bound for the British mainland colonies in America came first to the Caribbean, where they were “seasoned,” a process of physical and psychological adjustment to the rigors of slavery. Afterward they would make the final leg of the voyage to the American mainland. This pattern changed in the eighteenth century when the demand for slave labor increased dramatically, and many traders chose to bypass the seasoning process. Thus most slaves arriving in British North America in the eighteenth century were “saltwater slaves,” coming directly from Africa. Most slaves arrived at Sullivan’s Island in Charleston harbor, leading scholars to describe it as Black America’s Ellis Island (page 500). After being unloaded and quarantined on Sullivan’s Island, slaves were typically transported for sale in the slave markets of the major ports and cities. This was often the last time family members would see each other. After being subjected to a humiliating inspection, similar to that used by livestock buyers, slaves were auctioned off to their new masters. Even if family members had managed to remain together, they now faced permanent separation from their loved ones. Thus the experience of the auction block further traumatized slaves who had already suffered a multitude of horrors on their perilous journey from Africa to America.

Southern Slavery
 The two regional subcultures in the colonial South—the lower and upper South—had distinctive slave labor systems and cultures. Slavery in the lower South (parts of the Carolina and Georgia low country) had evolved as the region evolved from a frontier settlement to an integrated part of the Atlantic slave economy. In the upper South slavery had gradually replaced indentured servitude (p. 83) as the main source of labor by 1700.



3.12 Tight
Packing
 This abolitionist depiction of tight packing shows the cramped conditions on slave ships, which maximized the number of bodies carried with no concern for the health of the slaves transported.

 The lower South began as a colony of a colony. Carolina was first conceived as a base for supplying food to the Caribbean sugar islands. The colony also traded captured Indian slaves and deer hides. In the 1690s, rice was introduced into this region and eventually became its most profitable export. Many slaves had learned to cultivate rice in Africa, and their knowledge contributed to the increase in rice production from 10,000 pounds in 1698 to 20 million pounds in 1730. In the 1740s, another important cash crop— indigo—was introduced into the region. By the 1730s, when the Carolinas had been divided into North and South Carolina, two-thirds of the region’s population were African slaves. Most blacks worked under a task system that gave them considerable autonomy over their work. Once their tasks were completed, slaves might use the remaining time to hunt, fish, or tend their own gardens to supplement their meager diets.

 What was tight packing?



 CHAPTER 3

3.13 Slave
Quarters, Mulberry Plantation,
South Carolina
 The conical design of these slave cabins, including their thatched roofs, drew on West African architectural influences.

GROWTH, SLAVERY, AND CONFLICT: COLONIAL AMERICA, 1710–1763

 The swampy regions of the Carolina low country were fertile breeding grounds for tropical diseases, including malaria. Africans had developed partial immunity to this disease, but whites of European descent were extremely susceptible. Given the unhealthy environment of the coastal lowlands, wealthy planters preferred to spend much of the year at their Charleston homes. The many white absentees and the continuous influx of slaves from Africa helped blacks living in this region preserve aspects of their African heritage despite the deprivations of slave life. The conical-shaped, thatched-roofed huts in the slave quarters on Mulberry plantation (3.13), South Carolina, reflect the influence of African architectural styles. Slavery in the upper South, the Chesapeake region, differed markedly from its practice in the low country Carolinas. While the task system worked for rice cultivation, growing tobacco, the dominant crop in the Chesapeake, demanded more oversight. The plants were easily damaged if not properly tended, so planters preferred to organize their slaves into gangs that worked together under the watchful eye of a white overseer or a black slave driver chosen by the master. Slaves in the Chesapeake were a minority, and they lived on plantations typically smaller than those in the lower South. Although slaves in this region preserved elements of traditional African culture, their smaller numbers and wider distribution made it more difficult to preserve their African cultural heritage.

 What were the main differences between the task system and the gang system of labor?

Northern Slavery
 and Free Blacks Although slavery was less vital to the colonial economy outside of the South, it was important in some areas. For example, in parts of New York and New Jersey, the slave population might range from 15 to 30 percent. Typically slaves in the rural North worked as field hands on small family farms. There were also many urban slaves in the North, who generally worked as domestics in wealthier homes. In seaports, slaves worked in maritime occupations. In Pennsylvania slaves were so essential to iron manufacturing that their masters petitioned the assembly to lower tariffs on slave imports so that they could continue to produce iron. A small community of free blacks emerged and settled in northern cities such as Philadelphia, New York, and Boston. Slaves gained their freedom by several means. Some were freed by masters who recognized the evil of slavery. One of the earliest groups to condemn slavery was the Quakers. Other slaves, particularly those who had learned a skill such as carpentry, might be able to strike a bargain with their owners and gain the right to work for themselves part time, eventually saving enough money to buy their freedom. Although a few freed slaves became farmers, many ended up in one of the thriving seaports where economic opportunities were greater. Urban settings also provided African Americans in the North with many cultural opportunities. In both New York City and Albany, the African American communities adapted the Dutch religious holiday of “Pentecost” and turned it into a carnivallike festival they named “Pinkster.” The holiday was presided over by an African American figure, “King Charles,” who acted as the political leader of

AFRICAN AMERICANS IN THE COLONIAL ERA

 his community during the holiday. During Pinkster African Americans participated in music, dancing, and festive meals; they also paraded as part of their African “different nations,” an explicit demonstration of their African roots. The Great Awakening helped spread Christianity to slaves across America and among free blacks in the North. The Moravians were particularly aggressive in preaching the gospel to slaves in North Carolina. Jonathan Edwards, himself a slave owner, reported that slaves in his own community had embraced the revival. Evangelical groups such as the Methodists encouraged free blacks to attend their revival meetings. The new more emotional style favored by so many Awakening preachers appealed to African Americans because it more closely resembled traditional African styles of religious practice.

Slave Resistance
 and Rebellion The growth of slavery in the late 1600s led colonial governments to ensure that African slaves remained subservient to their white masters (see Chapter 2). Slave codes gave masters almost unlimited authority over their slaves. The codes also legally defined as slaves children born to slave mothers, even when fathered by free whites. Although deprived of any legal means to protect themselves, slaves developed strategies for coping with the horrors of slavery and escaping the domination of their masters. Stealing, shirking responsibility, feigning illness, or breaking tools: all of these actions deliberately slowed the pace of their work and provided temporary relief. Some slaves ran away, simply hiding in the woods, seeking refuge with a family on nearby plantations in the slave quarters. Avoiding the white patrols that were always on the lookout for runaways made this a risky option. In those parts of the South closer to Indian country or Spanish territory, including parts of the Carolinas and Georgia, slaves might try to find refuge in a territory beyond the control of the English colonists. Slaves who took part in South Carolina’s Stono Rebellion of 1739 took advantage of the colonies’ proximity to Spanish Florida. The rebels broke into a storehouse and seized arms, murdered whites, and torched the homes of slave owners. The rebels hoped that other slaves would rally to their standard, and some slaves from the



 “Many of the white people in these provinces take little or no care of Negro marriages . . . they often part men from their wives by selling them far asunder.” JOHN WOOLMAN, Journal, 1774 surrounding countryside did join the rebellion, whose numbers rose to around 150. The slave rebels hoped to find refuge in Spanish Florida. But the Carolina militia intercepted the rebels before they could reach it, and the better organized and armed militia routed the Stono rebels, slaughtering them by the dozens and executing those who survived. In response to the Stono Rebellion, South Carolina passed harsher slave codes and temporarily blocked importation of slaves into the region, a ban that was soon lifted because of the economic importance of slave labor. The Stono Rebellion was the largest African American uprising in the colonial era, but it would not be the last in the history of American slavery.

An African American Culture
 Emerges under Slavery Most slaves did not adopt rebellion as their primary strategy for challenging the authority of their masters. Simply establishing families, building an African American community, and practicing their own religion were more realistic goals for most slaves—but all were difficult to achieve given the constraints imposed by slavery. Forming a family under slavery was not easy. For one thing, the sex ratio among slaves during much of the colonial period was sharply skewed, with many more males than females. During the early years of the slave trade, slave owners preferred males for the backbreaking agricultural work required to produce, rice, tobacco, or sugarcane. So most slaves imported into the Americas were male; the odds of a male slave finding a wife were slim. During the eighteenth century, as more slaves were born in America, the sex ratio became more balanced because roughly comparable numbers of boys and girls were born. But even if the chances of a man finding a mate increased, slavery made

 How did slaves resist the authority of their masters?



 CHAPTER 3

GROWTH, SLAVERY, AND CONFLICT: COLONIAL AMERICA, 1710–1763

 family formation difficult. Slave marriages had no legal standing. So slaves faced the constant threat of separation from their spouses. The decision to break up slave families rested entirely with the master, and many children were sold from their families. On relatively small plantations slaves usually sought a spouse on a neighboring plantation, which left couples at the mercy of masters who could withhold visiting privileges and prevent husbands and wives from seeing one another. Nevertheless, many slaves did manage to find partners and create stable families. One of the many aspects of traditional African culture preserved by slaves was naming practices. As was customary in many parts of West Africa, slave parents might name their children after the day of the week on which they were born. Plantation records commonly show West African names like Cudjo (Monday) for boys or Cuba (Wednesday) for girls, evidence that slaves continued to honor their ancestral practices.

3.14 Slaves Dancing and Playing Banjo
 This image of slaves dancing in the slave quarters prominently features a banjo. The instrument was modeled on an instrument that was well known in Africa.

 What evidence exists for the persistence of African cultural traits among American slaves?

 Slaves also drew on African traditions in shaping distinctive music and dance forms, which provided an outlet for cultural expression. Using African techniques they constructed musical instruments, including drums and stringed instruments. Masters typically found African styles of dancing and singing exotic and alien to their European sensibilities. One British visitor to Maryland noted that on Sundays, the one day that masters generally allowed slaves to rest, blacks met “to amuse themselves with Dancing,” which was a “most violent exercise.” This rare colonial-era painting of slaves dancing not only illustrates the intensity of African-inspired dance but also shows the importance of an African-style instrument that would become a fixture in American music—the banjo (3.14). Music could serve ulterior purposes as well. Shortly after the Stono Rebellion, South Carolina banned drumming, fearing that slaves could drum and communicate secret messages from one plantation to another.

IMMIGRATION, REGIONAL ECONOMIES, AND INEQUALITY



Immigration, Regional
Economies, and Inequality
 Although distinctions of wealth emerged almost immediately in American society, especially in the cities, the relative abundance of land in the seventeenth century allowed many rural colonists to own their own land, a goal almost unattainable in Europe, where the aristocracy owned most land. Even in cities, those without a farmstead generally earned higher wages than they would have in Europe because labor commanded a higher price in the colonies, where skilled craftsmen were rarer. Although all of these facts contributed to the prosperity of the colonists, population growth (natural increase and immigration) and the dwindling availability of land became serious problems by the mid-eighteenth century. In the colonies’ expanding cities, the gulf between the rich and poor widened, and in rural areas young people faced the prospect that they might not be able to obtain land for their own farms.

Immigration to the Colonies


Regional Economies


 The population of British North America expanded rapidly in the eighteenth century. Between 1700 and 1750, the white population of the colonies rose from around 250,000 to more than a million. In contrast to America’s first predominantly English colonists who arrived in the early 1600s, eighteenth-century immigrants varied in national origin and ethnic identity. As chart (3.15) illustrates, the colonies attracted settlers from elsewhere in Britain, including Scotland, Ireland, and Wales. Immigration from the European continent also included many Dutch and Germans. The decision to immigrate to America was a momentous one. The financial and personal costs of immigration could demand heavy sacrifices. The trans-Atlantic crossing, which could take four months, meant enduring cramped conditions on a ship with few amenities. Additionally, the cost of the trans-Atlantic passage was well beyond the yearly wages of the average Englishman and even more expensive for those from the European continent. To finance their passage, many immigrants, men and women alike, contracted to work as indentured servants. In exchange for having their passage paid, indentured servants agreed to work for a specified number of years, usually seven. In some cases the indenture system separated family members, with husband and wife indenturing themselves to different families.

 By the mid-eighteenth century, the British had settled the eastern seaboard, from Georgia to New Hampshire. Although each of the thirteen colonies functioned as its own separate political unit, historians have grouped the colonies into five regions— New England, the mid-Atlantic, the upper South, the lower South, and the back country—reflecting their unique histories, distinctive patterns of settlement, and diverse economies (3.16). Race, ethnicity, and religious composition also lent a distinctive quality to each of the major regions of colonial America.

View the Map Interactive Map: Colonial Products


3.15 Ancestry of the Population of the British Mainland
Colonies in the Eighteenth Century
 During the eighteenth century, the number of non-English immigrants increased. Immigrants from other parts of the British Empire, including Scotland and Ireland, rose as well. Another major source of immigration was continental Europe, especially Germany and Holland. [Source: Adapted from Thomas L. Purvis, “The European Ancestry of the United States Population, 1790,” William and Mary Quarterly. 3d series, 41 (1984), p, 98.]

English and Welsh 51%


Other
European
2%
African 20%
Dutch 3%
Scottish 4%


German 7%


Scots-Irish 8%


Irish 5%


 How did the ethnic composition of America change in the eighteenth century?



 CHAPTER 3

GROWTH, SLAVERY, AND CONFLICT: COLONIAL AMERICA, 1710–1763

NEW FRANCE

Missouri R.


NEW ENGLAND

 INDIAN

 The ministerial elite continued to shape the affairs of the region, but the rising merchant class became increasingly powerful during the eighteenth century. Many of the region’s leaders were educated at Harvard (1636), the oldest college in the colonies, or Yale (1701).

MIDDLE ATLANTIC

C O U N T RY
R.


BACK COUNTRY

UPPER SOUTH

The Mid-Atlantic


Rio G


Miss iss


 ippi

 The mid-Atlantic (New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware) was the ATL ANTIC most ethnically diverse region in the coloOCEAN nies, and its hubs, New York and Philadelphia, were home to a wide range of ethnic PACI FI C NEW SPAIN NEW SPAIN and religious groups (see 3.16). Indeed as Gu lf of O CEAN this engraving (3.17) of the eighteenthMex ico century New York skyline illustrates, the spires and bell towers of the city’s churches and lone synagogue proclaimed its reli3.16 Map of Colonial Regions gious diversity for miles around. By the mid-eighteenth century, colonial America had evolved into five distinctive regions: Philadelphia and New York became centers of New England, mid-Atlantic, upper South, lower South, and the back country. commerce and finance. Each city boasted a thriving port, facilitating trade with Europe and coastal trade with other ports in the Atlantic world. Agricultural products from rural Pennsylvania and Delaware were sold in the markets of Philadelphia. New England (Connecticut, Massachusetts, New New York’s Hudson River carried agricultural Hampshire, and Rhode Island) was the most ethproducts from upriver farms and furs from northnically homogenous region in colonial British ern New York. The mid-Atlantic region also had America (see 3.17), overwhelmingly white and small manufacturing enterprises, including flour English. The Congregational Church, the heir milling, lumbering, mining, and metal foundries. of the Puritan tradition, was the dominant reliThe region depended on indentured servants for gion. New England also included other Protestant much of its labor. Between 1700 and 1775, about churches—Anglicans (Church of England), Pres100,000 servants came from the British Isles and byterians, Quakers, and Baptists. This lent some another 35,000 from German-speaking regions on religious diversity to the region, particularly in the European continent. Rhode Island, which had embraced religious tolAlthough Quakers were powerful in Pennsyleration from its founding. vania politics, the region’s merchant class was even The sea had always been central to the New more influential. The mid-Atlantic region was England economy, but in the eighteenth century, slower to create colleges than either Massachusetts its maritime economy expanded dramatically. or Virginia, but by the mid-eighteenth century it New England continued to supply fish to domestic boasted several new institutions of higher learning. and foreign markets, it became a major center of The following colleges were created in this region: shipbuilding, and its merchants carried on a lively the College of Philadelphia was established in 1755 trade in a variety of commodities. Yankee trade in (now the University of Pennsylvania); in New York spirits—including the amber-colored dessert wine George II chartered Kings College (now Columbia of Madeira, a Portuguese island group off the coast University) in 1754; the College of New Jersey was of Africa, and rum, distilled from molasses procured founded in 1746 (now Princeton), and Queens in the Caribbean—was vital to New England’s comCollege (now Rutgers) was established in New mercial economy. Jersey in 1766. LOWER SOUTH

 ra

 nd

 e

New England


 Which region of colonial America was the most culturally diverse?

IMMIGRATION, REGIONAL ECONOMIES, AND INEQUALITY

The Upper and Lower South
 The South was most closely tied to slave labor. Actually it was two distinct regions: the upper South, or Chesapeake Region, and the lower South, including parts of South Carolina and the Georgia low country (see 3.16). Each produced different cash crops and employed slave labor in different ways. Immigration into the two regions varied, and the ethnic composition of the upper and lower South was also different. Although more ethnically diverse than New England, the upper South, those areas of Virginia and Maryland tied to the Chesapeake, drew immigrants largely from England and Scotland. The planter elite who dominated this region built great fortunes from tobacco grown on plantations with slave labor. Many of the area’s wealthiest citizens were educated at the College of William and Mary (1693) in Virginia, the nation’s second-oldest college. The lower South was settled later than the Chesapeake, and it benefited more from the growth of immigration and was more religiously diverse than the upper South. In addition to Anglicans the region included Presbyterians, German Moravians, Baptists, and Quakers. The damp, hot climate of the low country bred diseases. To avoid these conditions, for much of the year, the wealthiest planters preferred their second

 homes in Charleston, which became a major cultural and economic center of the region. Nevertheless, Charleston lacked an educational institution comparable to William and Mary, so the wealthiest Carolinians typically headed to England for their education.

The Back Country




3.17 Engraving of
New York Skyline
 This engraving of New York’s skyline lists a score of churches and one synagogue whose spires dominated the skyline of the colonial town.

 In the early seventeenth century, colonists had hugged the coastline. By the eighteenth century they began pushing westward to areas such as the interior of the Carolinas, and western Pennsylvania, and Virginia (see 3.16). Many new immigrants headed directly for the back country. The Scots-Irish were particularly attracted to the back country of Pennsylvania and the Carolinas, where they settled in large numbers. The back country lacked many of the refinements of the older, more settled regions of the colonies, leading travelers to compare back country colonists with Indians and describe both as savages. Whatever their similarities, relations between back country whites and Indians were generally strained. Rather than seek to trade with Indians and learn their ways, the Scots-Irish wanted to create farmsteads, which required displacing Indians. The simmering tensions between residents of the back

Read the Document Of the Servants and Slaves in Virginia (1705)


 What were the main cash crops produced by slave labor in the South?



 CHAPTER 3

GROWTH, SLAVERY, AND CONFLICT: COLONIAL AMERICA, 1710–1763

 “They were as rude in their Manners as the Common Savages, and hardly a degree removed from them. Their Dresses almost as loose and Naked as the Indians, and differing in Nothing save Complexion.” Minister CHARLES WOODMASON, observations on the back country, 1766

 country region and the local Indians erupted into violence throughout the eighteenth century. Back country settlers farmed, hunted, and raised livestock for their own consumption and local trade and were less connected to the burgeoning Atlantic economy. The economic realities of life in the back country encouraged independence and a strongly egalitarian culture. Courts were rare, and so were tax officials or other representatives of either the colonial or the British governments. A visitor to this region would also have noted a lack of churches, primary schools, and institutions of higher education.

 had more than 100,000 inhabitants by the mideighteenth century. But the growth rates of the cities of colonial British America were impressive. Boston, for example, doubled in size between 1700 and 1760. Larger towns, including Albany (New York), Newport (Rhode Island), and Baltimore (Maryland), became regional centers. Throughout these urban areas eighteenthcentury society became polarized along economic lines. The percentage of wealth owned by the richest Americans increased. In Boston and Philadelphia 5 percent of the population had amassed almost half of their city’s wealth by the last quarter of the eighteenth century. At the same time the number of the urban poor also rose dramatically in Boston, New York, and Philadelphia. The graph (3.18) illustrates the dramatic climb in the amount of money Boston devoted to poor relief from the mid-century onward. During this same period many trades and crafts established their own mutual benefit societies to help the poor. The stark inequality between the lives of the destitute and those of Boston’s wealthiest merchants, who lived in fine new mansions and traveled around the city in elegant coaches, grew more pronounced, especially by the 1770s.

Cities: Growth and Inequality Rural America:
 Although most Americans lived in the countryside Land Becomes Scarce during the eighteenth century, cities were growing. 3.18 Poor Relief, Boston Poverty increased in colonial Boston in the late eighteenth century, as did the poor relief needed to deal with this problem.

 Philadelphia boasted 23,000 residents by 1760, making it the largest city in the colonies. Still America was far less urban than either Europe or the Spanish colonies to the south. Compared to London, with more than 700,000 people, Philadelphia was tiny, and Spanish America had half a dozen cities larger than Philadelphia. Mexico City, for example,

Poor Relief in Boston 1710-1775
Expenditure in Pounds per 1,000 Population
















 How was American society becoming more unequal toward the end of the eighteenth century?



 By the mid-eighteenth century, many Americans living in the countryside or in small towns in most of the settled regions of the colonies confronted a scarcity of land. The problem Connecticut’s colonists faced illustrates the interconnected issues of population growth and land scarcity. Between 1720 and 1760, Connecticut’s population more than doubled, from 59,000 to 142,000. Beginning in the 1740s, children faced the prospect that their parents would not have enough land to help them establish their own farms when they became adults. Many sons and daughters delayed marriage until they could acquire a farmstead and establish their own independent household. Others moved to nearby towns. Many of Connecticut’s young adults went as far as northern New Hampshire, and others headed to the most western parts of New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, or the Carolinas. Finally, some families simply postponed their dreams of independence, working as tenants on another farmer’s land as they struggled to save enough money to purchase their own farm.

View the Closer Look Expanding Settlements c. 1750


WAR AND THE CONTEST OVER EMPIRE



 War and the Contest over Empire By mid-century, nearly 1.2 million people lived in the British mainland colonies, making it far more densely populated than New France, which numbered well under 100,000. Britain and France had been almost constantly at war since the late seventeenth century. Although these wars generally originated in Europe, control of North America became important to both nations. The British were keen to eliminate French influence in Canada and the Great Lakes. Eliminating France also appealed to American colonists, who viewed the rich agricultural lands controlled by France as a means of alleviating the land shortage they faced. The struggle between the British and the French for control of North America would dramatically alter the map of North America. The relatively small population of New France was spread across a vast territory, from Quebec in the north to New Orleans in the south, and as far west as Illinois (see map 3.19). In the Great Lakes region, French traders lived and worked among the Indians, often marrying Indian women. Unlike the British, who sought to displace the tribes and resettle the land with small farmers, the French developed a complex multiracial society that included Indians.

The Rise and Fall of
 the Middle Ground In 1600, more than two million Indians lived in communities east of the Mississippi River. Lacking immunity to diseases brought by the Europeans, Indian populations who came into contact with Europeans were extremely vulnerable to infection. Tribes east of the Mississippi were repeatedly devastated by epidemics that reduced their numbers to less than 250,000 by 1700. One response to this dramatic decrease in population was “mourning wars,” in which rival tribes raided each other’s villages and took prisoners to bolster their own populations. In these wars men were often tortured and executed, but women and children were typically adopted into the conquering tribes. Indians were also increasingly drawn into the trans-Atlantic economy, exchanging furs for European goods, including beads, fabric, alcohol, metal tools, and even firearms. The growing European demand for furs, and increased Indian desires for European goods, led to conflict among tribes for access to prime hunting and trapping grounds. Intertribal warfare changed as limited mourning wars evolved into “beaver wars,” in which tribes fought one another for control of territory. Further west in the Great Lakes region, France, not Britain, was the dominant power. Here the French and Indians created a middle ground, a

 cultural and geographical region in which Indians and the French negotiated with each other for goods, and neither side could impose its will on the other by force. Indians traded furs for guns, metal tools, and cloth. Although the French colonial government had hoped to regulate and tax this lucrative trade by establishing a series of forts, or outposts, young, fiercely independent French traders, known as coureurs des bois (“runners of the woods”), established their own trading networks beyond the direct control of the French government. Many married Indian women, producing children who became a distinctive group called métis, or people of mixed French and Indian descent. Familiar with both Indian and French customs, and fluent in both Indian languages and French, the métis became critical intermediaries between Indian and French cultures, even when the gulf was difficult to bridge. Like other European societies, French culture was patriarchal: Inheritance passed from father to son, a practice that gave fathers enormous power over their sons. Thus it was natural for the French to cast themselves as fathers to their Indian children in the Great Lakes region. Indians accepted the notion of the French as fathers, but they understood the concept of fatherhood in radically different terms than Europeans. In the Indian cultures of the middle ground region, fathers were not powerful patriarchs. Indeed, one chief tried in vain to explain

Read the Document Cadwallader Colden, An Iroquois
 Chief Argues for his Tribe’s Property Rights (1742)

 What made the middle ground a distinctive region of colonial America?



 CHAPTER 3

GROWTH, SLAVERY, AND CONFLICT: COLONIAL AMERICA, 1710–1763

 “Go and see the forts our [French] Father has created, and you will see that the land beneath their walls is still hunting ground . . . whilst the English, on the contrary, no sooner get possession of a country than the game is forced to leave; the trees fall down before them, the earth becomes bare.” Contemporary Indian account of the French and English settlement, late eighteenth century to a French colonial official the different views of paternal authority in their respective cultures: “When you command, all the French obey and go to war. But I shall not be heeded and obeyed by my nation in such a manner.” Although a gulf continued to exist between the two cultures, intermarriage between French traders and Indian women nevertheless promoted cultural exchange and mutual understanding. The expansion of British settlement beyond the Appalachian Mountains threatened the middle ground created in the Great Lakes region. Rather than seek to preserve a middle ground, the British hoped to incorporate this region into their colonial empire. As had been true for so much of British colonization, the idea was to eliminate indigenous populations, transplant British agricultural practices, and establish permanent settlements.

The Struggle for
North America
 The great military powers of Atlantic Europe— Britain, France, and Spain—remained locked in a struggle for political supremacy. In 1739, European conflicts once more spilled over into North America when Britain again went to war, this time with Spain. British ships smuggled goods into Spanish America depriving Spain of valuable trade and tax revenues. Spain responded by capturing British ships, seizing their crews and cargos. British outrage over Spanish policy reached a critical moment when Captain Robert Jenkins testified before Parliament that after capturing his ship, the Spanish placed him in custody and cut off his ear as punishment for his alleged smuggling. Jenkins presented his ear in a pickle jar to an outraged Parliament. The resulting conflict between Britain and Spain was dubbed the War of Jenkins’ Ear (1739–1748).

 Why did British expansion threaten the middle ground?

 King George’s War (1744–1748), a conflict in which France joined with Spain against Britain and the American colonies, soon overshadowed the War of Jenkins’ Ear. The most important military victory from the colonists’ point of view occurred at Louisbourg where New England’s militias achieved a stunning triumph over the French and seized the mighty fortress on Cape Breton Island that guarded Atlantic access to the Gulf of St. Lawrence and French Canada. Although the fortress was returned to the French as part of the peace treaty ending the conflict, the victory became a source of colonial pride. The conflict between France and Britain occurred during a period when colonists were particularly eager to settle in the Ohio Valley, a region controlled by the French. The formation of the Ohio Company of Virginia in 1747 facilitated the exploration and settlement of this region, a development that prompted the French to solidify their hold on it by establishing a string of forts (3.19). The most important of these was Fort Duquesne, erected at a fork in the Ohio River at what is now Pittsburgh. In 1754, the royal governor of Virginia dispatched militiamen under the command of an ambitious young officer, George Washington, to seize the strategic fort. Overwhelmed by French and Indian warriors, Washington was forced to surrender. Washington’s defeat proved to be only the first skirmish in a protracted battle to control the Ohio territory. In 1755, the British dispatched General Edward Braddock with a larger force, comprising British regular troops and colonial volunteers, again including Washington, to take Fort Duquesne. The French and their Indian allies routed Braddock’s forces. Washington escaped, but Braddock was killed, and his troops suffered a 70 percent casualty rate. It was a shocking and ignominious defeat for the British and their colonial allies.

View the Closer Look European Claims in North
America, 1750 and 1763


WAR AND THE CONTEST OVER EMPIRE



Gulf of
CAPE
St. Lawrence BRETON IS. Louisbourg 
 FRANCE

N OVA
 SCOTIA

R.


 NEW

 en

Halifax


S t . L aw


 r

Quebec e
 c

Port Royal


Montreal


 cticut R.

Lake
Champlain


Portsmouth


Conne


Crown Point
Ft. Frontenac
Ft. Ticonderoga
Ft. Oswego
Ft.William
 rio nta Henry eO Lak Albany Ft. Niagara

ATLANTIC OCEAN

 rie

E
 ke

Boston


Ft. Presque Isle


La


New York


Ft. Venango


 French settlements British settlements

Ft. Duquesne


Philadelphia
Ft. Cumberland


 British victories French forts

Williamsburg


 British forts

3.19 British Conquest of New France
 The British and French battled one another across a huge arc of territory, fighting pivotal battles at Louisbourg, Quebec, and Montreal.

Li


 ttl e

Ka


Oh


 Land claimed by the Ohio Company of Virginia French victories

 na wh

 io

R


 aR .

.


Ft. Necessity


 Iroquois settlements

 The final phase of the great war for empire, the Seven Years War, what came to be known as the French and Indian War in the American colonies, lasted from 1756 to 1763. In England William Pitt, the ambitious secretary of state appointed by George II to oversee the war effort, believed that the balance of power in Europe hinged on control of America. In 1758, the British embarked on a bold new policy: to root out the French and make a direct assault on the strongholds of Quebec City and Montreal. Pitt promoted young, talented officers including Jeffery Amherst and James Wolfe to lead the campaign against Canada. An army of 10,000 regulars and a sizeable fleet were dispatched to North America. Defeating the French also meant taking on their Indian allies as well, so the conflict was known as the French and Indian War. The British suffered an early setback when the French General Louis de Montcalm seized Fort William Henry on Lake George in northern New York. Although Montcalm had negotiated a traditional surrender that allowed the British to retreat honorably, his Indian allies refused to accept these terms and sought scalps and other trophies of war. “The Massacre of Fort William Henry” alienated

 Montcalm from his Indian allies and stiffened the resolve of both the British and the colonists to defeat the French. British fortunes began to turn when Jeffery Amherst captured Louisbourg again in 1758. A year later British forces captured the city of Quebec. General Wolfe, the British commander, searched for a weakness in the city’s formidable defenses and finally settled on a daring attack. Wolfe approached the city from its poorly guarded rear flank. Rather than risk a frontal assault on the heavily fortified city, Wolfe’s men scaled the heights behind the city and overpowered the small detachment of troops guarding the cliffs. In the battle that followed, Wolfe and Montcalm were both killed. Pennsylvania painter Benjamin West commemorated the assault on Quebec in The Death of General Wolfe (1771) (3.20). West shows the dying general cradled in the arms of one of his officers. Contemporary viewers would have recognized this arrangement from European painting and sculpture: the Pieta, or the image of the dead Jesus sprawled across the Virgin Mary’s lap after the crucifixion. To heighten the drama in West’s painting, a British soldier runs toward the dying Wolfe with

 What was William Pitt’s new policy for North America?



 CHAPTER 3

GROWTH, SLAVERY, AND CONFLICT: COLONIAL AMERICA, 1710–1763

 the news that the French have been defeated, while an American Indian, a symbol of the noble warrior, looks on respectfully in tribute to the heroism of the general. Next to the Indian warrior, West placed a figure whose clothes include elements of Indian and British dress. The figure, Sir William Johnson, played a vital role helping the British forge and preserve their alliances with Indians in the region. For more on Johnson’s role as a cultural and political mediator, see Competing Visions: Sir William Johnson and the Iroquois: Indian Visions versus British Arms. The other important population center in French Canada, Montreal, fell to the British in late 1760, ending French domination in Canada. In 1763, France and Britain signed the Treaty

3.20 The Death of General Wolfe
 Benjamin West cast the dying Wolfe in the same pose artists used to depict Jesus after the crucifixion. The messenger arriving with the news of victory enters the scene from the light-filled area of the painting, symbolizing the bright future of North America after the British victory.

 What role does the Indian figure play in West’s painting?

 of Paris, permanently altering the map of North America. Quebec remained French culturally, but Britain now controlled Canada. Although the British had defeated the French in Canada, relations with Indians along the frontier, particularly in Ohio, remained tense. In 1762, the Indian revivalist prophet Neolin, developed a pan-Indian movement that rallied the tribes of the Midwest against British colonial expansion. A year later the Ottawa Indian chief, Pontiac, led a pan-Indian force against the British garrison at Fort Detroit. In what the colonists called Pontiac’s Rebellion, Indian peoples across the Midwest attacked weakly defended frontier garrisons in what is now Michigan, Indiana, and Ohio and settler communities in western Pennsylvania. Anger over the failure of the colonial

WAR AND THE CONTEST OVER EMPIRE



Competing Visions
SIR WILLIAM JOHNSON AND THE IROQUOIS: INDIAN VISIONS VERSUS BRITISH ARMS
In 1762, a delegation of Iroquois leaders met with the British Superintendent for Indian Affairs, Sir William Johnson, at his impressive residence, Johnson Hall, near Saratoga, New York. During the meeting an Onondaga Chief confronted Johnson, revealing a vision that a member of his tribe had received from the “Great Spirit” regarding English expansion into Indian lands. Johnson dismissed Indian visions, and he warned the tribes that Englishmen would not take such claims seriously and that English military power demonstrated that the “Great Spirit” favored the English. What does Johnson’s dismissive view of Indian religion reveal about Anglo-Indian relations? The Onondaga Chief testified to the assembled members of the Iroquois Council and Sir William Johnson about a recent vision to his tribe that revealed the Great Spirit’s displeasure with the British displacement of Indian peoples. The revelation contained a thinly veiled threat about the consequences of continuing this policy. 
 Johnson curtly told the members of the Iroquois Council that the British would not pay attention to Indian religious beliefs, which he dismissed as foolish superstitions. In response to the Onondaga’s oblique threat, Johnson reminded the Iroquois that British arms were superior to Indian weaponry and that resistance would not be tolerated.

Onondaga Chief:
Brother:


Sir William Johnson
Brethren:


 One of our People lately in a vision was told by the Great Spirit above, that when He first made the World. He gave this large Island to the Indians for their Use; at the same time He gave other Parts of the World beyond the great Waters to the rest of his creating, and gave them different languages: That He now saw the white People squabbling, and fighting for these Lands which He gave the Indians; and that in every Assembly, and Company of Governors, and Great Men. He heard nothing scarce spoke, or talk’d of, but claiming, and wanting, large Possessions in our Country. This He said was so contrary to his Intention, and what He expected would be the Consequence at the time when the white People first came, like Children among Us, that He was quite displeas’d and would, altho their Numbers were ever so great, punish them if They did not desist.

 Your romantic Notions, Custom of Dreaming, and Seeing visions, however, usual amongst you, cannot but appear in a very ridiculous Light to White People, who will consider it, only as a Scheme set on foot by some designing Persons to answer their Purposes; and I hope you cannot but be convinced that the Divine Being is satisfied with the Justice of Our Cause, from the great Successes with He has crowned the British Arms—I hope therefore, you will not Suspect us of defrauding you of your Lands.

 Sir William Johnson presented this certificate to the Iroquois for their loyalty to “his Britannic Majesty.” Diplomacy with Indians included many ceremonial exchanges such as the one depicted in the image at the top of this document.

 How did Johnson react to Indian demands that western expansion be halted?



 CHAPTER 3

GROWTH, SLAVERY, AND CONFLICT: COLONIAL AMERICA, 1710–1763
Hudson Bay Company 
Nova Scotia
 e R .

 ME (part of Mass.)

 re

 nc

Quebec
S


Ft. Edward Augustus


 t.

La


 w

 NH

Ft. Michilimackinac


MA
Boston NY Albany RI CT 
Ft. Niagara


Ft. Presque Isle
PA
Ft. Detroit New York Ft. Le Boeuf Ft. Venango NJ Philadelphia Ft. St. Joseph Ft. Sandusky Baltimore Ft. Pitt ATLANTIC DE Ft. Miami MD 
 OCEAN

Ft. Ouiatenon


VA
Indian reserve 
 NC

 (by proclamation 1763)

 ipp

 i R.

Spanish
Louisiana


Williamsburg


Miss


 iss

SC
Acquired by Britain from France 
 GA er 1764 Boundary aft

Charleston


Savannah


 Prior British colonies, as of 1763 Acquired by Britain but still controlled by Indians

West Florida
Boundary in


 Acquired by Britain from Spain



Spanish Louisiana
 Proclamation line 1763

New Orleans


G ulf of
M ex ico


East
Florida


 British forts seized during Pontiac’s Rebellion in 1763

 governments to protect them led to protests by western settlers. In Pennsylvania settlers from the frontier settlement of Paxton sought revenge by attacking friendly Indians and marching against the city of Philadelphia demanding the creation of a militia to fight Indians. The march of the “Paxton Boys” might have plunged Pennsylvania into widespread bloodshed, but violence was averted after leading Philadelphia citizens agreed to present the protesters’ grievances to the colonial assembly. (See Choices and Consequences: Quakers, Pacifism, and the Paxton Uprising, page 93.) The global struggle between Britain and France, the Seven Years War, not only transformed the political map of North America, it irrevocably altered the history of the region, establishing British supremacy once and for all. Colonists described this conflict as the French and Indian War for good reason. For colonists, British victory meant an end to French

 How did the Proclamation of 1763 serve British interests?

3.21 Proclamation of 1763
 The French and Indian War shifted the balance of power in North America. The Proclamation of 1763 banned colonial settlement west of the Appalachian Mountains.

 political influence in Canada and a reconfiguration of the balance of power in the vast region of the middle ground that had been a French sphere of influence for generations. Before the defeat of the French in Canada, western Indians could count on a reliable supply of arms and ammunition from Britain’s traditional rival, France. Without this vital support the panIndian alliance collapsed. Still Pontiac’s Rebellion persuaded the British to be conciliatory toward the more powerful tribes along the frontier. The peace treaty that was signed to end hostilities with Indians not only included favorable terms for trade but also placed severe restrictions on westward expansion by colonists. The Proclamation of 1763 (3.21) established a fixed line beyond which colonial expansion westward was prohibited, effectively restricting colonists to territory east of the Appalachian Mountains.

View the Map Interactive Map: The Seven Years War


WAR AND THE CONTEST OVER EMPIRE



Choices and Consequences
QUAKERS, PACIFISM, AND THE PAXTON UPRISING
Relations between Pennsylvanians and Indians had deteriorated during the eighteenth century as the white population grew. Newcomers, such as the Scots-Irish who dominated the backcountry, began to challenge the Quakers’ political power. The violence associated with Pontiac’s Rebellion only exacerbated these tensions. Western settlers, including the Paxton Boys, petitioned the Quaker-dominated colonial assembly to pass a mandatory militia law and provide arms for western settlers. Quakers, however, were pacifists who continued to believe that it was possible to maintain peaceful relations with their Indian neighbors. Quakers in the assembly faced a difficult decision. 
Choices




 Support a mandatory militia law and create a well-regulated militia, properly trained and armed.



 Continue to oppose the creation of a well-regulated militia and seek peaceful non-violent solutions to Indian–settler conflicts.



 Resign from elected office, so that their pacifism would not prevent the assembly from creating a militia.

Decision
 The legislature chose to continue its pacifist policies.

Consequences
 Pennsylvania was the only colony without a militia law. This issue continued to spark controversy until the American Revolution. The 1776 Pennsylvania Constitution and Declaration of Rights not only created a militia, but it became the first state to expressly protect a right to bear arms.

Continuing
Controversies
 Why were Quakers so obstinately against creating a well-regulated militia? Scholars sympathetic to the plight of the protestors view their challenge to the Quaker government as an expression of the rising tide of democratic sentiment that helped bring about the American Revolution. For those more sympathetic to the Indians, the Quaker government’s policies were as exceptional as they were praiseworthy. Paxton Uprising cartoon

 Why did Paxtonians demand that the Quakers create a militia?



 CHAPTER 3

GROWTH, SLAVERY, AND CONFLICT: COLONIAL AMERICA, 1710–1763









 Massachusetts battles Crown over salary for the royal governor

 The first synagogue in British North America is built

 James Oglethorpe founds Georgia

 First Moravian community established in America

 New York’s pluralistic society expands to include Jews as well as Christians

 A utopian experiment and a buffer between Carolina and Spanish Florida, Georgia eventually accepted slavery and became a plantation society

 Moravians, an evangelical Protestant sect from Germany, bring their message to America

 Massachusetts House and the royal governor disagree over salary, an important indicator of the growing power of colonial legislatures

 Benjamin Franklin founds Library Company

CHAPTER REVIEW

 America’s first circulating library

Review Questions
 1. How did changes in architecture and home furnishing reflect Anglicization and the rise of gentility in colonial America? 2. What were the leading Enlightenment ideals, and what was the significance of America’s role in that movement? In what ways did the colony of Georgia strive to embody Enlightenment ideals?

 3. How did the experience of slavery differ between the upper South and the lower South? 4. How did the French and Indian War affect colonial–Indian relations? What new problems did the British victory create for the empire?

Key Terms
 Enlightenment An international philosophical movement that extolled the virtues of reason and science and applied these new insights to politics and social reform. Great Awakening A religious revival movement that emphasized a more emotional style of religious practice. Anglicization The colonial American desire to emulate English society, including English taste in foods, customs, and architecture. Virtual representation A theory of representation in which legislators do not serve their localities but rather the whole nation. Old Lights Opponents of the Great Awakening who favored traditional forms of religious worship.

 New Lights Supporters of the Great Awakening and its more emotional style of worship. Middle passage The harrowing voyage across the Atlantic from Africa to the Americas during which slaves endured meager rations and horrendously unsanitary conditions. Indentured servants A form of bound labor in which a number of years of service were specified as payment for passage to America. Middle ground A cultural and geographical region of the Great Lakes in which Indians and the French negotiated with each other for goods and neither side could impose its will on the other.

CHAPTER REVIEW



 y RI

Ft. Niagara


 CT

Ft. Presque Isle


 PA

Detroit
Ft. Le Boeuf


New York
Ft. Venango NJ
Philadelphia
Ft. Sandusky
Baltimore
Ft. Pitt
DE
Ft. Miami MD 
. Ouiatenon


VA
Indian reserve clamation 1763) 
Williamsburg


 NC



1741–1751






 Eliza Pinckney introduces indigo to South Carolina

Academy of Philadelphia
 founded

 Quebec falls

Proclamation of 1763


 The sought-after dye produced by indigo became Carolina’s second most important export

 Franklin helps found the University of Pennsylvania

 The decisive battle in the French and Indian War signals the defeat of the French in Canada

 To prevent further encroachment on Indian lands and avoid future conflicts, Britain forbids colonial settlement beyond the Appalachian Mountains

 English preacher George Whitefield arrives in America The great evangelical preacher creates an inter-colonial sensation and extends the reach of the Great Awakening

 Benjamin Franklin publishes his experiments on electricity

 Treaty of Paris between Britain and France ends French and Indian War

 Earns Franklin fame and symbolizes America’s contribution to the Enlightenment

 The formal end of hostilities legally acknowledges British domination in North America

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Growth, Slavery, and Conflict.

Questions for Analysis
 1. In what ways did art and architecture become more English in the early decades of the eighteenth century? View the Closer Look Images as History: A Portrait of Colonial Aspiration, p. 67

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • William Byrd II, Diary: An American Gentleman (1709), p. 68 • Benjamin Franklin on George Whitefield, p. 75 • Of the Servants and Slaves in Virginia (1705), p. 85 • Cadwallader Colden, An Iroquois Chief Argues for his Tribe’s

 2. In what ways did Benjamin Franklin represent the ideals of the Enlightenment? Read the Document Profiles: Benjamin Franklin, p. 74

Property Rights (1742), p. 87


View the Closer Look
• Competing Visions: Slavery and Georgia, p. 73
• Expanding Settlements c. 1750, p. 86


 3. Which regions of the Atlantic world were most heavily involved in the international slave trade? View the Closer Look African Slave Trade, 1451–1870, p. 78

 4. How did French and English aims differ and how did these differences impact relations with Indians? View the Closer Look European Claims in North America, 1750 and 1763, p. 88

 5. What impact did the French and Indian War have on the colonies? View the Map Interactive Map: The Seven Years War, p. 92

View the Map Interactive Map: Colonial Products, p. 83


 How did British policy toward the colonies change after the French and Indian War?

 Patriots versus Loyalists p. 108

 CHAPTER

Tightening the Reins
 of Empire p. 98



Hear the Audio
Audi
Au
 dio o File File on myhistorylab.com myhi my hist stor oryl ylab ab.c .com om Watch the Video Vid deo Crit Critical itic ical al Visions, Vis V isio ions ns,, Chapter Chap Ch apte terr 4

Revolutionary
America
Change
Cha
 ange and Trans Transformation, sformatio on, 1764–1783 1764–1783

 How did revolutionary events in 1775 and 1776 transform the competing visions of Patriots and Loyalists?

America at War
 p. 113

 What were the major battles and turning points in the war from the summer of 1776 to its conclusion?

The Radicalism
 of the American Revolution p. 117

 How did the Revolution’s ideals of liberty and equality influence American politics and society?

 Britain’s decisive Britain’s deccisive victory in the French and and n Indian War in n 1763 17663 removed remo re mo move oveed the the French Fren Fr encch h threat hreat to t its American empire. But the war war had been expensive expens nsiv ivve to o wage, wagge, and and the the he ongoing ong ngoing oiingg costs osts off administering adm ministering and protecting North No America ne nearly ear arly ly d drained raain ined need d tthe hee B British rit ri iti tish h ttreasury. reas re asur as urry. ury. To pay thesee costs, Britain adopted a new w set of policies for for America, Am Ame meric ricca, including iin nclu nclu nc lud ngg new ludi n neew taxes, aggressive ways of collectingg them, and moree severe axes, more m ssev evverre methods m th me tho hod ods of enforcing en nffor orcciing ng these hese measures. m ures. The colonists viewed these measu theese policies as an n ominous omin om in nou ous first ous firs firs fi r t step step in in a plot plo pl ott to to deprive eprivee them m of their liberty. When King 1760–1820) British monarchism was Wh hen K ing George III (r. 1760–1820 0) assumed the Br Brit ittish h th tthrone, ro rone one,, mo m on on naarc arcchi hism hism mw as as deeply rooted Americans proud British heritage. eeply roote ed in American culture, and A mericans were pr prou ou ud off ttheir h iirr B he riiti riti tish ssh hh errittag age. e. e. Opposition from unjust Opposi ition tto o British policy began with rrespectful espectful pleas tto o th th ki the king ng ffor or rrelief or elie el i f fr ie rom mu njjust ust us policies. Gradually, decade, became that was oliciess. Gra adually, over the next decade e, Americans becam am me cconvinced onvin iin nce c d th hat at iitt wa w as no no longer British protect their rights. Resistance onger possible p to remain within the Brit tish Empire and pr prot otec ot e t th ec thei ir rri igh ghts. ghts ts. Re Resi sist si stan st tan anccee to British policies colonists decided declare o Briti sh po olicies stiffened, and the colon nists eventually de deci c de ci ded to ded od ecla ecl ec laree iindependence n ep nd epen en nde den denc ncce ce from Britain. rom B ritain n. Tensions Ten nsion ns between Britain and the American colonies reached rea eaach ched ed d a boiling boi oili ling ng point ng poi oint n this with the th he Teaa Act in 1773, the theme of th his cartoon, The Tea-Tax-Tempest. TeaTe a-Ta aT x-Te Ta x--T Teempes mppes est. t. In In the the th image mage “Father “ her Time” displays the eventss of the American “Fath n Revolution Revo v lution on to to four four fo ur figures figgur u ess who symbolize syymbollize the four continents. The “magic lantern”” shows a teaa pot po ott boiling boi oili lin ngg over, over, er symbolizing ymbollizingg revolution, while British and an nd American military millitary forces stand sta t n nd d ready rea eady dy to to face face fa ac one another. ne ano otherr. Thee ideals ideaals of liberty and equality that thaat Americans invoked invvoked in their theeirr struggle str tru ugggglle against aaggains aiins nst society. British tyranny tyran nny changed American socie ety. The claim that at “all men are arre created crea cr eatteed equal” ea eat eq qua ual” l and nd that thaat every eveery person enjoyed certain “inalienable “iinalienable rights,” rights, s,”” as a America’s Ame meeri meri rica ca’s ca ’ss Declaration Decla eeccla larraati lara tion on off Inde Independence epend dence asserted in 1776, were radical notions for for those ttho hose who ho who ho had had ad grown gro row wn n up up in n a society socciety that that was ruled by a king and d that enthusiastically enthusiastica call llyy embraced em mbrrac aceed d the th hee idea ide ide dea of dea of aristocracy. ristocrracy. Slavery Slav very continued continued to present a problem probllem for champions champio ons off the th he Revolution. Revol Re Revo vo olu lution tiion on. For Fo or some some so mee m slavery laveryy was incompatible incompatible with the Revolution’s Revollution’s ideals, while wh hile le others oth herrs sought sougght so soug ht to to reconcile rreecco on onc ncciille the two. he two o. New w England effectively eliminated elimin nated slavery after thee Revolution. R volu Re voluti tion on n. The The new Th neew n ew states more tates of o the mid-Atlantic adopted a mor re gradual approach h to to abolishing abol ab bol o is ishi hiing slavery. ssla lavveery la ery ry. In n the South, however, he Sou uth, h owever, where planters made mad de fortunes from crops crop op ps produced prod pr oduc duc uced ed d with wit w itth slave slav sla sl ave labor, abor, slaver sslavery ry remained deeply entrenched. entrench hed. Although women womeen were were we re not not yet yett full ful ull political po p olliiti tica ica cal participants, articip pants, revolutionary notions of equality eq quality led them to demand deem maand d that tha hat husbands hu usb ban nds ds treat trreeat at wives as a partners parrtners in their marriage. A new neew idea of companionate compani niio on nat atee marriage m rrrriaagee blossomed. ma blo oss ssom med d.

 “Yesterday the greatest question was decided . . . and a greater question perhaps never was nor will be decided among men. A resolution was passed without one dissenting colony, that these United Colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independent states.” JOHN ADAMS, 1776





