 insurance for the elderly, reimbursed doctors and hospitals whatever they charged senior citizens instead of establishing government rates. Johnson also agreed to let the states, not the federal government, run Medicaid, which provided health services to the poor. In creating the Great Society, Johnson wanted to restore America’s identity as the land of opportunity for immigrants. The Immigration Act of 1965 eliminated the quota system established in the 1920s that set stringent caps on immigration from Southern and Eastern Europe and barred all Asian immigration (see Chapter 21). In the first great wave of immigration since the 1910s, unprecedented numbers of Koreans, Chinese, Filipinos, and Vietnamese migrated to the United States over the next 30 years. Whether immigration benefited or hurt the nation again became a topic on which Americans offered competing visions (see Chapter 29). By detailing the destructive impact of pesticides, Rachel Carson’s best-selling book Silent Spring (1962) helped create a politically favorable climate for the environmental regulation that Johnson proposed. Silent Spring vividly detailed the destructive impact of pesticides on native birds, provoking alarm over the possibility of a future silent spring when no bird songs would be heard. Johnson noted that Americans had always been proud of “America the beautiful,” but polluted air, disappearing forests, and filthy rivers had tarnished this image. The air in some cities was so bad that motorists had to use their headlights after noon. The pronouncement that Lake Erie was “dead” and the sight of oil slicks on the Cuyahoga River in Cleveland burning for eight days after a man tossed a lit cigar into the water underscored the environmental deterioration. These ecological catastrophes helped spawn an exploding grassroots environmental movement that included Greenpeace, a radical direct-action group, and a resurgent Sierra Club, a long-standing conservation society. Responding to environmental activism and growing middle-class concerns, Congress enacted bipartisan environmental measures that required pollution controls on cars and established national standards for acceptable air and water pollution. Johnson also created federally protected wilderness areas to safeguard endangered domestic species at risk of extinction, such as the whooping crane. The Great Society chart (27.4) contains a list of Johnson’s most significant legislation.

Read the Document Rachael Carson, Silent Spring (1962)


NONVIOLENCE TRIUMPHANT: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT, 1960–1965



Nonviolence Triumphant: The Civil
Rights Movement, 1960–1965
 Kennedy’s and Johnson’s strong civil rights agendas came in response to carefully planned grassroots protests against segregation and disenfranchisement in Alabama and Mississippi. These highly visible demonstrations imperiled many civil rights workers, and their leaders hoped to win support from white liberals and moderates nationally by showing them the face of Southern segregationists’ resistance. Putting increased pressure on the federal government to act, the Civil Rights Movement ended legalized segregation and disenfranchisement by 1965. March on Washington 1963; Civil Rights Act 1964; Voting Rights Act 1965

IOWA NEBRASKA

Washington, D.C.


OHIO ILLINOIS

 INDIANA

 MARYLAND

WEST VIRGINIA VIRGINIA

 KANSAS

 DELAWARE

27.5 Civil Rights
Milestones, 1961–1965
The Civil Rights Movement
 spread across the Deep South in the early 1960s, pushing to end legalized segregation and disenfranchisement.

KENTUCKY MISSOURI NORTH CAROLINA ARKANSAS OKLAHOMA

 Police use fire hoses and dogs against protesters 1963

 TENNESSEE

Freedom Riders
 attacked 1961

Anniston


SOUTH CAROLINA

Rights Milestones,
1961–1965” (27.5)
ATLANTIC
Philadelphia Selma 3 civil rights workers murdered depicts where pivduring Freedom Summer 1964 Montgomery OCEAN Jackson ALABAMA otal demonstrations LOUISIANA TEXAS MISSISSIPPI occurred. Freedom Summer 1964; voter registration projects Selma to Montgomery The immediate and Freedom Schools March 1965 FLORIDA issue centered on the enforcement of recent Gulf of Mexico Supreme Court rulings 1961 Freedom Rides that desegregated bus terCORE (Congress of Racial Equality) route from Washington DC to Birmingham AL minals serving interstate SNCC (Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee) travelers. Faced with Kennedy’s from Birmingham AL to Jackson MS reluctance to act, the interracial Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) organized the Freedom Rides, interstate bus journeys by black and white activists who entered segregated bus waiting rooms together throughout the South. “We felt we could count on the racists of the South to create a crisis, so that the federal government would be compelled to enforce the law,” the African Inspired by Kennedy’s pronouncement during his inaugural address that “the torch has been passed to American CORE leader James Farmer recalled. The Freedom Rides began when 13 whites and a new generation of Americans,” civil rights leadblacks (including Farmer and John Lewis, a veteran ers expected the new president to aggressively seek of the 1960 Nashville sit-ins) boarded an interstate an end to Jim Crow. Kennedy, however, adopted a bus on May 4, 1961, in Washington, D.C., headed cautious stance, and like his predecessors, remained for the Deep South. Expecting the worst, several silent on civil rights. The movement would have to riders left sealed letters for their families to open compel the new president to act. The map of “Civil Birmingham 
 GEORGIA

Kennedy and the
Freedom Riders


 What was the purpose of the Freedom Rides?



 CHAPTER 27

27.6 Freedom
Riders Attacked in
Anniston, Alabama,
 Traumatized civil rights activists sit on the ground after a mob firebombed the bus the Freedom Riders were riding to protest the segregation of interstate bus facilities.

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

 if they were killed. After a smooth ride through the upper South, in Atlanta the Freedom Riders decided to take two separate buses into the heart of the rigidly segregated Deep South. As the first bus carrying Freedom Riders entered the depot in Anniston, Alabama, a mob pelted the bus with stones and slashed its tires. The driver drove away without stopping, pursued by 50 cars carrying vigilantes. When a flat tire obliged him to stop along a deserted country road, a firebomb forced the Freedom Riders off the bus and into the waiting gauntlet of sticks and crowbars. State troopers arrived in time to save the lives of the traumatized Freedom Riders, two of whom sit stunned on the ground in this photo (27.6) of the bus burning. Meanwhile the second bus arrived in Birmingham, where Ku Klux Klansmen beat white Freedom Rider James Peck, a 47-year-old labor and peace activist, when he entered a white-only waiting room with a black colleague. “When you go somewhere looking for trouble, you usually find it,” the governor of Alabama remarked unsympathetically. A photo of Klan members beating Peck accompanied the front-page story in the New York Times that informed President Kennedy about the organized attacks on the Freedom Riders. Still dealing with the fallout from the Bay of Pigs invasion that had ended in disaster four weeks earlier and preparing for a summit with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev (see Chapter 25), Kennedy urged the Freedom Riders to call off the rest of their scheduled journey. Instead members of the Student

 Who made key choices that affected the course and outcome of the Freedom Rides?

 Non-Violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), the student-run civil rights group founded in 1960 during the sit-ins (see Chapter 25), rushed to Birmingham to ride alongside John Lewis, a founding member of SNCC, taking the place of riders unable or unwilling to continue.

 “We can’t let them stop us with violence. If we do, the movement is dead,” SNCC leader DIANE NASH upon resuming the Freedom Rides, 1961 Avoiding a violent confrontation became the administration’s priority. Attorney General Robert Kennedy (the president’s brother) secured a promise from the governor of Alabama that state troops would protect the riders. When the state reneged on this promise and another savage attack occurred at the Montgomery, Alabama bus depot, Robert Kennedy sent 600 federal marshals to protect the riders as they traveled to the Mississippi border. Rather than allowing vigilantes to attack the riders, Mississippi authorities took a different tack. As the riders filed off the bus in Jackson, police escorted them into waiting patrol cars. Most of the riders spent four months in jail for violating segregation laws. The Freedom Rides continued through the summer of 1961, and eventually 300 white and black protesters took part. In the fall the Interstate Commerce Commission required the integration of all interstate travel facilities. The Freedom Rides, however, did not achieve the organizers’ broader goals of securing President Kennedy’s enthusiastic support for the Civil Rights Movement. Despite his own integrationist views, President Kennedy remained preoccupied with protecting his white Democratic Southern base and feared that open discussion of America’s racial problems provided fodder for Soviet propaganda. It would take a shocking visual demonstration of racial violence in Birmingham, Alabama, to make him a champion of civil rights.

NONVIOLENCE TRIUMPHANT: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT, 1960–1965

Birmingham, 1963
In 1963, the Southern Christian Leadership
 Conference (SCLC), Martin Luther King Jr.’s church-based civil rights organization, unfurled a carefully coordinated campaign to desegregate Birmingham, Alabama, perhaps the most segregated city in the nation. “We were trying to launch a systematic, wholehearted battle against segregation that would set the pace for the nation,” explained the Birmingham SCLC leader Fred Shuttlesworth. Volatile Police Chief Bull Connor made the city an especially dangerous place to launch such a protest. SCLC accurately predicted that they would gain the attention of the president once the world saw Connor’s police attacking nonviolent demonstrators with highpower water hoses and dogs. Television was vital to this campaign: The images of violence pouring into living rooms would make it impossible for moderate white Americans to ignore the nation’s racial problems. In April 1963, King and the SCLC initiated their Birmingham campaign with economic boycotts and sit-ins. Press coverage increased when King and Shuttlesworth led a march in defiance of a state injunction that prohibited public demonstrations. Police immediately arrested and jailed the pair. King timed his arrest to occur on Good Friday, the day that Jesus died on the cross, using religious symbolism to underscore the immorality of racial persecution. As King sat in solitary confinement, the Birmingham News published an open letter to him from white liberal Southern clergymen who criticized the demonstrations as “unwise and untimely” for trying to provoke hardcore segregationists. The opinion of liberal and moderate Southern whites mattered to King. The nonviolent strategy depended on swaying those who may have traditionally supported segregation but were not die-hard racists. Visitors to King smuggled out his response, written on the margins of newspapers and scraps of toilet paper during his eight-day jail stay. King’s “Letter from a Birmingham Jail” did not influence events in Birmingham (by the time it was published, the protests had ended), but the text was one of his most eloquent statements on the dehumanizing aspects of racial discrimination. “For years now I have heard the word ‘Wait!’ It rings in the ear of every Negro

 with piercing familiarity. This ‘Wait’ has almost always meant ‘Never,’ ” King wrote. How would whites feel about sleeping in their cars when traveling because “no motel will accept you,” telling their children that they could not go to the segregated amusement parks advertised on television, and “living constantly on tiptoe stance, never quite knowing what to expect next”? These were the reasons, King explained, “why we find it difficult to wait.” Hoping to stop downtown demonstrations that were keeping shoppers away and worried that the federal government might intervene, moderate white business owners initiated secret talks with SCLC leaders without Chief Connor’s knowledge. To increase pressure on the businessmen, SCLC went ahead with marches despite lukewarm support from Birmingham churches and adults. To fill the ranks Jim Bevel, another veteran of the Nashville sit-ins, proposed turning Birmingham into a “children’s crusade” by recruiting from the city’s high schools and, if necessary, middle and elementary schools. “A boy from high school has the same effect in terms of being in jail, in terms of putting pressure on the city, as his father, and yet there’s no economic threat to the family, because the father is still on the job,” Bevel argued. On May 3, 1963, the second day of the protests, Carolyn McKinstry, like many others, left her high school without telling her parents that she was joining the demonstrations. When the teenagers arrived downtown, Connor was waiting with water hoses and police dogs. A shocked nation viewed television and newspaper images of firefighters directing torrents of water at McKinstry and her friends and police dogs biting protesters. (See Images as History: Birmingham, 1963, page 822.) As the SCLC had hoped, Northerners reacted with outrage to this blatant display of police brutality, while Southern moderates worried that Connor’s heavy-handed tactics would invite more federal scrutiny of Southern politics and racial customs. The Civil Rights Movement scored a major victory in Birmingham. Besides winning a commitment to desegregate lunch counters and schools and the promise of jobs, the protests renewed President Kennedy’s interest in civil rights. Concerned about losing momentum in the Cold War, he asked the nation: “Are we to say to the world—and much more importantly to each other—that this is the land of the free, except for the Negroes … ?”

 Read the Document Martin Luther King Jr., “Letter from Birmingham City Jail” (1963)



 Why did the Birmingham campaign succeed?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

Images as History
 BIRMINGHAM, 1963 In Birmingham civil rights activists developed a strategy that included using television and news photos to their advantage. The Civil Rights Movement got exactly the images the activists wanted in 1963 when the Birmingham Police Chief Bull Connor unleashed extreme violence against protesters in the downtown area. How important

 “The water hoses hurt a lot,” recalled Carolyn McKinstry, the high school sophomore girl pictured here.

 was the press to the success of the Birmingham campaign? Why did the public react so strongly to these photos? As a white child in rural Alabama, Life photojournalist Charles Moore had accepted segregation “as the way things were.” Birmingham was a turning point in his own evolving social consciousness:

 Three teenage protesters clung to a doorway as water whipped their bodies, an ordeal that Moore immortalized in this iconic photograph of the Birmingham protests.

•
•
•


•
Fire Hoses, Birmingham, 1963


 McKinstry remained “proud of what I had done,” but afterwards questioned “the tactics that they [SCLC] were using because I think I felt that you could actually be hurt.”

 Does knowing more about McKinstry and Moore alter this photograph’s meaning?

 Moore avoided taking photos that might send a mixed message to the public. He took no pictures of students, only partly schooled in nonviolent techniques, who threw pieces of concrete at the police—even after a slab hit and injured him.

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Photographing the Civil
Rights Movement, Birmingham, 1963


NONVIOLENCE TRIUMPHANT: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT, 1960–1965

 “My emotional involvement in the story grew as I saw what was happening.” On the afternoon of May 3, 1963, Moore arrived in downtown Birmingham just as firefighters turned their high-pressure hoses and police dogs on teenage demonstrators. When Moore’s photos appeared in Life, a magazine read by half of American adults in the 1960s, his images, Movement leaders wanted liberal and moderate Americans to blame the police for escalating the violence in Birmingham, and Moore’s pictures left little room for an alternative explanation.



 along with television coverage of the mayhem, helped transform Birmingham from a local crisis into an event that prompted national soulsearching about democracy in America. Inspired by these images, civil rights activists initiated 1,000 demonstrations in nearly 100 cities throughout the South. The police arrested Moore when he refused to stop taking pictures. “It was scary to be a victim” of abusive police, Moore recalled, an experience that strengthened his solidarity with the protesters.

•
•


•
•


 “The sight of snarling dogs, and the possibility of dogs ripping flesh, was revolting to me,” Moore recollected.

 Moore sided with the protesters, but the story that accompanied his photos blamed extremists on both sides for the melee. “[The pictures] are frightening because of the brutal methods being used by white policemen in Birmingham, Ala. against Negro demonstrators. They are frightening because the Negro strategy of ‘nonviolent direct action’ invites that very brutality—and welcomes it as a way to promote the Negroes’ cause, which, under the law, is right,” Life told readers.

View the Closer Look Images as History: Birmingham, 1963


Police Dogs, Birmingham, 1963


 How did Life magazine and Moore differ over the meaning of this photo?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

 In his televised address to the nation Kennedy proposed a civil rights act that would outlaw racially segregated public facilities nationwide. The white supremacist response came immediately. The next day a Klansman shot and killed Medgar Evers, the head of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in Mississippi, as Evers stood in the driveway of his Jackson home. Evers’s killing was the first, but not the last, assassination of a major political figure of the 1960s.

March on Washington


27.7 March on
Washington, 1963
Martin Luther
 King Jr. speaks to a reporter while standing inside the Lincoln Memorial to underscore that 100 years after Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation blacks were still secondclass citizens in the segregated South.

 Birmingham had given the civil rights cause national and international visibility, and Evers’s shocking assassination reinforced Kennedy’s determination to enact a sweeping civil rights bill. Southern Democratic senators were equally prepared to filibuster to prevent its passage. Intent on winning this legislative battle, King and other civil rights leaders decided to organize the March on Washington, a massive demonstration in the nation’s capital that would demand passage of a federal civil rights act. Adopting the slogan, “Jobs and Freedom,” organizers underscored the link between greater economic opportunity and civic equality. The organizing committee included African American labor leader A. Philip Randolph, founder of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters. Randolph had cancelled his own March on Washington in 1941 when President Franklin D. Roosevelt agreed to guarantee fair protection at the workplace during World War II (see Chapter 23). On August 28, 1963, in the nation’s largest political protest to date, more

 What symbolism and rhetoric connected the 1963 March on Washington to the past and future?

 than 200,000 marchers walked from the Washington Monument to the Lincoln Memorial to listen to three hours of music and speeches. This photo (27.7) of Martin Luther King Jr. talking to a reporter reveals why organizers put their speakers’ platform before the Lincoln Memorial. On the hundredth anniversary of the Emancipation Proclamation, the larger-than-life statue of President Abraham Lincoln in the background offered a potent reminder of how long African Americans had waited for equal rights. “I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character,” declared King in the day’s most memorable speech. The march received the national media’s full attention. It was also among the first events that television viewers throughout the world could watch live, thanks to a new communications satellite. From Cairo to Amsterdam people participated in sympathy marches before American embassies and sent petitions to Kennedy. By August nearly 78 percent of white Americans believed that images of racial discrimination in the United States made it harder for the nation to achieve its Cold War foreign policy goals. Two weeks after the March on Washington, a bomb tossed into Birmingham’s Sixteenth Street Baptist Church killed four girls attending Sunday school. Carolyn McKinstry, the young woman that Charles Moore had photographed during the Birmingham protests, was in the church at the time, a friend to the girls. The attack convinced her that she too would one day die at the hands of white supremacists. “I guess this bombing is Birmingham’s answer to the march,” exclaimed an enraged Anne Moody, who was working on a voter registration campaign in Mississippi. President

 Watch the Video Martin Luther King Jr.’s Speech at the March on Washington, August, 1963

NONVIOLENCE TRIUMPHANT: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT, 1960–1965



 Kennedy’s assassination two months later only underscored her growing conviction that “nonviolence is through.”

Freedom Summer
 With SCLC’s Birmingham campaign to desegregate public facilities successfully concluded, the spotlight turned to Mississippi. Freedom Summer, a multipronged attack on white supremacy in Mississippi during the summer of 1964, was a turning point in the Civil Rights Movement. It forced the federal government to deepen its commitment to equal rights, laid bare the rising tensions within the Civil Rights Movement, and trained a generation of student activists who would soon spearhead new leftist and feminist movements. In the summer of 1964, the Council of Federated Organizations (COFO) coordinated the efforts of civil rights groups to launch Freedom Summer, including SNCC and CORE. With ambivalence SNCC recruited many Northern whites to work on the voter registration projects. SNCC had reluctantly concluded that the national media, which had started to ignore blacks-only protests, would pay attention to Freedom Summer only if white students

 “At night, people should not sit in their rooms without drawn shades.” Rule from CORE security handbook meant to protect Freedom Summer workers from sniper attacks

 were involved. SNCC, CORE, and COFO hoped that the media spotlight would protect Freedom Summer workers from racial violence, protection that the federal government was unwilling to give. This calculation proved incorrect. On the first day of Freedom Summer, three CORE workers went missing in Mississippi. Twenty-four-year-old Michael Schwerner was a white Jewish social worker from Manhattan who, one coworker recalled, “had been deeply affected by the photographs of Negroes sprawling under the dogs and fire hoses” in Birmingham. On June 21, 1964, Schwerner went with James Chaney, a 21-year-old Mississippi black activist,

 and 20-year-old Andrew Goodman, another white Jewish volunteer from New York, to inspect a church that the Ku Klux Klan had burned to stop CORE from opening a school there. On the return home they passed near Philadelphia, Mississippi, where local sheriff (and Klansman) Cecile Price recognized Schwerner’s car and license plate from a circular the governor’s office had issued concerning “outside agitators.” Price arrested them for speeding and then alerted fellow Klansmen to join him for an ambush after he released the three men from jail in the middle of the night. The trio’s disappearance created national headlines, forcing the FBI to launch a manhunt across five states to find them. The FBI posted this circular (27.8) seeking information about the men’s whereabouts, haunting images that conveyed more than the dangers of vigilante violence.

 Read the Document Letters from Mississippi Freedom Summer

FBI
Poster  of Three Slain Freedom Summer Civil Rights Workers, 1964 The murder of these three CORE workers hardened the resolve of many Freedom Summer volunteers to continue registering blacks to vote, but some blacks resented that the nation seemed to care only if white activists disappeared.

 What interracial tensions within the Civil Rights Movement did Freedom Summer expose?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

 Putting her own grief aside, Schwerner’s wife Rita, herself a CORE field worker, publicly voiced her suspicion that “if Mr. Chaney, who is a native Mississippian, had been alone at the time of the disappearance, . . . this case, like so many others that have come before it, . . . would have gone completely unnoticed.” As if to prove her point, sailors sent to comb through Mississippi swamps for the bodies of the three men (now assumed to be dead) discovered the corpses of three lynched black men whose disappearances authorities had ignored. As the FBI investigation unfolded, Freedom Summer continued. Nearly 1,000 black and white activists fanned out throughout Mississippi to register blacks in rural areas. Hoping to recruit and train a new generation of student leaders, SNCC and COFO founded summer Freedom Schools. In these schools Freedom Summer volunteers taught high school students African American history to build pride in the long legacy of black accomplishment and gave remedial instruction in basic subjects to remedy their deficient public education. In a state with no mandatory school laws, black children often spent more time in the cotton fields than in the classroom. In the midst of Freedom Summer, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which banned segregation in businesses and places open to the public (such as restaurants and public schools) and prohibited discrimination in employment on the basis of race, religion, ethnicity, or sex. This landmark legislation, the most sweeping civil rights law since Reconstruction, came about because thousands of individuals risked arrest, murder, or unemployment to participate in boycotts, sit-ins, and street demonstrations in towns and cities throughout the South. Their activism went unnoticed in the national press, which focused mostly on a few dramatic moments such as the disappearance of Schwerner, Chaney, and Goodman. A month after the Civil Rights Act’s passage, after six weeks of searching, the FBI paid $30,000 to an informant who helped officers locate the three men’s bodies buried in an earthen dam. All three had been shot in the head, and Chaney’s shattered bones attested to the savage beating he had received. No one was ever convicted of the murders, although Price and nine others were found guilty on federal conspiracy charges in 1967 and served a few years in jail. Like Kennedy, Johnson knew that the world was watching events unfold in Mississippi. Passage of the

 What pivotal role did college-age students play in Freedom Summer?

 Civil Rights Act was front-page news overseas, and world leaders rushed to congratulate Johnson. Winning the 1964 Nobel Peace Prize, King was now an international figure who inspired social justice activists worldwide. Passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act was a great victory for the Civil Rights Movement, but the combat-like conditions during Freedom Summer took their toll. Fearful SNCC volunteers began to arm themselves for self-defense. Many blacks resented the media attention given to white activists. Meanwhile female civil rights workers, black and white, objected to males’ expectations that they would clean and cook for them. The stage was set for a fracturing within the activist community.

Selma and the Voting
Rights Act of 1965
 The nonviolent Civil Rights Movement registered one more significant victory before that fracturing occurred, using a stand-off in Selma, Alabama, to secure President Johnson’s open support for federal legislation guaranteeing blacks the right to vote. On Sunday March 7, 1965, a day soon known as “Bloody Sunday,” about 600 marchers left the small town of Selma, Alabama, and began walking across the Edmund Pettis Bridge that spanned the Alabama River. They intended to march 50 miles to Montgomery, the state capitol, to demand voting rights. At the other end of the bridge, county troopers armed with clubs and tear gas waited for them. When the marchers knelt in prayer at the end of the bridge, Sheriff Jim Clark ordered the troopers to attack as white spectators cheered. Photographers and television crews witnessed the violent attack. That evening ABC interrupted the film Judgment at Nuremburg, a dramatized account of trials that convicted Nazi leaders of crimes against humanity, to show news footage of the Bloody Sunday assault. The juxtaposition between the film’s portrayal of the Holocaust and events in Selma haunted viewers. Late that evening the door opened to the chapel in Selma that served as the marchers’ headquarters. “We have seen on the television screen the violence that took place today, and we’re here to share it with you,” announced a group of blacks and whites from New Jersey who had chartered a plane to arrive that night.

Read the Document Voting Literacy Test (1965)


NONVIOLENCE TRIUMPHANT: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT, 1960–1965

 On Monday, March 15, 1965, President Johnson, who had spoken privately with King before Selma about how to win public support for voting rights legislation, announced in a televised address that he was sending a federal voting rights act to Congress. “It’s not just Negroes, but really it’s all of us, who must overcome the crippling legacy of bigotry and injustice,” Johnson told the nation. “And we shall overcome,” he concluded, quoting the anthem of the Civil Rights Movement. A triumphant march from Selma began the following Sunday, March 21, 1965. Along the way a group of men, women, whites, blacks, and veterans stopped to pray in front of a billboard claiming that King was a communist (27.9). Erected by the John Birch Society, the sign showed a photo of King attending a workshop at the Highlander Folk School for social activists, labeling it a “Communist Training School.” Like the



 “I asked my mother and father for my birthday present to become registered voters.” Eight-year-old SHEYANN WEBB, youngest member of the first Selma to Montgomery march.

 Republican’s 1964 presidential candidate Barry Goldwater, the arch-conservative Birch society opposed federal civil rights legislation as a violation of state and individual rights. The marchers took advantage of every opportunity to enlist the sympathies of mainstream journalists like Haynes Johnson, the white reporter standing and taking notes who won a Pulitzer Prize for his coverage of the Selma march. When the marchers arrived in Montgomery five days later, King addressed the crowd on the steps of the state capitol, looking down at the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church where he had helped initiate the Montgomery Bus Boycott ten years earlier (see Chapter 25): “I know you are asking today, ‘How long will it take?’ ... How long? Not long, because no lie can live forever.” Five months later Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which prohibited literacy tests and poll taxes and authorized the use of federal registrars to register voters if states failed to respect the Fifteenth Amendment. Within a year over 9,000 blacks had registered in Dallas County, Alabama, enough to block Jim Clark’s reelection as sheriff. 27.9 Prayer Vigil During the March from Selma to Montgomery, March 21, 1965 This image of peaceful protesters praying was meant to counter charges from ultraconservative groups that the civil rights movement was intentionally provoking violence to pave the way for a communist revolution.

View the Map Interactive Map: Impact of the Voting Rights Act of 1965


 How did the media, public, and government respond to events in Selma?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

The Fractured Left
 Conservative Republicans and Democrats never liked the antipoverty initiatives of Kennedy and Johnson, while die-hard segregationists adamantly opposed the integrationist goals of nonviolent civil rights leaders like King. The most potent attacks on these progressive visions, however, came from the left where competing visions proliferated. By the mid-1960s, disaffected student activists increasingly dismissed the Great Society as too cautious and protested against “Johnson’s War” in Vietnam, while others renounced all ties to mainstream culture. Within the Civil Rights Movement, militancy replaced nonviolence as the dominant ethos. Meanwhile many white women left the Civil Rights Movement to pursue women’s liberation.

The New Left and the
Counterculture
 The baby boom generation came of age in the 1960s. By 1968, over half of the American population was under the age of 25. By then a core of white middleclass college students had created the New Left, a small, but highly visible, coalition of student-based organizations that attacked racial discrimination, poverty, and the war in Vietnam. Al Haber formed Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) in 1960 at the University of Michigan, believing “that if any really radical liberal force is going to develop in America, it is going to come from the colleges and the young.” In 1962, Tom Hayden, a white activist in the Civil Rights Movement, penned the group’s manifesto, “The Port Huron Statement.” Hayden urged his peers to act, noting “we are people of this generation, bred in at least modest comfort, housed now in universities, looking uncomfortably to the world we inherit.” Although most college-age Americans did not attend university, their ranks were increasing. By 1965 nearly 6.5 million students attended colleges or universities, compared with 2.2 million in 1950. Strict rules governed student behavior. Students lived in single-sex dormitories, had to obey curfews each evening, and abide by dress codes that prohibited female students from wearing pants. The University of California, Berkeley, even forbade political debate or discussion on campus, a rule in place since the 1930s to prevent communist student groups from recruiting. For years students had used a small strip just outside the Berkeley campus main gate to hand out political pamphlets or give speeches. In the fall of 1964, the university administration shut this down as well, provoking the Free Speech Movement, a mass student protest that accused the University of California

 How did the New Left affect university life?

 of denying students the right to freedom of speech. Protest leader Mario Savio, who had just returned from Freedom Summer, pointed out that “the two battlefields [in Mississippi and Berkeley] may seem quite different to some observers, but this is not the case. The same rights are at stake in both places—the right to participate as citizens in a democratic society.” Aided by sympathetic television coverage, the Free Speech Movement succeeded after four months of demonstrations and inspired left-leaning students on other university campuses. Most college students never joined any organized protests, but in response to those who did, universities eliminated codes of conduct, introduced more elective courses into curriculums, and established black and women’s studies. After 1964, SDS chapters organized antiwar demonstrations on university campuses that included teach-ins and draft-card burnings (see Chapter 26). SDS at first embraced the liberal vision of using representative government to implement incremental reforms, but in the course of its antiwar protests the group became more radical. By 1968, New Left leaders expressed open admiration for Marxist-inspired communist revolutionaries like the Vietnamese leader Ho Chi Minh and Ernesto “Che” Guevara, a colleague of Cuban dictator Fidel Castro trying to foster revolution in Bolivia and the Congo. When student-led protests roiled Europe and South America in 1968, the American New Left assumed they were part of a global youth rebellion that would reshape the world. Once the novelty of student demonstrations wore off, getting television reporters to cover their protests required more outlandish theatrics, images that increasingly radicalized student leaders eagerly provided. Press scrutiny sometimes backfired, however. Nightly news reports of demonstrators hurling bricks and expletives frightened

 Read the Document The Report of the President’s Commission on Campus Unrest

THE FRACTURED LEFT

 moderates, who viewed the New Left as unpatriotic and dangerous. The challenge to the liberal vision went beyond the New Left. An emerging counterculture, the heir to the Beat cultural ethos of the 1950s (see Chapter 25), emphasized rejecting middle-class lifestyles more than agitating for political change. Hippies, youthful social rebels who renounced material acquisition and used drugs to explore their inner spiritual selves, refused to dedicate their lives to acquiring the same suburban home, car, and corporate job as their parents. The hippie utopian vision embraced peace, pleasure, sexual liberation, and sharing of material resources, an ethos captured in this 1968 photograph (27.10) of a hippie gathering by Robert Altman (who became a renowned filmmaker). Drugs, especially marijuana and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), formed an essential part of the counterculture’s challenge to the values of middleclass society. Rock music exposed many young people to these counterculture ideals. Bob Dylan, a folk troubadour whose songs had inspired civil rights protesters, transformed himself into a rock musician with poetic lyrics steeped in drug references. The Beatles underwent a similar transformation after taking America by storm. Nearly 60 percent of the nation watched the four mop-headed British musicians sing their masterful pop concoctions during the band’s first televised performance on the Ed Sullivan Show in 1964. In just three years the group

 underwent a complete makeover with the release of an album, Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band, that broadcasted the counterculture message, “I’d love to turn you on”—a reference to taking drugs and having sex. The heyday of the marriage between rock music and the counterculture was Woodstock, a free three-day drug-infused music festival held on a farm in upstate New York, in August 1969. New Left and young civil rights activists adopted a hippie-style of dress and experimented with drugs, but unlike hippies they remained dedicated to political activism. Most black civil rights activists, rather than rejecting white middle-class materialism, were fighting for their fair share of the nation’s wealth and prosperity. New Left radicals shared the hippie belief that acquisitive capitalism bred inequality and injustice, but they were committed to social action, not “tuning out.” Out of the spotlight conservative college students were also active, laying the foundation for the coming conservative resurgence within a Republican Party dominated by moderates. College students formed the Young Americans for Freedom (YAF) in 1960 under the guidance of National Review founder William F. Buckley. Throughout the 1960s the Radical Right YAF attracted more members than the New Left SDS. Goldwater supporters in 1964, these conservative students championed limited economic regulation, states’ rights, respect for law and order, and staunch anticommunism. For the time being, however, the New Left had center stage.



27.10 Holding
Together
 In their quest to define an alternative lifestyle, hippies emphasized love and harmony in their gatherings–– sometimes wearing clothes, sometimes not.

 How did the New Left, Civil Rights Movement, and counterculture diverge?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

Malcolm X: An Alternative
 to Nonviolence

27.11 Malcolm
X
Snaps a Photo  of Muhammad Ali, 1964. This meeting between two mid1960s icons of black manhood came just after Ali won the heavyweight boxing title. Both Black Muslims, Malcolm X and Muhammad Ali enjoyed keeping whites on edge with militant rhetoric that emphasized black pride and physical prowess.

 The New Left and counterculture did not speak with one voice, and by the mid-1960s fractures within the Civil Rights Movement were also apparent. The Nation of Islam, an African American religious sect founded in the 1930s, rejected integration as the path to salvation for the black community and instead wanted to establish a separate black nation within the United States. Followers of Nation of Islam leader Elijah Muhammad prayed to Mecca five times a day, dressed modestly, and avoided pork and alcohol. The Nation of Islam departed from mainstream Islamic practices, however, by viewing whites as “blue-eyed devils” whom Allah would condemn to eternal damnation on a forthcoming Day of Judgment. The celebrated African American writer James Baldwin understood the appeal of Elijah Muhammad’s prophecies, even though he rejected them. “The white God has not delivered them, perhaps the black God will,” wrote Baldwin in The Fire Next Time (1963) to explain the Nation of Islam’s growing popularity within Northern urban neighborhoods. Malcolm X moved armed self-defense and black separatism from the fringes to the center of the civil rights debate. A magnetic speaker, he had converted to Islam while serving a six-year stint in prison. After his release he changed his name from Malcolm Little to Malcolm X, the X signifying the lost name of his African ancestors.

 Why did Northern blacks find Malcolm X’s vision appealing?

 “I don’t see any American dream; I see an American nightmare.” MALCOLM X, ridiculing King’s “I Have a Dream Speech” during the 1963 March on Washington Even during the heyday of nonviolence in the 1950s and early 1960s, more militant voices within the black community championed a competing vision of self-defense and racial pride that extended back to Marcus Garvey (see Chapter 21). Malcolm X ridiculed the nonviolent strategy of the Christianled SCLC. “If someone puts his hand on you, send him to the cemetery,” he proclaimed in 1963. He received an increasingly sympathetic hearing among Northern blacks who could already vote and sit alongside whites at lunch counters but encountered racial prejudice that relegated them to segregated ghettos, limited their employment opportunities, and subjected them to police harassment. Malcolm X linked the domestic black struggle for civil rights to the anti-colonial movements underway in Africa and Asia, underscoring that the American Civil Rights Movement was one of many liberation movements being waged worldwide, including a campaign to end apartheid (rigid racial segregation) in South Africa. Malcolm X’s rhetorical links with Africa resonated among northern blacks, who adopted African clothing, hairstyles, and music. Many jettisoned the old label “Negro” in favor of “black” to reflect their growing color consciousness and racial pride. This photo (27.11) of Malcolm X smiling as he photographs boxer Muhammad Ali in a Miami restaurant after Ali won the heavyweight championship in 1964 conveys the charisma that each man radiated, and the Watch the Video Malcolm X

THE FRACTURED LEFT

 strong bonds they maintained to the black urban community. Ali, who called himself “the greatest,” gained fame not just for his athletic feats but, like Malcolm X, also for his defiance of authority. The day after this photo was taken, he announced his conversion to the Nation of Islam, changing his name from Cassius Clay to Muhammad Ali. His mentor Malcolm X applauded Ali’s announcement, knowing that the magnetic boxer would help attract other converts. By the time Malcolm X’s ideas began to gain widespread currency among disaffected blacks, however, his own philosophies were starting to shift. Viewing the increasingly powerful Malcolm X as a potential rival, Elijah Muhammad had silenced Malcolm X a few months before this photo was taken. Malcolm X’s transgression was calling the assassination of President Kennedy “a case of ‘the chickens coming home to roost’” because whites were finally experiencing the vigilante violence that had terrorized blacks for decades. Malcolm X left the Nation of Islam soon afterward, and Ali severed all ties with him. In 1964 Malcolm X made a pilgrimage to Mecca, Islam’s holiest city, in Saudi Arabia, where he saw pilgrims “of all colors” coming together to worship. This trip gave him new faith in the possibility of interracial cooperation. His more moderate stance did little to mollify his Nation of Islam critics. On February 21, 1965, as he stood to address a gathering in Harlem, three Nation of Islam members shot him dead.

Watts and Chicago
 Malcolm X did not live to help heal the fractures that divided the Civil Rights Movement. In the mid-1960s, tensions among activists led to an overt split between those who continued to advocate non-violence and integration and those who assumed a more militant, nationalistic approach. Stalwart civil rights veterans like John Lewis and Martin Luther King Jr. never stopped advocating their vision of nonviolent collective action. But after 1965, the vision of armed self-defense won many adherents. When riots and demonstrations in Northern cities moved the civil rights struggle to their own backyards, the limits of Northern whites’ support for the goal of racial equality became evident. August 6, 1965, the day that President Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act of 1965, represented the high-water mark of the nonviolent Civil Rights Movement. Five days later, with activists

 still basking in the afterglow of this achievement, riots erupted in Watts, a Los Angeles black ghetto rife with high unemployment, poor schools, and drug use. The routine arrest of a black man for drunk driving, which residents viewed as yet another example of the police harassment that plagued them daily, sparked the uprising. Watts burned for six days before 16,000 national guardsmen managed to stop the violence. The Watts riot left 34 dead and destroyed $35 million in property, including many businesses and homes owned by blacks. Watts changed the image of African American protest in the white imagination from a portrait of nonviolent demonstrators kneeling in prayer before their attackers to one of lawless mobs shouting “Burn, baby, burn.” The same cameras that helped awaken the liberal and moderate white consciousness now stoked white fears about unchecked black violence. The press ignored residents’ complaints about police harassment and instead portrayed Los Angeles police and firemen (27.12) as heroes who struggled to prevent black rioters from destroying their own community. Watts was the prelude to four long, hot summers of racial rioting that rocked cities throughout the nation from 1965–1968.



27.12 Watts
Riots, 1965.
 Images of heroic policemen arresting looters and firemen putting out fires set by rebellious blacks reassured anxious whites that authorities were restoring law and order. Only two years earlier, photographs of police and firemen attacking peaceful black demonstrators in Birmingham had encouraged whites to support integration and voting rights.

 “It’s much easier to integrate lunch counters than it is to eradicate slums.” MARTIN LUTHER KING JR, 1968

 Why did many Northern whites lose sympathy for the Civil Rights Movement?



 CHAPTER 27

27.13 Black
Panther Leader
Huey Newton, 1967
 This staged photo showed Newton dressed in guerrillastyle clothing surrounded by symbols of African warrior culture to convey the Black Panthers’ militant, nationalistic ideology.

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

 King rushed to Watts intent on teaching residents to employ nonviolent means to express their grievances. Instead, it was King who came away with a valuable lesson. When he toured the smoldering ruins, a crowd of black youths shouted “We won!” “How can you say you won when 34 Negroes are dead, your community is destroyed and whites are using the riot as an excuse for inaction?” King asked. Their reply taught him the extent of despair among Northern blacks: “We won because we made them pay attention to us.” The Watts riots convinced King to move aggressively to end economic inequality nationwide now that battles against legalized segregation and disenfranchisement were won. But the SCLC’s 1966 Chicago campaign dramatically demonstrated the limits of moderate Northern whites’ support for racial equality. When protesters marched through all-white neighborhoods to protest racial discrimination in renting and selling houses, white crowds pelted them with bottles and rocks, which some marchers threw back. “I have never seen—even in Mississippi and Alabama—mobs as hostile and hate-filled as I’ve seen in Chicago,” King noted with dismay. After King’s death in 1968, President Johnson successfully lobbied Congress to pass the Fair Housing Act that prohibited discrimination in selling, renting, or financing housing as a memorial to the slain leader.

Black Power
 and the Black Panthers The “black power” slogan emerged during James Meredith’s 1966 “March against Fear” in Mississippi. Meredith had faced down hostile crowds in 1962 when he became the first black student to graduate from the University of Mississippi. Four years later he decided to march 220 miles by himself from Memphis, Tennessee, to Jackson, Mississippi, hoping that his courage would inspire blacks to register to vote. On the second day of his march, a

 Did the tactics used by the Black Panthers to publicize their militant vision help or hurt them?

 sniper waiting in the bushes wounded Meredith. When activists flocked to continue his march, SNCC leader Stokely Carmichael told participants “we been saying freedom for six years, and we ain’t got nothing. What we gonna start saying now is black power.” Black Power, however, soon became a slippery term that people employed in different ways. Competing Visions: Defining “Black Power” explores how black leaders with different ideologies embraced competing definitions of Black Power. In 1966, Black Power militants came to the forefront of traditionally nonviolent civil rights organizations like SNCC, which expelled whites to foster black community leadership. That same year Bobby Seale and Huey Newton founded the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense in Oakland, California. The Black Panthers were a militant civil rights group dedicated to armed self-defense, racial pride, and inner-city renewal. To project an image of strength that would appeal to inner-city youth, the Black Panthers wore commando-style attire including black leather jackets, black pants, black berets, and dark sunglasses, items already fashionable among young black men. The 1967 photo (27.13) that became the emblem of the Black Panther Movement depicted Newton sitting in a throne-like wicker chair surrounded by a zebra rug and warrior shields, symbols of a racial identity rooted in African culture. Wearing Western military-style clothing and holding a rifle in his right hand and a spear in his left, Newton stared into the camera with the steely resolve of a revolutionary. The paramilitary group initiated community projects including free breakfasts for school children and health clinics, but the

THE FRACTURED LEFT



Competing Visions
DEFINING “BLACK POWER”
The image of a raised, clenched black fist became the most enduring symbol of “Black Power,” but it only represented one view of the slogan’s meaning. In the following excerpts civil rights leaders debate the meaning and implications of Black Power. Malcolm X never used the term directly, but his separatist message laid the groundwork for Black Power nationalism later in the decade. In contrast Martin Luther King Jr. advocated using nonviolent methods to empower the black community. Political scientist Charles Hamilton notes the various interpretations given to the “Black Power” slogan and embraces one that emphasizes pride in being black. Is there any agreement among these competing definitions? How does this debate compare to the one between Marcus Garvey and W. E. B. DuBois in the 1920s (see Competing Visions, Chapter 21)? The revolutionary, nationalist rhetoric in Malcolm X’s fiery 1963 “Message to the Grassroots” greatly influenced later advocates of Black Power. There’s no such thing as a nonviolent revolution. The only kind of revolution that is nonviolent is the Negro revolution. The only revolution in which the goal is loving your enemy is the Negro revolution. It’s the only revolution in which the goal is a desegregated lunch counter, a desegregated theater, a desegregated park, and a desegregated public toilet; you can sit down next to white folks—on the toilet. That’s no revolution. Revolution is based on land. Land is the basis of all independence. Land is the basis of freedom, justice, and equality … Whoever heard of a revolution where they lock arms … singing “We Shall Overcome”? You don’t do that in a revolution. You don’t do any singing, you’re too busy swinging. 
 In a “Conversation with Martin Luther King,” March 25, 1968, King offered a definition of Black Power that supported his strategy of nonviolence. We have always stood up against injustices. We have done it militantly. Now, so often the word ‘militant’ is misunderstood because most people think of militancy in military terms. But, to be militant merely means to be demanding and to be persistent, and in this sense I think the non-violent movement has demonstrated great militancy. It is possible to be militantly nonviolent. … I haven’t advocated violence, because I do not see it as the answer to the problem. I do not see it as the answer from a moral point of view and I do not see it as the answer from a practical point of view.… Let me briefly outline the positives [of Black Power]. First, Black Power in the positive sense is a psychological call to manhood. This is desperately needed in the black community, because for all too many years black people

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Defining
Black Power


 have been ashamed of themselves.… Secondly, Black Power is pooling black political resources in order to achieve our legitimate goals.… Thirdly, Black Power in its positive sense is a pooling of black economic resources in order to achieve legitimate power.… Withdrawing economic support from those who will not be just and fair in their dealings is a very potent weapon.

 Writing to white America in The New York Times Magazine in 1968, Charles Hamilton outlined competing views of Black Power and stressed the importance of maintaining black racial identity. Black Power has many definitions and connotations in the rhetoric of race relations today. To some people, it is synonymous with premeditated acts of violence to destroy the political and economic institutions of this country. Others equate Black Power with plans to rid the civil rights movements of whites who have been in it for years. The concept is understood by many to mean hatred of and separation from whites; it is associated with calling whites ‘honkies’ and with shouts of ‘Burn, baby, burn!’ Some understand it to be the use of pressure-group tactics in the accepted tradition of the American political process. And still others say that Black Power must be seen first of all as an attempt to instill a sense of identity and pride in black people.… Black Power rejects the lessons of slavery and segregation that caused black people to look upon themselves with hatred and disdain. To be ‘integrated’ it was necessary to deny one’s heritage, one’s own culture, to be ashamed of one’s black skin, thick lips and kinky hair. … The black man must change his demeaning conception of himself; he must develop a sense of pride and self-respect. Then, if integration comes, it will deal with people who are psychologically and mentally healthy, with people who have a sense of their history and of themselves as whole human beings …

 Why do all three writers emphasize racial pride and manhood?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

 press only saw their rifles. The Black Panthers organized paramilitary patrols that openly carried weapons (then legal under California law) and, Newton explained, “stopped whenever we saw the police questioning a brother or a sister” to ensure that no beatings or abuse occurred. In May, 1967, 30 armed Black Panthers filed onto the floor of the California State Assembly in Sacramento to protest the imminent passage of a law banning the open display of weapons, a bill meant to shut down the Black Panther street patrols. As security forces disarmed them, Bobby Seale called on “black communities of America to rise up as one man.” By October, 1967, Newton was under arrest, wounded by police during a shoot-out and accused of killing a white policeman who died in the melee. FBI chief J. Edgar Hoover viewed the Panthers as “the greatest threat to the internal security of the country” and used spies to plan raids on Panther offices and create rifts within the group to weaken the Panthers internally. When the courts overturned Newton’s conviction in 1970, he emerged from jail to find the Black Panthers in shambles.

 The Women’s Liberation Movement Another fracture within the Civil Rights Movement, this one between men and women, energized the modern women’s movement. When young white female activists began leaving the Civil Rights Movement to join the women’s movement, they joined a crusade already well underway. Feminists did not speak with one voice, but instead offered competing visions of how to empower women. Helen Gurley Brown and Betty Friedan each wrote bestsellers that helped re-ignite the women’s movement, which had faltered since the 1920s. Marriage was overrated, Brown asserted in Sex and the Single Girl, a 1962 advice book counseling young, single women to explore their sexuality while they

 “I’m a server of food and a putter-on of pants and a bedmaker…But who am I?” A middle-class housewife quoted in The Feminine Mystique, 1963

 What competing visions did Brown and Friedan offer on empowering women?

 had the chance. By using their sex appeal intelligently, young women could thrive despite earning less than men and having fewer career opportunities. Brown’s prescription was: find a job you liked, flirt to get special treatment, have your dates pay for everything, and wait to get married until your looks start to deteriorate. Friedan also challenged the accepted notion that women should focus solely on homemaking and child-rearing. Men were free to make careers, enjoy hobbies, and engage in politics, Friedan noted in her 1963 treatise The Feminine Mystique. By contrast, women “never had a chance to be anything else” than a “housewife-mother.” As they shopped for groceries, made beds, and drove their children to afterschool activities, many wondered, “Is this all?” Unlike Brown, Friedan did not believe that sex could fill the void, nor did she urge women to avoid marriage or having children. Instead she believed that women should be able to engage in the full range of meaningful activities available to men. Her analysis resonated strongly among white middleclass women who felt imprisoned within their suburban lives. Brown continued to promote her philosophy of “empowerment through sexuality” in Cosmopolitan, a provocative women’s magazine that she launched in 1965. Friedan took a different path, joining the political activists frustrated with the government’s failure to fully enforce the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which barred discrimination in employment on the basis of race, religion, ethnicity, or sex. The new Equal Employment Opportunity Commission took complaints of racial discrimination seriously, but ignored charges of sexual discrimination. “Men are entitled to female secretaries,” the Commission chairman glibly remarked. In 1966, Friedan helped found the National Organization for Women (NOW) to secure equal rights for women in employment, education, and politics—traditionally, male domains. NOW also wanted to give women control over their own bodies through unfettered access to contraception and legal abortions. A relatively small organization with only 5,000 members in the late 1960s, NOW nonetheless convinced President Johnson to issue an executive order that required government agencies and federal contractors to create affirmative action programs to hire and promote women and minority men. NOW also persuaded airlines to stop employing only attractive single women under age 32 as flight attendants.

Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Birth Control Pill: The Solution
 to the World’s Problems or Sexual Chaos?

THE FRACTURED LEFT

 The women’s movement grew as younger female activists, unhappy with gender discrimination within the Civil Rights Movement and New Left, took up the cause of female liberation. Collegeage women had participated enthusiastically in Freedom Summer by teaching in the Freedom Schools and registering blacks to vote. Women, however, also performed virtually all the clerical chores and housework for SNCC, and this gendered allocation of work provoked complaints. At the height of Freedom Summer, black female SNCC workers staged a sit-in at a SNCC office in Atlanta to protest gender discrimination within the Civil Rights Movement. The “assumptions of male superiority are as … crippling to the woman as the assumptions of white supremacy are to the Negro,” asserted white activists Mary King and Casey Hayden. Few males took these complaints seriously. “What is the position of women in SNCC?” joked Stokely Carmichael while relaxing with staffers one evening. “The position of women in SNCC is prone!” The punch line won Carmichael appreciative laughter from his male colleagues, but this oft-repeated story hastened the departure of white female activists. Women in the New Left experiencing similar problems with gender discrimination within SDS also redirected their energies to the women’s movement. Black women were more reluctant to abandon the Civil Rights Movement. In their view racial oppression affected them more severely than sexual discrimination. The feminists who founded NOW lobbied for legislative solutions to women’s problems. In contrast, more radicalized feminists, steeped in New Left ideology and nonviolent tactics, adopted a grassroots approach that used consciousness-raising—heightening awareness of social and political issues—to help women “understand the universality of our oppression.” They emphasized changing attitudes rather than lobbying for legislative changes. To combat the ways that sexism pervaded normal social

 interactions, feminists introduced the word “Ms.” into the American lexicon to replace “Miss” or “Mrs.,” titles that linked a woman’s identity to her marital status. When Robin Morgan brought busloads of women to Atlantic City to protest the annual Miss America pageant in 1968, she sought maximum media coverage. Demonstrators carried the photograph (27.14) of an attractive, naked young woman with lines dividing her body like cuts of beef to protest how beauty pageants dehumanized women. “Welcome to the Miss America Cattle Auction,” they chanted while filling a trash can with bras, high heeled shoes, fashion magazines, and copies of Playboy, items they believed reinforced “the Mindless Sex Object Image” of women. In deference to a local ordinance, the protesters never set the trash can on fire, but from this point onward detractors dismissed feminists as “bra-burners.” Despite their different styles and messages, both moderate and radical feminists had trouble expanding their support beyond the white middle class. “If your husband is a factory worker or a tugboat operator, you don’t want his job,” noted Democratic Congresswoman Barbara Mikulski to explain why NOW’s emphasis on equality in employment failed to resonate among working-class women.



27.14 Feminists
Picket the Miss
America Pageant,
 This satirical portrait of a woman marked up like a side of beef criticizes beauty pageants for reducing a woman’s value to the quality of her body parts.

 How did activists’ competing visions and media coverage shape the women’s liberation movement?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

The End of an Era
 As the Civil Rights Movement unraveled, the Great Society also floundered. Republicans widened their appeal by promising to end the cultural strife that was tearing the nation apart. Although most liberal and radical causes lost energy after 1968, Chicano and Native American activists helped keep the protest tradition alive as the decade ended.

The Faltering Civil
Rights Movement
 Embittered by years of violent attacks in the South, young activists either left the movement altogether or migrated to more militant organizations. By 1967, King’s weakening leadership reflected a movement adrift. When King attacked the Vietnam War, he strained his relationship with President Johnson, losing a valuable ally in the White House. King’s call for a complete restructuring of American capitalism to eliminate poverty also cost him the support of moderate blacks and whites. In fall 1967, after a summer of deadly race riots in Detroit and Newark, King proposed setting up a poor people’s encampment in front of the White House. When the Poor People’s Campaign stalled, King made a quick trip to Memphis to support a garbage men’s strike.

 On April 4, 1968, a sniper’s bullet tore through the knot in King’s necktie and fatally wounded him as he leaned over the balcony of his Memphis motel. Within hours Life photographer Steve Schapiro entered King’s motel room and snapped a haunting photograph of King’s open suitcase containing a copy of his book Strength to Love, a wrinkled shirt, and the remnants of a meal (27.15). “The half-drunk cup of coffee gave me a moment of pause,” Schapiro noted. “He had left his room planning to return.” King’s portrait appeared on the motel television during a newscast reporting his death to complete this eerie scene. The three-week urban rampage in 100 cities across the nation that followed King’s murder further alienated the white community, which increasingly supported using troops to restore “law and order.” Two months later a white man, James Earl Ray, admitted to killing King, a confession he later retracted.

The Great Society Unravels
 Diminishing sympathy for the Civil Rights Movement also meant less support for Great Society programs directed at the urban poor. Congress had written much of the legislation quickly, but the public had no patience to wait for the Great Society to work through its growing pains. Critics from the left and right continued their attacks. The New Left advocated redistributing corporate profits more equitably throughout society. The Radical Right denounced the Great Society as a “hodgepodge” of programs that humiliated the poor and encouraged dependency on government welfare. Ethnic working-class 27.15 King’s Room in the Lorraine Motel, April 4, 1968 King stepped out of this motel room to chat briefly with friends over the balcony and never returned. The television above King’s suitcase announces his death to an empty room. The former motel is now a civil rights museum, where this room is preserved in its original state.

 Why was King’s death a serious blow to the Civil Rights Movement?

THE END OF AN ERA

 whites and left-leaning suburbanites, groups that had traditionally supported the Democratic liberal agenda, began to resent federal programs that they felt helped primarily blacks and other minorities. The shift among the white working class had political significance. In 1964, nearly 60 percent had voted for the Democratic ticket; four years later only 35 percent did. The Great Society’s troubles reflected more than persistent racism, however. Johnson’s unwillingness to raise taxes to pay for an exploding array of domestic programs and the war in Vietnam also contributed to its undoing. As the economy overheated interest rates doubled, the national debt exploded, and inflation caused prices to rise faster than wages. This sudden decline in the standard of living after decades of prosperity dismayed Americans. This 1967 Herblock political cartoon ( 27.16) illustrated Johnson’s dilemma in trying to fund both the Vietnam War and the Great Society. In the drawing Johnson prepares for an evening out with his mistress, a robust and expensively attired woman wearing a mink stole emblazoned with the words “Vietnam War.” As they leave he tries to assure the other woman in his life, a thin homemaker wearing a tattered apron labeled “U.S. Urban Needs,” that “There’s Money Enough to Support Both of You—Now, Doesn’t That Make You Feel Better?” As this cartoon suggested, the administration was neglecting its domestic programs and giving the war the bulk of its attention and funds. In 1968, Johnson agreed to raise taxes to finance the expanded war in Vietnam, but Southern conservative congressmen refused to vote for the measure until the president cut funding for his domestic programs. The Democratic Convention in 1968 pulled together these strands of disenchantment with liberal politics. With Vice President Hubert Humphrey on track to secure the nomination, ten thousand antiwar activists led by New Left leader Tom Hayden protested outside the Chicago Convention Center to support the antiwar candidate Eugene McCarthy. Yippies, a New Left splinter group that stood for blending “pot and politics,” joined the protest. As Democratic delegates debated the administration’s Vietnam policy inside the convention hall, the police attacked the demonstrators outside. Televised images of longhaired, pot-smoking protesters who waved North Vietnamese flags and threw excrement swayed



 27.16 Torn between Two Mistresses, 1967 This Herblock cartoon illustrated how Johnson’s escalation of the war in Vietnam deprived his Great Society programs of funds.

 public opinion more than news reports of police brutality. Over 70 percent of adults supported the police crackdown. Critics of liberalism found the public suddenly much more receptive to their competing political vision. Richard Nixon won the presidency in 1968 promising to restore “law and order,” a Republican catch-phrase that fueled the political shift underway in many traditionally Democratic blue-collar and suburban neighborhoods. With grassroots conservatism on the rise, the liberal vision appealed to fewer Americans by 1970. A rare moment of national celebration occurred on July 20, 1969 when astronaut Neil Armstrong became the first man to walk on the moon. Watching the event on their television sets, Americans heard Armstrong declare “that’s one small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind” as he began to stride across the moon’s surface. Announcing the U.S. space race victory over the Soviet Union to the world, astronaut Buzz Aldrin

 How did presidential choices and public attitudes undermine Johnson’s Great Society agenda?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

 derarm deodorant. Worried that the counterculture had made addictive drugs such as heroin popular among the young, states passed stringent anti-drug laws. At the federal level, in 1972, President Nixon announced a “war on drugs” to disrupt the illicit drug trade. The quick commercialization of the counterculture also hastened its demise as a potent alternative social vision. Modes of hippie dress, slang, and values (albeit in diluted form) swept into the mainstream. Granola appeared on supermarket shelves, and middle-aged men grew their hair long. Affluent and educated adults increasingly smoked marijuana and listened to rock music. More sexually explicit movies and highly profitable rock record sales fueled rather than undermined acquisitive capitalism.

27.17 The First
Moon Landing,
 National pride surged at the sight of an American flag planted on the moon. For many Americans, beating the Soviets to the moon challenged the radical left’s view that American society was faltering.

 planted an American flag (27.17) near manmade footprints that would permanently mark the moon’s surface. This iconic photo of the United States conquering the moon bolstered many citizens’ faith in the superiority of the American way of life, giving them another reason to reject the New Left and counterculture critique of American culture.

The Demise of the
Counterculture
 As with the Civil Rights Movement and the Great Society, the hippie counterculture also unraveled. Media coverage drew large crowds to the 1967 “Summer of Love” in San Francisco’s HaightAshbury neighborhood, a hippie gathering dedicated to free food, drugs, sex, and music. In the fall hippie stalwarts organized a mock “Death of Hippie: Son of Media” funeral procession, blaming the over-hyped media image of the free-loving hippie for the drug-related violence and epidemic of rapes that now beset Haight-Ashbury. They then departed en masse, moving the foci of hippie culture to rural communes away from the media glare, where some kept the hippie utopian ideal alive. Ronald Reagan, the Republican Governor of California, echoed the views of mainstream America in 1969 when he characterized a hippie as someone who “dresses like Tarzan, has hair like Jane, and smells like Cheetah,” a reference to the counterculture’s embrace of public nudity, long hair, and disdain for un-

 How did media exposure affect the counterculture?

Keeping Protest Alive:
Mexican Americans and
Native Americans
 The declining fortunes of the Civil Rights Movement and the counterculture did not mean the end of all campaigns for social justice in the late 1960s. Mexican American and Native American activists drew inspiration from the African American struggle and launched their own highly visible, if short-lived, crusades to end ethnic discrimination. Ultimately, however, factionalism and police harassment also hurt these crusades. In the 1960s, the life expectancy for Mexican American migrant workers hovered around age 50, while their infant mortality rate was double the national average. The short-handed hoe represented the nearly complete exploitation of California migrant workers. “The short one” forced workers to bend all day (27.18) as they worked in the fields, often causing crippling back pain that sidelined workers who could not afford health care. California regulators finally banned the tool in 1975. Rallying Mexican Americans around the slogan Si Se Puede (“Yes, it can be done”), César Chávez, head of the United Farm Workers union, used strikes and marches to secure better working and living conditions. Chávez also appealed directly to consumers, convincing 17 million Americans to stop buying nonunionpicked grapes. These tactics provoked a backlash in some quarters. One Safeway grocery store manager reported antiunion customers loading up “their car with grapes and nothing else.” By

THE END OF AN ERA

 1970, however, the economic toll of the boycott forced growers to recognize the United Farm Workers and raise wages. Latino urban radicals in Texas, California, and Colorado embraced a competing vision called La Raza (The Race) that emphasized racial identity over union organizing. The Brown Berets modeled themselves after the Black Panthers and proudly called themselves “Chicanos,” embracing their Mexican American heritage while demanding an end to Anglo-American discrimination. In March 1968, 10,000 high school students in East Los Angeles staged a “blow-out” by walking out of their classrooms to protest the poor education they received in their mostly Hispanic schools. By this point most white Americans had little tolerance for radical political protest and overwhelmingly supported the police for shutting the demonstrations down. Internal divisions within the Mexican American community over the wisdom of mass demonstrations and steady harassment from the police hastened the demise of the Chicano student movement. Native American activists also drew inspiration from the integrationist vision that championed equality and the competing militant one that emphasized racial identity. After encouraging Indians to move off their reservations in the 1950s, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) began terminating the rights of some Indian tribes to federal protection. Ending their dependence on the BIA to run schools, manage their lands, and provide health care, the agency argued, would encourage Indians to assimilate into mainstream culture more quickly. Indian activists wanted the federal government to continue its financial assistance, while also allowing more self-government on reservations. On November 20, 1969, a group calling themselves “Indians of All Tribes” took over the abandoned federal prison on Alcatraz Island in San Francisco Bay. The Indian activists issued the sardonic Alcatraz Proclamation

 that offered to purchase the island for $24 in glass beads and red cloth, the same amount that the Dutch had paid indigenous people for Manhattan Island in 1626. The proclamation described Alcatraz as the perfect site for an Indian reservation because it lacked running water, sanitation, schools, mineral resources, and productive soil, plus “the population has always been held as prisoner and kept dependent upon others.” Eventually the cold and isolation took its toll, and the protest ended in June 1971. Native Americans staged nearly 70 other occupations throughout the nation, including the American Indian Movement’s armed takeover of the village of Wounded Knee, South Dakota, in 1973, the site of the army’s massacre of 300 Sioux in 1890. These highly visible protests prompted Nixon to increase funds for social services on Indian reservations and establish the Office of Indian Water Rights. In the early 1970s, the federal government ended the policy of termination, and Congress increased Indian selfrule on the reservations. Indian tribes also began successfully suing the government for past treaty violations. But government harassment, part of a general crackdown on revolutionary political movements in the early seventies, eviscerated radical Indian groups.

Read the Document Cesar Chavez, “He Showed Us the Way” (1978)




27.18 Hispanic
Farm Workers
Using Short Hoes
 Workers nicknamed short hoes “the devil’s arm” because using them caused intense back pain. Every time union activist César Chávez saw a head of lettuce in the supermarket, he remembered the suffering field workers had endured and felt renewed determination to organize strikes and boycotts to improve their working conditions.

 What problems did Chicanos and Native Americans face in the 1960s?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S









 Peace Corps established

 Supreme Court rules school prayer unconstitutional

Birmingham


Freedom Summer


 Furor lays the foundation for religiously based conservative resurgence

 Outrage over fire hose and dog attacks on civil rights protesters prompts Kennedy to support a federal civil rights law

 Murder of three Civil Rights workers in Mississippi prompts Congress to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964

Port Huron Statement


March on Washington


 Motivates student activists to join SDS

 International press coverage turns the peaceful march into a triumphant movement for the nonviolent Civil Rights Movement

 Largest legislative liberal reform effort since the New Deal

 Program sends U.S. aid volunteers worldwide

Freedom Rides


CHAPTER REVIEW

 Kennedy administration begins enforcing Supreme Court ruling against segregated interstate travel

 Great Society begins

Review Questions
 1. Why were the Freedom Rides, the Birmingham campaign, and the March on Selma effective nonviolent civil rights protests? 2. How did the Great Society compare to the New Deal? What continuities or differences existed between them?

 3. Why did black nationalist sentiment increase among African Americans after 1965? 4. How did media coverage affect protest movements in the 1960s? 5. How did the 1960s transform American society?

Key Terms
 Great Society President Johnson’s wide-ranging social welfare reforms intended to make the amenities of modern life—a decent standard of living, education, health care, and clean water—available to all Americans. Freedom Rides Interstate bus journeys by black and white activists who entered segregated bus facilities together throughout the South. Birmingham campaign Civil rights effort to desegregate Birmingham, Alabama, where shocking images of police brutality prompted Kennedy to push for a federal civil rights act. March on Washington, 1963 Massive demonstration in the nation’s capital that demanded passage of a federal civil rights act and more economic opportunities. Freedom Summer, 1964 Multipronged attack on white supremacy in Mississippi that included a voter registration drive and the creation of Freedom Schools.

 Civil Rights Act of 1964 Legislation that banned segregation in businesses and places open to the public (such as restaurants and public schools) and prohibited discrimination in employment on the basis of race, religion, ethnicity, or sex. Voting Rights Act of 1965 Legislation that prohibited literacy tests and poll taxes and authorized the use of federal registrars to register voters if states failed to respect the Fifteenth Amendment. New Left A small, but highly visible, coalition of left-leaning student-based organizations that attacked racial discrimination, poverty, and the war in Vietnam. Black Power A call for blacks to unite politically and economically in black-only organizations to protect their racial identity as they fought for equality. National Organization for Women (NOW) An organization dedicated to securing equal rights for women in employment, education, and politics.

CHAPTER REVIEW











 March from Selma to Montgomery

 Black Panthers founded

“Summer of Love”


 King assassinated

 Black militants embrace Black Power

 Congress responds to vigilante attacks on marchers by passing the Voting Rights Act of 1965

 NOW founded

 Hippie gathering in Haight-Ashbury publicizes counterculture

 Nationwide rioting signals the end of the nonviolent Civil Rights Movement

Watts Riot


 Feminists picket Miss America Pageant

 Government creates affirmative action programs for women and minorities

 Feminists use media coverage to challenge sexist stereotypes

 Violent rampage in Los Angeles ghetto generates white backlash against Civil Rights Movement

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of A Decade of Discord.

Questions for Analysis
 1. What different views did Johnson and Goldwater offer on the role of the federal government in American society?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • John F. Kennedy, Inaugural Address (1961), p. 813

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: The Federal


• Fannie Lou Hammer, Voting Rights in Mississippi (1964), p. 814


Government, Friend or Foe?, p. 817


• Rachael Carson, Silent Spring (1962), p. 818


 2. How did this test prevent African Americans from voting? Read the Document Voting Literacy Test (1965), p. 826

 • Martin Luther King Jr., “Letter from Birmingham City Jail” (1963), p. 821 • Letters from Mississippi Freedom Summer, p. 825 • Cesar Chavez, “He Showed Us the Way” (1978), p. 839

 3. What impact did a politically active youth culture have?

View the Closer Look


 Read the Document The Report of the President’s

• Images as History: Birmingham, 1963, p, 823


Commission on Campus Unrest, p. 828


• Competing Visions: Defining Black Power, p. 833


 4. Why did Malcolm X propose internationalizing the civil rights movement? Watch the Video Malcolm X, p. 830

 5. How did competing views about the pill mirror earlier debates over female sexuality? Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Birth Control Pill: The Solution to the World’s Problems or Sexual Chaos?, p. 834

View the Image New Frontier Legislation, p. 812
View the Map Interactive Map: Impact of the Voting Rights Act
 of 1965, p. 827

Watch the Video
• Lyndon Johnson Presidential Campaign Ad: Little Girl vs.
Mushroom Cloud, p. 816
• Video Lecture: Photographing the Civil Rights Movement,
Birmingham, 1963, p. 822
 • Martin Luther King Jr.’s Speech at the March on Washington, August, 1963, p. 824

 Why did the nation face economic problems in the 1970s?

A
Crisis of Presidential
Leadership p. 851


 CHAPTER

Downturn and
Scandal p. 844




 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 28

Righting a
Nation Adrift
 America in the 1970s and 1980s

 Why did presidents Ford and Carter lose public confidence?

The Rights
Revolution


 p. 858

 What debates emerged over gender identity and the environment?

The Rise of the
Right p. 866


 What constituencies united to form the New Right?

 The vision of the United States as a great and powerful nation suddenly seemed less assured in the 1970s. In 1973, a dispute between the U.S. and Arab nations led to an embargo that severely restricted oil imports. Gas stations across the nation posted signs like this one as they ran out of gas, dotting the American landscape with humiliating reminders that foreign nations could wreak havoc on the U.S. economy. Gas shortages also threatened the vision of America as a prosperous car culture, where it was the birthright of every citizen to work, live, and shop wherever they liked thanks to the freedom of movement that automobiles provided. To many Americans closed gas stations (which reappeared in 1979) were just one sign of a nation adrift. Domestic political scandals, a troubled economy, and lost international prestige made the future look dim. Americans lost confidence in the federal government in the 1970s as the Watergate scandal and cover-up brought down President Richard Nixon, and the post-World War II boom times finally ended, leaving high inflation and unemployment. Economic woes and troubles abroad hampered the efforts of presidents Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter to restore respect for the presidency. Americans did not agree over how to move the nation back onto the path of glory. Feminists and gays fought to extend the social justice campaigns of the 1960s, while the environmental movement focused America’s attention on conserving its natural heritage. A new and powerful conservative coalition, however, formed around a competing vision that focused on protecting traditional values, limiting the role of the government in the economy, and flexing the nation’s power overseas. In the 1980s, after two decades of grassroots activism, the conservative ascendancy was complete. When Ronald Reagan, a committed conservative, became president in 1981, he refused to accept that America had entered an age of limits. Reagan rejected the liberal vision and diagnosed government as part of the problem, not the solution to the nation’s economic woes. He also moved aggressively to restore America’s image as a world power. An immensely popular president, Reagan restored the nation’s confidence in the economy and the presidency, despite suffering political scandals of his own.

 “Government is not the solution to our problem; government is the problem.” President RONALD REAGAN, 1981





 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

Downturn and Scandal
 Americans enjoyed unprecedented prosperity in the 1950s and 1960s, and few expected the bubble to burst. By the 1970s, however, periodic recessions returned, a shocking development for a nation that had grown accustomed to a steadily improving standard of living. The political repercussions were significant. Still reeling from the cultural and civil rights upheavals of the 1960s, the nation’s new economic problems exacerbated the feeling that the country was adrift. The economic downturn, partly caused by turmoil overseas, coincided with a decade-long crisis of presidential leadership that began when political scandal enveloped the Nixon White House.

An Ailing Economy
 An ailing economy created the sense of a nation adrift by the 1970s. In the 1960s Lyndon Johnson had tried to pay for both the Vietnam War (see Chapter 26) and the Great Society programs (see Chapter 27) without raising taxes. Heavy governmental spending created both a ballooning federal deficit and, by pumping so much cash into the economy, inflation. The end of the Vietnam War added rising unemployment to the list of economic woes. Returning veterans entered a job market hit hard by the cancellation of government defense contracts that triggered massive layoffs in the industrial sector. Energy costs were also rising. Americans were six percent of the world’s population, but consumed nearly 40 percent of global energy resources. Due to increased U.S. reliance on Middle Eastern oil, the unending strife in the region affected the daily lives of Americans. The United States had offered Israel strong financial and moral support ever since the United Nations created a homeland for the Jewish people in 1947 by partitioning Palestine into Jewish and Palestinian areas. Israel claimed territory in Palestine as its ancestral land, a view supported by the United States, which also believed that the world owed the Jewish people reparation for the horrors of the Holocaust. To Arab nations, however, the arrival of Jewish immigrants perpetuated the history of hated Western colonization in the Middle East. Wars between neighboring Arab nations and Israel ensued (detailed on 28.1), and disputes over the fate of Palestinian refugees and Israeli land seizures continue to roil the region to this day.

 How did domestic energy needs affect U.S. foreign policy?

 Richard Nixon and subsequent presidents faced a thorny foreign policy dilemma in the Middle East. The U.S. government steadfastly supported Israel’s right to exist, but given America’s growing dependence on Middle Eastern oil, it could not afford to alienate oil-producing Arab nations. The Soviet push to form strong alliances in the Middle East also threatened to turn the oil-rich region into the new Cold War battlefield. In 1973, Egypt and Syria (both armed with Soviet-provided weapons) attacked Israel on Yom Kippur (Judaism’s holiest day) to regain territory lost to Israel in 1967. Nixon’s decision to send military aid to Israel enraged the Arab world. In retaliation the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), an international consortium of oil-producing nations that regulates the price and quantity of oil sold on the world market, announced an oil embargo of the United States. By this point the United States depended on the Middle East for 12 percent of the oil it consumed. The embargo lasted five months, enough time to ravage the American economy. OPEC finally lifted the embargo after Nixon persuaded Israel to withdraw from parts of Egyptian and Syrian territory seized during the Yom Kippur War. In 1974, the nation entered its worst recession since the Great Depression. In typical periods of recession and depression, high unemployment went hand in hand with declining prices and wages. In the 1930s, pumping more federal money into the economy through the New Deal did not end the Depression, but it eased unemployment and stabilized prices, so farmers and businessmen could make a profit. During the financial crisis of the

DOWNTURN AND SCANDAL



USSR USSR

C




 pi



 TURKMENISTAN

 an

S


 AZERBAIJAN

 ea

 GEORGIA



 as



Black Sea
 ARMENIA

 AFGHANISTAN

Tehran


Ankara




 TURKEY

I R A N




 SYRIA

Baghdad


IRAQ LEBANON

Mediterranean Sea




 KUWAIT





Pe


 ISRAEL

 rsi

 JORDAN



 an

BAHRAIN QATAR UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

 LIBYA

SAUDI ARABIA

 EGYPT



Riyadh


 Israel after partition of Palestine 1947 Israel after War of 1948−1949

 OMAN

 LEBANON

 Occupied by Israel after Six-Day War 1967

Strait of
Hormuz


Gulf


SYRIA
Occupied temporarily by Israel Beirut Damascus after Yom Kippur War 1973 Area returned to Egypt Haifa by Israel 1982 
R
 e

Tel Aviv
Amman


 d

Mediterranean Sea


 YEMEN

Jerusalem


S
 e a

ISRAEL JORDAN
Suez 
Cairo


E G


Y


P


Arabian
Sea


 ERITREA (part of Ethiopia until 1993)

T


Gu


SINAI PENINSULA

SAUDI ARABI A

 Sharm el-Sheikh

 lf

Ad
 of

 en Members of OPEC Oilfields

SOMALIA ETHIOPIA

 1 1948-1949: Egypt, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, and Iraq attack Israel 5 1973 OPEC oil embargo of US

 9 1979-1981 Iranian hostage crisis

 2 1953 Shah of Iran installed with US help

 6 1978 Camp David Accords between Egypt and Israel

3 1967 Six-Day War: Israel vs. Egypt, Syria, Jordan


 7 1979 Iranian revolution deposes Shah

11 1980-1988 Iraq-Iran War


 4 1973 Yom Kippur War: Egypt, Syria attack Israel

 8 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan

 12 Part of USSR until 1991

 10 1980 Carter Doctrine: US will defend Persian Gulf

 1974 Israel withdraws from Suez

28.1 Middle East and Persian Gulf, 1947–1988
 Dependence on Middle Eastern oil increased the importance of conflicts in this region for Americans.

 Why did Israel’s troubled relations with its neighbors concern the United States?



 CHAPTER 28

28.2 Inflation and
Unemployment,
1960–1990
 The combination of high unemployment and inflation created a phenomenon dubbed “stagflation” in the 1970s.

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 The decline in the steel industry was even more dramatic. In 1950, the 12% United States produced nearly half of the world’s steel. By 1980, it manu10% factured only 14 percent, a fall hastened by aggressive foreign competitors 8% that reaped the rewards of investing heavily in research and innovation. New furnace technol6% ogy, for instance, allowed Japanese competitors to produce a ton of steel for 4% a third of the price it cost American factories. As American automobile and 2% steel plants closed, a Rust Belt of decaying industrial cities appeared in the 0% Midwest, places plagued with high unemployment, Year crumbling roads, bankRate of inflation Rate of unemployment rupt governments, and high welfare rolls. By the mid-1970s, however, the economy suffered from 1990s, Americans increasingly chose to buy houseboth high unemployment and inflation that kept hold appliances, textiles, and television sets manuprices rising, an unusual combination dubbed factured in places like Japan and Taiwan. “stagflation,” which is pictured on the graph InNorthern manufacturing jobs also evaporated flation and Unemployment, 1960–1990 (28.2). In as American companies relocated to the South, where non-unionized labor costs were cheaper the 1970s, trying to solve one problem, unemployand air-conditioning now made the hot climate ment, often worsened inflation. Tax cuts meant to more hospitable. In 1960, only 18 percent of stimulate a business recovery and create more jobs, Southern homes were air-conditioned; by 1980 for instance, put more money into the economy that figure had risen to 73 percent. A “Sun Belt” and caused prices to rise even further. Trying to of new industrial manufacturing centers includcurtail inflation by raising interest rates put home ing San Diego, Phoenix, Houston, and Atlanta mortgage and business loans out of reach for many boomed. This demographic shift had important Americans. Without access to credit the business political consequences when grassroots conservarecovery stalled. Meanwhile the federal deficit skyrocketed as tax revenue declined, but high spending tism took hold in the Sun Belt, shifting the electoral map in favor of Republicans. on defense and entitlement programs like Social The economic picture was not all bleak, howSecurity, welfare, and Medicaid continued. ever. In the 1970s, the American economy began The rising unemployment had deep roots in a historic shift from a manufacturing-based the ailing auto and steel industries, long the backeconomy to one dominated by service-sector bone of the American economy. In 1970, the Big and high-tech jobs. No longer a leader in auto Three automakers, General Motors, Ford, and or steel manufacturing, America gained new Chrysler, sold 89 percent of the cars marketed in preeminence in high-tech fields like aerospace, the United States. Within ten years their market electronics, and eventually computers. In the share dropped to 66 percent. Faced with higher 1890s, Henry Ford had built his first car in his gas prices, American consumers bought smaller, garage before revolutionizing the auto industry more fuel-efficient cars imported from Japan. Percentage of Inflation and Unemployment, 1960–1990

 What economic problems plagued the United States in the 1970s?

Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Rise and Fall
 of the Automobile Economy

DOWNTURN AND SCANDAL

 (see Chapter 21). In 1976, Steven Jobs and Stephen Wozniak, 21 and 26 years old respectively, followed in Ford’s footsteps by constructing their first personal computer in a family garage. The pair founded Apple Computers a year later, envisioning a machine that would transform daily life. The first Apple logo showed the seventeenthcentury mathematician Sir Isaac Newton sitting under the apple that supposedly fell off a tree and hit him on the head, inspiring him to develop his theory of universal gravitational pull that revolutionized modern scientific thought. The subsequent, permanent logo just retained the apple. In 1976, the claim that computers could transform the world as much as Newton’s theories seemed ludicrous. Yet within a year the computer age got underway when Apple released the first home computer designed for the general public. The computer revolution received another boost in 1980 when 29-year-old Bill Gates, the cofounder of an obscure start-up company called Microsoft, signed an agreement with International Business Machines (IBM) to provide operating software for its home computers. The deal made Gates a billionaire within two years.

Frustration at Home
 Nixon initially embraced the same moderate course as Eisenhower, with whom he had served as vice president from 1953 to 1961. Like Eisenhower, Nixon billed himself as a fiscal conservative who was willing to accept popular social welfare programs like Social Security and Medicare. As the economic outlook worsened, however, Nixon instituted wage and price controls in 1971 to curb inflation, the most drastic government intervention in the economy since World War II. Conservative outrage over his fiscal policies had little effect on Nixon, who intended to stay in the political center. He hoped to bolster the moderate wing of the Republican party by turning disgruntled Southerners, Northern blue-collar workers, and white suburbanites (Democrats who had voted for him in 1968; see Chapter 27), into lifelong Republicans. Called “the silent majority” these voters rejected some, but not all, of the liberal vision. The silent majority disliked Great Society programs that primarily aided minorities, but they still subscribed to the New Deal orthodoxy that made the government responsible for ensuring prosperity. Nixon’s budget-cutting, therefore,

Watch the Video Richard Nixon Presidential
Campaign Ad (1968)




 targeted social-welfare programs for minorities and the poor, measures that partially appeased fiscal conservatives without touching New Deal programs like Social Security that former Democrats and many moderate Republicans viewed as sacrosanct. Nixon also tried unsuccessfully to reduce the jumble of laws and programs that made welfare assistance to the poor expensive to administer. The poor viewed his proposal to guarantee all Americans a minimum income of $1,600 ($8,500 in today’s dollars) as too low, while conservatives opposed it for redistributing income. Nixon gained the loyalty of the silent majority by trying to tame the Supreme Court, which under the leadership of Chief Justice Earl Warren (see Chapter 27) had issued controversial rulings on school prayer and desegregation. When Warren retired in 1969, Nixon appointed Warren Burger to replace him, believing that Burger would influence his colleagues to offer a more restrained interpretation of the Constitution than Warren. Burger, however, had no intention of reducing the Court’s commitment to school integration. The Court insisted that the North develop school busing programs to catch up with the South where, by 1971, 77 percent of black children attended school with white children. The 1954 Brown v. Board of Education decision outlawing segregated schools had set off massive resistance throughout the South (see Chapter 25). In the 1970s, opposition to court-mandated integration moved northward as the silent majority found its collective voice and took to the streets. Busing sent black and white children to schools outside their neighborhoods, generating opposition in Northern, ethnic white enclaves where angry white parents objected to “big government” turning their children into “guinea pigs.” Boston became a hotbed of anti-busing fervor. On April 5, 1976, 200 white working-class Irish American teenagers began an adult-supervised anti-busing march in downtown Boston. Joseph Rakes, one of the teenage protesters, who brought along his family’s American flag, later recalled feeling “blind anger” at busing policies that were destroying his close-knit South Boston community. “They took half the guys and girls I grew up with and said, ‘You’re going to school on the other side of town.’ Nobody understood it at 15,” Rakes explained. When Ted Landsmark, an African American lawyer on his way to a meeting, crossed the protesters’ path, the students pounced on him.

 How did the “silent majority” shape politics in the 1970s?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

28.3 “The Soiling of Old Glory,” 1976
 The image of an anti-busing protester in Boston preparing to ram an African American lawyer with a flagpole underscored that deeply ingrained racial prejudices were more than just a Southern problem.

 Boston Herald photographer Stanley Forman’s Pulitzer-Prize winning photo “The Soiling of Old Glory” (28.3) showed Rakes poised to attack Landsmark with his flagstaff. In the photo Landsmark apparently struggles to free himself from the grip of another white man grabbing him from the rear. Contrary to the impression given by the photo, however, the man holding Landsmark was actually helping him to his feet after white youths had thrown him to the ground and beaten him. Rakes never hit Landsmark with the flagstaff. Yet when Landsmark, a seasoned civil rights activist, who had marched from Selma to Montgomery in 1965 (see Chapter 27), went to the hospital, he had doctors put a large bandage on his broken nose. Landsmark knew that the appearance of severe injuries would draw more press attention. The portrait of raw racial hatred captured in the photograph, and Landsmark’s heavily bandaged face at How does this photograph compare to the images of racial violence in the South seen in earlier chapters?

 a press conference the following day, shocked white Boston and encouraged the city’s leaders to initiate a sustained campaign to deescalate racial tensions. When the new school year began in September, Time magazine trumpeted the “Truce in Boston.” By this time, however, the Supreme Court’s stance had shifted, thanks to Nixon’s more conservative appointments. After the Court ruled that independent suburban school districts did not have to participate in inner-city busing programs, accelerated “white flight” to the suburbs created a core of all-black urban schools ringed by suburban white schools in Boston and in other cities.

The Watergate Scandal
 By reshaping the political landscape, Nixon won a landslide victory against antiwar Democrat George McGovern in 1972 (see Chapter 27). Yet rather Read the Document Boston Busing (1975)

DOWNTURN AND SCANDAL

 than ushering in an era of unchallenged Republican control, Nixon became embroiled in the Watergate scandal, an episode of presidential criminality that created a constitutional crisis, ended Nixon’s political career, and helped the Democrats retake the White House in 1976. On June 17, 1972, a night watchman caught five burglars breaking into the offices of the Democratic National Committee in a Washington, D.C., building complex called Watergate. The plan, financed by Nixon’s reelection campaign and approved by White House staffers, called for the burglars to fix a broken telephone wiretap installed during a previous break-in so the Nixon campaign could listen to Democratic phone calls. After Nixon disavowed any previous knowledge of the plot, the story slid off the front pages, and he easily won re-election. When the burglars went on trial in early 1973, however, one confessed to accepting a bribe to keep quiet about the White House’s involvement in planning the break-in. In response the Justice Department and Senate launched two separate investigations. Washington Post reporters Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward detailed the growing scandal in articles based on information from a secret informant whom they identified only by the nickname, Deep Throat (revealed in 2005 as William Mark Felt, the FBI’s deputy director). During one Senate committee hearing, Senator Howard Baker asked the key question: “What did the President know, and when did he know it?” Secret tapes that Nixon had made of all White House conversations promised to provide the answer. The showdown over gaining access to these tapes and what they revealed transformed the Watergate burglary into a constitutional crisis over whether the president was above the law. Two competing visions of presidential power emerged. Nixon refused to turn over the tapes to the Justice Department or Congress, claiming that the constitutionally protected right of executive privilege



 meant he could keep advice from counselors private. Investigators argued that the president had no constitutional right to withhold evidence of corruption or abuse of power. Nixon next tried to use his authority to control the investigation. When Archibald Cox, who headed the Justice Department investigation, secured a court order for the tapes on Saturday, October 20, 1973, Nixon ordered Attorney General Elliot Richardson to fire Cox. Richardson and the deputy attorney general refused and resigned. The third-ranking official in the Justice Department finally fired Cox. Outrage greeted news of the “Saturday Night Massacre,” and Nixon endured a cacophony of car horns sounding outside the White House day and night, where protesters urged passing motorists to “Honk for Impeachment.” After much delay and controversy, Nixon finally turned over highly edited versions of his taped White House conversations, enraging his critics even further. Liberal political cartoonists lampooned Nixon as a tyrant and a crook (see Images as History: Watergate through Political Cartoons, page 850). In July 1974, the House Judiciary Committee issued articles of impeachment against Nixon, charging him with obstruction of justice, abusing his presidential powers by ordering the CIA, FBI, and Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to harass his political enemies, and violating the Constitution by refusing to honor congressional subpoenas. The Supreme Court also unanimously ruled that Nixon could not withhold information pertaining to his own potential criminal wrongdoing. On August 5, 1974, Nixon finally released the remaining tapes, and the nation heard the president authorize a cover-up plan. On June 23, 1972, Nixon had instructed the CIA to tell the FBI to end its Watergate investigation to protect “national security.” Two days later, on August 8, 1974, to avoid impeachment proceedings almost certain to remove him from office, Nixon became the first president in U.S. history to resign, and Vice President Gerald Ford became president. “Our long national nightmare is over,” the new president assured the nation.

 “When the president does it that means that it is not illegal.” RICHARD NIXON in 1977, defending his actions as necessary for national security

 “A government of laws was on the verge of becoming a government of one man.” Attorney general ELLIOT RICHARDSON

 Read the Document House Judiciary Committee’s Conclusions on Impeachment (1974)

 What competing views of presidential power emerged during the Watergate crisis?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

Images as History
WATERGATE THROUGH POLITICAL CARTOONS
Political cartoons have been a mainstay of political debate in America since the colonial era. “If the prime role of a free press is to serve as critic of government, cartooning is often the cutting edge of that criticism,” stated Herb Block, who drew under the pseudonym Herblock. Political cartoonists like Herblock and Paul Conrad followed the long career of Richard Nixon from his early days as a communist-hunting congressman through his resignation as president. Their illustrations caricatured his face and shoulders, depicting a long beak-like nose, dark circles under his eyes, five o’clock shadow, and slumping shoulders. Some conservative cartoonists defended Nixon, even as the Watergate scandal deepened. One caricature depicted the media as piranhas nipping at Nixon’s heels as he tried to reach calmer waters, suggesting that he was the victim of a media feeding frenzy. When Nixon resigned, a Bert Whitman cartoon in the Phoenix Gazette showed the president exiting center stage, leaving behind spotlights that illuminated his foreign policy successes such as ending the Vietnam War and improving relations with China and the Soviet Union. To these conservative commentators Nixon’s record as a strong leader in the world mattered more than his transgressions at home. 
 The cartoon, Herblock later noted, “comments not only on his situation at the time, but on his veracity and honesty—without using any words other than his own.”

•
•


 Nixon struggles to pull the two ends of a severed tape together, a reference to the severely edited tapes of White House conversations that Nixon had released to Watergate investigators.

•


 By depicting Nixon with the word “not” in his mouth, Herblock transformed Nixon’s 1973 statement, “I’m not a crook” into “I am a crook” in this 1974 cartoon.

Herblock, Nixon Hanging
Between the Tapes,
Washington Post, 1974
 Conrad satirized the president’s paranoia by depicting Nixon as a despot sitting in the dark, creating “enemies lists” (which eventually included 30,000 people).

 By 1973, the public knew that Nixon had instructed the FBI and IRS to harass people he considered political “enemies.” The list included Paul Conrad, who drew political cartoons for the Los Angeles Times.

 To prevent future presidents from using the FBI to spy on their domestic critics, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (1978) required secret judicial approval for any internal surveillance of U.S. citizens. After the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, Congress loosened these restrictions on monitoring Americans at home.

 The cartoon title suggested that Nixon, rather than his opponents, destroyed his presidency.

 What insights do these cartoons offer into the Watergate scandal?

•


•


•


•
Paul Conrad, His Own Worst Enemy, Los Angeles Times, 1973


View the Closer Look Images as History: Watergate
Through Political Cartoons


A CRISIS OF PRESIDENTIAL LEADERSHIP



A
Crisis of Presidential Leadership  The Watergate scandal and the scars from the Vietnam War tested Americans’ faith in the federal government. Congress moved to limit the powers of the president, and Americans disagreed over the direction to take in foreign policy post-Vietnam. The challenges were significant: dealing with renewed Soviet aggression, ensuring that support for Israel did not alienate oil-producing Arab nations, and improving relations with Central America.

A
Weakened Presidency  When Gerald R. Ford became president, for the first time a man unelected as either president or vice president led the nation. Nixon had appointed Ford, then Republican House Minority leader, as his vice president in 1973, invoking the TwentyFifth Amendment to fill the office after disgraced Vice President Spiro Agnew resigned for having accepted bribes while governor of Maryland. During his 24 years in Congress, Ford built a reputation as an honest, fiscally conservative Republican and won the respect of legislators in both parties. “I’m a Ford, not a Lincoln,” he said when he became vice president, distancing himself from both the elite who bought luxurious Lincoln cars and the political genius of the nation’s sixteenth president. Ford’s modesty compared favorably with Nixon’s obsessive quest for power. Believing that the nation wanted to turn the page quickly on the Watergate scandal, Ford announced that he was giving Nixon a “full, free, and absolute pardon” for any illegal acts that he might have committed as president. A long trial and possibly imprisoning the former president would only prolong the nation’s agony, he believed. Ford, however, had misread the public’s mood. His approval rating sank to 42 percent amid accusations that he was fulfilling the terms of a backroom deal made while Nixon was still president—a pardon in return for the presidency. Nixon went free, but over 70 others were eventually convicted of Watergaterelated crimes. Ford never recovered from this loss of confidence in his leadership. An emboldened Congress reined in presidential power. Nixon had accepted large donations from businessmen in return for favors and influence. In response Congress created a Federal Election Commission (FEC) in 1974 to monitor federal elections. Congress also limited campaign contributions by individuals and official political organizations and

 established a system of public funding for presidential elections. Opponents immediately challenged the constitutionality of these restrictions. In 1976, the Supreme Court struck down a provision that limited how much an individual could spend of his or her own money to win elected office, claiming that such restrictions (except for candidates who accepted matching federal funds) violated the First Amendment right to free speech. These efforts to curb influence-peddling through campaign donations had unintended consequences. Political action committees (PACs), which represented private interest groups, such as labor, business, and retirees, were allowed to donate more money than individuals, increasing their sway over the politicians they supported. To repair public faith in the presidency, President Ford tried to shape a post-Vietnam foreign policy that restored America’s image as an invincible superpower without reigniting fears that the nation was overextending its reach or behaving unethically. Exposés about how the United States was conducting the Cold War acquainted Americans with their government’s willingness to support dictators around the world who pledged friendship to the United States over the Soviet Union. In 1974, The New York Times exposed the CIA’s covert involvement in the overthrow of Salvador Allende, the democratically elected Marxist president of Chile. With aid from CIA operatives, anti-Soviet and pro-American General Augusto Pinochet seized power and established a brutal 16-year dictatorship that tortured, imprisoned, and killed dissenters. Congressional investigations also exposed CIA plots to assassinate leftist leaders in the Congo, Cuba, and the Dominican Republic. To regain public confidence in how the government was waging the Cold War, Ford prohibited any government employee from engaging or conspiring in assassination plots. Complaints over

 How did Congress and Ford respond to Nixon’s wrongdoing?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 human rights violations influenced him less. Ford Rumsfeld and poured money into the American refused to cut off U.S. aid to Pinochet and supmissile program. ported the military junta that seized power in Argentina in 1976. Ford also tried to build on Nixon’s foreign policy successes by retaining Henry Kissinger as secretary of state and national security advisor. Ford initially accepted Kissinger’s view that détente, the policy of using diplomatic, economic, and cultural contacts As the 1976 presidential contest approached, Ford to improve U.S. relations with China and the Soviet faced a strong challenge in the Republican primaUnion, would promote global stability by lowering ries from 65-year-old Ronald Reagan, a former the risk of nuclear war. Consequently Ford abided film actor who had just finished his second term by the terms of the 1972 Strategic Arms Limitation as governor of California. Reagan’s father had kept Treaty, or SALT I, the first treaty between the Soviet the family afloat during the Depression by workUnion and the United States that limited the deploy- ing for the Works Project Administration, but ment of intercontinental and submarine-launched some key adult experiences gradually transformed ballistic missiles. this son of the New Deal into a staunch conservaNixon had also signed tive. During the Second the 1972 Anti-Ballistic MisRed Scare, Reagan became sile (ABM) Treaty, in which concerned about commuthe United States and the nism’s influence in Holly Soviet Union agreed to wood, and he objected to A bumper sticker that reflected refrain from creating napaying nearly 70 percent widespread voter apathy in the tional missile defense sysof his film earnings in 1976 presidential election tems. This treaty embraced taxes. In 1962, he joined the long-standing logic of the Republican Party, mutually assured destrucenthusiastically supported tion (MAD), the belief that the guarantee of a Barry Goldwater in 1964, and became governor of devastating nuclear counterattack would deter California in 1966. In a close vote, Ford prevailed the United States and Soviet Union from ever at the Republican convention, but Reagan vowed employing their nuclear arsenals. By pledging to to “rise and fight again.” remain defenseless against a nuclear attack, each Ford’s Democratic opponent was former Georside hoped to dampen fears that it would ever gia Governor Jimmy Carter, a surprise choice, launch a first strike against the other. Ford also whom few Americans knew when he declared his joined with the Soviet Union and 31 other nacandidacy. Carter’s political ambitions even surtions to sign the 1975 Helsinki Accords, which prised his own mother. When he told her that he accepted the current East-West balance of power was running for president, she replied, “President in Europe. of what?” Carter’s Baptist faith and the image he Ford’s moderate course invited pounding criticultivated of an uncorrupted Washington outsider cism from the left and the right, ultimately spelling who could restore honor to the White House atthe demise of détente. Conservative critics, led by tracted conservative Democrats who had voted California Governor Ronald Reagan, lambasted for Nixon. “I will never lie to you,” Carter assured Ford for “giving” away Eastern Europe to the Soviet voters. Union. Liberal critics shared conservatives’ concerns Neither candidate generated much enthusiasm. about Soviet treatment of dissidents. Bipartisan The made-up campaign slogans in this politiobjections also arose over letting the Soviets maincal cartoon (28.4)—“Gerald R. Ford: a perfectly tain a larger arsenal of long-range and submarineadequate guy for the seventies” and “Oh . . . Why launched nuclear missiles than that of the United Not? Ford in ’76”—captured the general apaStates. Over time Ford began to share these concerns thy to Ford’s campaign. An equally lackluster that the Soviet Union was untrustworthy. Certain campaigner, Carter benefited from the nation’s that the Soviets were continuing to build long-range ongoing economic woes, anger over Watergate, intercontinental ballistic missiles, Ford heeded the and Ford’s misstep in pardoning Nixon. Carter advice of his hawkish defense secretary Donald managed to temporarily reassemble the New Deal

The Leadership Crisis
Continues: Carter in the
White House


 “Don’t Vote, It Only Encourages Them.”

 What competing visions arose over Nixon’s efforts to reshape U.S.-Soviet relations?

Watch the Video Gerald Ford Presidential Campaign Ad (1976)


A CRISIS OF PRESIDENTIAL LEADERSHIP

 coalition of white Southerners, urban blacks, and union members to carry the election by 297 to 240 electoral votes. Less than 55 percent of the electorate even bothered to vote, however, a historic low and disappointing follow-up to the 1960s, when countless civil rights activists had put their lives on the line to secure this right. On his inauguration day Carter chose to walk from his swearing in on the Capitol steps to the White House with his wife and family rather than ride in a limousine, the type of populist gesture that he frequently made as president. Ford had pardoned Nixon in an attempt to heal wounds quickly. Carter tried to remove another source of festering discord by pardoning 10,000 Vietnam War draft resisters, many of whom had fled to Canada, a move that enraged conservatives but earned him the gratitude of liberal Democrats. Seeking to solidify liberal Democratic support, Carter moved quickly to build on the liberal vision of Democrats John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson by creating the Department of Education and working with Congress to establish a “Superfund” to clean up the nation’s most polluted areas. He also appointed the most women and minorities to federal office of any previous president. Carter’s outsider status and his tendency toward self-righteousness, however, hampered his presidency. A hard worker, who rose early and went to bed late, he pored over every memorandum, even personally handling requests to use the White House tennis court during his first six months in office. The fiscally conservative Carter had strong philosophical differences with liberal Democrats who emphasized the advantages of deficit-spending over balancing the federal budget. Carter believed that too much government regulation was hampering the business recovery, while liberal Democrats felt that regulation was necessary to protect the public. The president eventually prevailed, convincing Congress to deregulate the trucking, communication, and airline industries.

 Identifying rising oil costs as the main cause of the nation’s economic woes, Carter urged Americans to consume less oil in a 1977 television address that recalled Franklin D. Roosevelt’s famous fireside chats. As a fire crackled behind him, Carter, dressed in a cardigan sweater, called the energy crisis “the moral equivalent of war,” which was the title of a famous essay by nineteenth-century philosopher William James. To discourage consumption, Carter proposed ending the price controls that kept oil and gas prices low and imposing higher federal taxes on gasoline. To prevent price-gouging, he also wanted oil and gas companies to pay higher taxes on their profits. Carter tried to craft a vision that would appeal to both laissez-faire adherents who liked the idea of lifting price controls so the market determined the price of oil, and liberals who believed in government regulation to rein in corporate profits and protect the environment. The resulting energy law in 1978 compromised between these conflicting visions. It lifted price controls, raised the sales taxes on gas-guzzling cars, and offered tax incentives for using alternative energy sources such as coal and solar heating. The law did not, however, include a windfall profits tax on oil and gas company profits. The country soon felt the effects of lifting price controls without also raising taxes on oil



28.4 Do You Get
 the Feeling This Campaign Lacks a Little Something? Like Carter, Ford failed to generate much enthusiasm among the electorate in the 1976 presidential election.

 Why did the 1976 presidential election fail to engage the country?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 and gas company profits. In 1979, OPEC raised prices four times in five months, and revolution in Iran curtailed its oil exports. Images of motorists waiting for hours in line to buy gas, last seen during the 1973 oil embargo again dominated the news. The crisis reached its zenith on June 13, 1979, when over half of the nation’s service stations ran out of gas. Meanwhile Exxon, an American company that imported oil from overseas, announced first quarter earnings of $1.9 billion in 1980, a record profit by an American corporation. Carter renewed his call for a windfall-profit tax on oil and gas companies, hoping to use this revenue to fund public transportation, develop alternative energy sources, and help the poor pay for heating. To stimulate interest in energy conservation, Carter took to the airwaves to deliver an address soon dubbed the “malaise speech.” America, he lamented, was enmeshed in a moral and spiritual crisis. The nation had gone from one that celebrated “hard work, strong families, close-knit communities, and our faith in God” to one that worshiped “self-indulgence and consumption.” Carter’s call for Americans to “seize control again of our national destiny” aroused only resentment over his sermonizing.

 28.5 Hey, man … like I don’t CARE what it’s costing me This political caricature blamed Americans’ oil addiction for the nation’s energy problems.

 What different opinions surfaced about the root of America’s energy problems?

 These two political cartoons, both drawn in 1980, encapsulated competing notions of where blame for the energy crisis lay. Bob Taylor, drawing for the Dallas Times Herald, focused on the nation’s insatiable appetite for oil (28.5). He portrayed Uncle Sam as a drug addict willing to pay any price for his next fix of oil. “Hey, man . . . like I don’t CARE what it’s costing . . . I need it,” a disheveled and stony-eyed Uncle Sam says as he prepares to inject a barrel of oil into his vein. By contrast John Milt Morris’s “Profitsharing plan!” indicted OPEC and American oil companies for price-gouging, viewing the consumer as a victim of their conspiracy to empty his pockets (28.6). A sign posted outside one gas station presented a third view by proclaiming “Higher prices, More Sass, Bad President, Out of Gas,” putting the blame squarely on Carter’s shoulders.

New Paths in Foreign Affairs
 Carter had more success in foreign affairs than in domestic matters, although not without encountering opposition to his Wilsonian-inspired vision of America championing democracy worldwide. Constant meddling in the domestic affairs

28.6 Profit Sharing Plan
 Expressing more sympathy for the average consumer, this caricature accused oil-producing nations and oil companies of creating artificial shortages to gouge consumers.

Watch the Video Jimmy Carter, “Crisis of Confidence” (1979)


A CRISIS OF PRESIDENTIAL LEADERSHIP

 of neighboring nations, he noted, had earned the United States the reputation as an imperial exploiter throughout Latin America. Liberal Democrats rejoiced when Carter resolved to make human rights and the spreading of democracy the centerpieces of his foreign policy. The president’s first major achievement was consistent with his desire to forge a new path in American diplomatic relations. Making amends for past American wrongdoing (see Chapter 19), Carter negotiated a treaty that returned the Panama Canal to Panama in 2000. The United States had controlled the Canal Zone since 1903, but by the 1970s, America’s bigger submarines and ships did not fit through the canal, reducing its importance to national security and the economy. Three previous presidents had recognized these facts and opened negotiations, but Carter sealed the deal and won Senate ratification for the agreement in 1978. Giving up control of the Panama Canal failed to dramatically improve relations between the United States and Latin America. Overtures to normalize relations with the Communist Cuban dictator Fidel Castro went nowhere. Carter also faced a severe test in Nicaragua, where civil war pitted the anti-communist dictator Anastasio Somoza against the Cuban-supported Sandinista rebels. When the Sandinistas prevailed, Carter offered them economic aid in the vain hope that he could dissuade them from creating a Cubanlike authoritarian communist state. Turning to Asia, Carter continued along the path forged by Nixon and established diplomatic relations with the People’s Republic of China in 1979. This decision angered conservatives who viewed Taiwan, where the Nationalist government had fled after the Communist takeover of the mainland in 1949, as the rightful government of China. “To the Communists and those others who are hostile to our country,” Reagan fumed, “President Carter and his supporters in the Congress seem like Santa Claus. They have given the Panama Canal away, abandoned Taiwan to the Red Chinese, and they’re negotiating a SALT II treaty (with the Soviets) that could very well make this nation NUMBER TWO.” Ignoring these criticisms Carter signed the SALT II pact in June 1979, which capped missiles and bombers on each side. But as Reagan’s comments revealed, American disaffection with détente ran deep. In the 1970s, Soviet-backed regimes took control of Angola, Somalia, Ethiopia,



 “An inordinate fear of communism has led us to embrace any dictator who joined in our fear.” President JIMMY CARTER, making human rights a guiding principle in U.S. foreign policy

 and Afghanistan, confirming skeptics’ fears that détente had strengthened the enemy. Additional signs of Moscow’s aggressive intentions came in 1977 when the Soviets began aiming new, highly accurate intermediate-range missiles (SS-20s) at Western Europe. Carter responded by securing NATO’s authorization to install Pershing II missiles in Western Europe, which could reach Moscow in ten minutes. Strained Soviet-American relations took another hit when the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in December 1979 to prop up its faltering Marxist government. The Soviets were eager to keep a friendly regime in power along their border, but the United States feared their ambitions might stretch into the oil-rich Middle East. Calling the invasion “the most serious threat to peace since the Second World War,” Carter announced the Carter Doctrine, a declaration that the United States would use armed forces to stop any outside power from making inroads into the Persian Gulf region. He withdrew the SALT II treaty from the Senate, increased defense spending, cut off shipments of grain and technology to the Soviet Union, and announced that the United States would boycott the summer Olympics in Moscow. The Carter administration also sent aid to Muslim fundamentalist rebels battling the Soviets in Afghanistan, whose ranks included the Saudi-born Islamic militant Osama bin Laden. A wealthy recent college graduate dedicated to establishing an Islamic state in Afghanistan, bin Laden would later found al-Qaeda, an Islamic fundamentalist terrorist organization. The Cold War had long held the attention of American presidents. The United States was just learning, however, to take conflicts in the Middle East as seriously. Carter hoped to lessen tension by negotiating an end to hostilities between Israel and Egypt. In 1978, he invited Egyptian President Anwar El Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin to Camp David, a presidential mountain retreat in Maryland. Thirteen days of tense Did Carter’s dealings with the Soviet Union continue or undo initiatives undertaken by Nixon and Ford?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 negotiations ended with the Camp David Accords. Israel agreed to give the Sinai Peninsula back to Egypt in 1982 (see 28.1). In return Egypt became the first Arab state to recognize Israel’s right to exist. The United States rewarded each side with pledges of substantial military aid, support that continues to this day. Befriending Egypt neutralized the only credible military threat to Israeli security and brought a previous Soviet ally into the American fold, strengthening the American position in the Middle East. If the Middle East gave Carter his greatest diplomatic victory, it also provided the low point of his presidency. In 1953, the United States had helped overthrow the left-leaning Iranian government and reinstated the reliably anti-communist Shah of Iran to ensure American access to Iranian oil. In 1979, radical Islamists overthrew the Shah, who fled the country. An Islamic cleric and revolutionary, the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, became the head of the world’s first radical Islamist government. Khomeini’s intense dark eyes, long snowy beard, and flowing robes made him appear dark and dangerous to Americans, who recoiled at his ferocious denunciations of the United States as “the Great Satan.” In October 1979, Carter made a fateful decision when he reluctantly agreed to let the ailing Shah of Iran, who was living in Mexico, into the United States for medical treatment. If the United States “turned our backs on the fallen Shah, it would be a signal to the world that the U.S. is a fair-weather friend,” National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski told Carter. At 3:00 a.m. on November 4, 1979, the State Department received a telephone call from panicked officials in the American embassy in Teheran, the capital of Iran, reporting that a mob of Iranian university students had broken into the compound. The students proceeded to take embassy employees hostage. Khomeini had not ordered the hostage-taking, but he supported the students’ demands that the United States return the Shah and his fortune to Iran to secure the hostages’ release. His government, worried that the United States might try to return the Shah to power, wanted him in hand. The Iranian hostage crisis became the defining event in Carter’s presidency as Iranian revolutionaries held 52 Americans captive for 444 days. The media coverage was unprecedented, and most reporters viewed the crisis as a humiliating blow to America’s honor. ABC News

 How did Carter respond to old and new problems in the Middle East?

 created a late-night show, “Nightline,” that gave constant updates on “America Held Hostage” and repeatedly showed film footage of Iranian crowds chanting “Death to America” and the blindfolded captives. Frustration with Carter’s inability to resolve the crisis caused his approval ratings to sink to 28 percent. How to proceed was not clear, however, and Carter’s key advisors offered him conflicting recommendations. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance focused on saving the hostages’ lives and argued that the United States needed to negotiate patiently, no matter how long it took. National Security Advisor Brzezinski worried more about protecting America’s image as a global superpower. He felt that the longer the crisis lasted, the weaker America appeared to the rest of the world, emboldening America’s enemies. The Soviet

 “The release of the American hostages had become almost an obsession with me.” President JIMMY CARTER comments on the Iran hostage crisis in his memoirs

 invasion of Afghanistan a month into the hostage crisis seemingly corroborated Brzezinski’s vision. Choices and Consequences: Ending the Iranian Hostage Crisis explores Carter’s options and the repercussions of his decision to try to rescue the hostages. Five months later Iraqi ruler Saddam Hussein launched an invasion of Iran to acquire its oil fields, and Khomeini finally decided to negotiate in earnest. Iran could no longer afford its diplomatic isolation, needing to reestablish its global trading networks to fend off the attack. After months of negotiations the United States agreed to give Iran $7.9 billion (the estimated value of the Shah’s holdings in the United States) and pledged not to interfere in Iranian domestic affairs. Carter hoped to deliver the good news to the American people that the hostages were coming home before he left office on January 20, 1981. Instead, Khomeini waited until a few minutes after the new president Ronald Reagan was sworn into office to release the hostages, denying Carter a final triumph.

View the Image The Signing of the Camp David Accords (1978)


A CRISIS OF PRESIDENTIAL LEADERSHIP



Choices and Consequences
ENDING THE IRANIAN HOSTAGE CRISIS
When Iranian students stormed the U.S. Embassy and took Americans hostage in 1979, President Carter faced a choice over whether to follow the advice of Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, who recommended patient negotiations, or National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski, who favored using force to end the crisis. For five months Carter brokered a compromise between these two positions by freezing Iranian financial assets in the United States, engaging in secret negotiations, and beefing up the American naval presence in the Arabian Sea. As Carter began his 1980 reelection bid, mounting public frustration along with concern that American inaction had encouraged the Soviet Union to invade Afghanistan, increased the pressure on Carter for decisive action. 
Choices




 Wait for Iran to tire of its diplomatic isolation, and then negotiate the hostages’ release without alienating the rest of the Muslim world.



 Make a show of strength by bombing Iranian oil refineries and military bases and mining harbors.



 Use Special Forces to rescue the hostages.

Decision
 When an Iranian negotiator told the administration that a diplomatic resolution was months away, Carter decided to act. In April, 1980, while Vance was out of town, Carter authorized a rescue mission by Special Forces.

Consequences
 Swirling desert sands and a collision between American aircraft doomed the rescue mission in its first stages, further humiliating the United States. Vance immediately resigned, and in July the Shah died in Egypt, ending the question of returning him to Iran. When Iraq invaded Iran in September, seeking oil-rich territory, Khomeini decided to end Iran’s diplomatic isolation. Winning concessions from the United States, Iran released the hostages on January 20, 1981, the day that Ronald Reagan was inaugurated president.

 The ex-hostages arrive at Frankfurt, Germany on January 21, 1981, the day after their release.

Continuing Controversies
 How important was the hostage crisis for the United States in the long-term? Some say it was very important. The hostages’ prolonged captivity branded Carter as inept and contributed to his reelection loss. To contain Iran, the United States supported Saddam Hussein during his eight-year war with Iran, again using a repressive Middle Eastern dictator to advance American interests. The hostage crisis also created a

 negative image of Islam in the United States that future Islamic terrorist attacks reinforced. The crisis was not so important, others counter, rejecting it as a major reason for Reagan’s victory. In the 1980s, the failed Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the Camp David Accords, and using a secular Iraq to contain Iranian influence protected U.S. economic interests in the region, diminishing the long-term significance of the hostage crisis.

 What larger significance did Carter’s advisors attach to the Iranian hostage crisis?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

The Rights Revolution
 Social turbulence did not cease with the end of the Vietnam War. Feminists and gay activists carried the 1960s’ rights revolution into the 1970s and 1980s, striking at the heart of gender identity in American society. Meanwhile the environmental movement sought to reverse the toll of industrial pollution on the nation’s natural habitats.

The Equal Rights
Amendment and
Abortion Controversies


28.7 Women and
Work, 1900–2000
 As more women entered the workforce, combating discrimination in the workplace became a major issue for the women’s movement.

 Feminist political demands received unprecedented attention in the 1970s. To eradicate gender discrimination and sexual inequality at the workplace, feminist organizations lobbied for equal pay for equal work, an end to sexual harassment, and paid maternity leave. These bread-and-butter issues became even more pressing as the economic downturn of the 1970s forced more women into the workplace. The chart Women and Work, 1900–2000 (28.7) shows the steady increase in the percentage of single and married women who worked outside the home over the second half of the twentieth century. Changing attitudes toward married women working and declining birthrates





Percentage


























Year
 Percentage of single women working Percentage of married women working Percentage of widowed, separated, and divorced women working







 contributed to the increased female presence in the job market. Thanks to vacuum cleaners, gas and electric stoves, washing machines and dryers, women in the 1970s spent less time doing housework than their counterparts earlier in the century. Supermarkets, fast food, and prepackaged foods also simplified the tasks of shopping and cooking for a family. Nonetheless, working women faced challenges including the lack of affordable day care and the difficulty of convincing men to pitch in at home. On average women worked 15 hours (outside and inside the home) more a week than men. “You’re on duty at work. You come home, and you’re on duty,” complained one wife. With one in two marriages ending in divorce, single-parenting often put more strains on working women with children. The most common reason couples gave for divorcing in the 1970s and 1980s: arguments over domestic responsibilities. The feminist movement, however, faced challenges convincing working women that feminism provided the answer to the problems they faced balancing work and home life or advancing in the workplace. The press, one activist noted, portrayed the feminist as “a total weirdo—bra-burner, man-hater, lesbian, sickie!”—exaggerated stereotypes that threatened the movement’s growth. Many women proved reluctant to publicly identify themselves as feminists, even if they privately supported the women’s movement goals, fearing social stigmatization as unfeminine. Divisions within the women’s movement created another major obstacle. Poor minority women often saw racial and ethnic prejudice as bigger obstacles to their economic advancement than gender discrimination, and regarded white, upper-middle-class feminists with suspicion. Feminism, in the words of one black woman, was “basically a family quarrel between White women and White men.” Divisions between radicals and

 What were the consequences of shifting trends in the female workforce?

THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION

 moderate feminists (see Chapter 27) also prevented women from speaking with one voice. The feminist movement occasionally benefited from positive media coverage, as during made-fortelevision moments like the heavily hyped “battle of the sexes” in 1973 between tennis stars Billie Jean King and Bobby Riggs. Millions of Americans tuned in to watch King defeat Riggs, a self-proclaimed “male chauvinist pig” who argued that even a 55-year-old former tennis champion like himself could defeat the best female player in the world. Riggs announced his conversion to the feminist cause by shouting “equality for women” as he hit the final volley into the net. King’s triumph advanced opportunities for women’s professional sports. Feminist campaigning also led to the passage of Title IX of the 1972 Education Act, prohibiting gender discrimination in education. This law revolutionized high school and college sports by forcing administrators to create more teams and scholarships for female students. Despite negative media portrayals and problems attracting working-class women, the feminist movement enjoyed other successes in the early 1970s. Cities established shelters for battered women and rape-crisis centers. Congress also passed the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) in 1972, a proposal that congressional supporters had introduced regularly since 1923 that stated, “equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex.” Within three years, 34 of the 38 states needed for ratification of the ERA had approved the measure. This avalanche of change outraged cultural conservatives who charged that the ERA would destroy the American family. Phyllis Schlafly, a conservative Illinois lawyer with six children, led the anti-ERA crusade. Catapulting into the national spotlight, Schlafly helped forge the coalition among Catholics, Southerners, antifeminists, religious fundamentalists, and fiscal conservatives that pushed the Republican Party to the right throughout the 1970s. Feminists branded Schlafly a hypocrite, pointing out that she was a well-educated woman who had enjoyed a satisfying career in Republican politics before spearheading the anti-ERA campaign. “She’s an extremely liberated woman,” asserted Karen DeCrow, the president of the feminist National Organization for Women. Competing Visions: Defining the Ideal Woman (page 860) explores the debate over female gender identity in the 1970s. Schlafly’s anti-feminist message resonated in the Southern and Mountain states, areas without strong local feminist organizations to offer a competing view of how gender discrimination adversely affected women in



 the workplace. In the end the anti-ERA forces prevailed. The ERA remained three states short when the deadline for approving the measure came in 1982, the first of many conservative political victories to come in the 1980s. The rancor over legalized abortion, however, far surpassed the barbs exchanged over the ERA. Between 700,000 and 800,000 women a year sought illegal abortions, and botched procedures by incompetent practitioners working in unsanitary conditions killed 2,000–3,000 patients annually. The signs (28.8) in this 1970 St. Louis, Missouri protest march, held on the anniversary of the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment, listed the right of legalized abortion as a key feminist demand. It remained the right of individual states sttattess to to determine dete de term te rmin rm inee the in t legality th l

28.8 Women Marching for Equal Rights
 These protesting feminists carried signs demanding legalized abortions, children’s day care centers, passage of the Equal Rights Amendment, and more female candidates for political office.

 How did the women participating in this protest march define female liberation?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

Competing Visions
DEFINING THE IDEAL WOMAN
What did it mean to be a woman? Cultural conservatives answered “wife and mother;” feminists disagreed. In 1972, Gloria Steinem, founder of Ms., a popular feminist magazine, argued that both women and men would be happier once freed from the straitjacket of culturally constructed gender roles. Conservative activist Phyllis Schlafly countered that gender identity was rooted in biology. Gloria Steinem argued that women’s liberation would benefit men as well as women. 
 Phyllis Schlafly claimed that the “Positive Woman” embraced her distinctly female role.

 I don’t think most women want to pick up briefcases and march off to meaningless, depersonalized jobs…. We want to liberate men from those inhuman roles as well. We want to share the work and responsibility, and to have men share equal responsibility for the children. Probably the ultimate myth is that children must have fulltime mothers, and that liberated women make bad ones. The truth is that most American children seem to be suffering from too much mother and too little father. Women now spend more time with their homes and families than in any other past or present society we know about. To get back to the sanity of the agrarian or joint family system, we need free universal day care. With that aid, as in Scandinavian countries, and with laws that permit women equal work and equal pay, man will be relieved of his role as sole breadwinner and stranger to his own children. No more alimony. Fewer boring wives. Fewer childlike wives…. No more wives who fall apart with the first wrinkle because they’ve been taught that their total identity depends on their outsides. No more responsibility for another adult human being who has never been told she is responsible for her own life, and who sooner or later says some version of, “If I hadn’t married you, I could have been a star.” Women’s Liberation really is Men’s Liberation, too.… Colleague marriages, such as young people have now, with both partners going to law-school or the Peace Corps together, …. Communes; marriages that are valid for the child-rearing years only, there are many possibilities. The point is that Women’s Liberation is not destroying the American family. It is trying to build a human compassionate alternative out of its ruins.

 The first requirement for the acquisition of power by the Positive Woman is to understand the differences between men and women…. She rejoices in the creative capability within her body and the power potential of her mind and spirit. She understands that men and women are different, and that those very differences provide the key to her success as a person and fulfillment as a woman. The women’s liberationist, on the other hand, is imprisoned by her own negative view of herself and of her place in the world around her…. Women must be made equal to men in their ability not to become pregnant and not to be expected to care for babies they may bring into the world. This is why women’s liberationists are compulsively involved in the drive to make abortion and childcare centers for all women, regardless of religion or income, both socially acceptable, and government-financed…. The Positive Woman looks upon her femaleness and her fertility as part of her purpose, her potential, and her power. She rejoices that she has a capability for creativity that men can never have … A Positive Woman cannot defeat a man in a wrestling match or boxing match, but she can motivate him, inspire him, encourage him, teach him, restrain him, reward him, and have power over him that he can never achieve over her with all his muscle…. The overriding psychological need of a woman is to love something alive. A baby fulfills this need in the lives of most women. If a baby is not available to fill that need, women search for a baby-substitute. This is the reason why women have traditionally gone into teaching and nursing careers. They are doing what comes naturally to the female psyche.

Gloria Steinem


 Do Steinem and Schlafly offer realistic or clichéd depictions of women’s lives, or a combination of both?

Phyllis Schlafly


View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Defining the Ideal Woman


THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION

 of abortion throughout the sixties and early seventies. California took the lead in changing what the Los Angeles Times called “Our Archaic Abortion Law” that only allowed a woman to end a pregnancy if her life was in danger. Bending to the popular will, then-California Governor Ronald Reagan reluctantly signed a bipartisan bill in 1967 that let women terminate pregnancies in cases of rape and incest and fetuses with severe physical and mental defects, a decision he later called a mistake. Texas, however, still only allowed abortions if a pregnancy jeopardized a woman’s life. Feminists felt that women, not male doctors, should have the right to make medical decisions about their own bodies. In 1970, Norma McCorvey, an unmarried, poor, pregnant 25-year-old, sued Texas under the pseudonym Jane Roe claiming that she had the right to a legal and safe abortion based on her constitutional “right to privacy.” The Supreme Court dealt the feminist movement a stunning victory when it legalized abortion in its 1973 Roe v. Wade decision. The ruling came too late for McCorvey, who gave birth to a baby girl and gave her up for adoption as the case moved through the courts. In rendering the Roe v. Wade decision, the Supreme Court ruled that the “right to privacy . . . is broad enough to encompass a woman’s decision whether or not to terminate her pregnancy.” The Court decision prohibited states from criminalizing abortion in the first trimester, but allowed them to regulate abortion in the second trimester and prohibit it during the third trimester when a fetus became viable. The Court, however, sidestepped a key question that would provoke much future controversy. “We need not resolve the difficult question of when life begins,” the Court asserted. Critics argued that the Court had invented a right to privacy that did not exist in the Constitution. Supporters countered that court decisions over the last century had established this right. The debate soon seeped into national politics, when the Democrats assumed the mantle of the party dedicated to maintaining a woman’s right to choose an abortion and the Republicans became predominantly against the right to abortion, a position that came to be known as “pro-life.”

Read the Document Roe v. Wade (1973)


 The vocabulary embraced by each side in the abortion debate revealed competing visions of what abortion meant. Supporters of legalized abortion called themselves “pro-choice,” a label encapsulating their view that abortion was a question of personal liberty. In contrast “pro-life” forces believed that human life began at conception (not when a fetus was viable outside the womb); they therefore viewed abortion as tantamount to murder. Both sides employed the language of rights, the “rights of women” (pro-choice usage) squaring off against those of “unborn children” (pro-life term). The activist women facing off in this debate had different life experiences and conceptions of motherhood. Pro-life activists had often built their lives around children and the home and were outraged by their suspicion that pro-choice women had abortions “as a matter of convenience.” Prochoice activists tended to marry later, had more education, and were less religious. They usually wanted careers as well as children and refused to allow biology to dictate their life choices. Twenty years after Roe v. Wade McCorvey changed her mind about abortion and became a born-again Christian, who joined the anti-abortion crusade. Her reversal illustrated the growing momentum of the pro-life movement, which used images of children, like the one affixed to the sign of this 1979 pro-life demonstrator protesting in Washington, D.C. (28.9), to emphasize the rights of children.



 28.9 Pro-life Protest, 1979 Pro-life demonstrators who opposed legalized abortion put the focus on the right of unborn children to have a life rather than the right of women to control their own bodies.

 What different visions separated the pro-life and pro-choice camps?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 In the twenty-first century, the pro-life movement took advantage of new ultrasound portraits of fetuses in the womb that showed beating hearts to underscore their argument that life began at conception. Unable to overturn the Roe decision directly, pro-life activists secured a ban on federal funding for abortions. Some states also required parental notification when minors sought abortions.

Gay Rights


AIDS
Memorial Quilt, The panels of the AIDS Memorial Quilt portrayed the disease’s victims as sons, brothers, and lovers with strong ties to their families and communities to challenge stereotypes of homosexuals as diseased pariahs. 
 The rights revolution also encompassed the gay and lesbian subcultures that existed in the shadows of mainstream society until the 1960s. Except for a few men and women who joined fledgling gay rights groups after World War II, most gay men and lesbians before the 1960s chose to live “in the closet,” hiding their same-sex preferences from the world. Unlike blacks, women, and other minority groups, gay Americans did not have a long history of organizing to defend their rights. Heterosexual Americans uniformly disparaged gays as deviant and morally reprehensible. The American Psychiatric Association categorized homosexuality as a “mental disorder,” a position it did not jettison until 1973. Taking the psychological stereotyping a step further, Time magazine viewed homosexuality as “a pernicious sickness.” “If you were gay and you

 How similar were the Gay Rights and Civil Rights Movements?

 accepted those societal norms, then you were at war with yourself,” stated one college student as he recalled his own struggle to come to terms with his homosexuality. Exposure as a homosexual or lesbian could mean losing everything—job, spouse, friends, and social position. In the 1960s the Civil Rights Movement and the hippie counterculture assault on sexual taboos inspired some gay people to “come out of the closet” and challenge the ways that American society ostracized them. The true awakening of the gay rights movement came during the Stonewall riot on June 28, 1969, when patrons frequenting the Stonewall Inn, a Greenwich Village male gay bar, fought back during a New York City police raid. This open defiance electrified the gay community, and the next morning a huge crowd gathered outside the Stonewall Inn, chanting “Gay Power,” a modification of the “Black Power” slogan that black militants embraced (see Chapter 27). Energized gay men and lesbians founded the radical Gay Liberation Front in response to Stonewall, while hundreds of smaller gay rights groups sprouted up throughout the country. These organizations formed gay support groups on campuses, lobbied for antidiscrimination laws, marched in Gay Pride parades, and followed the “sit-in” model of the Civil Rights Movement by staging “kiss-ins” in restaurants. “We should have the same right to

Read the Document The Gay Liberation Front, Come Out (1970)


THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION

 express our affection publicly as heterosexuals have,” asserted lesbian activist Barbara Gittings. The increased visibility of the gay rights movement provoked a conservative response. In 1977, the deeply religious pop singer Anita Bryant, known to most Americans for her appearances in Florida orange juice television commercials, spearheaded a campaign to overturn a gay rights law in Dade County, Florida. Her victory galvanized forces on both sides of the gay rights debate. Fundamentalist churches opposed legislation granting gays legitimacy, lobbying strongly for laws that prevented homosexuals from teaching in public schools. Gay rights groups ridiculed the notion that gay men, because they preferred men as sexual partners, were pedophiles. A more insidious challenge loomed ahead, however. In 1981, the mainstream press began printing stories of a mysterious ailment sweeping through homosexual communities in New York and San Francisco. Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), a virus transmitted through the exchange of bodily fluids, ravaged the immune system of its victims. Acquiring AIDS was a virtual death sentence in the 1980s; the disease killed over 100,000 Americans by 1990. Because in the U.S. AIDS disproportionately struck homosexuals, the nation viewed the epidemic as more than a public health crisis. The raging political debate over the status of homosexuals in America colored the competing visions about AIDS. Religious conservatives viewed AIDS as God’s retribution against the “morally degenerate,” ignoring evidence that AIDS could also strike the heterosexual population. (Thousands of hemophiliacs and other straight Americans for example, died after contracting AIDS from tainted blood transfusions.) Having just recently repudiated the notion that gay people were mentally ill, homosexuals now confronted fears that they were all diseased. AIDS patients told heartbreaking stories of losing their jobs, being turned away from hospital emergency rooms, and facing eviction from apartments by landlords who feared contamination. The gay community lobbied vigorously for increased federal funds to find a medical cure for the disease. Still, having fought so long to escape police harassment and end legal penalties for consensual homosexual acts, many gay activists were leery about urging homosexual men to modify their sexual behaviors. Larry Kramer chastised gay activists who “took the position that sexual promiscuity was the one freedom we had and that we had to fight to maintain it—even if it killed us. And it did kill us, a lot of us.”

View the Image Sign at a Gay Pride March




 Kramer instead worked to popularize the “safe sex” message—no exchange of bodily fluids—that eventually gained currency in the gay community. The two images shown here illustrate the competing visions within the gay community over how to best draw media attention to the mounting AIDS death toll. In 1987, the AIDS Memorial Quilt, the brainchild of San Francisco activist Cleve Jones, began touring the country after an inaugural unfurling on the National Mall in Washington, D.C. The nation’s largest-ever public art endeavor, the quilt (28.10) made the individual stories of AIDS visible by allowing family and friends to create a square for a loved one, homosexual or heterosexual, lost to the disease. Squares were the size of a human grave, and they portrayed a mixture of embroidered personal remembrances and treasured possessions like jewelry. Radical activists adopted a less poignant and more militant tone. Embracing the slogan “SILENCE = DEATH,” the AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT-UP) staged its first “funeral” demonstration in 1987 to demand better medical treatment. Protesters lay down on a busy Wall Street intersection until police carried them away (28.11), employing the same civil disobedience tactics used by the Civil Rights Movement in the 1960s. ACT-UP also conducted phone “zaps” that barraged officials with calls on AIDS-related issues and barricaded the doors to the Food and Drug Administration to protest delays

28.11 Act-Up Protestors Stage a Funeral Demonstration in Wall Street
 Militant gay activists used civil disobedience to protest high prices and slow federal approval of life-saving anti-AIDS drugs. [Source: John Sotomayor/The New York Times/ Redux Pictures]

 What competing strategies did gay activists develop to publicize the AIDS crisis?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 in approving AIDS-fighting drugs. The New York Times called ACT-UP, “rude, rash, effective.” On September 14, 1989, seven ACT-UP members handcuffed themselves to the balcony of the New York Stock Exchange to protest the huge profits that Burroughs-Wellcome, a pharmaceutical company, had amassed selling AZT, the only drug then available to inhibit the progression of AIDS. Four days later, as a result of negative publicity, Burroughs-Wellcome dropped the price of AZT 20 percent. By 1996, a drug “cocktail” dramatically reduced AIDS-related deaths. A relentless safe-sex campaign and screening of donated blood also lowered the infection rate.

Environmentalism
 On April 22, 1970, communities throughout the nation celebrated their first Earth Day. New York City crowds walked through a block-long plastic bubble to breathe pure air; demonstrators in Boston protested noise pollution; and population control

 advocates in Bloomington, Indiana, handed out free birth control pills. Earth Day made environmentalism visible, but the variety of causes that activists championed revealed the competing visions within the environmental movement. For New Left and counterculture environmentalists, eating organically produced food grown without pesticides became a symbolic way of purging the poison of mainstream American values out of their lives. Politicians interested in securing environmentally friendly legislation framed pollution as a straightforward health issue. To win widespread support for laws mandating lead-free gas and paint, they focused, for example, on how lead poisoning damaged children’s brains. Traditional conservationist societies like the Sierra Club and Audubon Society concentrated on preserving pristine wild habitats from development. They supported expanding the National Park Service to safeguard wildness areas and provide recreational sanctuaries for over-taxed citizens living in the industrial world.

28.12 Environmental Disasters 1960-2010
 Intense media coverage of man-made environmental disasters led to increased regulation of offshore drilling, nuclear energy, and the disposal of industrial waste. Love Canal, 1978 When dumped chemical waste sickened residents. Congress created the “Superfund” requiring companies to clean up toxic waste sites.

WASHINGTON NORTH MONTANA

 VERMONT

SOUTH DAKOTA W YO M I N G

Santa Barbara Oil Spill, 1969
 Offshore drilling was banned near coastlines after a drilling accident dumped 3 million gallons of oil into southern California waters.

NEBRASK A

Cuyahoga River Fire, 1969
 Outrage over the heavily polluted river catching fire spurred clean water regulations and the creation of the EPA.

U T AH
 NEVADA

NEW YORK

 MICHIGAN

 OHIO

MASSACHUSETTS RHODE ISLAND CONNECTICUT PENNSYLVANIA NEW JERSEY DELAWARE

INDIANA WEST VIRGINIA

 ILLINOIS

MARYLAND WASHINGTON DC

COLORADO KANSAS

 MISSOURI

 KENTUCKY

NEW ARIZONA

 OKLAHOMA

VIRGINIA NORTH CAROLINA

 TENNESSEE

CAL I F OR NI A

PACIFIC OCEAN

NEW HAMPSHIRE

WIS CONS IN

OR EG O N IDAHO

 MAINE

 MINNESOTA

 DAKOTA

SOUTH CAROLINA

 ARKANSAS

MEXICO ALABAMA

Three Mile Island, 1979
 Support for nuclear energy evaporated after a nuclear reactor leaked radioactive gas.

GEORGIA T E X A S

Arctic
National
Wildlife
Refuge
AL ASK A

MISSISSIPPI LOUISIANA FLORIDA

 CANADA

Exxon Valdez Oil Spill, 1989
 Opposition intensified to drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge after a tanker ran aground, spilling 11 million gallons of oil.

 How did the nation respond to modern environmental disasters?

Gulf of Mexico Oil Spill, 2010
 In the nation’s largest oil spill a blown-out offshore well leaked oil for 3 months, leading to inconclusive investigations into industry practices.



ATLANTIC OCEAN

 miles

 kms



THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION

 Presidential support for environmental reforms had begun during the Kennedy and Johnson administrations (see Chapter 27), and in the 1970s Nixon and Carter also increased federal environmental controls. New laws required the removal of asbestos (a cancer-causing building material) from schools. Companies had to reduce the amount of airborne toxins that their factories produced and clean up sites they had contaminated. Car manufacturers installed required catalytic converters that helped reduce automobile pollution by 75 percent. Meanwhile the consumer protection movement spearheaded by Ralph Nader led to the creation of a federal Consumer Product Safety Commission that could ban the sale of hazardous products, from cribs to cars. While the general public applauded changes that made their lives healthier and safer, blue-collar workers feared that new, expensive pollution controls on industry 28.13 Three Mile Island Nuclear Reactor Towers America rejected nuclear power after the accident at the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant. That decision, coupled with limited federal support for solar and windgenerated power, increased the nation’s dependence on overseas oil.



 simply encouraged industrialists to move their factories overseas. “If you’re hungry and out of work, eat an environmentalist,” read one popular labor union bumper sticker. Two well-publicized environmental scandals, however—one at Love Canal, a waterway near Niagara Falls, New York, and the other at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania—convinced most Americans that their well-being depended on strict federal environmental regulation (28.12). After years of ignoring residents’ complaints about rising levels of miscarriages and birth defects, New York State finally admitted in 1978 that the foul-smelling industrial waste dumped into the Love Canal contained deadly toxins that had polluted the area’s ground and air. Congress responded by creating a Superfund to clean up dangerously polluted areas, spending $400 million over 20 years to restore the Love Canal region. In 1979, the partial meltdown of a nuclear reactor at the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant in Pennsylvania caused nearly 100,000 panicked residents to flee when radioactive steam poured into the air. No one was hurt, but the government-sponsored clean-up took 14 years. Despite new, more stringent federal regulations for nuclear reactors, Americans equated the image of nuclear reactor towers with danger (28.13) and refused to accept new nuclear power plants in their neighborhoods despite a strong industrywide safety record. Not all Americans applauded new environmental regulation. A “Sagebrush Rebellion” arose in the West among conservatives demanding that the federal government return federally controlled lands to the states. Western miners, ranchers, and loggers chafed under new federal restrictions that limited their access to water, their ability to hunt predators, and their grazing rights on federal lands. Western votes helped Ronald Reagan win the presidency in 1980, and as president he listened sympathetically to their complaints about federal environmental policies. An avid outdoorsman who enjoyed riding horses at his California ranch, Reagan did not believe that the environment was in jeopardy. Emphasizing economic growth he loosened recently enacted pollution controls on industry and reduced the size and budget of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), an agency founded under Nixon’s watch to enforce federal environmental regulations.

 Which environmental visions prevailed in the 1970s and 1980s?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

The Rise of the Right
 Successful attacks on environmental regulation were just one component of a resurgent conservative coalition that emerged as the dominant force in American politics in the 1980s. Through right-leaning policy institutes, magazines, lobbying groups, and direct mail campaigns, conservatives spearheaded a powerful political movement whose vision Ronald Reagan championed when he entered the White House. A charismatic leader, Reagan’s unrelenting optimism changed the national mood. The vision of a nation adrift evaporated as confidence in the economy and government rebounded.

The New Conservative
Coalition
 The emerging conservative coalition known as the New Right created alliances among groups with different concerns and views of what America and American government should be, reshaping the Republican Party in the process. Conservatives differed on whether a balanced budget or cutting taxes would guarantee prosperity. They disputed whether the government should actively promote conservative values or adopt a more libertarian approach that reduced governmental activity in all spheres. In the 1970s, the mix of ideas grew even more complicated, when neoconservatives, defectors from the liberal ranks, joined the conservative coalition. Seeking to explain his own political journey from the left to the right, Irving Kristol defined neoconservatives as “liberals who’ve been mugged by reality.” Neoconservatives focused mostly on foreign affairs, urging the nation to cast off its Vietnam hangover and stand proud in the world again. Their insistence that America had the right to act unilaterally in world affairs soon prevailed over lingering noninterventionism in conservative thinking. Former working-class and Southern Democrats also joined the emerging conservative coalition. Angry over court-ordered integration and busing, affirmative action programs that reserved jobs or school slots for minorities, and rising crime, these newcomers accepted the conservative orthodoxy of smaller government when it came to programs that primarily benefited minorities. Ethnic Northern whites in the Rust Belt resented their declining economic clout as industrial jobs evaporated, and they responded to Republican claims that “limousine liberal” elites were out of touch with workingclass America. Finally the popularity of grassroots

 Who made up the New Right?

 conservative movements among burgeoning Sun Belt populations from Florida to Arizona completed the political realignment in the 1980s. In the late 1970s, simmering resentment against increasing taxes exploded into open revolt. Big business and the well-to-do had long championed lower income and corporate taxes. Now the working class and middle class joined the tax revolt by demanding lower property taxes. Voters in California spearheaded the tax rebellion in 1978 when they approved Proposition 13. This ballot referendum, which reduced property taxes by 57 percent, caused drastic cuts in funding for public schools and universities. Voters in other states soon followed suit and increasingly found the Republican anti-tax message appealing. The Republican Party also benefited from the rise of the Religious Right, conservative Christian groups that defended traditional values and supported right-wing political causes—the most sustained grassroots movement of the late twentieth century. Reagan saw the benefits of reaching out to the Religious Right, hoping to create a strong conservative coalition that would “attract those interested in the so-called ‘social issues’ and those interested in economic issues.” Protestant Fundamentalists had mobilized their ranks in the 1920s to end the teaching of evolution in Southern public schools. After the Scopes Trial (see Chapter 21), the mainstream media paid little attention to religious conservatives, but Fundamentalist radio stations, publishing houses, and revival meetings thrived in the South. Fundamentalists ended their self-imposed exile from mainstream politics in the 1950s when religious conservatives supported the nation’s Cold War crusade against godless communism. The Supreme Court’s 1962 ruling against school prayer (see Chapter 27) incensed Fundamentalists, as did Carter’s attempts to revoke

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Evangelical Religion
 and Politics, Then and Now

THE RISE OF THE RIGHT



 the tax-exempt status of religious schools that failed conservative Catholics, who shared their concerns to integrate racially. about religious instruction in schools, abortion, and But politics alone does not explain why fundagay rights. Along with other members of the New mentalism became a nationwide phenomenon in the Right, the Religious Right voted overwhelmingly for 1970s, when nearly a quarter of the 50 million ProtReagan in the 1980 presidential election. estant Americans described themselves as born-again Christians. In an era when sprawling suburbs and rancorous cultural debates created a sense of social fragmentation, close-knit Fundamentalist churches offered members cohesive communities, where During the 1980 presidential campaign, Reagan people with similar values spoke the same language. focused voters’ attention on the nation’s economic The Fundamentalist vision of leading a morally upwoes by repeatedly asking “are you better off than right life in keeping with divine will attracted white, you were four years ago?” Reagan’s cheerfulness, humiddle-class suburbanites along with white, rural mor, and athleticism offered a residents, creating a strong stark contrast to Carter’s more grassroots religious movedrawn and weary demeanor. ment that cut across class and Memorizing his speeches and regional, if not racial, lines. delivering them in a soothEvangelical preachers, such as ing baritone voice, Reagan’s Pat Robertson, Jerry Falwell, charisma helped him amass Oral Roberts, Jimmy Swagan almost worshipful followgart, Robert Sculler, and Jim ing. His victory capped the and Tammy Bakker, built rise of the New Right, a twomedia empires preaching that decade ascendancy that Wathe Bible contained the literal tergate and Carter’s election truth to millions of television had interrupted. Reagan won viewers—further popularizing the election by an impressive the appeal of the Fundamenmargin: 489 to 49 electoral talist vision. votes. In his inaugural address In the late 1960s, Nixon he entreated the nation “to claimed to speak for the “sibelieve in our capacity to perlent majority” who objected form great deeds . . . after all, to liberal policies in the priwhy shouldn’t we believe that? vacy of their living rooms. We are Americans.” ComIn the 1980s, Republican mentators likened Reagan’s politicians showered atten28.14 America Can Be Saved (1979) victory over the unpopular tion on the “moral majority,” The cover of Jerry Falwell’s book illustrated the new Carter in 1980 to Franklin a well-organized network of connection between religious fundamentalism and D. Roosevelt’s triumph over political activism in the 1970s. politically active religious Herbert Hoover in 1932 conservatives. In 1979, Falwell founded the Moral Majority, which he described (see Chapter 22). Each man created new coalitions that reshaped the political landscape; each inspired as a “pro-life, pro-family, pro-morality, and prothe country at a moment when it felt besieged. American” organization. The cover of Falwell’s 1979 Reagan entered the presidency passionate about book, America Can Be Saved, showed him in front cutting income and corporate taxes, reducing social of a huge American flag, melding patriotism with religious fervor to create a vision of faith and conser- welfare spending, and fighting communism. He immediately sent Congress a budget that cut spendvative politics providing salvation to a nation adrift ing for social programs, increased allocations for (28.14). The Moral Majority and other conservative defense, and lowered taxes. Embracing the theory religious groups registered two million new voters of supply-side economics, pro-business officials for the presidential contest of 1980. In the past Funin the Reagan administration believed that letting damentalists had distrusted Catholicism, but now, entrepreneurs keep more of their profits would fuel political concerns outweighed doctrinal differences. economic growth, creating more and better-paying Fundamentalists formed a political alliance with

Setting a New Course:
Reagan at Home


View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Two Presidential
Views of America


 Why did the Religious Right thrive in the 1980s?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 “Please tell me you’re all Republicans.” A wounded President RONALD REAGAN to the emergency surgical team before they operated, 1981 jobs that generated enough tax revenue to offset the increases in military spending that Reagan proposed. Liberal Democrats, however, suspected that Reagan had a more sinister reason for slashing taxes. Reagan, they charged, planned to starve the budget to force Congress to undertake even more draconian cuts in New Deal and Great Society social welfare programs that conservatives longed to abolish. Liberal Democrats derided his budget proposal as trickledown economics, an approach discredited during the Hoover administration (see Chapter 22), when aid to the wealthy failed to create more jobs for the poor.

28.15 President Reagan Shot, 1981
 The last photo shows Secret Service agent Jerry Parr shoving Reagan into his presidential limousine as a bullet hits him, but no one realized that Reagan had been shot until he reached the hospital.

 Why was Reagan so popular?

 Democrats in Congress were determined to fight Reagan’s proposals. Then a nearly tragic turn of events gave Reagan an unexpected advantage. On March 30, 1981, a deranged 25-year-old named John Hinckley (seeking to impress teenage film actress Jodie Foster) shot Reagan, his press secretary James Brady, and two others outside a Washington hotel. After hearing a firecracker-like pop, news photographer Ron Edmonds took three quick photos (28.15): The first shows the president flinching as he hears shots; the second shows him turning to locate the source of the shooting; in the third, Secret Service agent Jerry Parr pushes Reagan into the presidential limousine as a bullet ricocheted off the car door and hit Reagan under his left armpit. Parr’s quick-thinking is credited with saving Reagan’s life—if Parr had not pushed the president down then the bullet would have likely hit him in the head. In the hospital, with a bullet lodged near his heart, Reagan maintained his trademark cheerfulness, telling his distraught wife, “Honey, I forgot to duck.” Americans rallied to his side, and when Reagan returned to work a month later, he presented his 70 percent approval ratings as evidence that the nation supported his budget proposal. It passed easily with bipartisan support from conservative Democrats. The top tax rate dropped from 70 percent to 50 percent, lowered again to 28 percent in 1986. Reagan’s image as a resolute leader got another boost when he fired 11,000 striking air traffic controllers in August 1981, enforcing a ban on strikes by federal employees working in critical industries. Liberal critics lamented that the president’s act sent a chilling message to organized labor, whose membership rolls and willingness to strike declined throughout the decade. In 1984, Reagan easily won his reelection bid against Democrat Walter Mondale. Mondale energized the Democratic Party when he selected New York Congresswoman Geraldine Ferraro as his running mate, the nation’s first female vice presidential candidate, but he made a key error by stating that he would raise taxes to close the deficit. Mondale expected Americans to reward him for his candor about the worrisome federal debt, but the nation was in no mood to fret. Reagan scored well with television campaign ads that centered on the theme “Morning Again in America.” They featured scenes of small-town America where contented citizens celebrated marriages, schoolchildren pledged allegiance to the flag, and friends laughed together. “America is prouder, stronger, better. Why would we want to return to where we were less than four short years ago?” the voiceover asked. Many Americans agreed, and Reagan won every vote in the Electoral College except those

Watch the Video Ronald Reagan on the Wisdom of Tax Cuts


THE RISE OF THE RIGHT

 from Mondale’s home state of Minnesota and the District of Columbia, with a landslide total of 525 to 13. Reagan remained relentlessly pro-business throughout his presidency. Driven to free private industry from government regulations that, in his view, restricted its growth, Reagan convinced Congress to deregulate the savings and loan industry. Once freed from strict government oversight, these banks lost huge amounts of depositors’ money in speculative investments. In 1989, President George H. W. Bush, Reagan’s successor, convinced Congress to bail them out at great cost to taxpayers rather than accept wide-scale bank failures that would certainly have sent the economy into a deep recession. As the budget battles and savings and loan debacle revealed, Reagan’s fiscal policies remained controversial. During his time in office, the federal debt nearly tripled (from $994 billion in 1981 to $2.6 trillion in 1988) as the hoped-for tax revenue failed to materialize and the military build-up continued unabated. After a serious recession in 1981–1983, the economy began to improve as inflation lessened and business activity picked up. The return of prosperity muted the impact of liberal criticism and helped Republicans argue that people at all class levels were doing better financially under Reagan’s stewardship. Democrats and Republicans offered competing visions on the economy throughout the 1980s. Democrats lamented the increased concentration of income in the hands of the top fifth of the population. “What I want to see above all is that this remains a country where someone can always get rich,” Reagan stated in 1983. Chief executive officers (CEOs) of leading corporations had no reason for complaint. Their average salaries, adjusted for inflation, rose from $3 million to $12 million a year during Reagan’s eight years in office, while outlays for subsidized housing dropped from $30 billion to $7 billion. In 1980, the average CEO made 40 times more than the average factory worker. By 1989, CEOs earned 93 times more. To Democrats Reagan’s economic policies helped the rich get richer while the poor got poorer. Republicans countered that consumption was a better measurement of Americans’ overall financial health than income distribution. In the 1980s, Americans went on a buying spree that rivaled the postwar boom of the 1950s, purchasing nearly 88 million cars, 63 million VCRs, and 62 million microwave ovens. Items previously available only to the wealthy, such as refrigerators and telephones, were found in nearly every American household by 1990. While the poorest Americans were not living as well as the richest, their

Read the Document Ronald Reagan, Speech at the
Brandenberg Gate (1987)




 material circumstances were much improved when compared with those of previous generations. Reagan spoke eloquently about cutting taxes and slashing welfare. He was decidedly less passionate about education, housing, health care, and the environment, often letting subordinates make key decisions in these areas. His hands-off management style differed vastly from Carter’s micromanagement. Reagan rarely worked more than eight hours a day, enjoyed many vacations to his California ranch, and usually took an afternoon nap. “It’s true that hard work never killed anyone, but I figure why take the chance?” he joked. Reagan’s detractors viewed his detachment as senility and charged that he was just a figurehead. Supporters sometimes agreed that Reagan put his trust in the wrong hands. Over 100 members of his administration were indicted or forced to resign amid corruption charges, stemming in part from Reagan’s lax oversight of his subordinates, who often acted without consulting him.

Foreign Policy Triumphs
 and Scandals Reagan did more than reject the liberal economic vision; he also overturned the foreign policy initiatives set in place by his Republican predecessors. He changed the rules of the Cold War by abandoning MAD, the doctrine embraced by American and Soviet policymakers since the 1950s, as the basis for U.S. defense against the Soviet Union. Remaining defenseless against enemy nuclear weapons was an essential component of MAD. The ability to shoot down incoming missiles, the doctrine asserted, might encourage the enemy, who no longer feared its own destruction, to attack. Reagan offered a competing view. “Let me share with you a vision of the future which offers hope,” he declared in 1983, announcing the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI). Challenging the view that vulnerability made America more secure, Reagan proposed building a missile shield that used lasers from space satellites to destroy incoming missiles. Publicly, he argued that his plan was compatible with the 1972 ABM treaty (which critics disputed), since he intended to share the technology with the Soviets. Privately, he expected the Soviet Union to go bankrupt trying to match the United States in building its own missile defenses. Despite the billions spent on research, the SDI project failed. SDI nonetheless hurt the Soviet Union. A rapidly changing slate of elderly Soviet leaders responded to Reagan’s challenge much as he expected. The new leaders increased military

 How did Democrats and Republicans differ on the state of the economy in the 1980s?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

 spending, ignoring the devastating consequences for Soviet citizens. In the 1980s, the Soviet Union spent between 15 and 17 percent of its GNP on defense, compared to 6.5 percent by the United States. Pervasive shortages meant that Soviet citizens spent hours in long lines outside poorly stocked stores, stoking discontent with communist rule. Closer to home, Reagan looked for ways to destabilize communist and leftist regimes in the Caribbean and Central America, activities portrayed on the map, American Intervention in Latin America, 1980–2000 (28.16). In Nicaragua he hoped to unseat the leftist Sandinistas. Sandinista aid to Marxist rebels battling the pro-American government in El Salvador confirmed Reagan’s fears that communism was on the march in Central America, and he approved covert CIA assistance to the Contras, counterrevolutionary forces in Nicaragua that opposed the Sandinistas. Congress had a different view of Central America. To continue the move away from direct interference in other nations’ domestic affairs (a process begun by Ford and Carter), Congress prohibited the CIA and Department of Defense from funding any effort to overthrow the Sandinistas. National Security Council (NSC) Director Robert McFarlane and his assistant Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North convinced Reagan that these restrictions did not prevent the NSC from soliciting millions from Saudi Arabia and private donors

 to aid the Contras. When Congress heard about these donations in 1984, it prohibited the government from using non-American funds to unseat the Sandinistas. To thwart the regional expansion of communism, in October 1983 Reagan ordered U.S. troops to invade the tiny Caribbean island of Grenada. The president ostensibly dispatched U.S. forces to rescue American medical students trapped in Grenada, when a leftist government seized control. The troops’ real mission was to remove a government seeking Cuban and Soviet military aid. By ordering troops into battle without consulting Congress, Reagan also used his powers as commander-in-chief (some argued unconstitutionally) to restore the strength of the presidency, badly diminished since Watergate. Reagan supporters celebrated America’s swift victory in Grenada, but critics viewed the event differently. They accused Reagan of using the Grenada invasion to distract Americans from more dismal news coming out the Middle East. Two days before the Grenada invasion, an Islamist suicide bomber had plowed a vehicle loaded with explosives into an unsecured barracks housing U.S. peacekeeping troops in Beirut, Lebanon, killing 241 servicemen. Iranian-backed Islamist terrorist groups (angry over U.S. support for Israel and Iraq, Iran’s enemy) then increased their assaults against the United States by taking Americans hostage in Lebanon.

UNITED STATES

ATLANTIC OCEAN
New Orleans 
Houston


BAHAMAS
Miami 
Gu l f o f
M ex i c o


US VIRGIN ISLANDS

Havana


CUBA CUBA
Carter tries to normalize relations 1977–1978 
BELIZE HONDURAS GUATEMALA
Tegucigalpa 
28.16 American
Intervention in Latin
America, 1980–2000
The United States
 continued to maintain Latin America as a sphere of influence in the 1980s.

Domingo


Guatemala


EL SALVADOR US
aid to government fighting communist rebels 1979–1992 
 US invasion 1983

Caribbean Sea
NICARAGUA US
aid to Contras fighting Sandinistas 1981–1986 Iran-Contra scheme 1985–1986 
Caracas


 VENEZUELA

Panama Canal


COSTA RICA

Panama City


 COLOMBIA

PA C I F I C OCEAN

PANAMA US
agrees to future return of canal 1978 US invasion 1989 Return of canal 2000 
 How did Reagan’s foreign policy initiatives break with policies set by Nixon and Carter?

PUERTO RICO

 GRENADA

 JAMAICA (Br.)

Mexico City


 MEXICO

Guantanamo Bay


DOMINICAN REPUBLIC HAITI
Santo 
Bogotá


THE RISE OF THE RIGHT

 Reagan’s desires to end the Middle Eastern hostage crisis and halt the spread of communism in Central America led to the biggest political scandal of his administration. In the Iran-Contra scandal, Reagan administration officials sold arms to Iran to secure the hostages’ release and then illegally used the proceeds to support the anti-Communist Contras in Nicaragua. The problems began in 1985 when Reagan asked his new NSC director John Poindexter and Oliver North to devise a covert plan to sell arms to Iran, which needed the weapons for its war with Iraq. As part of the secret agreement, the United States demanded that Iran secure the release of hostages held in Lebanon. After the deal went through, a few hostages were freed, but the arms-for-hostages deal backfired. Reagan’s willingness to pay bribes to free American hostages encouraged militant Islamist groups to seize more over the next two years. Even more troubling, Poindexter and North secretly decided to divert profits from the arms sales to the Contras in Nicaragua—directly violating the congressional ban on aid to the anti-Communist rebels. When an American cargo plane carrying arms to the Contras crashed in 1986, their illegal action was exposed. Convicted of breaking the law, the pair won appeals based on legal technicalities and went free. Poindexter and North claimed that Reagan knew nothing about their illegal diversion of funds to the Contras. “I made a very deliberate decision not to ask the president so I could insulate him,” Poindexter testified before Congress. The public accepted this explanation, viewing Reagan as a hands-off administrator who could not always control his subordinates. With his approval rating dipping to below 50 percent, Reagan hoped to restore confidence in his leadership by improving relations with the Soviet Union. The night before he became the Soviet leader in 1985, 54-year-old Mikhail Gorbachev admitted to his wife, “We can’t go on living like this.” Gorbachev was referring to both the ironclad Soviet control over the domestic economy and the government’s long obsession with a possible American nuclear attack. Gorbachev embraced reform to save the Soviet Union, not destroy it. Eager to reduce Soviet outlays for defense so he could pump funds into the long-ignored economy, Gorbachev also moved to reduce tensions with the United States. When Reagan and Gorbachev met in Washington, D.C., in December 1987, the pair took a historic step by signing the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty that approved the destruction of all U.S. and Soviet intermediate-range missiles in Europe. Past



 arms treaties had curtailed the growth of nuclear stockpiles. For the first time a U.S.-Soviet pact actually reduced nuclear arms. The thaw in relations continued when Gorbachev withdrew Soviet forces from Afghanistan in 1988 and reduced support for communist regimes throughout the world. Like Carter, Reagan enjoyed his greatest successes and failures in the foreign policy arena. He rewrote the rules of the Cold War and achieved a new accommodation in U.S.-Soviet relations. The Iran-Contra scandal, however, brought back fears in some circles that the imperial presidency of the Nixon years had returned.

The Reagan Revolution
 Reagan was a popular president, but supporters’ claims of a “Reagan Revolution” appear exaggerated. Reagan lowered taxes for the wealthy and permanently curtailed the growth of the welfare state. He appointed right-leaning judges to the federal judiciary, including Sandra Day O’Connor as the first female Supreme Court justice. Cultural conservatives remained loyal to Reagan even though he offered little more than lip-service to their goals of outlawing abortion, returning prayer to public schools, or ending affirmative action. As president Reagan always won applause when he proclaimed, “government is not the solution to our problem; government is the problem.” Yet when he left office, the New Deal and Great Society were as vibrant and relevant as the day he entered the White House. Americans still expected the federal government to pay pensions, guarantee unemployment benefits, curb pollution, and help educate poor children. Rather than leaving an enduring institutional legacy, Reagan presided over a profound shift in political vision. His pro-business policies reinvigorated faith that an unfettered free market could make Americans prosperous, and his open alliance with the Religious Right brought discussion of issues that concerned cultural conservatives into the center of American political discourse. In foreign policy neoconservatives’ interventionist ideas became influential in Republican circles. Finally, “Reagan succeeded in reviving national confidence at a time when there was a great need for inspiration. This was his great contribution as president,” reporter Lou Cannon concluded. In a testament to Reagan’s popularity, George H. W. Bush became the first vice president since Martin Van Buren (who followed the well-liked Andrew Jackson in 1837) to win election immediately after the president under whom he served completed his term.

 How does Reagan’s legacy compare to that left by Franklin D. Roosevelt?



 CHAPTER 28

RIGHTING A NATION ADRIFT: AMERICA IN THE 1970s AND 1980s S LEBANON

Mediterranean Sea




ISRAEL JORDA



LIBYA EGYPT







1977–1978


 Congress passes ERA

 OPEC oil embargo against the United States

 Nixon resigns

 First home computer marketed

 Gerald Ford, the first unelected vice president, becomes president

 Computer revolution begins

 Ford pardons Nixon

 Secures lasting peace between Egypt and Israel

 Provokes heated debate over gender roles in American society

 Watergate burglary

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Sets in motion constitutional crisis over extent of presidential power

 Dramatizes American dependence on overseas oil exports

 Roe v. Wade legalizes abortion Religious conservative coalition forms in opposition

 Shakes public confidence in Ford’s leadership

Camp David Accords


Review Questions
 1. What were the differences and similarities between the Watergate and Iran-Contra scandals? 2. How did concerns over human rights, communism, and the domestic economy influence foreign relations during the 1970s and 1980s?

 3. How did Ronald Reagan’s political vision differ from those embraced by his predecessors in the White House? 4. What competing visions animated debates over feminism, gay rights, and environmentalism? 5. Why did the New Right become so influential?

Key Terms
SALT I
(1972) The first treaty between the Soviet Union and the United States that limited the deployment of intercontinental and submarine-launched ballistic missiles and the creation of missile-defense systems. Mutually assured destruction (MAD) The claim that the guarantee of a devastating nuclear counter-attack would deter the United States and Soviet Union from ever employing their nuclear arsenals. Camp David Accords (1978) Israel agreed to give the Sinai Peninsula back to Egypt; in return Egypt became the first Arab state to recognize Israel’s right to exist. Iranian hostage crisis Defining event in Carter’s presidency as Iranian revolutionaries held 52 Americans captive for 444 days. Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) A proposed constitutional amendment, which stated that “equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex.” 
 Roe v. Wade (1973) Supreme Court decision that legalized abortion. Stonewall riot A 1969 battle between patrons of a Greenwich Village male gay bar and police that became the catalyst for the gay rights movement. Religious Right A collection of right-wing Christian groups that defended traditional values and supported conservative political causes. Iran-Contra scandal A law-breaking scheme that sold arms to Iran to secure the hostage’s release and used the proceeds to support anti-Communists in Nicaragua. Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (1987) Approved the destruction of all U.S. and Soviet intermediate-range missiles in Europe.

CHAPTER REVIEW



7–1978


 JAMAICA (Br.) BELIZE HONDURAS LA Tegucigalpa

 a

Caribbean
NICARAGUA US
aid to Contras fighting Sandinistas 1981–1986 Iran-Contra scheme 1985–1986 
Panama Canal


COSTA RICA

P


Cit




1980–1981


1983–1985


1987–1988


 Meltdown of nuclear reactor at Three Mile Island

 AIDS epidemic begins

 Reagan announces SDI

 Stigmatizes gay people as diseased

 Challenges MAD doctrine

 ACT-UP stages first funeral demonstration

 Americans reject nuclear energy as an alternative to oil

 President Reagan shot

 Iran-Contra scandal

 Upsurge in popularity helps controversial budget plan pass

 Most serious presidential scandal since Watergate

 Iranian hostage crisis begins Carter’s approval ratings plummet

 Puts pressure on government to fund anti-AIDS research

Intercontinental-Range Nuclear
 Forces Treaty signed Spells the final phases of the Cold War

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Righting a Nation Adrift.

Questions for Analysis
 1. What role did the car industry play in the 20th century economy? Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Rise and Fall of the Automobile Economy, p. 846

 2. How does this campaign ad speak to the concerns of the silent majority?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • House Judiciary Committee’s Conclusions on Impeachment (1974), p. 849 • Roe v. Wade (1973), p. 861 • The Gay Liberation Front, Come Out (1970), p. 862

View the Closer Look
• Images as History: Watergate Through Political Cartoons, p. 850


Watch the Video Richard Nixon Presidential Campaign


• Competing Visions: Defining the Ideal Woman, p. 860


Ad (1968), p. 847


View the Image


 3. How did the integration of Boston’s public schools compare to the experiences of the Little Rock Nine in 1957? Read the Document Boston Busing (1975), p. 848

 4. What different views did Carter and Reagan offer on the state of American society?

• The Signing of the Camp David Accords (1978), p. 856
• Sign at a Gay Pride March, p. 863


Watch the Video
• Gerald Ford Presidential Campaign Ad (1976), p. 852
• Jimmy Carter, “Crisis of Confidence” (1979), p. 854


View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Two Presidential


• Video Lecture: Evangelical Religion and Politics,
Then and Now, p. 866


Views of America, p. 867


• Ronald Reagan on the Wisdom of Tax Cuts, p. 868(


 5. How does this speech encapsulate Reagan’s Cold War policy? Read the Document Ronald Reagan, Speech at the Brandenberg Gate (1987), p. 869

 Why did the Cold War end?

Contested Visions of
Government p. 884


 Why was presidential politics so controversial?

Transforming Daily
Life p. 888
American Family Structure, 1972
Not Married Children
10%
Not Married
No Children
16%


Married No Children
29%


 Married with Children 45%

 How did technological and demographic changes transform American society?

New Threats in
 the Post-Cold War World p. 894

How did the United States
 respond to 9/11?

 CHAPTER

 “A Moment Rich with Promise” p. 876



 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 29

Building a
New World Order
The United States, 1989–2011
 On the morning of September 11, 2001, 19 young Arab men boarded four planes on the East Coast. All belonged to the Islamic extremist organization known as al-Qaeda. Within half an hour after take-off, they stormed the cockpits of their planes with box cutters and mace, killed the American pilots, and installed their own pilots (who had each received flight instruction in private American aviation schools) to fly the planes into predetermined targets. At 8:46 a.m. the first plane plowed into the North Tower of the World Trade Center in New York City, an internationally recognized landmark that symbolized American dominance over the world economy. Seventeen minutes later a second plane hit the South Tower. The nation now understood that what had first looked like a tragic accident was actually a coordinated attack against the United States. A third plane crashed into the Pentagon, headquarters of the U.S. Department of Defense, in Virginia, the building most closely associated with U.S. military might in the eyes of the world. Meanwhile passengers in the fourth hijacked plane reached the cockpit and prevented the terrorists from flying the plane into the Capitol, a worldwide symbol of democratic government. This plane instead crashed into a Pennsylvania field. The blazing World Trade Center towers quickly crumbled, with the office workers and firefighters still inside the buildings as onlookers ran for cover. The skeletal ruins and mountains of debris became the burial site for thousands. One onlooker echoed the nation’s sense of disbelief: “This is America. How can it happen in America? How?” The 9/11 attacks, as they came to be known, reshaped the ongoing debate about America’s role in the world and the best way to protect American citizens. Only 20 years earlier Americans had savored their victory in the Cold War as communist governments in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union collapsed. When the Cold War ended, Americans believed that their nation would take the lead in creating a new world order even as they disputed how best to spread democracy, protect the U.S. economy, and flex the nation’s military muscle. Enjoying prosperity for most of the 1990s, the country paid little attention to the new threat that loomed before the world’s sole remaining superpower—terrorist strikes by antiAmerican Islamist extremists, such as al-Qaeda. Political debate instead centered on whether the liberal or conservative vision of government would prevail at home. After 9/11 President George W. Bush moved with resolve to restore the image of America as a powerful and triumphant nation. He led the country into two wars: the first in Afghanistan; the second, far more controversial, in Iraq. In 2008, Americans provided a different sort of history-making moment by electing the first African American president of the United States. By then, the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression posed an additional challenge for the nation.

 “None of us will ever forget this day, yet we go forward to defend freedom and all that is good and just in our world.” President GEORGE W. BUSH, speaking to the nation on the evening of September 11, 2001





 CHAPTER 29

BUILDING A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE UNITED STATES, 1989–2011

 “A Moment Rich with Promise” On his inauguration day in 1989, George H. W. Bush announced that he had become president “at a moment rich with promise.” The fall of communism throughout Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union within the next two years seemed to confirm this judgment. However, the end of the Cold War did not mean peace; the United States immediately fought two short wars in Panama and the Persian Gulf. Conflict also arose at home, as a huge federal deficit and simmering racial tensions that occasionally exploded into violence left some feeling that America’s promise lay unfulfilled.

The Election of 1988
 The son of a former Connecticut senator, George H. W. Bush served as a congressman, ambassador, Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) director, and vice president before becoming the Republican candidate for president in 1988. In this sense the decorated World War II pilot and former oilman was the ultimate insider, a man familiar with the corridors of power in Washington and the exclusive private clubs where financial deals were negotiated. A moderate Republican with a patrician style, Bush never projected the same charisma or the passion for conservative causes that had drawn voters to Ronald Reagan, the man he hoped to follow as president. Bush’s campaign had to overcome these obstacles when he faced Massachusetts Democratic Governor Michael Dukakis in the presidential contest.

 When Dukakis proposed increased spending on health care, education, and housing, the Bush team ridiculed the Democrat as a big-spending liberal and began calling him the governor of “Taxachusetts.” In his stump speeches Bush also tapped into white peoples’ fears of so-called black criminality by frequently mentioning Willie Horton, an African American prisoner who had taken advantage of a weekend furlough program in Massachusetts and gone on a crime rampage that included raping a white woman. Adding to his woes Dukakis made critical missteps, including one ill-advised photo-op during which he donned an oversized helmet and military jumpsuit to ride a tank (29.1). Most Americans felt that the photo made Dukakis look ridiculous, not presidential. By Election Day Bush had defined Dukakis as someone who would raise taxes and let criminals out of jail, and was

A
Failed Photo-Op  Seeking to appear like a commander in chief, 1988 Democratic presidential candidate Michael Dukakis was instead ridiculed for riding around in a tank in a suit and tie.

 How did George H. W. Bush prevail in the 1988 presidential election?

Read the Document George H. W. Bush Inaugural Address (1989)


MOMENT RICH WITH PROMISE”

 unprepared to be commander in chief. He defeated Dukakis 426 to 111 in the Electoral College, capturing 53 percent of the popular vote.

 Popular Revolts against Communism When Bush became the 41st president of the United States in 1989, the former director of the CIA remained suspicious about Soviet Premier Mikhail Gorbachev’s true motives for instituting internal reforms and reaching out to the United States (see Chapter 28). Officials worried that Gorbachev “was attempting to kill us with kindness,” according to National Security Advisor Brent Scowcroft. Gorbachev was equally distrustful of Bush and his inner circle: “These people were brought up in the years of the Cold War and still do not have any foreign policy alternative.” Caught off guard by the quick demise of communism in Eastern Europe, within a year Bush had changed his mind about Gorbachev “by 180 degrees.” In the first sign of the upheaval to come, Communist Hungary decided to take down the barbed wire fence between it and democratic Austria in May 1989. The East German government watched in dismay as thousands of its citizens drove to the Hungarian-Austrian border and then walked across to defect to the West. Turning to Moscow for help, East Germany received a surprising reply: “We can’t do anything about it.” A similarly uncharacteristic Soviet reaction greeted news that candidates from the democratic Polish workers’ union Solidarity had won control of Poland’s new bicameral Parliament, forming the first democratic government in postwar Eastern Europe. “This is entirely a matter to be decided by Poland,” a Soviet official announced. Soviet, Hungarian, and Polish leaders lifted restrictions on speech, voting, and economic activity to save their Communist regimes, unleashing a tide of popular revolt against Communist rule that soon overwhelmed them. Perhaps nowhere did the fall of communism come faster, and more unexpectedly, than in East Germany. On November 9, 1989, a botched news conference by a harried East German official triggered the destruction of the Berlin Wall. Instead of announcing a relaxation in rules governing travel between East and West Berlin, a confused East German official mistakenly told the press that starting immediately, East Germans could freely leave “through any of the border



 crossings.” Electrified by the news that the wall was open, thousands of people gathered at armed crossing points, places where over 175 East Germans had been shot trying to cross over the last 28 years (see Chapter 24). When confused guards opened the gates, streams of East Germans poured across and joined with West Germans to rejoice atop the Berlin Wall. Images as History: The Fall of the Berlin Wall (page 878) examines the media images that shaped Americans’ reactions to this event. Further evidence of television’s power to mold history came in the following days, as thousands of East Berliners headed for downtown department stores in West Berlin. Concrete walls had not prevented East Berliners from viewing American sitcoms (dubbed in German) showing the abundance of goods available in the West. Television-stoked desires for “worksaving gadgets, [well-stocked pantries], attractive surroundings and a touch of luxury,” one reporter contended, helped bring the Berlin Wall down. Gorbachev’s refusal to intervene with armed force was also critical. Within a year East and West Germany had reunified into one democratic nation, an American goal since the Cold War began in the late 1940s. By the end of 1989, the Soviet Union no longer dominated Eastern Europe, losing territory that it had controlled since the end of World War II. One by one the individual states that formed the Soviet Union also demanded their independence, secession movements that Gorbachev tried to squash with economic embargos and, occasionally, troops. Desperate to stop the hemorrhaging, hard-line Communist insiders orchestrated a coup attempt in August 1990. They put President Gorbachev under house arrest in his vacation home and ringed the Soviet Parliament in Moscow with troops and tanks. Hesitating, the coup leaders lost the military’s support, and the overthrow attempt failed. With the populace now demanding economic reforms and Communist Party officials blaming Gorbachev for losing control, he resigned as head of the Communist Party on August 24, 1990. Five days later the Soviet Communist Party itself was dissolved. By December 25, 1991, he was also no longer president as the Soviet Union ceased to exist, and all its member states, including Russia, became independent nations. After decades of trying to contain, weaken, and defeat the Soviet Union, the United States declared victory in the Cold War. “The Soviet Union did not simply lose the Cold War; the Western democracies won,” Bush announced.

 What role did ordinary citizens play in ending communism in East Germany and the Soviet Union?



 CHAPTER 29

BUILDING A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE UNITED STATES, 1989–2011

Images as History
THE FALL OF THE BERLIN WALL
Photographs of Berlin had already punctuated key moments in the Cold War for Americans, including images of the 1948–1949 Berlin airlift and the wall’s construction in 1961 to prevent East Berliners from defecting to West Berlin (see Chapter 24). Presidents John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan had made welldocumented pilgrimages to the site, where they publicly denounced the Berlin Wall as a symbol of Communist oppression. Now, from the comfort of their living rooms, TV-viewing Americans watched as East and West Berliners climbed atop the wall throughout the night on November 9, 1989 to demand the reunification of their divided city. The fall of communism in Europe reinforced American faith in the superiority of capitalism over communism, but some commentators urged the United States to undertake economic reforms at home to ensure that capitalism operated more fairly. What competing views do this photograph and political cartoon offer Americans about the importance of the Berlin Wall falling? What counter-arguments could critics offer? 
 What symbolic importance did the fall of the Berlin Wall have?

 After the evening celebrations East German guards reclaimed the top of the wall and impassively watched German civilians attack the graffitiladen western side of the wall with chisels and hammers.

•
•


 President Bush told the press that he had no desire “to dance on the wall,” worried that any gloating might goad Gorbachev into sealing up the wall or prompt Soviet hardliners to overthrow Gorbachev.

•
 Both reporters and ordinary people brought cameras to document this historic moment.

•


 The image of one man destroying the wall piece-by-piece with his hammer resonated with Americans—it symbolized the ability of common people to make history and their desire to collect pieces of the wall as souvenirs.

 Attacking the Berlin Wall with a Hammer Would the fall of Communism usher in a better world? Many Americans believed so, but cartoonist Pat Oliphant offered a competing view by implying that free market capitalism did not always benefit everyone equally. The befuddlement of the hungry, homeless man dressed in rags suggests that there is no “we” in the United States—rich and poor view events like the fall of the Berlin Wall differently.

•


•
•
•
Pat Oliphant Questions the Triumph of
 Capitalism over Communism

 Many Americans celebrated the fall of the Berlin Wall as a triumph of the nation’s democratic, capitalist vision over a competing autocratic, anti-capitalist Communist one.

 In the 1980s, the number of homeless people living and begging on the streets grew to a level not seen in urban America since the Progressive era.

View the Closer Look Images as History: The Fall
 of the Berlin Wall

MOMENT RICH WITH PROMISE”

 The U.S. battle against communism was not over, however. On the other side of the world, the Chinese Communist regime made different choices when faced with a popular revolt. In April 1989, university students occupied Tiananmen Square in central Beijing to protest the removal of a high-ranking Communist official who had called for economic and political reforms. Behind closed doors Chinese Communist officials debated whether to end the demonstrations with troops or adopt a Gorbachev-like approach and accommodate some of the students’ demands. On the morning of June 4, tanks appeared in Tiananmen Square, signaling that discussion within the inner circle had ended. Troops shot hundreds as they cleared the area of protesters. Two days later a lone man walking down the deserted Avenue of Eternal Peace made a solitary gesture of defiance by standing steadfast in the middle of the street as 17 tanks approached. When the lead tank swerved right to avoid hitting him, the man stepped right. When it swerved left, he stepped left. Finally the tanks stopped and the man jumped onto the first one, shouting to its driver, “Why are you here? My city is in chaos because of you.” Associated Press photographer Jeff Widener captured this encounter in an award-winning photo seen on newspaper

 front-pages around the globe (29.2). Americans hailed “Tank Man,” as he became known, for his inspirational defense of peace and human rights. No one in China, however, except for the bystanders who whisked him away and the Chinese authorities who probably executed him, ever knew of this encounter. As the economic relationship between the United States and China changed, China’s violent suppression of democracy movements provoked competing visions over how to proceed. In 1900, America wanted to sell China goods; by 1990, American companies increasingly outsourced manufacturing jobs to China, using cheap Chinese labor to satiate American consumers’ demands for affordable goods. Some critics argued that by helping the Chinese government improve the standard of living for ordinary citizens, Americans were also bolstering the autocratic Communist regime. Others countered that recent events in Eastern Europe demonstrated that exposing Chinese citizens to Western values and goods would sow the seeds for an eventual democratic and capitalist revolution. A third faction worried that a prosperous and industrially strong China might replace the United States as the world’s strongest power.



29.2 Standing Up
 for Democracy in China, 1989 Two days after the Chinese military brutally suppressed a popular rebellion in Tiananmen Square, a lone man stopped army tanks in their tracks; the world cheered his courageous stand.

 Why did popular uprisings against communism in Europe and China have different outcomes?



 CHAPTER 29

BUILDING A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE UNITED STATES, 1989–2011

Domestic Policy in the
Bush Administration


29.3 Los Angeles
Police Beat
Motorist Rodney
King, 1991
 Many whites saw the police trying to control an unruly black man who had resisted arrest for speeding, but many blacks saw racist police brutality.

 The growing trade deficit with China (the United States bought more than it sold) was only one economic issue troubling Americans during the Bush years. “Read my lips: No new taxes,” Bush had proclaimed during the 1988 campaign. Once in office, however, he reneged on his pledge by raising income taxes. Faced with the largest deficit in American history, the result of increased defense spending during the Reagan years without any corresponding tax increases and Bush’s own decision to bail out the failing savings and loan industry in 1989 (see Chapter 28), he saw no other option. His decision angered many conservative Republicans, and some never forgave him. “Read My Lips: I Lied,” ran one New York Post headline. The combination of a huge deficit and an unfriendly Democratic majority in Congress discouraged Bush from proposing dramatic new domestic initiatives. A revolution of sorts nonetheless occurred when Bush signed the Americans with Disabilities Act, a 1990 civil rights law that prohibited discrimination against the disabled in employment, public accommodations, and telecommunications. The disabled gained unprecedented freedom of movement as legally required elevators, ramps, and sloped curbs became commonplace.

 Which gender and racial issues dominated the headlines in the early 1990s?

 During the campaign Bush had courted the conservative wing of the Republican Party by promising to appoint like-minded judges. He fulfilled this pledge by nominating a conservative African American judge, Clarence Thomas, to the Supreme Court when Thurgood Marshall, the Court’s first African American justice, retired. Controversy erupted, when Anita Hill, a former colleague, accused Thomas of sexual harassment, and Thomas responded by calling the televised confirmation hearings a “high-tech lynching.” The Senate ultimately confirmed Thomas by a narrow majority in 1991. With workplace sexual harassment front-page news, an unprecedented number of women won congressional seats in the 1992 elections, including the first female African American senator, Carol Mosley Braun, a Democrat from Illinois. While the Thomas hearings exposed gender discord, the 1991 Los Angeles riots brought simmering racial and ethnic tensions to the surface. In March a 78-mile car chase along Los Angeles freeways ended with white police brutally beating Rodney King, an African American, when he resisted arrest for speeding. A nearby resident captured the incident on film, but Americans differed on what the video revealed (29.3). Most blacks and some sympathetic whites saw a poorly trained and racist police force that harassed blacks, echoing complaints that had set off the Watts riots in 1965 (see Chapter 27).

Read the Document William Julius Wilson,
“The Urban Underclass”


MOMENT RICH WITH PROMISE”

C
 USSR

 as

 pi

 TURKMENISTAN

 an

Kabul


S


 GEORGIA

Black Sea


A FGH AN ISTA N

 ea

AZERBAIJAN ARMENIA

AFGHANISTAN: US
airstrikes against al-Qaeda bases, 1988 US invades, 2001 
 TURKEY

Istanbul


Tehran


Ankara


PA K I S TA N
Mosul 
I R A N
 IRAN:

 SYRIA

Iraq-Iran War, 1980–88


Baghdad


PAKISTAN:
Osama bin Laden's alleged hideout, 2003-2011 U.S. Special Forces kill Osama bin Laden, May 2, 2011 
Cyprus


Jerusalem


Karachi


 IRAQ

 Mediterranean LEBANON Beirut Damascus Sea

Basra


Amman


Pe
 rs

 KUWAIT

ISRAEL JORDAN

KUWAIT:
Iraq invades, 1990 
 BAHRAIN

 ian G ulf

Strait of
Hormuz


QATAR UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

EGYPT
Riyadh 
SAUDI ARABIA

 OMAN

Arabian
Sea


SAUDI ARABIA: UN
staging ground for Persian Gulf War, 1991 
R
 e d S e a

 Others, including the jury (consisting of ten whites, one Latino, and one Asian American) that acquitted the officers, offered a competing vision. They saw overworked police doing their job to protect law and order in a dangerous neighborhood. The “not guilty” verdict set off four days of rioting in Los Angeles during which Latinos also took to the streets to air their frustration with failing schools and entrenched poverty. Television networks continuously aired footage of black youths assaulting a white truck driver, but paid little attention to the Asian-American–owned stores that blacks and Latinos ransacked as payback for allegedly having refused to serve or hire young men of color.



YEMEN ARAB REPUBLIC

 YEMEN:

 Bush did not propose any new initiatives to address gender, racial, or ethnic inequities; his real interest lay in foreign affairs. As he contemplated the new role that the United States should assume in a post–Cold War world, Bush moved to address a festering problem close to home. His administration felt particularly uneasy about returning the Panama Canal in 2000 (see Chapter 28) to a Panamanian dictator who ruthlessly suppressed political opponents and oversaw lucrative drug-trafficking schemes. In December 1989, Bush launched Operation Just Cause, the largest American military campaign since the Vietnam War, to remove Manuel Noriega from power. The Panamanian invasion continued the nation’s long tradition of maintaining Central America as a U.S. sphere of influence. A crisis in the Middle East, however, offered Bush the opportunity to propose a new focus for U.S. foreign policy, now that the Cold War was

 Watch the Video President George Bush’s Early Response in the Persian Gulf War

 Allied air attacks Area of ground combat US battleships US aircraft carriers

Iraq War (2003--)
 US-led land campaign

 Al-Qaeda suicide bombers attack USS Cole, 2000

Panama and the
Persian Gulf War


Gulf War (1990-1991)
PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF YEMEN

Aden


 over. Bush faced the severest test of his administration when Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein, whose nation’s oil fields supplied 11 percent of global oil exports, invaded the neighboring nation of Kuwait, a small country that provided 9 percent of the world’s oil, on August 2, 1990 (29.4). The 1979 Carter Doctrine (see Chapter 28) had already established the oil-rich Persian Gulf as a region vital to national economic and strategic interests. Throughout the 1980s Iranian-financed terrorist attacks and hostage crises in Lebanon convinced the U.S. government that the fundamentalist Islamic government in Iran, not Iraq, posed the major threat in the Persian Gulf. During the eightyear Iraq-Iran War, the United States supplied Iraq with weapons and intelligence. Oil-rich Arab nations, including Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, had also lent Iraq billions of dollars to prevent Iranian revolutionary religious fervor from spreading to their kingdoms. When the war ended inconclusively in 1988 after nearly one million combatant deaths, Saddam demanded that Arab nations forgive Iraq’s debt. He harbored particular animosity against

29.4 America and
 the Middle East, 1980–2003 The United States fought two major wars against Iraq, one in 1991 and the other beginning in 2003.

 What problems did the United States face in the Middle East from 1980–2003?



 CHAPTER 29

BUILDING A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE UNITED STATES, 1989–2011

 Kuwait, which he accused of exporting too much oil and depressing world oil prices, thereby hurting the Iraqi financial recovery from the war. When Kuwait refused his demands, Saddam declared that Kuwait had historically been part of Iraq and invaded. After the Iraqi army easily overran Kuwait, President Bush rushed American troops and ships to Saudi Arabia. Operation Desert Shield, the president assured the public, was solely a defensive measure to prevent Iraq from attacking Saudi Arabia. After Saddam announced that he was annexing Kuwait, Bush began to question whether a purely defensive strategy was enough. Now in control of 20 percent of the world’s oil, overnight Iraq became a major rival of Saudi Arabia, which had 26 percent of global oil supplies. With the president now contemplating war, General Colin Powell, chair of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, urged Bush to follow the rules of military engagement established in the Reagan years. The Powell Doctrine asserted that America should go to war only as a last resort when the president had full support from the nation and the international community, could employ overwhelming military force to win without serious loss of American life, and had a clear exit strategy. To amass overwhelming military strength, Bush sent Secretary of State James Baker on a diplomatic tour to build an international coalition

 that eventually included 34 nations. Bush secured a United Nations (UN) resolution authorizing military action if Saddam did not withdraw by January 15, 1991. With Saudi Arabia agreeing to serve as the staging ground for the invasion, nearly 500,000 U.S. troops and 65 warships made their way to the Persian Gulf. The Powell Doctrine called for more than overwhelming force; it also required enthusiastic support from the American people for an overseas military campaign. Bush faced stiff opposition from congressional Democrats, who argued that the president, a former Texas oilman, was primarily interested in protecting the lucrative profits of his former oil-business associates who imported oil from the Persian Gulf. Instead of war, Democrats promoted a competing vision that relied on economic sanctions to force Hussein to withdraw. Bush countered that Hussein’s atrocities against his own people, notably his 1988 poison gas attacks against Kurdish villagers in northern Iraq, made him “worse than Hitler.” Echoing Bush’s claim, this political cartoon (29.5) showed Saddam holding a paper labeled “Kuwait takeover” as he looked into the mirror and asked Adolf Hitler’s smiling reflection, “How’m I doing?” Bush, a decorated World War II veteran, reminded Americans that the world’s failure to act when Hitler began his expansionist drive in 1938 had led to World War II. If an emboldened Saddam next attacked Saudi Arabia, he would control nearly half of the world’s oil reserves. Bush also claimed that Saddam was actively trying to acquire nuclear weapons, and if he succeeded, he would be unstoppable. These arguments did not sway Democrats. With a vote split mostly along partisan lines, Congress voted to authorize war according to the terms spelled out in the UN resolution. When the UN deadline for withdrawal passed, the American-led UN coalition attacked Iraq the next day. Once the fighting started public debate ceased, and Americans rallied around the flag. The Persian Gulf War unfolded in two phases. In the 29.5 “Mirror, Mirror on the Wall–How’m I doing?” first phase U.S. forces bombed This 1990 political cartoon supported President George H. W. Bush’s Iraqi installations in Kuwait claim that Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein was a modern-day Hitler.

 How did the Powell Doctrine influence Bush’s preparations for war against Iraq in 1991?

Read the Document George Bush, Allied Military Action in the
Persian Gulf (1991)


MOMENT RICH WITH PROMISE”

 and major cities in Iraq for 39 days. In Kuwait the massive bombing terrified many poorly trained occupying Iraqi soldiers, and nearly one-quarter of the 400,000-man force deserted. A news team from the cable television news network CNN stayed in Baghdad, the capital of Iraq, throughout the bombing, and each night Americans watched their own nation’s missiles streak across the sky and explode. The bombing destroyed Iraq’s power grid, water treatment plants, radio and television stations, and roads—hampering its military activities but also leaving civilians without power or clean water. With Iraqi defenses in shambles from the air attacks, the war’s second phase began when ground troops attacked the Iraqi forces occupying Kuwait on February 23, 1991. General Norman Schwarzkopf led coalition forces during Operation Desert Storm, a massive assault that soundly defeated the Iraqi army within four days, pushing it out of Kuwait. When American soldiers crossed into Iraq, Bush abruptly halted the fighting. The war had lasted a total of 42 days.



 the war beyond its original goal, Bush’s approval ratings soared to 89 percent. The UN peace agreement prohibited Saddam from rearming or acquiring nuclear weapons, restrictions enforced by UN inspectors who stayed in Iraq until 1998. The establishment of no-fly zones over Shiite and Kurdish areas stopped Saddam and his Sunni-dominated government from launching aerial attacks against these minorities within his own nation. The UN also instituted an oil embargo to prevent him from acquiring funds to reconstitute his nuclear weapons program. Critics charged that the embargo led to widespread food and medicine shortages among the civilian population, and failed to prevent Iraq from rearming. Instead of caring for his people, Saddam used the nation’s meager cash flow to continue his lavish lifestyle and secured funds to amass a large arsenal of conventional weapons by illegally smuggling oil through Jordan, Turkey, Syria, and Egypt. When the UN initiated a “foodfor-oil” program in 1996 that allowed Saddam to export some oil legally if he used the profits

 “By God, we’ve kicked the Vietnam Syndrome once and for all.” An exultant President GEORGE H. W. BUSH at the end of the Persian Gulf War, 1991

 American forces, Bush declared, had met their goal of ending Saddam’s occupation of Kuwait and had no intention of conquering Iraq. The United States would henceforth rely on sanctions to curb Saddam, returning to the strategy of containment that had succeeded against the Soviet Union to win the Cold War. Neoconservatives embraced a competing vision. They viewed the war as an opportunity to remove Saddam from power. Bush advisors, including Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney, however, saw no advantage to staying in Iraq. They argued that it would be difficult, if not impossible, to bring together the nation’s three different ethnic and religious groups (Sunnis, Shiites, and Kurds), each of which inhabited distinct regions, to form a democratic government. Abiding by the Powell Doctrine’s emphasis on a clear exit strategy, Bush wanted to avoid a long, protracted war that could become a Vietnam-like quagmire. Having suffered relatively few casualties (148 battlefield deaths) and avoided widening

 for humanitarian purposes, civilian conditions improved slightly. Victory in the Persian Gulf War, along with the end of the Cold War, led to a revaluation of American foreign policy goals. After defeating Iraq Bush announced that the United States would build a “new world order,” which he defined as playing an active global peacekeeping role dedicated to spreading democracy and prosperity. Some of his defense advisors encouraged the president to go even further to protect American dominance. In 1992, Cheney and his neoconservative aide, Paul Wolfowitz, asserted that the United States needed to respond immediately, and preemptively, to any foreign nation that challenged American military superiority or attempted to “overturn the established political and economic order.” Bush never publicly embraced these neoconservative principles, but his son George W. Bush, the 43rd president of the United States, proved more receptive to these ideas.

 What vision of American world leadership did neoconservatives promote?



 CHAPTER 29

BUILDING A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE UNITED STATES, 1989–2011

Contested Visions of Government
 The Reagan years had redefined the American political landscape, shifting the political center away from New Deal and Great Society liberal assumptions that government could be a positive force in citizens’ lives. To succeed in this changed political climate, a new breed of Democratic politician was needed—socially liberal but fiscally conservative. The most successful and most controversial “New Democrat” was William “Bill” Jefferson Clinton, who defeated George H. W. Bush in the 1992 presidential election and won reelection in 1996 against Kansas Senator Bob Dole. When Republican George W. Bush won the presidency in the heavily disputed 2000 election, he restored the conservative vision of low taxes and limited regulation that the political right had long championed.

 Clinton’s New Democrats Clinton was relatively unknown when the 1992 presidential campaign began. While governor of Arkansas, at just 44 years of age, Clinton had chaired the Democratic Leadership Council, a group committed to shifting the Democratic Party to the political center by accepting market-based solutions to social problems and ending deficit spending. Exuding boundless energy and a vast knowledge of government, Clinton’s magnetic personality and compassionate nature soon won him a dedicated following. “I feel your pain,” became his mantra as he bear-hugged voters on the campaign trail. Clinton, one commentator noted, cultivated the image of “the president as the guy next door,” who “struggles like the rest of us with his weight, his marriage, and his golf game.” Worried about the nation’s finances, third-party candidate Ross Perot, a self-made Texas billionaire, entered the race and focused almost exclusively on how the federal deficit had ballooned under Bush. Winning 19 percent of the popular vote, Perot registered the best third-party showing since Theodore Roosevelt’s run as the Progressive Party candidate in 1912. Clinton defeated Bush in the Electoral College, 370 to 168, but only 43 percent of the electorate voted for him. Widely praised for his political skills, Clinton nonetheless stumbled badly during his first few weeks in office when he tried and failed to fulfill a campaign pledge to lift the ban against gays in the military. Proponents viewed the issue as a straightforward question of protecting civil rights; opponents countered that ignoring heterosexual soldiers’ objections to serving alongside gay soldiers would undermine military discipline and hurt recruitment.

 How did Clinton’s centrist vision affect his policy decisions?

 Clinton pleased no one with his compromise. Rather than lift the ban, he instituted a policy of “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell,” which allowed closeted homosexuals and lesbians—gays who kept their sexual preferences hidden—to serve in the military. Clinton’s domestic agenda was ambitious, including a comprehensive plan to provide all Americans with health care. He delegated this major policy initiative to Hillary Rodham Clinton, his wife, an attorney with extensive experience in public service. Republicans successfully attacked the plan as “socialized medicine” that would deprive Americans of the freedom to choose their healthcare providers. The plan failed to win congressional approval. Clinton achieved a more modest victory with his tax proposals. Overcoming Republican opposition, he passed an economic stimulus package that offered tax incentives for job creation and increased taxes for large corporations and wealthy Americans— reversing Reagan’s decision to lower taxes on the richest citizens. Clinton also addressed economic problems caused by the recent globalization of the American economy. As late as 1970 most U.S. businesses manufactured strictly for the American market, and few stores stocked items made overseas. By the early 1980s, the United States exported and imported more goods than ever before. Exports rose from $43 billion in 1970 to $178 billion in 2000, while imports surged from $40 billion to $519 billion in 2000 (all figures adjusted for inflation). Importing more than it exported, the nation questioned whether this trade deficit hurt or helped the overall economy. American companies selling products at home now faced stiff competition from foreign manufacturers, while U.S. companies shifted production to places like China and Mexico where

Watch the Video Bill Clinton Sells Himself to America:
Presidential Campaign Ad (1992)


CONTESTED VISIONS OF GOVERNMENT

 workers earned less. Globalization, however, also lowered costs for consumers and gave them a greater selection of products. Clinton helped accelerate the trend toward globalization when he broke with organized labor to back the 1992 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), a treaty that lifted trade barriers among the United States, Mexico, and Canada. Labor unions opposed NAFTA because they feared that it would encourage U.S. factories to relocate to Mexico, resulting in fewer jobs for American workers. American businesspeople liked NAFTA because it prohibited Mexican companies from manufacturing knock-offs of American products such as films, drugs, and clothing, essentially protecting their overseas and domestic markets by stopping the flow of counterfeit goods. Clinton’s emphasis on free trade reflected his desire to move the Democratic Party to the political center, but his Republican opponents cited his failed healthcare initiative as evidence that he subscribed to the same 1960s liberal vision that had spurred the creation of the Great Society (see Chapter 27). In the 1994 midterm elections, Georgia Congressman Newt Gingrich mobilized the New Right (see Chapter 28) with his call to end the “corrupt liberal welfare state.” The Republicans captured both the House and the Senate for the first time since 1952. Gingrich’s manifesto, “The Contract with America,” envisioned smaller government, less regulation, term limits for members of Congress, welfare reform, and adding a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution. Little of this ambitious agenda was enacted, partly because Clinton stole some of Gingrich’s thunder by undertaking his own program of welfare reform. Modifying legislation passed during the New Deal, he joined with Republicans and conservative Democrats in Congress to reduce the time that families (mostly single mothers) with dependent children could receive financial assistance. Clinton also tried to appeal to fiscal conservatives by balancing the federal budget for the first time in 30 years. Clinton used his superior political skills not only to weaken the Republican resurgence but also to survive the scandals that plagued his presidency. In 1994, a special federal prosecutor, Kenneth Starr, began investigating charges that the president had

Read the Document Articles of Impeachment Against
William Jefferson Clinton


 participated in a fraudulent land deal during his tenure as Arkansas attorney general. During his investigation, Starr learned that President Clinton had engaged in a sexual relationship with a White House intern named Monica Lewinsky. Clinton was not the first president to have extramarital dalliances, but when giving testimony under oath on an unrelated matter, he denied the affair. Seven months later the president publicly acknowledged that he had lied as seen in this New York Daily News headline reporting his televised address to the nation (29.6). Republicans argued that Clinton’s failure to tell the truth warranted impeachment. In 1998, the Republicancontrolled House of Representatives completed the first stage of impeachment by voting that the president had lied under oath and obstructed justice. The Senate now had to decide whether these infractions met the constitutional test of “high crimes and misdemeanors” needed to remove a president from office. Ten Republican senators joined with Democrats in defeating the first charge of perjury by a vote of 55 to 45. The second charge of obstructing justice resulted in a 50 to 50 tie. Neither charge obtained the requisite two-thirds vote required to remove Clinton from the White House. Clinton survived impeachment by cultivating the same “everyman” appeal that won him the presidency. “The essence of Clinton’s success has been to persuade America that this scandal is about human weakness, not crime, and that at its core is not a string of felonies but a sin familiar to all—adultery,” lamented conservative commentator Patrick Buchanan. The strong economy also helped keep Clinton’s approval ratings near 60 percent throughout the ordeal.



 29.6 Clinton’s Sex Scandal When Clinton finally admitted to an “inappropriate relationship” with White House intern Monica Lewinsky, the lies he had previously told to cover it up led to his impeachment.

 How did Clinton’s sex scandal compare to the Reagan-era Iran-Contra scandal (see Chapter 28)?



 CHAPTER 29

BUILDING A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE UNITED STATES, 1989–2011

The Disputed Election
 of 2000 The election of 2000 again offered voters two competing notions of the role that the government should play in American society. Democrat Al Gore, then serving as vice president under Bill Clinton, ran against Republican George W. Bush, the son of former president George H. W. Bush. More liberal than Clinton, Gore was a well-known environmentalist whose pedantic manner often made him appear wooden. Bush was a born-again evangelical Christian who had cultivated a folksy persona while governor of Texas. Reflecting the generally prosperous times, the two candidates put forward competing visions on how to spend the projected federal surplus. Calling it “the people’s money,” Bush proposed enormous tax cuts that he argued would fuel investment and economic growth. Rejecting the Democrat’s emphasis on federal government activism, Bush vowed to create an “ownership society” where people had more control over their wealth, Social Security retirement accounts, health care, and property. Gore adhered to the traditional Democratic vision of using government regulation and federally funded programs to promote equity, environmental responsibility, and prosperity. He charged that Bush’s tax cuts would disproportionately help the wealthy and starve federal programs for the poor. Gore proposed saving the surplus to prepare for the coming explosion in Social Security payments once the baby boom generation began retiring. Green Party candidate Ralph Nader, a consumer advocate who railed against corporate greed, and the conservative Patrick Buchanan, who ran on the Reform Party ticket, also entered the race.

29.7 Hanging Chads
A
Florida election worker uses a magnifying glass to try to determine which candidate this voter had selected, reflecting the closeness of the 2000 presidential election. 
 Why was the 2000 presidential election so controversial?

 In an age of machine-counted votes and instantaneous communication, Americans expected complete results on election night. However, with several states too close to call that evening, it took a few days before Gore emerged with 266 electoral votes, three short of the 270 required to win the presidency, to Bush’s 246. All eyes now turned to Florida where a riveting 36-day drama unfurled over recounting ballots that vote-counting machines had rejected because voters had not completely punched the perforated box next to the candidate’s name. Gore’s team went to state court and won a hand recount in four primarily Democratic counties. Election inspectors, like the one pictured here (29.7), spent hours examining “hanging chads,” partially punched boxes, to determine voters’ intent. Arguing that time for a recount had run out, Republican Florida officials certified that Bush had won the state. The battle now moved to the Supreme Court, where conservative justices accepted the Republican argument that the different standards used by inspectors to include or reject ballots violated the “equal protection” clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. As the map (29.8) shows, although Gore won the national popular vote, by winning Florida, Bush had the 271 electoral votes to win the election. Echoing the outraged Democratic response to the Supreme Court’s decision to halt the recount, Justice John Paul Stevens wrote, “Although we may never know with complete certainty the identity of the winner of this year’s Presidential election, the identity of the loser is perfectly clear. It is the Nation’s confidence in the judge as an impartial guardian of the rule of law.” Subsequent privately funded recounts undertaken by major news organizations all concluded that Bush had indeed won Florida. The election results continued to rankle Democrats. Besides questioning poor ballot design and Supreme Court partisanship, Democrats charged that Florida Republicans had used shady tactics

CONTESTED VISIONS OF GOVERNMENT













29.8 Presidential Election, 2000
 A mere 537 votes in Florida decided the outcome of the 2000 presidential contest.

8 4
















 initiatives that funded church-run community programs, arguing that local clergy understood their neighbor14 hood problems better than government bureaucrats. Federal money flowed to churches offering after-school tutoring to students, transportation for the elderly, counseling for drug addicts, and soup kitchens for the homeless. Critics saw little compassion for the poor in some of Bush’s other economic Electoral Vote (%) Popular Vote Electoral vote by state initiatives. Ignoring the election’s evi271 (50) 50,456,062 (48.2) dence that strong competing visions of George W. Bush (Republican) governing continued to divide the nation, Albert Gore, Jr. 266 (50) 50,996,582 (48.7) Bush relied on the Republican-controlled (Democrat) Congress to win swift congressional ap0 (0) 2,882,955 (3) Ralph Nader proval for the tax cuts and deregulation (Green Party) of financial markets that he had proposed Buchanan 0 (0) 448,895 (0.4) during the campaign. Faced with the beginnings of a recession as overinflated stock prices collapsed, Bush and other conservative to disenfranchise African Americans, such as inRepublicans offered a new rationale for slashing correctly claiming they were felons who could not taxes by an average of 15 percent. Over 40 percent vote. The post-election recriminations also targeted liberals who had rejected the centrist direction of the of the tax cuts went to the wealthy, the people whose companies and investments would provide Democratic Party and voted for Nader. The Green the jobs and capital to jump-start the economy, the Party candidate received 97,488 votes in Florida—a president argued. When the short recession ended, state that Bush won by a mere 537 votes. Bush and his congressional supporters credited their tax cutting. Some economists suggested that the overinflated housing market was the real reason for the economic rebound. Home prices doubled Bush entered office proclaiming that his adminbetween 1997 and 2005 as speculators bought and istration would move away from the laissez-faire, sold homes quickly to take advantage of rising antigovernment message championed by past prices. Low-interest loans encouraged homeowners Congressional Republican leaders like Gingrich. He instead embraced a new vision termed “compas- to use their houses as collateral to borrow money, which they used to purchase consumer goods. For sionate conservatism,” a philosophical approach to the moment the credit-fueled rise in housing prices governing that emphasized using private industry, infused cash into the economy, but the day of reckcharities, and religious institutions, rather than the government, to provide community services. Adher- oning was ahead. Despite his antigovernment philosophy Bush ents of compassionate conservatism argued that the sometimes proved willing to strengthen the federal poor quickly became dependent on government-run government’s power. The bipartisan 2001 “No Child social welfare programs, losing the motivation and Left Behind” law tried to improve public schools drive to improve themselves. As one Bush adminisby linking federal funding to student performance tration official put it, compassionate conservatives on annual standardized exams. Bush also dramatibelieved that “the government should encourage cally increased the investigative powers of the Justhe effective provision of social services without tice Department in the wake of the terrorist attack providing the service itself.” In keeping with this against the United States on September 11, 2001. philosophy, the president championed faith-based









10 3










Compassionate Conservatism


 How did George W. Bush reshape the conservative vision of governing?



 CHAPTER 29

BUILDING A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE UNITED STATES, 1989–2011

Transforming Daily Life
 In the 1990s, computers altered daily life in countless ways, becoming essential to work and leisure. The Monica Lewinsky scandal broke on the Internet, revealing how the emergence of the World Wide Web transformed the way Americans communicated with one another in the 1990s. Demographic shifts also reshaped American society. Fewer heterosexual American couples married, while the desire of gay couples to wed provoked heated debate over the meaning of marriage. A sizable population of senior citizens emerged, and new immigrant communities formed across the nation. Meanwhile environmentalists worried about humaninduced climate changes and entreated Americans to stop using fossil fuels to run their cars and factories. American Family Structure, 1972 Not Married Children 10%

Not Married
No Children
16%


Married No Children
29%


 Married with Children 45%

 educated workers and developed global markets for their products. Going the way of the horse and buggy when At key moments in American history, transportation cars were invented, typewriters became obsolete or communication breakthroughs transformed daily when people from office workers to students began life. The intercontinental railroad and federal highusing computers to write letters and essays. At first way system had quickened the movement of goods computer users printed copies of these documents and people. Telegraphs, telephones, and televisions broke down the barrier of distance among people liv- and delivered them in traditional ways—such as by mailing letters or handing a teacher a completed ing in different regions. Thanks to these inventions assignment. By the end of the decade, however, Americans could speak directly to loved ones living more and more Americans relied on the Internet to elsewhere, learn instantaneously about events deliver busifar from home, ness and social and laugh at the correspondence same jokes told electronically. on weekly teleThe Internet vision shows. In evolved from the 1990s, coma primitive puter technolcomputer sysogy, especially tem designed President BILL CLINTON, personal comin the 1960s to puters and the facilitate the Internet, again changed how Americans communicated, shopped, exchange of data among geographically disparate military installations. The creation in the late 1980s and received information. of a computer network linking universities and five First introduced in the 1980s (see Chapter 28), national supercomputer centers paved the way to by the late 1990s millions of Americans spent hours providing instantaneous computer communication a day at work or home typing on personal computamong civilians. When engineers in Switzerland deers. The lucrative computer industry, fueled by the veloped the World Wide Web, a system for organizconstant invention of ever-improving components and programs, supplanted the car and steel industry ing electronic information, Internet use exploded. In 1994, six million Americans were connected to the as the engine that drove prosperity. As manufacInternet. By 2001, the 130 million Americans who turing plants continued to close in the Midwest, surfed the web daily in offices, libraries, schools, or areas where high-tech enterprises clustered, like at home accounted for a quarter of all global InterSilicon Valley in northern California, boomed. net traffic. Computer giants Microsoft (which produced the Computers and the Internet quickly reshaped computer operating system Windows) and Apple became powerful corporations that employed highly how Americans worked and played at the dawn of

The Computer Age


 “When I took office [in 1993], only high energy physicists had ever heard of what is called the World Wide Web… Now even my cat has its own page.

 Which technological innovations of the twentieth century had the greatest impact on daily life?

 View the Image ENIAC computer

TRANSFORMING DAILY LIFE

 the twenty-first century. Virtual business meetings now took place among geographically dispersed colleagues who looked into small cameras attached to their computers to converse with the people they saw on their screens. Office workers working in the same building sent a stream of e-mails to each other throughout the day, rather than telephoning or delivering a message in person. Many companies replaced paper records with computer databases that stored personal and commercial data. Americans differed on the benefits that children derived from this new technology. A generation of youth hooked on computer games alarmed commentators who worried that their sedentary lifestyle was fueling an epidemic of childhood obesity. Others fretted that violent computer games desensitized children to real-world violence. Schools, however, quickly brought the Internet into the classroom. By simply typing a phrase into an Internet search engine, researchers of all ages gained instant access to information from libraries throughout the world. The Internet facilitated the spread of misinformation as well. Anyone could create a Web site, allowing virtual communities to form around almost any issue. A great resource for researching a medical condition, the Internet also helped terrorists publicize their causes and killings around the world. The Internet reshaped commerce, becoming a virtual shopping mall and entertainment center as entrepreneurs rushed to market their wares. Shopping on the Internet, however, differed from taking a stroll down Main Street. The Internet-based company Amazon.com not only sold books more cheaply but built virtual communities in which readers posted their own reviews of books and sold used copies. The privacy and accessibility that the Internet afforded gave the pornography and gambling industries a boost, drawing millions of customers on a daily basis. To pay the credit card bills that they accumulated while shopping online, many Americans stopped sending checks through the mail and began using the Internet to pay their bills electronically. Droves of Americans stopped watching their favorite shows on TV when broadcast, preferring instead to watch them through the Internet when it was convenient.

 title character’s decision to have a child. Quayle voiced the New Right’s lament that marriage had lost ground to nontraditional family arrangements. The charts “American Family Structure, 1972” and “American Family Structure, 1998” (29.9) show that the composition of the American family had indeed changed radically in less than a generation. By 1998, 47 percent of American families lived in non-married households, both with and without children, compared to 26 percent in 1972. Gender roles within families also changed. In the traditional model of marriage, the husband worked and the wife stayed at home. By the end of the 1990s, most married couples worked outside the home. Changing family structure prompted sometimes acrimonious debate between the New Right, who wanted to reverse these trends, and liberal Democrats, who championed the right of non-married partners to cohabitate and of single women to have children. Many people who considered themselves liberal on myriad economic and social issues, however, joined with the New Right in condemning same-sex or gay marriage. While many Americans were willing to tolerate same-sex couples living American Family Structure, 1972 Not Married Children 10% Not Married No Children 16%

Married No Children
29%


 Married with Children 45%

American Family Structure, 1998
Not Married Children
14%


Married No Children
26%


The Changing
Face of Families
 In 1992, George H. W. Bush’s vice president Dan Quayle attacked a popular television series Murphy Brown for positively portraying the unmarried



Not Married
No Children
33%


 Married with Children 27%

29.9 Changes
 in American Family Structure, 1972–1998 These graphs reveal that the percentage of married households with children dropped significantly by the end of the twentieth century.

 What changes in family structure do these charts illustrate?



 CHAPTER 29

BUILDING A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE UNITED STATES, 1989–2011

 “Regardless of how you feel about marriage, it’s wrong to treat people differently under the law.” An ad equating bans against gay marriage with past laws prohibiting interracial marriages

 “I can marry a princess.” In a competing ad a young girl suggests that schools will promote legalized gay marriage

 together, people on both ends of the political spectrum drew the line at same-sex marriages. In 1996, Congress passed the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), a law that defined marriage as a legal union between a man and a woman. Under this statute states that banned same-sex marriages did not have to accept legal marriages performed in other states, if a gay couple moved to their jurisdiction. In 2011, only Massachusetts, Connecticut, Vermont, New Hampshire, Iowa, Washington, D.C., and New York allowed same-sex marriages. Nine other states authorized “civil unions” between same-sex partners that granted them rights similar to those accorded married couples. Most of the remaining states, either through referendum or stature, prohibited same-sex marriage. But after lower federal courts ruled DOMA unconstitutional, the Justice Department stopped defending legal challenges to it in 2011. This opened up the possibility that all states would be required to recognize samesex marriages performed elsewhere. The debate over gay marriage received a tremendous amount of press exposure, but few reporters paid much attention to how the graying of America was altering family life. Life expectancy had increased thanks to improved medical care and decreasing poverty. Many middle-aged parents finished raising their children only to discover that their aging parents needed full-time caretaking. As the population aged, Social Security and Medicare payments went up, but a declining birthrate meant that there were fewer native-born workers available to pay the taxes that kept this social welfare system afloat. Over the last 25 years of the twentieth century, the birth rate had declined from 18.4 births for every 1,000 people in 1970 to 14.8 in 1996. Faced with a labor shortage of able-bodied workers, the nation turned, as it had in the past, to immigrants to fill available jobs.

 What competing visions emerged over same-sex marriage?

A
Wave of Immigration  The massive wave of immigration that began after Congress eliminated national quotas in 1965 initiated another important social transformation. Between 1931 and 1965, around five million immigrants came to the United States. These numbers skyrocketed to 4.5 million in the 1970s; 7.3 million in the 1980s; and 9.1 million in the 1990s. Hundreds of thousands more entered the country illegally. Most of these immigrants came from Asia, Africa, and Latin America—only two million Europeans settled in the United States between 1980 and 2000. Some Americans satirically referred to the exploding Hispanic immigrant population in the Southwest as the reconquista, or reconquest of territory that Mexico had lost to the United States after the Mexican-American War of 1848 (see Chapter 11). Overall the United States attracted twice as many immigrants as all of the other nations in the world combined. Competing claims about the economic benefits of immigration emerged, a debate explored more fully in Competing Visions: The Economic Costs of Immigration. The New Right also feared dire cultural consequences as the nation fragmented into permanent ethnic enclaves. “If America is to survive as ‘one nation, one people’ we need to call a ‘time-out’ on immigration, to assimilate the tens of millions who have lately arrived,” exhorted Patrick Buchanan. To protect the nation’s cultural cohesion, these right-leaning critics organized campaigns to make English the nation’s official language. Both Democrats and Republicans worried that immigrants, who were willing to work for less, took jobs away from native-born workers. Critics especially denounced illegal immigration, arguing that people who sneaked across the border often violated other laws as well. Illegal immigrants sent their

TRANSFORMING DAILY LIFE



Competing Visions
THE ECONOMIC COSTS OF IMMIGRATION
To this day Americans continue to disagree about the economic costs of immigration. In the following passage Harvard economist George J. Borjas paints a pessimistic economic portrait. Tamar Jacoby disputes his claim that three decades of high immigration have hurt the U.S. economy. What factors does each emphasize to make a case? George J. Borjas suggested that immigration affected socioeconomic groups differently in his 1996 article “The New Economics of Immigration: Affluent Americans Gain: Poor Americans Lose.” New research has established a number of points. The relative skills of successive immigrant waves have declined over much of the postwar period. In 1970, for example, the latest immigrant arrivals on average had 0.4 fewer years of schooling and earned 17 percent less than natives. By 1990 the most recently arrived immigrants had 1.3 fewer years of schooling and earned 32 percent less than natives … The large-scale migration of less-skilled workers has done harm to the economic opportunities of less-skilled natives. Immigration may account for perhaps a third of the recent decline in the relative wages of less-educated native workers … The increasing welfare dependency in the immigrant population suggests that immigration may create a substantial fiscal burden on the most-affected localities and states … There exists a strong correlation between the skills of immigrants and the skills of their American-born children, so that the huge skill differentials observed among today’s foreign-born groups will almost certainly become tomorrow’s differences among American-born ethnic groups. In effect, immigration has set the stage for sizable ethnic differences in skills and socioeconomic outcomes, which are sure to be the focus of intense attention in the next century … Current immigration redistributes wealth from unskilled workers, whose wages are lowered by immigrants, to skilled workers and owners of companies that buy immigrants’ services, and from taxpayers who bear the burden of paying for the social services used by immigrants to consumers who use the goods and services produced by immigrants.… Immigration changes how the economic pie is sliced up.… The harmful effects of immigration will not go away simply because some people do not wish to see them. 
View the Closer Look Competing Visions: The
Economic Costs of Immigration


 In her 2002 article “Too Many Immigrants,” Tamar Jacoby argued that large-scale immigration benefited the United States economically. The most commonly heard complaint about foreign workers is that they take jobs from Americans. Not only is this assertion untrue—nobody has found real evidence to support it—but cities and states with the largest immigrant populations (New York, Los Angeles, and others) boast far faster economic growth and lower unemployment than cities and states that do not attract immigrants. In many places, the presence of immigrants seems to reduce unemployment even among native-born blacks—probably because of the way immigrants stimulate economic growth.… Even if Borjas is right that a native-born black worker may take home $300 less a year as a result of immigration, this is a fairly small amount of money in the overall scheme of things. More to the point, globalization would have much the same effect on wages, immigrants or no immigrants … What about the costs imposed by immigrants, especially by their use of government services? It is true that many immigrants—though far from all—are poorer than nativeborn Americans, and thus pay less in taxes. It is also true that one small segment of the immigrant population— refugees—tends to be heavily dependent on welfare. As a result, states with large immigrant populations often face chronic fiscal problems.… [But] If we shift the lens to the federal level, and include the taxes that immigrants remit to the IRS, the calculation comes out very differently: immigrants pay in more than they take out.… 28 million immigrants form but a small part of the $12-trillion U.S. economy, and most of the fiscal costs and benefits associated with them are relatively modest. Besides, fiscal calculations are only a small part of the larger economic picture. How do we measure the energy immigrants bring—the pluck and grit and willingness to improvise and innovate? Not only are immigrants by and large harder-working than the native-born, they generally fill economic niches that would otherwise go wanting.

 Are contemporary concerns about immigration similar or different from objections made earlier in the twentieth century?



 CHAPTER 29

29.10 Competing
Views on
Immigration
 Americans continue to debate whether immigrants are a burden or an asset.

BUILDING A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE UNITED STATES, 1989–2011

 children to school and received health care in hospitals, all at taxpayer expense, they charged. Unions and their supporters complained that undocumented workers could not join labor unions, making it more difficult to organize labor to improve working conditions and wages. Champions of immigration, mostly from the political left, pointed to the nation’s past success in assimilating immigrants and argued that immigrants took the low-paying jobs such as busboys, gardeners, and nannies that few Americans wanted. Countering claims that new immigrants failed to assimilate, advocates of immigration noted the high rate of interethnic marriages among second-generation immigrants. They also viewed complaints about multiculturalism as a racist attempt to protect the United States as a primarily white society. The different meanings attached to the word “benefits” in this political cartoon by Brian Fairrington (29.10) encapsulated the debate over whether immigrants drained the economy by seeking taxpayer-funded social services or contributed to overall prosperity by working for very little.

Climate Change
 The computer revolution and shifting demographics were not the only factors changing American daily life. Scientists worried that accelerated climate change threatened to reshape the physical space that Americans inhabited and urged the nation to reverse human-induced environmental damage. They entreated Americans to switch from gas-guzzling cars like sport-utility

 vehicles (SUVs) to automobiles that burned little or no fossil fuels. Americans, 4.5 percent of the global population, drove 24 percent of the world’s 590 million cars. Ingrained driving habits, however, were hard to change. Environmental scientists claimed that average temperatures had risen 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit over the last 100 years, a phenomenon called global warming. They attributed this climate shift to the widespread burning of fossil fuels (coal and oil) that pumped carbon dioxide into the air. Carbon dioxide was one of several greenhouse gases that trapped the sun’s heat in the Earth’s atmosphere. While the sun’s rays were essential to human life, environmentalists blamed the rapidly rising levels of greenhouse gases for global warming. This 2007 world map (29.11) shows which nations emitted the greatest amounts of carbon dioxide from burning fossil fuels. The United States, China, Russia, India, and Japan head the list. Developing nations in Africa with few cars or heavy industry emitted relatively little carbon dioxide. Besides emitting more total greenhouse gases than most other nations, the United States ranked tenth in the amount of greenhouse emissions per person. Why did global warming matter? The quickerthan-normal melting of the Arctic ice cap, environmentalists warned, was causing sea levels to rise. If unchecked, rising waters would soon wash over sea-level lands throughout the world including the Mississippi Delta in the United States. Scientists also speculated that global warming affected rainfall patterns and storms, increasing droughts, wildfires, and hurricanes. Not everyone in the United States accepted these dire predictions. Some Americans questioned the scientific evidence linking climate change to human activity. Fluctuations in the earth’s average temperature had occurred before, they argued, disputing the claim that permanent or catastrophic change in the atmosphere was underway. In 1997, the United States signed the Kyoto Protocol, an international agreement that set targets for reducing greenhouse emissions in industrial nations. In 2001, however, President George W. Bush argued that the agreement was flawed because it exempted China and relied on governmental controls, not market incentives, to develop “green” technology. The United States subsequently became the only nation besides Australia to sign, but not ratify, the treaty. For Americans to reduce the amount of fossil fuels burned in cars and factories, lifestyles

 What core arguments support and question the theory of global warming?

TRANSFORMING DAILY LIFE



R U S S I A


U S A
 CHINA

 JAPAN

 INDIA

 Carbon dioxide emissions, thousands of metric tons 1,000,000+ 300,000 to 1,000,000 100,000 to 300,000 50,000 to 100,000 20,000 to 50,000 5,000 to 20,000 1,000 to 5,000 0 to 1,000

29.11 Global Carbon Dioxide Emissions
 This 2007 map depicts the proportion of carbon dioxide gases emitted from burning fossil fuels (mostly in factories and cars) by each nation. The United States and China were the worst polluters, along with Japan, Russia, and India.

 needed to change. Enjoying low gas prices few Americans felt compelled to invest time or money into developing “green” technology. National security concerns proved more effective in motivating the nation to re-examine its energy policy. The United States imported 65 percent of its oil, with Canada providing the largest share. After 9/11, a consensus emerged that the ongoing American presence in the Middle East (which provided 11 percent of the oil Americans consumed) bred resentment among Arab populations that helped Islamist terrorists recruit members.

 Republicans and Democrats, however, disagreed over how to wean the nation off its dependence on foreign oil. The Bush administration championed bolstering oil production at home by lifting restrictions on drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, a nationally protected wilderness in Alaska. This proposal enraged environmentalists and Democrats who worried that drilling accidents could contaminate this pristine area. They also feared losing valuable time in the battle against global warming by continuing, rather than ending, fossil fuel consumption.

 “We are entering a period of consequences.”

 “Global warming—at least the modern nightmare version—is a myth.”

AL GORE,
who won the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize for publicizing the global warming crisis 
View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Global Warming:
Good Science or Media Hype?


 British botanist DAVID BELLAMY

 What accounts for the disparity in carbon dioxide emissions on this map?



 CHAPTER 29

BUILDING A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE UNITED STATES, 1989–2011

New Threats in the
Post–Cold War World
 Middle East oil remained critical to the American economy throughout the 1990s and 2010s. Containing Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein presented an ongoing challenge for Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush. Ethnic cleansing in Eastern Europe and Africa raised additional questions of how much responsibility America should assume to prevent massacres worldwide. When Islamic terrorists attacked U.S. targets overseas and at home, competing visions also arose over how to defend the nation from this new threat.

Ethnic Cleansing
 and Terrorism In the 1990s, the nation faced a new foreign policy dilemma: when or whether to intercede on humanitarian grounds to stop massacres in parts of the world strategically unimportant to the United States. In 1992, images of a civil-war induced famine in Somalia, a country in East Africa, flooded American airwaves and newspapers. This image of a Somali woman and her starving child (29.12) echoed the Madonna and Child compositions used

29.12 and
29.13 Competing
Views of Civil
Turmoil in Somalia,
1992 and 1993
 Photographs like this one of a starving Somali woman and child prompted Americans to demand that the United States send troops to end the civil war responsible for the famine. A year later, angered by a photograph of Somali rebels dragging the corpse of an American soldier through the streets, Americans called for the return of U.S. troops. Both images encouraged Americans to view African nations as dysfunctional places where famine and fighting were endemic.

 How did media coverage influence American views of Africa?

 by Jacob Riis during the Gilded Age (see Chapter 17) and Dorothea Lange during the Depression (see Chapter 22) to rally popular support for aiding the poor. President George H. W. Bush responded to the public outcry by sending U.S. troops to help UN peacekeepers restore order, aid that incoming President Bill Clinton continued. Public opinion shifted dramatically in 1993, however, when news cameras captured the image of cheering Somalis dragging the corpse of an American soldier through the streets of Mogadishu, the capital city of Somalia, after rebel Somali warlords downed a U.S. helicopter (29.13). The

NEW THREATS IN THE POST–COLD WAR WORLD

 public now demanded an immediate withdrawal, and Clinton complied. The UN also withdrew its troops, and years of anarchy in Somalia followed. Reluctant to jeopardize American soldiers’ lives again, Clinton proceeded cautiously in April 1994 when Hutus, the majority ethnic group in Rwanda, a nation in Central Africa, unleashed a 100-day genocidal rampage that killed 800,000 Tutsis, a minority ethic group. This time Clinton came under attack for failing to intervene decisively with force. The photo of Somalis desecrating the corpse of an American soldier had other repercussions. Osama bin Laden, the Saudi exile who headed al-Qaeda, a fundamentalist Islamic terrorist organization, concluded that terrorist attacks against the United States would work, because Americans had no stomach for casualties. “One American pilot was dragged in the streets of Mogadishu [and] you left…. the extent of your impotence and weaknesses became very clear,” he jeered in 1996. Such pronouncements caused Paul Watson, the photojournalist who took the Pulitzer-prize winning image, to conclude that the “storm of outrage” over his photo taught terrorists that they could rely on publicity in the Western media to amplify the impact of their terrorist attacks. During his first years in office, Clinton also had to respond to “ethnic cleansing,” the intentional mass killing of one ethnic group by another, in the Balkans, a mountainous region of southeastern Europe. When Communist Yugoslavia dissolved in 1991, ethnic and religious differences provoked a civil war among Croatia, Bosnia, and Serbia, all former parts of Yugoslavia. Clinton resisted intervening until July 1995 when Serbian forces forced 25,000 Bosnian Muslim women and children to leave the town of Srebrenica, and murdered the 7,500 Muslim men and boys who remained behind. The United States participated in NATO air strikes of Serbian military positions and helped broker the 1995 Dayton Peace Accords, which settled disputed territorial boundaries and placed NATO troops (including Americans) on the ground as peacekeepers. Preoccupied with humanitarian tragedies overseas, Americans paid less attention in the early 1990s to signs that the terrorist threat was moving closer to home. Many Arabs saw the United States and Israel as one, blaming both for taking away land that belonged to the Palestinians. Overseas hostagetakings and plane hijackings in the 1970s and 1980s kept the Arab-Israeli conflict in the news. In 1993, Kuwaiti and Iraqi-born terrorists exploded a massive car bomb in the parking garage of the World Trade



 Center, two towering skyscrapers in the heart of New York City’s financial district that housed governmental agencies and companies involved in foreign trade. The explosion killed six people and created a six-story hole in the ground. The FBI captured the culprits easily when one tried to recover his deposit from a car rental agency for the van used in the attack. Reassured that law enforcement agencies had done their job and that the terrorists were inept, the public and government quickly forgot the incident. But al-Qaeda, which maintained training bases in Afghanistan, resolved to try again. Determined to launch a jihad, or holy war against Western nonbelievers, bin Laden relied on his family’s fortune and donations from Saudi Arabians to construct a clandestine terrorist network that recruited disciples from the Middle East, Asia, and Africa. Not all terrorist threats during this period originated overseas. On April 19, 1995, Timothy McVeigh parked a rental truck filled with explosives in front of a federal building in Oklahoma City. The blast killed 168 people, including many children in a day care center, and wounded 800. McVeigh and his accomplice Terry Nichols viewed the attack as payback for the federal government’s recent assaults against private paramilitary groups and their rural compounds filled with caches of weapons. Militia supporters like McVeigh rejected any legal restriction on their Second Amendment right to bear arms, citing gun laws as just one example of government tyranny. The bombing remained the deadliest terrorist attack against American civilians until 9/11. Meanwhile al-Qaeda attacked U.S. targets overseas. Issuing a fatwa, or religious decree, declaring war against all Americans, bin Laden demanded that the United States remove its troops from Saudi Arabia (stationed there since the 1991 Persian Gulf War) and end its support of Israel. “It is more important for Muslims to kill Americans than other infidels,” bin Laden declared. This pronouncement was more than rhetoric. In August 1998, al-Qaeda terrorists bombed the U.S. embassies in Nairobi, the capital of Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, a city in Tanzania. Clinton ordered an immediate retaliatory attack, and tomahawk cruise missiles rained down on eight al-Qaeda training camps in Afghanistan and on a pharmaceutical plant in Sudan, which was thought to have supplied bin Laden with chemical weapons. His advisors presented Clinton with competing views over the next possible step. His antiterrorist advisor recommended continuing the bombing until the Taliban, Afghanistan’s fundamentalist Islamic

 Why did foreign and domestic terrorists attack Americans?



 CHAPTER 29

29.14 The World
Trade Center
Collapses
 This photograph conveyed the panic that spread through lower Manhattan as rubble and smoke from the collapsing World Trade Center towers rained down on the streets.

BUILDING A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE UNITED STATES, 1989–2011

 government, turned bin Laden over to the United States. Pentagon officials opposed sustained bombing, worried that mounting civilian casualties would inflame anti-American sentiments throughout the Middle East. Assassinating bin Laden, others argued, would turn him into a martyr whose death fundamentalists would certainly avenge. Faced with these conflicting views, Clinton chose to rely on the CIA to thwart terrorist attacks against U.S. targets overseas. These covert agents uncovered several planned attacks but failed to prevent al-Qaeda from sending a small explosiveladen boat into the side of the USS Cole, a destroyer, which was anchored near the Middle Eastern

 How did the nation and government respond to the 9/11 attacks?

 country of Yemen. The October 12, 2000, assault killed 17 sailors and injured 40. Clinton left office still waiting for verification that al-Qaeda was behind this attack. Incoming President George W. Bush received that confirmation, but had not settled on a response when al-Qaeda struck again on September 11, 2001.

9/11
 On the morning of September 11, 2001, in an attack that became known as 9/11, 19 terrorists operating from al-Qaeda cells inside the United States hijacked four planes. The terrorists, from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Lebanon, and the United Arab Emirates, flew two planes into the World Trade Center towers, and a third into the Pentagon. The fourth plane crashed in Shanksville, Pennsylvania, after the passengers seized control of the cockpit, thwarting the terrorist plan to fly it into the Capitol. On this “day of terror,” Americans watched in horror as the World Trade Center towers crumbled, causing rescue workers, victims, and onlookers to run for safety as the massive structures collapsed in a heap (29.14). A total of 2,973 people died in the attacks. President Bush immediately announced that “we will make no distinction between the terrorists who committed these acts and those who harbor them.” He issued an ultimatum to Afghanistan’s Taliban government: turn over al-Qaeda members living there, including bin Laden, or face invasion. The Taliban refused. Receiving overwhelming support from Congress, the American people, and most foreign nations, the United States attacked Afghanistan on October 7, 2001. U.S. forces first bombed al-Qaeda training camps and arms depots, and then joined with the Northern Alliance, an Afghan rebel group, to drive the Taliban from power. The two-month conflict failed, however, to capture bin Laden, who had likely escaped into the mountains of neighboring Pakistan with help from Pakistani sympathizers. Most Americans had supported the invasion, but many grew uneasy about how the Bush administration was conducting the war. These critics accused Bush of condoning torture by allowing CIA agents to use water-boarding, an interrogation tactic that simulated drowning, to try to extract information from captured al-Qaeda suspects held prisoner at the U.S. naval base in Guantánamo Bay in Cuba. The decision to incarcerate captured prisoners indefinitely at Guantánamo Bay, denying them the right to a fair trial, also aroused controversy.

Read the Document George Bush, Address to Congress
(September 20, 2001)


NEW THREATS IN THE POST–COLD WAR WORLD

 Responding to criticism that the nation’s security agencies had failed to prevent the 9/11 attack, the president created the Department of Homeland Security, a new umbrella organization that housed the nation’s intelligence-gathering and law enforcement agencies. He also secured congressional approval for the 2001 Patriot Act, which expanded the government’s investigative and police powers. Critics soon attacked the law as an unconstitutional assault on civil liberties. This 2002 political cartoon by Pulitzer Prize winner Clay Bennett (29.15) exposed a familiar wartime dilemma—how to protect the nation against enemy agents operating on American soil while simultaneously safeguarding the privacy rights of Americans. In the cartoon determined federal workers remove planks from a couple’s home to build a security fence, exposing their personal lives to public scrutiny. In the weeks after the 9/11 attacks, the FBI arrested hundreds of Arabs and Muslims in an effort to destroy any remaining al-Qaeda cells in the United States. Acting hastily, and often

 on flimsy evidence, the FBI caught innocent people in its dragnet, and some spent months in jail before being released. Scores of Arab Americans, like Japanese Americans in World War II, hung American flags outside their businesses to counter suspicions that all Muslims were terrorists. In 2007, a federal court overturned the sections of the Patriot Act that made it easier for the government to secure search warrants as well as Internet and phone records.



29.15 Security
 versus Privacy, This cartoon suggests that invading the privacy of Americans under the guise of increasing security worsened, rather than improved, their lives.

The Iraq War
 America’s “war on terror” soon spread to Iraq. Containing Saddam Hussein’s ambition to acquire weapons of mass destruction (nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons) had been an ongoing goal since the end of the 1991 Persian Gulf War. In 1998, the UN halted its weapons inspection program after Iraq refused to continue cooperating. President Clinton subsequently authorized Operation Desert Fox, a four-day

 How do governmental efforts to prevent internal enemy attacks after 9/11 compare to those during World Wars I and II?



 CHAPTER 29

BUILDING A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE UNITED STATES, 1989–2011

 bombing campaign in December 1998 against 100 Iraqi military targets to destroy any weapons Saddam was hiding. Neoconservatives publicly urged Clinton to make removing Saddam a goal of American foreign policy. They had the chance to advance their views more forcefully once Bush appointed neoconservatives to key defenserelated positions, including Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld and Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz. This core of key neoconservative defense policy advisors included Vice President Dick Cheney. Reversing his previous stand when he had counseled the first President Bush to stop the Persian Gulf War without attacking Baghdad, Cheney, along with others, urged the president to attack Iraq while public concern about national security remained high. “Do we wait and hope he doesn’t do what we know he is capable of, which is distributing weapons of mass destruction to anonymous terrorists, or do we take preemptive action?” asked neoconservative Richard Perle, chairman of the Defense Policy Board. These advisors championed preemptive war, the doctrine that the United States should use force to remove hostile regimes before they could pose a serious threat.

 “Our security will require all Americans to be forward-looking and resolute, to be ready for preemptive action when necessary to defend our liberty and to defend our lives.” President GEORGE W. BUSH, announcing a shift in foreign policy from containment to preemption, 2002 State Department officials, especially Secretary of State Colin Powell, disagreed. They offered a competing vision that relied on the same Cold War–era containment policies that had eventually toppled the Soviet Union. Those urging restraint worried that a hostile fundamentalist Islamic government might replace Saddam’s secular regime, fueling rather than dampening the terrorist threat against the United States. “Better the devil we know than the one we don’t,” one high-ranking intelligence official reasoned. Choices and Consequences: Launching a Preemptive War examines

 What debates occurred within the Bush administration over going to war against Iraq in 2003?

 the options before Bush as he made his decision to attack Iraq. Having privately resolved to topple Saddam Hussein, Bush began laying the groundwork for sending American troops into Iraq. In September 2002, his administration announced a new national security strategy. The Bush Doctrine established the unilateral right to attack nations that harbored terrorists, to launch preemptive military strikes to prevent future attacks on the United States, and to replace autocratic governments with democratically elected ones. The inclusion of preemptive war was new, but other parts of the Bush Doctrine reiterated key principles announced by Bush’s father when he defined a new post–Cold War direction for American foreign policy in 1992. Neoconservative Paul Wolfowitz played a key role in both administrations, devising a foreign policy that aggressively protected America’s singular status as the world’s strongest military power. In building his case for war, the president repeatedly claimed that Saddam Hussein possessed weapons of mass destruction and had links to terrorist organizations, including al-Qaeda. By the summer of 2002, this rhetoric had convinced 54 percent of the American public of the falsehood that Saddam was responsible for the 9/11 attacks. To win support in the international community and at home, Bush sought both a UN resolution demanding that Iraq readmit weapons inspectors and a congressional joint resolution authorizing the use of force to enforce UN mandates and remove the “continuing threat” that Saddam posed. In arguing for war the administration pointed to secret correspondence between Iraq and Niger provided by Italian intelligence agents indicating that between 1999 and 2001 Saddam had made overtures to buy uranium oxide, material used to build a nuclear bomb, from Niger. Some CIA agents, including the envoy sent to Niger to investigate, privately doubted that Saddam had tried to buy uranium from Niger. This charge, however, convinced wavering Democrats to support the war. When the International Atomic Energy Agency announced that these incriminating letters were indeed forgeries, antiwar advocates charged that Bush had deliberately misled the country to build his case for war. The Iraq War followed the same pattern as the 1991 Persian Gulf War—intense bombing followed by a ground invasion. The bombing campaign began on March 19, 2003, and within three weeks

Read the Document George W. Bush, National Security Strategy
 of the United States of America (2002)

NEW THREATS IN THE POST–COLD WAR WORLD



Choices and Consequences
LAUNCHING A PREEMPTIVE WAR
In 2002, the Bush administration feared that Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein had acquired, or was on the verge of acquiring, nuclear weapons and was developing chemical and biological weapons. President Bush worried that once Hussein acquired a sizeable arsenal, he would use it against his neighbors, including Israel, and help terrorists attack the United States. His advisors gave Bush three options about how to proceed. 
Choices




 Launch a preemptive war to remove Saddam from power.



 Work through the UN to impose economic sanctions and send weapons inspectors to Iraq.



 Support Iraqi exiles’ plan to organize a coup that might trigger a mass uprising.

Decision
 In February 2002, Bush decided to fight. He announced that Saddam harbored weapons of mass destruction and had aided al-Qaeda. He made a half-hearted effort to work with the UN to reconstitute the weapons inspection program halted in 1998 and secured support from a handful of potential allies if the United States went to war. Announcing that Saddam had refused to cooperate adequately with UN weapons inspectors, the United States attacked Iraq on March 19, 2003.

Consequences
 Active combat lasted three weeks and toppled Saddam. No weapons of mass destruction were found. Iraq elected a democratic government that struggled to contain ethnic and religious strife. U.S. forces came under daily attack until a surge of troops in 2008 weakened rebel insurgencies.

 Looking for a coherent Iraq policy, Jack Ohman, The Oregonian, 2002

Continuing Controversies
 Was the Iraq War justified? Supporters of Bush’s policies argued that removing Saddam benefited the Iraqi people and the world. Building a stable, democratic, and militarily weakened Iraq was necessary to protect American interests in the strategically and economically important Persian Gulf. The 9/11 attacks demonstrated that the United States must act aggressively and preemptively overseas to prevent future strikes on its own soil. Critics argued that Bush misled the American

 people by making false claims that Saddam possessed weapons of mass destruction and had ties to al-Qaeda. The war made America less secure by fanning antiAmerican sentiments in the Middle East that helped al-Qaeda recruit and diverted resources from the war in Afghanistan, where al-Qaeda was regrouping. Preemptive war set a dangerous precedent that lowered the threshold for going to war to simply feeling threatened by another nation.

 What justifications and criticisms did the doctrine of preventative war arouse?



 CHAPTER 29

BUILDING A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE UNITED STATES, 1989–2011

 American troops were in Baghdad. On April 10, 2003, USA Today was one of many newspapers and television newscasts (29.16) showing an Iraqi crowd enlisting the aid of U.S. Marines to pull down a huge statue of Saddam. “The toppling of Saddam Hussein’s statue in Baghdad will be recorded alongside the fall of the Berlin Wall as one of the great moments of liberty,” Bush proclaimed. Although the event was initially seen as emblematic of Iraqi celebration over the fall of Saddam, subsequent reports suggested that American army personnel had staged the event in a square across from the hotel housing international journalists to create a positive iconic image of the war similar to the World War II image of U.S. Marines raising the flag on Iwo Jima (see Chapter 23). The controversy surrounding the picture mirrored Americans’ debate over whether the war was based on lies or was, as Bush and his

 supporters maintained, spreading democracy to the Middle East. After active combat operations ceased, American troops faced a host of problems that kept them in Iraq. Widespread looting greeted the fall of Saddam Hussein, who eluded capture until December 13, 2003. He was held in prison, then put on trial and executed on December 30, 2006. Restoring law and order and creating a new democratic government proved difficult as Sunnis, Shiites, and Kurds divided along ethnic and religious lines. American soldiers caught up in the emerging civil war provided inviting targets for suicide bombers, while Iran and alQaeda penetrated Iraq to expand their influence in the region. Controversy over the war continued at home, especially when scandalous photographs taken by soldiers at the American-run Abu Ghraib prison circulated in the mainstream media and on the Internet in 2004. While interrogating prisoners U.S. guards had taken photos of prisoners forced into humiliating sexual positions and being threatened with dogs. Other photos showed smiling American soldiers standing beside beaten and bloody corpses. As with the 1968 My Lai massacre in Vietnam (see Chapter 26), Americans held strong competing visions on what they felt the photos represented. Some saw rogue soldiers acting on their own; others blamed the president for authorizing brutal interrogating techniques on suspected terrorists. Another group sidestepped the moral question and instead debated whether torture produced valuable information or simply encouraged suspects to say what interrogators 29.16 “Baghdad Falls,” April 10, 2003 wanted to hear. Initial news reports spoke of jubilant crowds cheering as U.S. Marines helped them pull down a statue of Saddam Hussein, but later reports suggested that the army had staged the incident.

 What accomplishments and setbacks did the United States experience in the Iraq War?

NEW THREATS IN THE POST–COLD WAR WORLD

The Election of 2008
 In 2004, Bush won reelection against Democratic challenger Massachusetts Senator John Kerry, a Vietnam War veteran whose record both as a decorated officer and peace activist came under Republican attack during the campaign. Despite the growing unpopularity of the war in Iraq, the fresh memories of 9/11 bolstered Bush’s argument that only he could adequately protect the nation against terrorism. In a close election Bush won the popular vote by only 3 percent and captured the Electoral College 286 to 252. By 2008, however, the president’s approval rates had sunk to historic lows—only Truman and Nixon had polled lower. These lows reflected the nation’s unease with its seemingly permanent presence in Iraq and recoil at the White House’s initial failure to react when Hurricane Katrina devastated New Orleans’ predominantly black neighborhoods in 2005. In the 2008 presidential contest, Democratic and Republican candidates both repudiated the Bush administration and ran campaigns that promised change. The election soon assumed historic dimensions when Hillary Rodham Clinton, the former First Lady and now a senator from New York, announced her candidacy. Clinton had a long record of public service dedicated to healthcare issues, but her initial support for the war in Iraq angered antiwar Democrats. Firstterm Illinois Senator Barack Obama, the 47-year-old son of a white woman from Kansas and an African father, astutely campaigned on his own consistent opposition to the war. When the crowded Democratic field narrowed to Clinton and Obama, the 2008 election was guaranteed to make history. For the first time either a woman or an African American would head the national Democratic ticket. At the end of a bruising primary battle, Obama prevailed to become the Democratic nominee. In the general election Obama faced Republican John McCain, a former Navy pilot whom the Communist Vietnamese had held captive for six years during the Vietnam War. The 72-year-old senator from Arizona had a reputation as a maverick for occasionally breaking ranks with fellow Republicans. Hoping to make some history of his own, and perhaps woo Clinton supporters, McCain selected Alaska Governor Sarah Palin as his running mate— only the second time that a woman had received this honor. Obama pledged to end the war in Iraq quickly and roll back the Bush-era tax cuts for the wealthy, while McCain supported both. Debate over the Iraq War

Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Historical
Significance of the 2008 Election




 faded when a cascade of bank and insurance company failures sent the stock market into a tailspin. In the midst of the crisis, economists offered the following explanation for the downturn that future investigations may or may not confirm. During the last five years, as housing prices rose dramatically and Congress deregulated the banking and financial industries, banks had made numerous risky loans that let people purchase homes they could not afford, and Wall Street brokers had invested heavily in mortgage-backed securities. When housing prices started declining in summer 2007, the dominos began to fall. Bank foreclosures on people who could not pay their mortgages increased, and even more ominously, the declining value of mortgage-backed securities threatened to bankrupt leading Wall Street firms, wiping out many Americans’ retirement investments. To stabilize the mortgage market, the government took over two leading lenders, Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae. Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson refused to intervene when Lehman Brothers, a major investment firm, went bankrupt in September 2008. This bankruptcy shocked the financial sector. Credit markets froze as banks stopped lending and investors began moving money from stocks and bonds to U.S. Treasury notes. By mid-September the Bush administration decided that an infusion of $700 billion was needed to unfreeze the credit markets and stop the stock market’s freefall. Enraged House Republicans revolted. In their view the government “bail-out” used taxpayer money to reward bad behavior. Many Democrats accepted the competing view that the government would recoup this money when the economy and value of these investments improved. Congress eventually authorized the funds, which Paulson used to infuse capital directly into banks rather than buying low-valued assets. What happened to this money became a major political question, still unanswered. Obama was a captivating orator who drew thousands to his rallies. Even Hillary Clinton campaigned for him. Obama drew enthusiastic support from whites and blacks; young and old; Hispanic and Asian.

 “[I]t is that American spirit—that American promise—that pushes us forward even when the path is uncertain.” BARACK OBAMA, accepting the 2008 presidential Democratic nomination

 What factors led to the economic downturn in 2008?



 CHAPTER 29

BUILDING A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE UNITED STATES, 1989–2011

29.17 “Obamanania”
 Almost overnight Barack Obama became an American icon, a boon to Washington, D.C.area gift shops selling souvenirs to the 2 million people who braved freezing temperatures to see Obama inaugurated as the nation’s 44th president on January 20, 2009.

 Exuding confidence, calm, and charm, Obama amassed an inspired following who put his likeness on posters, vans, t-shirts, bridges, boats, and even tattoos. The image of Obama on the souvenir mugs in this photo (29.17) came from an iconic poster by artist Shepard Fairey. The mugs paired Obama’s silhouette with the campaign’s catchphrase: “Change we can believe in.” By contrast, Fairey’s poster carried the single word “Hope,” a message that detractors modified into “Nope” on their own tee-shirts and bumper stickers. An intensely disciplined candidate, Obama stuck to a clear message of economic reform. The McCain campaign was more erratic, one day highlighting economics; the next portraying Obama as the heir to sixties-era radicalism. Thanks to support from swing voters (those without strong ideological convictions), momentum for Obama built throughout the fall. On November 4, 2008, he became the first African American president of the United States by winning a decisive victory: 365 to 173 electoral votes, and 53 percent of the popular vote.

Troubled Times
 Obama’s emphasis on change during the campaign raised liberals’ expectations that he would move quickly to regulate Wall Street, enact universal health care, end the ban on gays in the military, and

 How did past civil rights activism help make Obama’s election possible?

 withdraw from Iraq and Afghanistan. Conservatives, however, adamantly opposed enlarging the role and cost of government. Within this highly contentious partisan environment, Obama found himself under attack from the right and left. The economic crisis posed the most immediate challenge for Obama. With the Democrats controlling both the House and Senate, he quickly secured passage of a massive government spending bill to stimulate the economy. Republicans (including many who had supported Bush’s deficit spending) vehemently opposed increasing the national debt. When the economy failed to rebound quickly, two competing views on the stimulus spending emerged. The Obama administration asserted that the infusion of government money prevented another Great Depression by staving off the collapse of the nation’s financial institutions and averting massive layoffs. Republicans countered that ineffective government interference stymied the recovery, leaving taxpayers with a bill that would take generations to pay off. Liberals urged Obama to hold Wall Street accountable for the misdeeds that caused the economic meltdown, and Congress did strengthen regulatory oversight of financial institutions. Americans increasingly, however, directed their anger over the ongoing economic crisis at Washington. Concerns about the escalating debt and federal power energized

Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Connection
Between Obama and Lincoln


NEW THREATS IN THE POST–COLD WAR WORLD

 grassroots conservatives, who used social networking media to draw crowds to their initial demonstrations. The spectacular rise of the Tea Party movement had begun, named to evoke the revolutionary spirit of the 1774 Boston Tea Party. Support from conservative television pundits and high-profile politicians like Sarah Palin also fueled the movement’s growth. By actively opposing the president’s health insurance reform initiative, the Tea Party solidified its influence within Republican circles. In pushing for health-care reform, Obama hoped to succeed where Truman and Clinton had failed. J.R. Rose’s 2009 political cartoon aptly captured the political divide that characterized this rancorous debate (29.18). To marshal support, Obama cited the many uninsured (16 percent of the population, or 47 million people), rising health-care and insurance costs, and troubling industry practices such as lifetime limits on coverage. Opting for a reform of private health insurance practices rather than the single-payer government-run system liberals favored, Obama angered his base and did little to assuage conservatives. Health insurance reform legislation passed in 2010 without receiving a single Republican vote amid liberal criticism that the law did too little. The law’s requirement that all Americans purchase health insurance became a flashpoint for conservatives and independents worried about intrusive governmental power. States immediately challenged the constitutionality of this mandate. The mixed rulings in federal district courts suggested that the Supreme Court would ultimately determine whether Obama’s attempt to establish universal healthcare would prevail. Sweeping Republican victories in the 2010 mid-term elections included Tea Party candidates who vowed to curb the power of government by repealing the healthcare law, cutting the federal budget, and making Bush-era tax cuts permanent. Focused on fiscal issues, Tea Party activists had less interest in championing conservatives’ traditional social and cultural agenda. Instead of rallying supporters to reverse the 2010 repeal of the military’s “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” policy that prevented gay servicemen from openly acknowledging their sexual orientation, the Tea Party used its influence within the Republican

 Party to demand a permanent reduction in the size and scope of the federal budget. Liberal disenchantment with Obama stemmed mainly from his foreign policy decisions, especially escalating the war in Afghanistan and continued operation of the Guantanamo Bay prison. Obama prohibited the use of water-boarding, but reaffirmed the Bush-era policy of holding prisoners indefinitely without charges. Sending an additional 30,000 troops to Afghanistan in October 2009, Obama tried to reassure his liberal base by setting a tentative withdrawal date of 2014 from Afghanistan. Obama satisfied Americans of all political persuasions when he announced on May 2, 2011 that U.S. Special Forces had tracked down and killed Osama bin Laden in his Pakistani hideout. Documents recovered during the raid provided crucial intelligence that allowed Obama to claim that the United States for the moment had the upper-hand in the war on terror. He also moved decisively to draw down forces in Iraq. An influx of U.S. troops in 2008 had reduced insurgent attacks, both improving the public’s views of the Iraq War and strengthening Obama’s claim that the war had been won. In October 2011 Obama announced that the U.S. military would leave Iraq by year’s end. “After nearly nine years, America’s war in Iraq will be over,” he announced, a decision supported by 75% of Americans.



A
Vigorous Debate.
 During the yearlong debate over health insurance reform Democrats and Republicans articulated competing visions of the role that the federal government should play in American society.

 What challenges did Obama confront during his first two years in office?



 CHAPTER 29

BUILDING A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE UNITED STATES, 1989–2011









Fall of the Berlin Wall


Persian Gulf War


 Symbolizes demise of communism in Eastern Europe

 United States announces intention to build “a new world order”

 UN withdraws weapon inspectors from an uncooperative Iraq

 al-Qaeda strikes USS Cole near Yemen

 Chinese students occupy Tiananmen Square

 Soviet Union ceases to exist

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Communist government violently suppresses pro-democracy movement

 United States declares victory in the Cold War

 Growing U.S. alarm over Saddam’s drive to acquire nuclear weapons

President Bill Clinton
 impeached Cleared of charges, but scandal mars Clinton’s second term

 Precursor to 9/11 attacks inside the United States

 George W. Bush elected president Controversy over disputed recount in Florida divides the nation

Review Questions
 1. What values and ideas shaped key American foreign policy decisions in this period?

 4. How did the media shape American attitudes about world events?

 2. What controversies emerged over immigration and gay marriage?

 5. How did the United States reconcile its domestic values with its new imperialistic ventures in the world from 1989–2009?

 3. How did liberals and conservatives modify their long-standing visions of the role government should play?

Key Terms
 Powell Doctrine General Colin Powell’s assertion that the nation should go to war only as a last resort when the president had full support from the nation and the international community, could employ overwhelming military force to win without serious loss of American life, and had a clear exit strategy. “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” The policy instituted during the Clinton era that allowed closeted homosexuals and lesbians, gays who kept their sexual preferences hidden, to serve in the military. North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) A 1992 treaty that lifted trade barriers among the United States, Mexico, and Canada. “compassionate conservatism” A philosophical approach to governing that emphasized using private industry, charities, and religious institutions, rather than the government, to provide community services.

 global warming The scientific theory that widespread burning of fossil fuels emitted greenhouse gases into the atmosphere that caused average global temperatures to rise. al-Qaeda A fundamentalist Islamic terrorist organization led by Saudi exile Osama bin Laden. 9/11 September 11, 2001, was the day of al-Qaeda attacks on the United States; terrorists hijacked four planes and flew two into the World Trade Center towers and one into the Pentagon; one crashed on a field in Shanksville, Pennsylvania. Patriot Act A controversial 2001 law that greatly expanded the government’s investigative and police powers. preemptive war The notion that the United States should remove hostile regimes with force before they could pose a serious threat. Bush Doctrine Established the unilateral right to attack nations that harbored terrorists, to launch preemptive military strikes to prevent future attacks on the United States, and to replace autocratic governments with democratically elected ones.

CHAPTER REVIEW











 al-Qaeda launches 9/11 attacks

 Iraq War begins

 Economic downturn begins

 Tea Party emerges

 United States begins “war on terror” overseas and at home

 Preemptive war puts U.S. troops in Iraq indefinitely

 Economists predict worst financial crisis since the Great Depression

 Grassroots conservative movement emphasizes limited government

Barack Obama
 elected president

 Health insurance overall

 Congress passes the Patriot Act Americans debate whether law protects nation or violates civil liberties

 First African American elected president

 Establishes universal healthcare system

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Building a New World Order.

Questions for Analysis
 1. Why does Wilson conclude that class matters more than race in explaining urban poverty? Read the Document William Julius Wilson, The Urban Underclass, p. 880

 2. How did the president justify military action against Iraq in 1991?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • George H. W. Bush Inaugural Address (1989), p. 876 • Articles of Impeachment Against William Jefferson Clinton, p. 885 • George Bush, Address to Congress (September 20, 2001), p. 896

View the Closer Look
• Images as History: The Fall of the Berlin Wall, p. 878
• Competing Visions: The Economic Costs of Immigration, p. 891


Read the Document George Bush, Allied Military Action in
 the Persian Gulf (1991), p. 882

 3. What are the competing views on global warming? View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Global Warming: Good Science or Media Hype?, p. 893

 4. What new vision of America’s role in the world followed 9/11? Read the Document George W. Bush, National Security Strategy of the United States of America (2002), p. 898

 5. What is the historical significance of electing the nation’s first African American president? Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Historical Significance of the 2008 Election, p. 901

 View the Image ENIAC computer, p. 888 Watch the Video • President George Bush’s Early Response in the Persian Gulf War, p. 881 • Bill Clinton Sells Himself to America: Presidential Campaign Ad (1992), p. 884 • Video Lecture: The Connection Between Obama and Lincoln, p. 902

