 the machinery,” a state of affairs they found “very demoralizing.” The industrial workplace was also extremely dangerous. Every year between 1880 and 1900, 35,000 workers (on average) were killed on the job and another 500,000 injured. This carnage resulted in part from the monotony of factory work, which led mind-numbed workers to make mistakes or fall asleep. But most injuries stemmed from the factory owners’ negligence. With no laws compelling them to make their workplaces less lethal, few industrialists were willing to pay for safety devices or procedures. Not until the early twentieth century did most states begin enacting laws requiring compensation be paid to injured workers or the families of killed workers (see Chapter 18). Another disturbing trend was the sharp rise in child labor. Before the Industrial Revolution children of farmers and artisans performed all sorts of work that contributed to the family economy—but always under the supervision of a parent or relative. Children working in industry, however, left their homes to work in factories and mines under the supervision of a manager rather than a parent. Between 1870 and 1900, the number of children younger than 16 working for wages—usually a fraction of those paid adults—skyrocketed from 700,000 to 1.7 million. Children as young as seven toiled long hours in dangerous conditions in mines and factories, at jobs that exposed them to dangerous and unhealthful conditions. The boy in this photograph (16.10) lost his arm while operating a power saw in a box factory. Many states passed laws prohibiting child labor, but they rarely enforced them.

Exploitation,
Intimidation,
 and Conflict of

The
 end

 Central to the transformation in the lives workers ushered in by industrialization was the increasing power exercised by employers in the workplace. Since profit was their paramount goal, employers imposed strict discipline on their workers. clock dominated the workplace, as employers demanded workers begin and their day (with a few short scheduled breaks) at precise times. Workers who

 Why were industrial workplaces so dangerous?

 arrived late or took unauthorized breaks were fined or fired. Some factories forbade workers to talk to one another—or even to whistle.

 “I make about three dollars a week, and my sister—she is only six years old—she does not make as much, sometimes a dollar a week, sometimes more.” An eight-year-old child laborer, New York, 1871 Enforcing these new rules was an increasingly important figure in the industrial workplace: the manager or foreman. In sharp contrast to the early nineteenth-century preindustrial economy, few workers now ever saw, let alone spoke to, their employer. Instead, they dealt with managers or foremen hired to run a factory as efficiently and profitably as possible. This meant pushing workers to meet production goals and firing those who could not keep up or caused trouble. Many foremen came from working-class backgrounds and treated workers fairly, but others could be abusive, especially to workers of a different ethnic background. Female workers were particularly vulnerable to abuse. In this drawing from 1888, the foreman in a garment factory shakes his fist at a weary woman, urging her to work faster (16.11). In the larger inset, the overworked woman sprawls on a bed in a dingy tenement. That this image ran under the sensational title The Female Slaves of New York in a popular newspaper that often expressed hostility toward workers indicates the notoriety the foreman had achieved in the garment industry by the late nineteenth century. Workers also found it difficult to organize labor unions. The first major effort to build a national labor movement after the Civil War began in 1866 when William Sylvis, a charismatic iron molder, founded the National Labor Union (NLU). A federation of independent craft unions, the NLU sought to unite skilled workers nationwide to secure demands such as a federal law establishing the eight-hour day and a federal department of labor. Its membership topped 300,000 (nearly all native-born white men in skilled trades)

Read the Document Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics of Labor,
 from “The Working Girls of Boston” (1884)

THE WORLD OF WORK TRANSFORMED



16.11 Exploiting Female Workers
 Shop floor foremen and managers became increasingly important as workplaces grew bigger. As demands for productivity grew, female workers were especially vulnerable to abusive foremen. The threat of overwork to the health of women is emphasized in the two insets. One depicts workers carrying heavy bundles of work home while another shows an exhausted laborer collapsed on her bed.

 by 1869. But Sylvis’s sudden death that year weakened the NLU, and the depression of the 1870s wiped it out. Most employers saw unions as threats to their profits and freedom to run their businesses as they wanted. Many hired spies to expose labor organizers so they could fire them and put them on blacklists, lists of workers that employers in a town or industry refused to hire because they were considered trouble-makers. During strikes, employers routinely hired replacement workers, and enjoyed the support of local officials who ordered policemen to drive away or arrest pickets gathered outside a workplace. If a labor dispute went to court, an employer could normally count on a favorable ruling by a judge or jury. On top of all this, workers faced one over-riding problem—few unions had the resources to support striking workers for more

 than a few weeks. Strikers, one worker attested, “have had nothing to combat capital with except their empty stomachs, while the capitalists have had unlimited financial resources and have been able to starve the workingmen into submission.” Rising worker frustration and anger led to more strikes and violence. Between 1881 and 1905, six million American workers participated in nearly 37,000 strikes. One particularly bitter incident took place in Pennsylvania. In response to the abusive policies of coal mine bosses in the 1860s, miners had formed a union called the Workingmen’s Benevolent Association (WBA). Many of its members were Irish immigrants, some of whom, drawing on the tradition of secret societies that resisted oppressive landlords in Ireland, formed a clandestine labor organization known as the Molly Maguires that carried out acts of intimidation, vandalism, violence, and murder against foremen and managers. In 1874, mine owners set out to destroy the WBA by convincing the public that it was one and the same as the Molly Maguires. Within a year this campaign resulted in more than 50 arrests and numerous convictions—many on questionable testimony and with little or no evidence. Twenty alleged Molly Maguires were hanged for murder, including ten on a single day, June 21, 1877. Note how in this drawing (16.12) public officials created a powerful public spectacle to emphasize the men’s guilt and, aware that

16.12 The
Pageantry of
Execution
On June 21, 1877,
“Black Thursday,”
 Pennsylvania officials staged carefully planned executions of ten convicted miners known as Molly Maguires.

 Why were employers so hostile to labor unions?



 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

 most of the region’s miners were Catholic, their sinfulness. Three weeks later, on July 14, 1877, the largest nineteenth century strike in the world erupted. The “Great Uprising” of railroad workers began in Martinsburg, West Virginia, and quickly spread to Baltimore, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, St. Louis, Chicago, and other cities. The strike involved thousands of workers, and violence emanated from both sides. In Pittsburgh, for example, soldiers opened fire on striking workers and their families, killing 25 and wounding 29. Enraged strikers and their supporters attacked the troops and destroyed all of the Pennsylvania Railroad terminal’s buildings and other property. The mainstream press criticized the railroads for slashing workers’ wages, but most dismissed labor activism as illegal, ill-informed, and un-American. (See Competing Visions: The Legitimacy of Unions.) While workers faced hostility from employers, politicians, and journalists, they also had to contend with animosity within the ranks of labor that often hindered their ability to organize. Deep hostility often existed between skilled and unskilled workers, who frequently saw little in common with each other. Workers were also riven by disputes arising from different ideologies, including varieties of socialism, a theory that rejected capitalism and advocated common ownership of private property and greater social and economic equality. They also argued the persistent question of whether workers’ interests were best

 served by pressuring the major political parties or by forming an independent labor party. Perhaps the most significant divisions among workers centered on race and ethnicity. A rising tide of immigration in the late nineteenth century increased the ethnic, racial, and religious diversity of an already diverse workforce, making it more difficult to unite them in common cause. For example, when hard times hit during the depression of the 1870s, anti-Chinese sentiment among American workers soared, leading to the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882 barring Chinese immigration to the United States. As the cartoon (16.13) from The Wasp demonstrates, Chinese workers were blamed for taking jobs from Americans. The artist depicts a 12-armed Chinese worker, drawn in racist caricature, laboring maniacally at a dozen tasks while young American-born workers stand idly near a factory. One of the workers is being hauled away by a policeman, implying that unemployment has led him to a life of crime. African American workers also faced racist hostility from white workers, especially when they began moving to Northern cities in the 1890s. Much of this hostility stemmed from the widely held racist beliefs of the day including the concept that all whites were superior to blacks. But it also emanated from the fear that African Americans would take jobs from white workers—a fear exacerbated when employers occasionally used black workers as strikebreakers.

16.13 Hard Times
Fuel Anti-Chinese
Racism
During the
 depression of 1873–1878, workers blamed high unemployment on Chinese immigrants, whom they accused of working long shifts for low wages.

 Why were industrial workers so divided?

Read the Document Chinese Exclusion Act


THE WORLD OF WORK TRANSFORMED



Competing Visions
THE LEGITIMACY OF UNIONS
Although conflict between workers and their employers often centered on wages and hours, it also occurred over the legitimacy of labor unions. Many Americans denounced unions as illegal, foolish, and un-American. The editor of Scribner’s Monthly, writing after the 1877 Great Uprising of railroad workers, reflects this view as does the image from Puck. Workers and their advocates like John Swinton, editor of a pro-labor newspaper in New York, offered a different vision of labor unions as vital organizations that protected workers from the exploitation. Why did employers find unions so objectionable, even dangerous? What benefits did workers see in unions? 
 Scribner’s Monthly (October 1877)

 John Swinton’s Paper (January 27, 1884)

 And now that it is over, it is a good time to ask once more what good has come from this strike, and what good has come of any strike. The laws of nature which, after all, govern the laws of trade … can never be overcome or circumvented by a strike. Labor will always command its value—no more, no less.… Strikes are always mistakes; they are often crimes. The day of the inauguration of trades unions and labor organizations in this country was a day the blackest and fullest of menace to the popular prosperity and peace that ever dawned upon the nation. They have been an unmitigated curse to employers and employed alike. The nature and purpose of these organizations are simply outrageous. They have been despotic toward their own members, oppressive toward the class in whose interest they pretend to have been established, impertinent and intermeddling. They have assumed the right to control property and business in which they had no more right than if they lived in the moon. There should be in the good sense of the great mass of laborers a reaction against this wretched crime, and this stupendous foolishness.

 There are many who cannot understand why Trades Unions exist here. They have heard them described as alien to the American craftsman, causing strikes, and raising ill-feeling generally between … employer and employe[e]. In the present state of industry, Trade Unions are a necessity, recognized as such by the great majority of intelligent workmen, … and securing for their members a partial degree of protection without which they would sink into depths as yet unfathomed. There is a hue and cry against the Unions as agencies that provoke strikes. In nine cases out of ten, strikes are made necessary by circumstances over which the Unions have no control whatever; sometimes they are a protest against unendurable reductions in wages … sometimes by unjust conduct on the part of bosses or corporations. No Union to-day orders a strike that can be avoided by reasonable means; no Union orders a strike without full consideration of the subject and after a fair vote.… But we are told that no strike ever brings any advantage to the strikers … This is a mistake that cannot be made by any one who has observed the results of strikes either in the United States or in any other country.… But strikes often fail,—yes, it is true. Capital often triumphs in the conflict with labor,—true again. Yet capital would be even harsher and more exacting than it is, if it were not for the protest of the strike, and the warning that it gives. The wages which, in many industries, are but little above the living point, would be put down and kept down to the starvation point, if the men accepted with submissive spirit every reduction of wages, and all the severe terms that capital tries to enforce.

 This Puck magazine cartoon from the mid-1880s portrayed labor union officials as tyrants who hurt the interests of workers.

 Why did labor activists argue that unions were defensive in nature?



 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

Women Employed
 in Offices Women Employed as Saleswomen

19,000 / 503,000


7,462 / 142,265


16.14 Rising
Numbers of
Women in the Paid
Workforce
Economic
 necessity and a desire for greater independence brought millions of women into jobs outside the home.



New Roles and Opportunities
 for Women Economic necessity brought millions of women into the paid workforce. Whereas just 13 percent of women worked outside the home in 1870, 20 percent did so by 1900. Nearly all these women were single and younger than 25. Domestic service (cooking, cleaning, and childcare in the homes of middleand upper-class families) remained the leading occupation for wage-earning women in this period, but many also took on factory work, especially in the garment and textile industries. Like their male counterparts, women factory workers labored at repetitive tasks for long hours in unsafe conditions—but for only half (or less) the wages of men. Employers justified this disparity by claiming women worked merely for extra money, whereas men worked to support whole families and therefore deserved higher pay. In fact, many working-class families depended for their survival on the earnings of wives and daughters. Factory owners simply paid them less because women were powerless to prevent it. The emergence of modern corporations requiring armies of secretaries, clerks, and stenographers, combined with the invention of the telephone,

 adding machine, and typewriter, created new opportunities for educated, native-born, white women (16.14). Teaching, social work, and, as indicated in the graduation photograph of the Philadelphia School for Nurses (16.15), nursing emerged in the late nineteenth century as almost exclusively female professions. Although these fields represented new opportunities for women, they were deemed appropriate because they drew on what was widely believed to be women’s “natural” role as nurturers. The pageantry evident in this photograph, especially the bright white and highly professional looking uniforms, the elegant setting of the Philadelphia Academy of Music, and the presence of Red Cross founder Clara Barton (seated at center), indicates the high reputation the profession had achieved by 1900. Regardless of the level of work, social custom dictated that women leave the paid workforce soon after they married (only five percent of married women worked outside the home in 1900). Of necessity, working-class women continued to earn money to support their families. Only now they did so from within the home by taking in boarders, laundry, and “piece work,” which paid by the piece rather than by the hour. Many more African American women, more out of economic necessity than custom, remained in the paid workforce even after marriage. In urban areas in both the North and South, many worked as domestic servants in white homes, cooking, cleaning, doing the laundry, and caring for children. These jobs required long hours and paid low wages, but racist hiring policies in industry and other sectors of the economy left African American women with few options.

16.15 Women
Find Opportunities
 in Nursing These graduates of the Philadelphia School for Nurses, with Red Cross founder Clara Barton at center, were among the thousands of young women in the late nineteenth century who became nurses.

 Why did more women enter the paid workforce?

View the Map Atlas Map: Changing Lives of American
Women, 1880–1930


CONFLICTING VISIONS OF INDUSTRIAL CAPITALISM



Conflicting Visions of
Industrial Capitalism
 As the Industrial Revolution unfolded in the late nineteenth century, Americans of all classes, occupations, and regions felt its impact. For many it was an age of wonder, marked by a succession of new inventions, ideas, and possibilities. Yet one did not have to look far for signs of anxiety, fear, and discontent. Numerous critics offered a different vision of society, emphasizing the growing poverty, gaps between rich and poor, and inequality.

Capitalism Championed
 Many Americans in the late nineteenth century celebrated industrial capitalism. Proponents noted that every year American industry produced more consumer goods, from inexpensive clothing in a dizzying array of colors and styles to exciting new products like phonographs and bicycles. It also generated new forms of transportation that allowed people, including the poor, to travel to new and different places. In farming industrial technology led to stupendous annual harvests, falling food prices, and a more varied diet for the average American, whose life expectancy rose from a mere 38.3 years for white men in 1850 to 50 years by 1910. The telegraph, telephone, and steampowered printing press allowed for the unprecedented spread of information and literacy (aided by an expanded public school system). And despite unrest, depressions, and strikes, real wages for the average worker rose 50 percent between 1860 and 1900 (74 percent for skilled workers and 31 percent for unskilled). To these optimists industrial capitalism meant progress. Of the enthusiastic champions of the new industrial order, none was more fervent and influential than Andrew Carnegie. He offset his harddriving corporate style with a carefully constructed public image designed to set him apart from many of his fellow industrialists who angered the public with arrogant pronouncements. The shipping and railroad magnate Cornelius Vanderbilt, for example, once brushed aside the suggestion that his business practices violated the law by saying, “Law! What do I care about the law? Ain’t I got the power?”

Read the Document Andrew Carnegie, “Wealth”


 In countless speeches and articles in prominent magazines, Carnegie defended the status quo and emphasized its virtues. Rejecting the claims of critics that industrialists like him were greedy, abusive monopolists, he insisted they were visionaries who built key industries that brought immeasurable benefits to Americans, including jobs for workers and products that improved the quality of life. Granted, Carnegie explained in what he came to call the “Gospel of Wealth,” he and other entrepreneurs had grown fabulously rich, but this was a necessary and beneficial result of a free economy. Without the hope of future riches, business leaders would not have the incentive to seek new opportunities, take risks, and develop new products.

 “I can hire one half of the working class to kill the other half.” Financier and railroad magnate JAY GOULD Carnegie and other champions of big business also emphasized that industrial fortunes could be— and increasingly were—used to fund philanthropic projects such as schools and libraries. In the 1880s and 1890s he emerged as the nation’s most ostentatious philanthropist. In 1901 he sold his steel empire to financier J. P. Morgan for $400 million and then donated most of it to various causes, including thousands of public libraries. For a man who was both conservative and optimistic, libraries appeared the perfect form of charity because they

 How did business leaders like Carnegie defend industrial capitalism?



 CHAPTER 16

16.16 The
Carnegie Library
 and Floor Plan in Lincoln, Nebraska As a symbol of the virtue of industrial capitalism and the spirit of individual uplift, steel magnate Andrew Carnegie funded nearly 1,700 public libraries in America. The exterior designs reflected the popularity of classical styles circa 1900. The interiors emphasized the industrial values of order and efficiency.

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

 provided ambitious, hard-working, and intelligent people opportunities to better themselves, instead of handouts. This Carnegie library (16.16), built in Lincoln, Nebraska, in 1901, typified the more than 2,500 (1,689 in the United States) libraries funded by Carnegie between 1886 and 1929. Communities awarded a library were allowed to pick their own architectural style. Most, like Lincoln, opted for some variation on the popular neoclassical style. But Carnegie and the staff that oversaw the program insisted that library interiors stress efficiency and order—the values reflected in the design of his steel factories. Note how the floor plan allowed for a single centrally located librarian (seated at the curved desk in the center) to monitor all the neatly organized spaces devoted to reading, children, reference, and stacks. When Carnegie and other defenders of industrial capitalism were asked about the growing problem of poverty amid such progress, they pointed to what they claimed was the greatest virtue of a capitalist economy: the self-made man. As Carnegie’s own life story seemed to attest, anyone, regardless of birthplace, family, education, or poverty, could climb the ladder of success. Success was not guaranteed, noted Carnegie. But for those who possessed self-discipline, intelligence, frugality, and diligence and who avoided liquor and debt, the future was bright. Aiding Andrew Carnegie and other optimists in spreading this ideal of the self-made man was Horatio Alger. A former minister, Alger wrote more than 100 young adult books, beginning with Ragged Dick in 1868. All featured similar plots that told the story of a young boy, often a bootblack or a delivery boy, who lived a life of poverty and irresponsibility on the mean streets of a big city. Through the intervention

 Why was the self-made man idea so popular in the age of industry?

 of a “respectable” man, the boy discovers that he need only end his prodigal ways and pursue education and opportunity to enjoy the good life. Alger sold millions of books, and imitators churned out similar publications, including the popular Fame and Fortune magazine (16.17). As this cover shows, each issue offered dramatic “stories of boys who make money” by exhibiting honesty, diligence, and courage. Not all conservative defenders of industrial capitalism shared Alger’s rosy vision of a society where anyone willing to work hard, save money, and avoid liquor could find success. They subscribed to a theory known as social Darwinism, a corruption of Charles Darwin’s biological theory of natural selection (later termed “evolution”). British philosopher and sociologist Herbert Spencer took Darwin’s central idea that in evolution, plants and animals that are able to adapt to changing conditions survive, while those that cannot become extinct, and tailored it to fit his idea of modern industrial society as “survival of

16.17 The Promise of Success
 Taking their cue from the success of Horatio Alger’s success in writing scores of young adult novels, many imitators published similar books and magazines preaching that reward and respectability could be won if only one worked hard, told the truth, and helped the less fortunate.

Read the Document Herbert Spencer, Social Darwinism (1857)
Read the Document Horatio Alger, Ragged Dick


CONFLICTING VISIONS OF INDUSTRIAL CAPITALISM

 “What a blessing to let the unreformed drunkard and his children die, and not increase them above all others…. How wise to let those of weak digestion from gluttony die, and the temperate live. What benevolence to let the lawless perish, and the prudent survive.” The Christian Advocate (N.Y.), 1879

 the fittest.” The wealthy and powerful were the “fittest,” people endowed with innate intelligence, strength, and the adaptability that enabled them to succeed in the competitive world of business. And the poor? They were the “unfit,” men and women consigned by nature to failure, misery, and early death. To impose government regulation on business, social Darwinists argued, was both immoral and impractical, an affront to the laws of nature and God. They also attacked any initiatives public or private to alleviate the plight of the poor because they would promote the survival and growth of the unfit population with devastating consequences for society.



 parents fail to notice the shivering children as they pass. Many commentators in this period focused on the profound extremes of wealth and poverty found in two New York City neighborhoods: Fifth Avenue and Five Points. In the former neighborhood were the homes of the Stewarts, Vanderbilts, Astors, Morgans, and Carnegies. They patronized the opulent Metropolitan Opera House, entertained each other at lavish balls and dinners, and summered in their 50-room “cottages” in coastal retreats like Newport, Rhode Island. Just a few miles downtown was a notorious district called the Five Points. In this neighborhood and the surrounding Lower East Side district, nearly one million people lived in tiny, airless tenement apartments with no running water or toilets. Their neighborhoods had no parks, and the streets were filled with filth due to irregular street cleaning. Reformers, ministers, and social critics began to question whether American democracy, with its ideals of equal rights and individual freedom, could endure under such inequality and enslaving poverty. For example, a self-taught political economist named Henry George wrote Progress and

Capitalism Criticized
 Despite these confident assertions on the morality and virtue of laissez-faire industrial capitalism, critics decried the widening chasm between rich and poor. While some 4,000 Americans had become “millionaires” by the early 1890s, millions of others lived in poverty, or perilously close to it. A tour of any city provided ample evidence of what some called the “haves and the have nots,” a concern vividly captured in this 1876 image (16.18) from a popular magazine. Its caption, “The Hearth-Stone of the Poor,” and accompanying article pointed out that many of the poor, unlike the wealthy family on the left, had no warm fireplace around which to gather on cold nights. Instead, like these children, they gathered around outdoor steam vents to keep warm. Note how the wealthy

 16.18 The Growing Gap between the Haves and Have-Nots This image, The Hearth-Stone of the Poor from the popular magazine Harper’s Weekly (February 12, 1876) captured the growing concern among Americans over the growth of poverty amid rising levels of wealth.

 Why was the theory of social Darwinism so attractive to the wealthy and successful?



 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

 Poverty, an influential book that addressed one of the central questions of the age: Must industrial and technological progress be accompanied by increased poverty? If so, he warned, American democracy was doomed. George claimed that the monopolization of resources, especially of land, by powerful elites was to blame for the era’s growing social inequality and class conflict. Few people understood or supported George’s unorthodox solution (a “single tax” on land values), but his vivid diagnosis of the rising clash between labor and capital and his vision of a more equitable social order gained him an enormous following in the 1880s and turned Progress and Poverty into a bestseller. Edward Bellamy achieved similar fame as a critic of laissez-faire capitalism with his novel Looking Backward, 2000–1887. Published in 1887, it told the story of Julian West who, like Rip Van Winkle in another era, falls asleep in 1887 and awakens in 2000. To his astonishment he finds American society transformed into a socialist utopia. The class conflict, poverty, and economic inequality of the late nineteenth century are gone. The government controlled the economy, eliminating destructive competition and providing a comfortable living for all citizens. Bellamy’s book became a bestseller, and his largely middle-class followers established nearly 500 clubs to spread its message.

Power in Numbers:
Organized Labor
 Less famous, but more influential than critics like George and Bellamy, were the protests of those most buffeted by the Industrial Revolution: workers. Through the pages of labor newspapers and in speeches at worker rallies—and in actions such as strikes—American workers articulated a sharp critique of the new industrial order. A few were socialists, but most supported the broad ideals of a free market economy. Their protest stemmed from the growing conviction that greedy monopolists, in league with unscrupulous politicians, had seized control of the economy and bent it toward their own advantage. As a result, argued workers, they received a shrinking portion of the wealth they created, while working longer hours in increasingly inhumane conditions. Try as they might, these workers claimed, the upward mobility celebrated by

 What conditions led to rapid membership growth in the Knights of Labor?

 Andrew Carnegie and Horatio Alger was less and less attainable. Unsettled and angered by their declining power in the face of big business, American workers renewed their efforts to organize labor unions. In 1869, Philadelphia garment cutters formed The Noble and Holy Order of the Knights of Labor (KOL), an organization that called for many of the same reforms as the NLU, but added a long list of radical, even utopian, goals. For example, it advocated replacing the existing competitive industrial system with an economy based on cooperation. In addition, unlike the NLU’s emphasis on craft workers, the KOL was an industrial union open to all workers, including unskilled wage earners, immigrants, and eventually women and African Americans. Its leaders believed that fundamental social change was impossible unless this broad spectrum of workers joined forces. To overcome employer hostility, the organization adopted a policy of strict secrecy that necessitated holding meetings in clandestine locations. This requirement, however, combined with the depression of 1873–1877, hindered its growth. By 1879, it counted just 10,000 members, most in Pennsylvania. But two key developments that year propelled the KOL to become the world’s largest industrial union. First, the national economy recovered, providing wage earners with a measure of economic security that allowed them to form and join local unions in huge numbers. Second, a young machinist named Terence Powderly became the KOL’s leader, or Grandmaster Workman. Powderly was a superb organizer and gifted orator who in 1882 abolished the KOL’s secrecy rule, a decision that made it possible to recruit thousands of new members and fend off accusations from employers, politicians, and religious leaders that the KOL was a sinister and conspiratorial organization. Membership soared to 42,000 in 1882 (on its way to an eventual peak of more than 700,000 in late 1886). What drew many workers to the organization was the KOL’s sharp critique of laissez-faire capitalism and emphasis on economic justice and democracy. Its constitution decried, “the recent alarming development and aggression of aggregated wealth” by industrialists, bankers, and stock speculators, warning that it would soon lead “to the pauperization and hopeless degradation of the toiling masses.” (See Images as History: Why Fear Big Business?”)

Read the Document Henry George, “Progress and Poverty”


CONFLICTING VISIONS OF INDUSTRIAL CAPITALISM



Images as History
WHY FEAR BIG BUSINESS?
people—retain its legitimacy when big business exercised so much power and answered to no public officials and no voters? Other Americans focused on the plight of the worker under such a system. How could workers resist the power of large employers to slash wages, increase hours, and ignore safety issues? Could the United States endure as a republic if these citizens were reduced to desperate poverty while a few wealthy families reveled in luxury? These concerns are on full display in this vivid political cartoon from Puck Magazine. 
 As large corporations emerged in the Gilded Age (the late nineteenth century period of rapid economic growth), many Americans grew concerned about their power and influence. Some focused on the fact that large corporations and the immensely powerful men that ran them, people like John D. Rockefeller and William H. Vanderbilt, operated beyond the control of laws and democratic institutions. Did this not mean, they asked, that the republic was in danger? How could a democracy—a society governed by the will of the

 The artist represents the horse of “monopoly” as a huge golden locomotive. Railroads were the original big businesses and the largest corporations. They were also at the center of the era’s biggest corruption scandals and strikes. In contrast, the shoeless American worker sits on a scrawny horse labeled “poverty.”

 Big business and monopoly are depicted as a knight, a symbol of European aristocracy and the antithesis of republicanism. His plume carries the word, “arrogance.” Note how this figure stands in sharp contrast with the much smaller, humble worker.

 In a section labeled “Reserved for Capitalists,” sits a collection of the nation’s most powerful businessmen, including Cyrus Field, William H. Vanderbilt, and Jay Gould. Note the joy they seem to take in seeing the American worker destroyed.

 This huge, seemingly endless, crowd symbolizes the American people, who clearly outnumber the handful of capitalists on the left. Observe how small the people are compared to the industrialists. Note too how most of the crowd looks anxious or angry at what is happening (some shake their fists) and how some of the children appear malnourished.

•
•


•


 One of the most significant aspects of this image is its source. Subscribers to Puck were overwhelmingly middle- and upper-class. This shows that the rising fear of big business in the Gilded Age was not confined to low-wage factory workers. It was shared by a large cross-section of the American people.

•


•


•
•
•


 The vast disparity in power is captured in the weapons brought to the fight. The knight holds a shield labeled “corruption of the legislature,” suggesting corporate titans’ ability to bribe state and federal elected officials to ensure laws favorable to business. In his other hand he holds a lance labeled “subsidized press,” indicating the power of big business to buy favorable coverage in the newspapers. The lowly worker, in contrast, holds only one weapon: the strike.

 Why did so many Americans come to fear big business in the Gilded Age?



 CHAPTER 16

16.19 Establishing
Labor Day
 In 1882, workers in New York City held the first local Labor Day celebration. It soon became a national holiday.

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

 These sentiments and spirit of protest inspired workers in New York City, many of them KOL members, to establish the Labor Day holiday in September 1882. The organizers took care to present workers as orderly and dignified, marching in almost military fashion (16.19). Yet they also held aloft signs voicing their grievances (“Abolish Contract Labor” and “8 Hours to Constitute A Day’s Work”) and announcing their intent to reclaim their influence in the political system (“Vote for the Labor Ticket”). Others proclaimed the importance of workers (“Labor Creates All Wealth” and “Labor Pays All Taxes”), and in an age of growing economic inequality, reminded the spectators of key American principles (“All Men Are Created Equal”). The annual Labor Day holiday quickly gained popularity. By 1886, it was a national event, and in 1894, President Grover Cleveland signed a law establishing Labor Day as a holiday for all federal workers. Another significant aspect of the KOL’s vision, albeit one that was not embraced in every part of the country, especially the South, was its inclusion of African American workers as members. Many in the KOL’s leadership argued that the union

 Why did so many workers find the Knights of Labor appealing?

 must include all workers, including blacks, because employers would inevitably use them against organized labor to break strikes and lower wages. This same argument for inclusion led the KOL to allow women members. As a result, in an era when labor unions were almost exclusively the domain of white men, in 1886, ten percent of the KOL’s membership was women and another ten percent was African American. Many workers also joined the KOL because it emphasized practical goals. Its constitution called for the eight-hour workday, equal pay for men and women, the establishment of state bureaus of labor, and the prohibition of child and convict labor. The KOL also gained enormous support among workers because it led successful strikes. But the decision to strike was difficult and risky. (See Choices and Consequences: To Strike or Not to Strike?) Most strikes in this period were small and local, but on several occasions the KOL enjoyed success on a grand scale. In 1885, KOL-affiliated railroad workers won a strike against the Wabash Railroad, owned by financier Jay Gould, a man widely despised and

View the Map Interactive Map: Organizing American Labor in
 the Late Nineteenth Century

CONFLICTING VISIONS OF INDUSTRIAL CAPITALISM



Choices and Consequences
TO STRIKE OR NOT TO STRIKE?
Most strikes in the late nineteenth century failed, but the surge in labor activism and the emergence of the Knights of Labor in the 1880s boosted confidence among workers that strikes could succeed. In the summer of 1881, the hundreds of male shoemakers in the Knights Local Assembly 64 successfully opposed a wage reduction by the Mundell Company in Philadelphia. Management then imposed a rate cut on its female shoemakers. One of the workers, Mary Stirling, urged the workers, men and women, to strike until the company rescinded the wage cut. The workers at the Mundell Company considered essentially three major options: 
Choices




 Fearing for their jobs male and female workers refuse to strike.



 Seeking to protect their recent victory, the men remain on the job while the women walk out.



 Recognizing their mutual interests in opposing wage cuts for all workers, the male and female workers agree to strike together.

Decision
 Inspired by the KOL motto, “an injury to one is the concern of all,” the 700 men and women of the Mundell factory decided on option 3, walking out at Mary Stirling’s urging. The strike lasted weeks, during which time the female workers formed their own KOL local assembly—even though the union did not yet enroll female members. Strikers organized pickets, rallies, and fundraisers to help pay for food and rent.

Consequences
 The Mundell Company, facing lost profits and pressure to settle from other factory owners who feared worker unrest, rescinded the wage cut. The victory boosted the confidence of the workers and the reputation of the KOL locally. Within three years the shoe industry alone had 11 local assemblies that managed to win many struggles with employers over wages, firings, and work rules. Even more important, later in 1881, Mary Stirling attended the national convention of the KOL and convinced the organization to admit women. By 1887, ten percent of the KOL’s 700,000 members were women.

The Mundell Shoe
Company was one of the
 nation’s leading footwear manufacturers in the late nineteenth century

Continuing Controversies
 How should organized labor deal with the rising number of women in the workforce? The admission of women into the KOL did not end the opposition of many American workers to the rights of women to work and join unions. They continued to argue that keeping women out of the workforce

 would open up jobs for men and raise overall wages. When the KOL fell apart in the 1890s, the status of women in the labor movement fell with it. The American Federation of Labor, the organization that succeeded the KOL, admitted few female members until well into the twentieth century.

 What made strikes so risky for workers?



 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

 feared by workers. Elsewhere the KOL popularized the boycott, the organized effort to discourage customers from patronizing a business engaged in antilabor activity, as an effective labor tactic less costly and risky than a strike. As the KOL’s membership and influence grew in the mid-1880s, it alarmed employers, politicians, and conservatives, who feared its radical rhetoric of class conflict and demands for economic reform. They denounced Powderly and other KOL leaders as radical socialists bent on promoting violence and class warfare. Although both accusations were false, they made many Americans, including many wage earners, leery of the KOL and of organized labor.

The Great Upheaval of 1886
 Fear of the KOL in particular and the labor movement in general peaked in 1886. On May 1, 340,000 workers across the country staged a one-day work stoppage to bring attention to their demand for the eight-hour day. Three days later a far more serious

 incident occurred that would hurt the labor movement for decades. Outraged by the killing of striking workers outside the McCormick Reaper Works in Chicago, the city’s radical labor leaders called a mass meeting in Haymarket Square on May 4. When 300 policemen moved in to disperse the crowd, a bomb exploded amid their ranks. The enraged police attacked the crowd with guns and batons. In less than 20 minutes, seven policemen lay dead (most, an investigation would show, from shots fired by fellow officers) along with four workers. The press quickly dubbed the incident the Haymarket Riot, and especially when accompanied by images such as this one (16.20), the incident stoked vehement opposition to organized labor. Note the placement of the dead policemen in a sort of martyrs’ pantheon above a riot scene depicting “murderous rioters” being gunned down. The next day, as hysterical headlines across the nation proclaimed that revolution was at hand, Chicago police arrested eight men, all selfproclaimed anarchists, and charged them with

16.20 The Haymarket Incident, 1886
 The Haymarket incident sparked a nationwide backlash against organized labor. Newspapers ran images like this one, in which martyred policemen hover over a scene where, “murderous rioters” are gunned down.

 What role did the press play in promoting a negative impression of labor unions?

Read the Document George Engel, “Address by a Condemned
Haymarket Anarchist” (1886)


CONFLICTING VISIONS OF INDUSTRIAL CAPITALISM

 murder. After a hasty trial in which even the prosecution conceded that no one had seen the men throw a bomb, all were convicted. Seven were sentenced to death and one to life imprisonment. Four were hanged; one committed suicide in his cell. In 1893, Illinois elected a pro-labor governor who pardoned the remaining three, declaring they had not received a fair trial. Haymarket created a climate of fear and provided justification for officials across the nation to crack down on the labor movement. Throughout the spring and summer of 1886, hundreds of labor activists were arrested—100 in New York City alone. In response workers across the nation formed labor parties and ran candidates for offices from city councilor to governor. Most candidates lacked the money or experience to win, but there were notable surprises. For example, Chicago’s United Labor Party polled 25,000 votes (of 92,000 cast) and elected a state senator and seven state assemblymen. In Milwaukee, the People’s Party elected a mayor, a state senator, six state assemblymen, and a congressman. In one of the most widely watched contests, Henry George, the reformer and author of Progress and Poverty, finished a close second in the mayor’s race in New York City—out polling Republican Theodore Roosevelt, who finished a distant third. However, the unity and hope expressed by workers at the polls in November 1886 were soon undermined. First, the tumult of 1886 brought to the fore the dissatisfaction of many skilled workers within the KOL. Deeming the organization too strike prone and too influenced by socialists and radicals (who after Haymarket brought organized labor unwanted criticism), 25 unions of skilled workers convened in Columbus, Ohio, in December 1886 and founded the American Federation of Labor (AFL). The more radical activists within the



 KOL also grew dissatisfied with Powderly’s leadership, decrying his growing opposition to strikes and political action. Anti-labor hysteria in the press and legal repression following Haymarket further weakened the labor movement. Membership in the KOL dwindled rapidly, from 700,000 in 1886 to only 100,000 by 1890. National leadership of the labor movement after 1886 fell to the new AFL. Comprised exclusively of unions of skilled workers and led by cigar-maker Samuel Gompers, the AFL shunned the KOL’s idealistic goal of industrial cooperation. Instead, it accepted capitalism and the wage system and focused on what it termed “pure and simple” goals: higher wages, shorter hours, and job security. The AFL also refused to organize unskilled workers, arguing that they were too weak and unreliable. They similarly excluded (with a few exceptions) women, African Americans, and recent immigrants. The AFL grew to 1.6 million members by 1904. However, its narrowed vision and conservative approach to the labor question would leave the growing numbers of less-skilled industrial workers without a national voice until the 1930s. These divisions within the labor movement reflected the dramatic and often controversial changes industrialization brought to the United States after 1865. Many Americans prospered in this period, but others found themselves working in dangerous factories for long hours and meager wages. As a result, this period was marked by vigorous debates about economic justice, social equality, and the proper role of government in regulating the economy and protecting the rights and well-being of its most vulnerable citizens. These debates that would continue into the next century.

 What role did the press play in promoting a negative impression of labor unions?



 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

1866–1868


1873–1876




1878–1879


 William Sylvis founds the National Labor Union

The Panic of 1873


The “Great Uprising”
 railroad strike

 Terence Powderly elected Grandmaster Workman of the Knights of Labor

 First significant effort to organize workers nationally

 Horatio Alger publishes Ragged Dick

CHAPTER REVIEW

 First of one hundred “rags to respectability” novels popularizing the ideal of the self-made man

 Begins four years of severe economic depression

 Wanamaker opens Grand Depot in Philadelphia Sets standard for lavish department stores in an era of increasing consumerism

 Massive strike spreads to several cities. Clashes between workers and police and soldiers leave dozens killed and millions of dollars in damage

 Transforms KOL into a powerful industrial union with 700,000 members by 1886

 Henry George publishes Progress and Poverty The bestseller gives voice to the anxiety over growing social inequality

Review Questions
 1. What strengths did the United States possess in terms of resources, culture, technology, and public policy that facilitated industrialization after 1865?

 4. Why did American workers have such a difficult time uniting to oppose abusive and exploitative employers?

 2. Why were the Supreme Court and Congress so slow to curb the power of big business?

 5. How did industrialization create new opportunities for women? How and why were these opportunities limited?

 3. How was advertising transformed after 1865? How did it affect the Industrial Revolution?

 6. Why did the Knights of Labor expand in the 1880s? Why did it collapse almost as suddenly?

Key Terms
 Laissez-faire (French for “let do” or “leave alone”) A philosophy that argued that the government should impose no restraints on business. Monopoly The control of an industry or market by one corporation. Vertical integration Business organization where one company controls the main phases of production of a good, from acquiring raw materials to retailing the finished product.

Sherman Anti-Trust Act Authorized the Justice Department to
 prosecute any illegal contract, combination, or conspiracy among corporations that eliminated competition or restrained free trade. Blacklist A list of workers that employers in a particular town or industry refused to hire because they were considered troublemakers.

 Horizontal integration Business organization where one company buys many other companies producing the same product to eliminate competition and achieve greater efficiency.

 Social Darwinism The belief that the principles of evolution, which Darwin had observed in nature, also applied to society. Advocates argued that individuals or groups achieve advantages over others as the result of biological superiority, an idea expressed as “survival of the fittest.”

 Robber barons A pejorative name for big business leaders that suggested they grew rich by devious business practices, exploitation of workers, and political manipulation.

 Knights of Labor A labor organization founded in 1869 that in the 1880s accepted workers of all trades and backgrounds and became the world’s largest industrial union

 Trust A legally binding deal bringing many companies in the same industry under the direction of a board of “trustees.”

 Haymarket Riot A violent incident touched off when a bomb exploded amid a group of policemen as they broke up a peaceful labor rally in Chicago’s Haymarket Square on May 4, 1886.

CHAPTER REVIEW



1883–1884




 John D. Rockefeller creates the first trust

1889–1890


 Railroads establish standard time zones

 Becomes a key feature of modern business organization and target of social critics

 Police and workers clash in Haymarket

 Reflects power of railroads and the trend of standardization in business. In 1886, they establish a standard track gauge

 Leads to nationwide crackdown on labor union activism

 Andrew Carnegie publishes “The Gospel of Wealth”

 Knights of Labor wins strike against Wabash Railroad

 Workers in skilled trades separate from Knights of Labor

Workers in New York City
 establish Labor Day Reflects strengthening of labor movement and protest against growing inequality and exploitation

The American Federation of
 Labor founded

 Gains publicity and credibility for the KOL, leading to a surge in membership



 Popularizes the belief that opportunity and upward mobility are available to all in an industrial society

 Sherman Anti-Trust Act passed Reflects popular mood that big business must be restrained; weak, and ineffective

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Wonder and Woe.

Questions for Analysis
 1. Why did many Americans come to fear large corporations like railroads? View the Image Modern Colossus of (Rail) Roads (1879), p. 474

 2. How did the introduction of new technology impact American workers? Read the Document Technology and the Shoe Industry in Fincher’s Trade Review (1864), p. 481

 3. How did industrialists champion industrial capitalism? Read the Document Andrew Carnegie, “Wealth,” p. 487

 4. How did critics of industrial capitalism argue that it threatened the republic? Read the Document Henry George, “Progress and Poverty,” p. 490

 5. What challenges did workers face in trying to organize unions? View the Map Interactive Map: Organizing American Labor in the Late Nineteenth Century, p. 492

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • Thomas Edison, The Success of the Electric Light (October 1880), p. 471 • Interstate Commerce Act, p. 475 • Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics of Labor, from “The Working Girls of Boston” (1884), p. 482 • Chinese Exclusion Act, p. 484 • Herbert Spencer, Social Darwinism (1857), p. 488 • Horatio Alger, Ragged Dick, p. 488 • George Engel, “Address by a Condemned Haymarket Anarchist” (1886), p. 494

View the Closer Look
• Images as History: Advertising and the Art of Cultivating Anxiety and
Desire, p. 478
 • “Testing” Clark’s O.N.T. Spool Cotton, p. 479

View the Image John D. Rockefeller Cartoon (1901), p. 476
View the Map Atlas Map: Changing Lives of American Women,
1880–1930, p. 486


Watch the Video Video Lecture: Mastering Time and Space:
How the Railroad Changed America, p. 472


 What challenges emerged with the rise of large cities?

A
Search for Solutions p. 505


 How did reformers seek to improve urban life?

New Habits, Roles,
 and Lifestyles p. 511

 How did the roles and expectations of women change?

 The Challenge from Below p. 517

 How did American workers and farmers respond to the economic turmoil of the 1880s and 1890s?

 CHAPTER

The Rise of the
City p. 500




 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 17

Becoming a
Modern Society
America in the Gilded Age,
1877–1900
 Hundreds of thousands of people, including President Chester A. Arthur and countless dignitaries, participated in the joyful ceremonies marking the opening of the Brooklyn Bridge on May 23, 1883. As this painting of the event demonstrates, Americans in the late nineteenth century celebrated the onset of the urban age. An astonishing sight and the very embodiment of the modern age, it was the world’s largest suspension bridge, a style made possible by the one product that in many ways defined the industrial revolution—steel. The bridge’s designer, German immigrant John Roebling, emphasized this transition to the modern age by using a stark contrast: he constructed the bridge’s twin towers out of the ancient building material (stone) and formed them into gothic archways, a style reminiscent of the great medieval cathedrals of Europe. The Brooklyn Bridge embodied the new urban and industrial era beyond its cutting-edge technology and symbolic design. Workers who were either immigrants or the children of immigrants constructed the bridge. By connecting the nation’s largest city (New York) and third largest city (Brooklyn), a prelude to their consolidation into one city in 1898, the new bridge also symbolized rapid urban growth. Finally the bridge hinted at the emergence of a new, more independent American woman. When Washington Roebling (who had succeeded his father as chief engineer) fell gravely ill in 1872, his wife, Emily Warren Roebling, spent the next 11 years as the project’s onsite manager. The enthusiasm that marked the bridge’s opening masked the grave problems that rampant urban growth entailed. Indeed, the era’s name, the Gilded Age, reflected this notion that the amazing achievements of the period were like a thin gold layer that covered many unresolved social problems. The sections of New York and Brooklyn connected by the bridge, for example, were vast working-class immigrant districts beset by high rates of poverty, crime, and disease. Equally unseen in the glow of the fireworks was the rising discontent among American workers over exploitation by employers and alienation from an unresponsive political system. Indeed, dozens of men had died during the bridge’s construction, and more than once the workers went on strike. These sentiments and those of hard-pressed American farmers in the heartland would explode in the 1890s, leading to the emergence of the People’s Party. The party eventually faded away, but not before establishing a reform agenda that would shape the Progressive Era (1900–1920).

 “The day seems brought distinctly nearer when the nation, equipped with the latest implements furnished by science, shall master and use as never before its rich domain.” REV. RICHARD STORRS, speech at the opening of the Brooklyn Bridge





 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

The Rise of the City
 The United States experienced explosive urban growth in the second half of the nineteenth century. Industrialization and mass immigration transformed older cities, such as New York and Philadelphia, and newer ones, such as Denver and Chicago, into major metropolises. Their growth was often chaotic and attended by significant increases in crime, poverty, and epidemics. City political machines grew powerful, providing relief to the vulnerable and promoting urban growth, but earning a reputation for corruption.

To the Cities
 The urban population of the United States grew at an astonishing rate between 1860 and 1900. In 1860, one in five Americans lived in urban areas—by 1900, two in five. In that same period the number of cities with populations greater than 100,000 soared from 9 to 38. Among these were New York (3.4 million), Chicago (2.7 million), and Philadelphia (1.3 million). Seventy-eight other cities had 50,000 or more inhabitants by 1900. Much of this new urban population came from rural areas within the United States. As agriculture became more mechanized (see Chapter 15), thereby lowering demand for farm labor, men migrated to urban areas. Similarly, the rise of American manufacturing eliminated the need for rural women to make clothes and other household goods, leading many to seek economic opportunity in cities. These men and women found an array of job opportunities in the city, from low-paid work as factory operatives, laborers, and servants to more desirable positions as skilled artisans and clerks. They also were faced with the challenge of adjusting to an utterly new lifestyle.

1880–1889
17.1 Immigration
 to the United States, 1880–1920 Before 1880, most immigrants to the United States came from Northern and Western Europe, but after 1880, most were from Southern and Eastern Europe. [Source: U.S. Bureau of

Austria-Hungary
German Empire
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Russia
Scandinavia
United Kingdom


314,787
1,445,181
1,807
764,061
276,660
182,698
761,783
810,900


Totals


5,248,568


 Another rural-to-urban internal migration involved African Americans seeking to escape the poverty, racism, and violence of the Jim Crow South (see Chapter 14). Drawn by word of better jobs and greater freedoms, some 300,000 migrated to northern cities between 1890 and 1910. Chicago’s African American population jumped from 15,000 in 1890 to 110,000 in 1920. This marked the beginning of what became known as the Great Migration, the relocation of some 7 million African Americans from the South to the North between 1890 and 1970. However, the greatest source of urban population growth was mass immigration from Europe, with significant numbers also from Latin America, the Caribbean, and Asia. Before 1880, most immigrants to the United States came from Britain, Ireland, Germany, and Scandinavia. Thereafter, the sources of immigration shifted to nations in Southern and Eastern Europe such as Russia, Italy, Greece, and AustriaHungary (17.1). All told, the United States accepted 28 million newcomers between 1860 and 1920. As with all immigrants before and since, some of these newcomers chose immigration to escape poverty, warfare, political and religious

%


1890–1899


%


1900–1909


%


1910–1919


%


6.0
27.5
.1
12.8
5.1
3.5
12.7
15.5


534,059
579,072
12,732
405,710
603,761
450,101
390,729
328,579


14.5
15.7
.3
11.0
16.3
12.7
10.5
8.9


2,001,376
328,722
145,402
344,940
1,930,475
1,501,301
488,208
469,578


24.4
4.0
1.8
4.2
23.5
18.3
5.9
5.7


1,154,727
174,227
198,108
166,445
1,229,916
1,106,998
238,275
371,878


18.2
2.7
3.1
2.6
19.4
17.4
3.8
5.8


3,694,295


8,202,388


6,347,380


 the Census.]

 Why did so many people flock to American cities?

Read the Document Adna Weber, “The Growth of Cities”


THE RISE OF THE CITY

 persecution, and natural disasters. But most were drawn by the promise of economic opportunity and upward mobility in America. Some migrated to rural areas and became farmers, but most headed for America’s cities with their ever-expanding number of jobs in industry, construction, service, and entrepreneurship. Cities already characterized by ethnic, racial, and religious diversity brought by earlier immigrants and African Americans saw their diversity reach unprecedented levels. By 1910, immigrants and their American-born children comprised an astonishing 78.6 percent of New York’s 4.8 million residents. Chicago (77.5 percent), Milwaukee (78.6 percent), San Francisco (68.3 percent), and most medium-tolarge cities boasted similarly astoundingly numbers. Overall, the foreign-born comprised 14.8 percent of the national population in 1910.

Emergence of
Ethnic Enclaves
 These new immigrants, like the Irish and Germans before them, soon formed concentrated ethnic enclaves. Often they moved into neighborhoods previously dominated by immigrants who had arrived before the Civil War. As a result in New York, for example, the Lower East Side enclaves of Little Ireland, Little Germany, and Little Africa became by the 1890s Little Italy, Chinatown, and the Jewish East Side. This process of ethnic succession is captured in a World War I memorial plaque affixed to the façade of the Church of the Transfiguration on New York’s Lower East Side (17.2). A community of native-born Americans built the church in 1801 as the English Lutheran First Church of Zion, but they sold it in the 1840s to Irish Catholics who renamed it Church of the Transfiguration. In the 1890s, a massive influx of Italians and outflow of Irish to other parts of the city turned the neighborhood into Little Italy and Transfiguration into a mostly Italian Catholic church. (Mother Elizabeth Cabrini, later canonized a saint, worked in the church caring for Italian immigrants.) The plaque provides a snapshot of the transformation from Little Ireland to Little Italy. Of the twenty names of parishioners who died in World War I,



 seventeen are Italian and only three—Donahue, Durkin, and Kane—are Irish. Today the neighborhood is part of Chinatown and most of the parishioners are Chinese. Immigrant groups formed ethnic enclaves in part because they faced hostility and discrimination from Americans and other immigrant groups. But the primary cause was their recognition that grouping together enhanced their chances of success in America. Italian immigrants in Chicago’s Little Italy, for example, enjoyed the comfort and practical benefits of residing among people who spoke their language. There they could find help getting a job from an immigrant aid association, fellowship in an Italian fraternal society, or solace in an Italian Catholic church. They also found things that reminded them of home: Italian food, books, newspapers, churches, theaters, and opera houses. A closer look at these enclaves revealed that they usually comprised smaller units composed of people from a particular region or village of their home country. New York’s Jewish East Side, for example, included large concentrations of Jews from Hungary, Romania, Galicia, Russia, and the eastern Mediterranean. Italians in Boston’s North End clustered on certain streets depending on whether they came from Sicily, Campania, the

17.2 Evidence of Ethnic Succession
 This 1919 plaque lists 17 Italian and three Irish names, indicating that the neighborhood once known as Little Ireland had become Little Italy.

View the Closer Look Immigration to the U.S. 1870–1915


 Why did immigrants form ethnic enclaves in cities?



 CHAPTER 17

17.3 Mapping the
Diversity of Ethnic
Chicago
This 1895 map of
 the 12-block area surrounding Hull House demonstrates the diversity of the immigrant neighborhood. [Source: ICHi51283; Hull House— map of Nationalities in Chicago; Chicago (Ill.); n.d.; Creator- Hull House. Nationalities Map No. 1—Polk Street to Twelfth, Halsted Street to Jefferson, Chicago.]

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 Abruzzi, or Liguria. Yet as this 1895 map (17.3) of the neighborhood surrounding Chicago’s famous Hull House, which provided that city’s immigrants with social and educational services, demonstrates, even immigrants in ethnic enclaves shared their neighborhoods with people of diverse origins. This twelve-block section of the city included immigrants from Ireland, Germany, Italy, Russia, Poland, Switzerland, France, Canada, Bohemia, Scandinavia, China, and the Netherlands, not to mention African Americans.

The Troubled City
 Many Americans in the late nineteenth century saw cities as exciting places filled with opportunity, cultural diversity, entertainment, and new technology such as electric lighting and skyscrapers. Yet many more viewed cities as places of crowding,

 Why was life in tenement districts so difficult?

 turmoil, filth, and despair. Both images were accurate, but the latter generated the most commentary and concern. One of the most striking features of modern urban life was the emergence of densely packed “slums.” In one ward on New York’s Lower East Side in 1890, population density reached 334,000 people per square mile, numbers never seen before in history. Most people living in these densely packed districts were immigrants who worked for low wages as day laborers and factory operatives. Few men earned enough money to support their families. So they relied on their wives and children to produce additional income (see Chapter 16). Squalid housing exacerbated the poverty of urban workers. Tenements, or multiple family dwellings of four to six stories housing dozens of families, became the most common form of housing for poor city dwellers by the 1860s. Most tenement

THE RISE OF THE CITY

 apartments consisted of just two or three dimly lit and poorly ventilated rooms. Tenement districts in every city suffered from high rates of disease and death, much of it caused when drinking water became contaminated by bacteria due to primitive sewage systems. Another source of disease was horses. In 1900, New York’s 120,000 horses dropped six million pounds of manure on the streets every day. In most cities, as shown in this photograph (17.4), street cleaning was inadequate in working-class neighborhoods. Note that in this filthy working-class street in New York, vendors sell all manner of goods on the sidewalks, including food. These conditions contributed to frequent epidemics. In Chicago in 1891, for example, 2,000 people died from typhoid fever and 4,300 from bronchitis and pneumonia. Every year in Chicago in the early 1890s, 10,000 to 12,000 children under the age of five died. Despite the dreadful condition of many tenements, the surging population of American cities kept the demand for housing high, causing rents to rise continually. In New York an 1883 survey of bricklayers, among the city’s best-paid workers, determined that they paid 28 percent of their annual income to their landlords. Another survey a few years later revealed that cloak makers, another skilled group, devoted 38 percent of their income to



 rent. As a result evictions for falling behind in rent were common. New York averaged more than 16,000 evictions per year in the early 1880s and more than 23,000 by 1892.

 “Thousands of small houses and cottages arranged for one family are now packed with a family in each room.” Chicago Board of Health report Late-nineteenth-century cities also suffered from high rates of crime, especially in the tenement districts. Some crime was driven by poverty or despair. Women, for example, usually turned to prostitution as a last resort to survive. Immigration also increased crime, because it resulted in a disproportionately high population of young single men (typically an age cohort with higher than average crime rates). The overall growth, diversity, and mobility of urban populations also contributed to increased crime because these populations fostered anonymity and undermined the ability of communities to prevent potential criminal activity.

Read the Document George Waring, “Sanitary Conditions in New York” (1897)


17.4 Mired
 in Muck Late-nineteenthcentury American cities, especially in working-class neighborhoods, had public health problems because of inadequate street cleaning.

 Why were crime rates so high in cities?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

The Political Machine—
“Boss Rule”
 Another unsettling feature of urban life, in addition to poverty, crime, and disorder, was the emergence of political machines. Most often associated with the Democratic Party, these organizations became powerful in nearly every large American city by mobilizing large blocs of working-class and immigrant voters while developing favorable relationships with real estate and business interests. Some machines controlled small sections of big cities. Martin Lomasney, for example, was the “boss” of Boston’s Eighth Ward. Others, such as New York’s Tammany Hall, ruled the entire metropolis by the 1860s. By the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, several machines extended their power to the state level.

 “Tammany Hall bears the same relation to the penitentiary as the Sunday school to the church.” A reformer, 1876

17.5 Winning By
Any Means
 Political machines often resorted to voter intimidation and election fraud. As the motto “In Counting There Is Strength” suggests, vote counts were manipulated to ensure victory.

 Several trends coincided to account for the rise of political machines in American cities. The spread of universal white male suffrage in the 1820s (see Chapter 8) meant that political success depended less on a candidate’s family name or wealth than on his ability to whip up enthusiasm and get out the vote on Election Day. Rapid urban growth also produced unprecedented opportunities for politicians and their machines to reward supporters with construction contracts and jobs such as police officers and building inspectors. Machines also garnered support from immigrants by denouncing nativism and stymieing anti-immigrant legislation such as proposals to deny public jobs to the foreign born. Finally, the growing numbers of the poor provided a needy constituency, for which the machines supplied not only jobs but also a range of services and favors, including cash handouts, payments for funerals, legal assistance, and seasonal giveaways of turkeys at Thanksgiving and bags of coal in winter. Recipients of machine

 How did political machines gain the support of working-class and immigrant voters?

 largesse and charity were expected to vote for its candidates. The emergence of political machines horrified many wealthy and native-born Americans. They found rule by the foreign-born threatening and the rough and corrupt style of bosses offensive. One aspect of machine politics, however, aroused especially bitter criticism: the policy of no-questions-asked charity. Political machines acquired and retained power not only by providing services to their constituents but also, as suggested by this political cartoon of boss William Tweed, the notoriously corrupt head of Tammany Hall, by intimidating voters and engaging in election fraud (17.5). This image shows that the ballot “box” in many cities was actually a transparent glass ball that allowed the political machines’ “shoulder hitters” to intimidate voters by letting them know they were watching to see how they voted. The motto “In Counting There Is Strength” refers to the machines’ tactic of using the police and boards of elections to manipulate the vote count to ensure victory for their party. Equally important was the money machines garnered by selling patronage jobs, demanding kickbacks from city contractors, and collecting protection fees from a vast economy of vice the machine-controlled police allowed to flourish. Reformers railed against the machine, but consistently failed to defeat it.

Read the Document Lincoln Steffens, The Shame of the Cities
View the Closer Look Competing Visions: How Best to Help the Poor?


A SEARCH FOR SOLUTIONS



A
Search for Solutions  The dark side of urbanization in the late nineteenth century prompted a wide range of competing views and responses. Some Americans concluded that the real problem of urban poverty and the troubling crime, disease, disorder, and corruption that accompanied it was the urban poor, in particular, the foreign-born. Their solution was heightened nativism and a demand to restrict immigration. Other Americans, however, worked to develop government agencies to address the emerging challenges of urban life. Still others established private institutions like settlement houses that reflected a new attitude toward the immigrant poor.

The Nativist Impulse
 The rise of the modern American city was accompanied by a revival of nativism, or antiimmigrant views and sentiments. Suspicion of and hatred for the foreign-born had flared up during the Know-Nothing movement (see Chapter 12) in the 1850s, which targeted Irish and German immigrants, especially those who were Catholics. In the Gilded Age nativism targeted the so-called new immigrants, or those coming from Southern and Eastern Europe. As this 1899 image (17.6) illustrates, nativists decried newcomers as bearers of a wide range of unwanted habits and ideas. The immigrant, shown here in a racist caricature of Eastern Europeans, carries according to his labels poverty, anarchy, superstition, intemperance, and Sabbath desecration (working or recreating on a Sunday). Note Uncle Sam’s disdainful reaction and the sarcastic inscriptions on the gateway— “admittance free,” “walk in!” and “welcome”—meant to convey nativists’ anger over what they considered lax immigration laws. As slums grew larger and strikes (often involving many foreign-born workers) became more violent, nativists called all the more loudly for the sharp restriction of immigration. One of the most prominent was Josiah Strong, a Midwestern minister whose 1885 book, Our Country:

Read the Document Josiah Strong, “Anglo-Saxon
Culture Under Siege” (1885)


 Its Possible Future and Present Crisis, warned the nation against the immigrant menace. In 1882, Congress responded to pressure by American workers and passed the Chinese

17.6 Fear of
Foreigners
 on the Rise Decrying the so-called “new immigrants” from southern and Eastern Europe as bearers of unwanted habits and ideas, nativism surged in the Gilded Age.

 Why did nativists oppose immigration?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 Exclusion Act (see Chapter 16), which barred Chinese immigration to the United States. In 1887, nativists who were especially fixated on the dangers posed by Catholic immigration formed the American Protective Association (APA) to lobby for immigration restriction. The organization grew to 500,000 members by the end of 1893. Its main base of strength was middle-class Protestants in the Midwest, but chapters also sprang up in most cities in the East.

 The city has become a serious menace to our civilization…. It has a peculiar attraction for the immigrant….Here is heaped the social dynamite; here roughs, gamblers, thieves, robbers, lawless and desperate men of all sorts, congregate; men who are ready on any pretext to raise riots for the purpose of destruction and plunder. JOSIAH STRONG, Our Country: Its Possible Future and Its Present Crisis (1885) In 1890, Congress made oversight of immigration a federal responsibility and established immigration depots in most major ports to weed out and reject immigrants with incurable diseases, radical beliefs, criminal backgrounds, or so little money and skills they seemed likely to swell the ranks of the urban poor. The largest and most famous of these facilities, Ellis Island in New York harbor, opened in 1892. Many nativists considered this new system too lenient and called for additional restrictions on immigration. In 1894, several Harvard graduates founded the Immigration Restriction League to lobby for a literacy test for all would-be immigrants (requiring they demonstrate the ability to read and write in any language). Presidents Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson vetoed immigrant literacy test bills, but Congress overrode Wilson’s veto, and it became law in 1917. How did urban reformers try to improve the safety and livability of cities?

A
Different View: Urban Reforms
 While some Americans believed urban poverty, crime, disease, and overcrowding could be eliminated simply by restricting immigration, others developed a range of innovative policies and institutions to solve, or at least minimize, these problems. To meet the problem of rising crime, most cities followed the lead of New York, when in 1845 it replaced the traditional night watch of a few untrained and unarmed men with a paid professional police department. Large cities also disbanded their volunteer fire companies and invested in new fire-fighting technology, such as steam pumpers, and adopted tougher building codes. More dangerous to a city than fire—at least to its inhabitants—were the frequent outbreaks of cholera, diphtheria, typhoid fever, and other maladies. Drawing on increasing knowledge about germ theory, cities established boards of health and took steps to improve water quality, waste removal, and street cleaning. The latter half of the nineteenth century also witnessed a movement to build urban parks to provide the beauty and serenity of nature and offer wholesome and healthy recreation space (as opposed to alleys and saloons) for all. New York’s Central Park, built in the 1850s and 1860s, proved so successful that nearly every large city commenced its own park projects. Because most of the grand parks were located far from the slums, however, reformers in the 1890s pushed urban governments to condemn blocks of tenements and build parks within working-class neighborhoods. Urban reformers also expanded public education. Compulsory education laws (usually requiring schooling until age 14) and a massive building campaign saw public school enrollments surge from 6.9 million to 17.8 million between 1870 and 1910. Millions more students attended parochial schools established by the Catholic Church. This effort reflected the traditional belief that education made for a productive and informed citizenry. But as the photograph (17.7) of children reciting the Pledge of Allegiance illustrates, advocates also saw expanded urban public schooling as a means of Americanizing the immigrant masses, teaching them English and respect for democracy and the law. The pledge was first published in a youth magazine in 1892 to promote patriotism and civic pride among school children on the eve of the 400th anniversary of Read the Document Proposal to Buffalo, New York, Park Commission (1888)

A SEARCH FOR SOLUTIONS

 Christopher Columbus’s arrival in the New World. Educators quickly made its recitation a daily ritual in schools across the country. This earlier style, which required people to end the pledge by extending their arms out straight, was abolished in the 1930s because of its similarity to salutes used in fascist Germany and Italy.

Capturing a New
View of Poverty
 Reformers in the Gilded Age also developed a new way of thinking about poverty and its causes. Most Americans held to the traditional view that poverty was caused by personal or moral failures such as laziness or drunkenness. The poor, as Read the Document Jacob Riis, How the Other Half Lives

 Horatio Alger and others argued so persuasively in popular literature (see Chapter 16), needed only to abandon their dissolute ways and seize the opportunities for success that abounded in American life. But reformers began to challenge this view of poverty by arguing that factors beyond their control made people poor. A key figure in this new outlook was photojournalist Jacob A. Riis, who emigrated from Denmark to New York in 1870. After spending his first years in America in poverty, he gained a foothold in journalism. By the mid-1880s, he had earned a reputation as a reporter covering the city’s crime beat. But Riis was troubled by the poverty and suffering he saw and decided to publicize it to gain public support for reforms. In 1887, he started taking photographs of



17.7 Promoting
Loyalty and
Patriotism
Advocates saw
 public education as a means of Americanizing the urban immigrant masses. Soon after its introduction in 1892, educators made the Pledge of Allegiance a daily ritual in schools.

 Why was the Pledge of Allegiance adopted in the 1890s?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 slum life to spark public awareness, and by 1888–1889, he began showing his photographs while giving lectures before reform societies and church groups. Spurred by the positive reaction to these talks, especially to the photographs (see Images as History: Seeing the Poor, page 509), he wrote the book How the Other Half Lives: Studies among the Tenements of New York, which he published in 1890. Books providing shocking accounts of prostitution, drunkenness, and violence in America’s slums had appeared as early as the 1840s, but Riis’s book was different and it caused a sensation.

 Living among the Poor: Settlement Houses Riis was not alone in promoting a more progressive and sympathetic view of poverty and remedies to it. In the early 1880s, middle-class and collegeeducated women began establishing in immigrant neighborhoods settlement houses, or institutions dedicated to helping the urban poor by providing a wide range of social and educational services. Jane Addams and Ellen Gates Starr founded the most famous and influential settlement house, Hull House, in Chicago in 1889. Born to wealthy Illinois families, they had met in college and toured Europe together in 1888, where they were inspired by a visit to Toynbee Hall, a settlement house in London’s poor East End. There they saw educated, wealthy young men enter the East End to assist the poor. They vowed to establish a similar institution in Chicago. With financial backing from wealthy reformers, Addams and Starr rented an old mansion on Chicago’s Near West Side. The neighborhood was overwhelmingly foreign born (see 17.3) and its residents lived in dreary, run-down tenements. It also suffered from poor sanitation and high rates of crime. Unlike socially conscious elite women of earlier generations who simply raised money for the poor or lobbied the state legislature for laws against child labor, Addams, Starr, and the many women workers they attracted to Hull House chose to live among the poor to get to know them and understand their needs— even learn from them. The staff at Hull House first offered educational classes in literature and art. When these proved popular, they began to teach more practical subjects, such as cooking, sewing, hygiene, civics, the English

 What services did settlement houses provide the urban poor?

 language, and vocational training. They also opened their doors to fledgling labor unions, recognizing the vital role unions could play in raising the earnings of workers, especially the foreign born. Within a decade Hull House was a flourishing institution offering an array of services to the poor of Chicago. Addams and other Hull House workers like Florence Kelley also became activists to prod city authorities to improve tenement laws, increase street cleaning and garbage removal, and expand public education. They also lobbied state officials for laws against child labor and for improved factory safety. Hull House was not the first settlement in America, but it soon became its most famous, inspiring hundreds of successful imitators (400 by 1910), including Denison House in Boston (1889) and Henry Street Settlement in New York (1893).

The White City
 The optimistic vision of modern urban life articulated by reformers like Jane Addams and Jacob Riis found vivid expression in the City Beautiful Movement. Taking form in the late 1880s, it brought together architects, landscape architects, and urban planners who believed the many problems afflicting American cities could be ameliorated, even eliminated, through the comprehensive planning and grand redesign of urban spaces. City Beautiful proponents like Daniel Burnham and Frederick Law Olmsted argued for the creation of large parks and public squares linked by grand boulevards. They also emphasized classical architectural styles for both public and private buildings. Burnham, Olmsted, and others first demonstrated these ideas at the 1893 Chicago World’s Exposition, a grand celebration of the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus’s arrival in the New World in 1492 and of Chicago’s recovery from its devastating fire in 1871. Like the many world’s fairs that preceded it, the Chicago Exposition celebrated technology, culture, and commerce. It contained thousands of exhibits on science, machinery, art, history, ethnic heritage, music, and theater. But its greatest significance was its impact on architecture, design, and urban planning. Given nearly 700 acres of waterfront property along Lake Michigan on which to erect buildings, Burnham and the extraordinary team he assembled, including landscape architect

Read the Document Jane Addams,
“Twenty Years at Hull House”


A SEARCH FOR SOLUTIONS



Images as History
SEEING THE POOR
In 1890, Jacob Riis published a shocking exposé, How the Other Half Lives, of the dreadful conditions in which the poor lived. But unlike most Americans writing about urban poverty in that era, who attributed these problems to the moral failures of the poor, Riis argued that the poor were victims of unhealthy and unregulated tenements for which they were forced to pay most of their earnings. Adding to the book’s impact were his photographs and drawings made from photographs. His carefully composed photograph, “An Italian Rag-Picker in Jersey Street,” shows the woman’s desperate situation. 
 Riis convinced many of his readers that the growing numbers of impoverished slum dwellers were trapped in circumstances beyond their control largely due to unhealthy and expensive tenement housing. He called for improved tenements that would free the poor from their debilitating circumstances and allow them the chance to succeed. As a result of How the Other Half Lives and other books, not to mention magazine articles and speeches, many cities passed tougher laws regulating room size, windows, running water, and toilets.

Sandro Botticelli, Madonna and Child (c. 1470)


 The ladder suggests her “apartment” is little more than a dingy, windowless basement room with only one piece of furniture (the chair on which she sits). Riis presents her not as filthy or drunk; despite the dreadful circumstances, she and her baby wear clean clothes. Riis often included babies and innocentlooking children in his photographs to prompt the viewer to wonder— and worry—about their fate if the plight of the poor was not alleviated.

 The man’s hat on the wall prompts the viewer to wonder if this desperate woman has a husband or has been abandoned.

•
•
•


•


•
•


Jacob A. Riis, “Italian Mother and Her Baby in Jersey Street” (1889) [Source: Jacob
A.
Riis “Italian Mother and Her Baby in Jersey Street”, in the home of an Italian rag-picker, Jersey Street, circa 1890. Museum of the City of New York, The Jacob A. Riis Collection (#157)] 
 Although poor this woman is a hard worker. A rag picker collected discarded rags and other fabric (note the sacks), laundered them on a stovetop tub, and then sold them to paper manufacturers for pennies per pound. The mother’s heavenward gaze was intended to spur sympathy among middle- and upper-class viewers by conjuring up the familiar religious imagery of the Madonna and Child.

 How did Jacob Riis’s portrayal of the poor differ from traditional notions of poverty?



 CHAPTER 17

17.8 The
White City
 Designed by some of the nation’s leading architects, Chicago’s White City consisted of 14 main buildings designed in the BeauxArts style, set in landscaped grounds featuring waterways and reflecting pools.

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 Frederick Law Olmsted and architect Louis Sullivan, developed a master plan that called for landscaped grounds featuring waterways and reflecting pools. Around the waterways, (17.8), Burnham placed 14 main buildings designed in the Beaux-Arts style, which emphasized logic, harmony, and uniformity. The Court of Honor buildings, shown in the image, lined the Grand Basin that formed the centerpiece of the exposition grounds. Covered in shimmering bright white stucco, the buildings of the White City astonished the estimated 27 million visitors who entered through the main gates.

 Yet as this image indicates, Burnham and his team sought not simply to wow the public with grand architecture. They wanted to showcase the potential glory of the modern city. All cities could be—should be—as impressive as the White City. All that was needed were civic leadership and enlightened urban planning. This grand vision never fully caught on, but many of the City Beautiful ideals and concepts exhibited in the White City influenced a generation of urban planners and architects committed to making American cities more beautiful, healthy, and efficient.

 How did the White City reflect an optimistic vision of urban life in the future?

NEW HABITS, ROLES, AND LIFESTYLES



New Habits, Roles, and Lifestyles
 The development of vast working-class districts was but one aspect of a broad trend that reshaped urban life in the late nineteenth century. Urban and suburban growth also led to the development of middle-class and elite residential neighborhoods and urban central business districts dedicated almost exclusively to commerce. Middle-class neighborhoods increasingly reflected the new values of the urban middle class, including a growing interest in leisure activities. The growth of leisure time allowed women to take on significant roles in public life through memberships in socially and politically active clubs.

The New Urban Landscape
 The evolution of mass transit systems like horse cars, steam railroads, and trolleys, led to explosive urban growth and specialized districts dedicated to specific functions. Most cities, for example, developed central business districts where almost no one lived. Instead the high-value real estate in downtowns from Baltimore to Chicago to San Francisco was dedicated to commerce: banks, department stores (see Chapter 16), and the offices of corporations, accountants, lawyers, and other professionals. Each day mass transit systems carried thousands of shoppers and workers to central business districts from sections of cities now dedicated almost exclusively to residential use, or from residential neighborhoods just beyond the city limits. Soaring real estate values and new technology led to another distinct feature in central business districts: skyscrapers. Before the Civil War few buildings exceeded six stories, but the invention of the elevator and new building materials like cast iron and steel led to ten- and twelve-story buildings by the early 1880s. The big breakthrough came in 1885 with the completion of the Home Insurance Building in Chicago. It was remarkable not for its height (ten stories), but for its internal steel skeleton that allowed for thin walls and large windows. This first true skyscraper led to a boom in tall building construction in downtowns across the country. By 1900, Lower Manhattan alone featured 12 buildings of 300 feet or more in height. Equally significant, although less dramatic, than the upward reach of city skylines was the outward sprawl of urban areas due to mass transit. Suburbs, or residential communities established just beyond a city’s boundary but connected to the urban center by

View the Closer Look The Bowery at Night


 mass transit, boomed in the Gilded Age. This cover image (17.9) from an 1874 real estate publication renders the great commercial metropolis of Chicago in the background while touting the immense tracts of surrounding land as ideal for suburban development. Note the many sets of tracks for trains and trolleys, suggesting the ease with which commuters could travel to and from work in the dirty, loud, and crowded city. Suburbs attracted middle-class

17.9 Spreading
Outward
 Fast and inexpensive transportation systems in cities led to the development of separate and distinct urban areas. This image from the cover of an 1874 real estate publication shows the densely settled commercial and residential districts of Chicago surrounded by vast stretches of land being developed into commuter suburbs. Note the many sets of train and trolley tracks.

 How did new modes of transportation promote the development of specialized urban and suburban districts?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 families that could afford to buy a house and pay the cost of commuting to the city for work. Middle-class families found suburbs attractive for their serenity, cleanliness, and greenery—aspects that stood in sharp contrast to the crime, disease, violence, and noise of the inner city. Given the prevalence of racist and nativist attitudes in Gilded Age American society, suburbs also attracted people unwilling to live with immigrants and African Americans.

 dishonesty, immorality, and violence that threatened virtuous womanhood. Yet two trends in the late nineteenth century led directly to new, more public roles for middleclass women. The first was a rise in education, especially at the college level. By 1900, women constituted nearly 20 percent of college graduates, up from just 13 percent in 1890. Education allowed women, if only temporarily, to leave the domestic sphere to interact with other young women and encounter emerging ideas about women’s rights. Not surprisingly, nearly every leader in the women’s rights movement in the late nineteenth century had attended Real estate columnist, Chicago Tribune, 1888 college. The second was the inThe creation of middle-class communities of creased involvement of women in clubs dedilike-minded people of similar ethnic and religious cated to charity and social reform. The General backgrounds fostered the development of new Federation of Women’s Clubs, established in middle-class values, tastes, and social patterns. 1890, counted 160,000 members in more than Middle-class families had fewer children and 500 clubs by 1900. The largest and best known higher incomes than their working-class counterorganization was the Women’s Christian Temparts. Greater wealth and fewer mouths to feed perance Union (WCTU). Activism in clubs allowed them to purchase an ever-increasing argave women the opportunity to exert politiray of consumer products, most often by women cal influence, build leadership skills, and learn who rode trolleys or commuter lines to the cenfrom networks of other activist, reform-minded tral business district. Many of these products women. were everyday items that came with increasingly By the 1890s, many of these activist women recognizable names like Ivory Soap and Cocajoined the women’s suffrage movement to obtain Cola. Others were more substantial, such as small voting rights for women. The movement had pianos that could be purchased on credit. The split into rival factions in 1869 in the debate over popularity of pianos in the late nineteenth century the Fourteenth Amendment (see Chapter 14), reflected not merely the rising wealth of middlebut in 1890, they reunited to form the National class families, but also the increased leisure time American Woman Suffrage Association they enjoyed and their desire to develop refined (NAWSA). It helped win suffrage in states like tastes. Colorado (1893) and Idaho (1896) and then, after considerable struggle, for all women with the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment in 1920 (see Chapter 18). Racism led white women to exclude black women from their clubs and the suffrage movement. Nonetheless, African American women esLower birth rates and a growing trend for hiring tablished their own clubs to pursue goals such as servants to perform duties like cooking, cleaning, temperance and women’s suffrage. Most of these and laundry left middle-class women with more free time. The dominant notions about gender roles, clubs affiliated with the National Association however, emphasized the need for women to remain of Colored Women, an umbrella group. Some black women pursued goals of particular concern in the home, focusing on creating a moral and nurturing environment for their husbands and children. to African Americans. Ida B. Wells launched a According to this view the outside world of business national campaign against lynching in the 1890s that drew many African American women and and politics was the male sphere, full of corruption,

 “Since water hems in the business center on three sides and the nexus of railroads on the south, Chicago must grow upward.”

New Roles and Expectations
 for Women

 Why did public activism among women increase?

Read the Document Susan B. Anthony, “The ‘New
Departure’ for Women” (1873)


NEW HABITS, ROLES, AND LIFESTYLES



 men into public activism for reform, especially civil rights. By the 1890s, Americans had begun to use the term “New Woman” to describe middle-class women who pursued higher education, engaged in political activism, delayed marriage, and bore fewer children. The New Woman had a distinct look, donning the clothing, hair style, and air of the so-called Gibson Girl. A creation of illustrator Charles Dana Gibson in 1890s popular magazines, the Gibson Girl was tall and beautiful, with a tightly cinched waist that accentuated her bosom and with hair piled high on her head. Offsetting these traditionally feminine characteristics, however, was an outgoing, even mischievous spirit that reflected the greater independence and activism of younger American women. Symbolic of this attitude was the degree to which young women took part in the great national enthusiasm for bicycling in the 1890s. Note the striking contrast between these two images.

 The first from 1886 (17.10) shows a traditional Victorian-era wife in formal attire being carried as a passenger by her husband. The second image, an 1896 advertisement poster for the Stearns Bicycle Company (17.11), shows a self-confident and carefree woman in the Gibson Girl style breezing along on her own bicycle. Many conservative Americans condemned the bicycling craze as unnatural and immoral because it allowed young women and men the freedom to pedal off unchaperoned, away from the watchful eyes of parents and other guardians of respectability.

17.11 The New
Woman
Many Americans
 saw a connection between the growing independence, activism, and outgoing spirit of young women and their participation in the national enthusiasm for bicycling in the 1890s.

17.10 The Traditional Woman
 Reflecting Victorian values, this conservatively dressed woman in 1886 enjoys a bicycle ride only as the passenger of her husband.

View the Map Atlas Map: Changing Lives of
American Women, 1880–1930


 What was new about the “New Woman”?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 “Bicycling has done more to emancipate women than anything else in the world. I stand and rejoice every time I see a woman ride by on a wheel. It gives women a feeling of freedom and self-reliance.” SUSAN B. ANTHONY, 1896 17.12 Selling Celebrity The booming tobacco industry created the original baseball cards to capitalize on the value of sports celebrity endorsements for their products.

New Forms of Leisure
 and Popular Culture As industrial life created sharp distinctions between time spent at work and time doing everything else, Americans in the Gilded Age developed the concept of leisure time. This trend

 How did commercial interests shape the new forms of leisure in the Gilded Age?

 was at the heart of the labor movement’s persistent demand for the eight-hour day as both a call for shorter hours of toil and an insistence on the right to leisure time. Many city dwellers spent their leisure time in informal activities in their neighborhood, such as walking about, playing games in streets and local parks, and socializing with their neighbors. For many working-class men, the local saloon was the preferred place of leisure. Increasingly popular, however, were more formal leisure opportunities such as amusement parks and organized spectator sports. Amateur, semiprofessional, and professional baseball teams, for example, drew large crowds. Entrepreneurs soon saw baseball as a business, despite its reputation as the “national pastime.” They built large baseball stadiums near streetcar lines and sold patrons not merely tickets but also food, beer, trinkets, and scorecards. By the 1880s, baseball stars like Mike “King” Kelly and Adrian “Cap” Anson were high-paid celebrities. Corporations, especially the booming tobacco industry, quickly realized the value of celebrity endorsements for their products and in the 1880s created the original baseball cards like the one shown here ( 17.12 ). To legitimize tobacco use, companies such as Old Judge portrayed players like Kelly as ideal men—the perfect blend of athletic masculinity and refined, almost gentlemen-like bearing. In an era when the press rarely reported on the bad behavior of athletes or politicians, few Americans could have known that the real Mike Kelly was a violent alcoholic who would drink himself to death in 1894 at age 37. Other spectator sports also enjoyed great popularity in the late nineteenth century. Professional boxing, horseracing, track and field competitions, and bicycle races drew large crowds to venues such as Madison Square Garden in New York City, the Chicago Coliseum, and the Boston Arena. By the 1890s, college football games in Boston, New York,

Read the Document Coney Island Frolics


NEW HABITS, ROLES, AND LIFESTYLES

 Philadelphia, and Chicago often drew more than 50,000 fans. Baseball, football, and other urban spectator sports proved consistent money-makers for promoters, but they also attracted criticism from ministers and public officials who decried the violence, alcohol consumption, and gambling associated with them and the trend to play them on Sundays. Competing for the attention of the American with increased leisure time on his or her hands was a burgeoning theatrical entertainment industry. By the late nineteenth century, the typical city resident could choose from a vast array of entertainment forms on stage. In ethnic neighborhoods, for example, Old World productions like Italian melodramas based loosely on operas and Yiddish comedies drawn from Eastern European traditions flourished. Elsewhere in the city in more mainstream venues, people flocked to musical comedies, a distinctly American innovation pioneered by the duo of Edward Harrigan and Tony Hart. They were succeeded by others such as George M. Cohan and Irving Berlin, whose popular songs like “Give My Regards to Broadway” and “Alexander’s Ragtime Band” became enduring hits. Also popular was vaudeville, a kind of variety show featuring a series of acts by entertainers from jugglers, musicians, acrobats, and family routines, to singers, wild animal acts, ribald comedians, and scantily clad women. With its low admission fees and democratic approach, vaudeville was geared for the masses. At its peak circa 1900, vaudeville shows drew two million patrons a day. Many of the great American stage and film performers from the early twentieth century, such as James Cagney, Mae West, and Al Jolson, began their careers in vaudeville. Wealthier and better-educated city residents rejected vaudeville and the more raucous forms of musical comedy as undignified and coarse. Instead they went to opera houses to hear European music and to what they considered legitimate theater to see productions of Shakespeare and the classics. While these varied forms of entertainment were developed and popularized in large cities, they quickly spread via published sheet music and touring companies to communities across the nation. The result was the beginning of a national popular culture, one that would flourish more fully with the arrival of movies, radio, and television in the twentieth century.



Lifestyles of the Rich
 and Famous Another feature of urban life that became a defining feature of the Gilded Age (so much so that it gave the era its name) was lavish displays of wealth. Dubbed “conspicuous consumption” by sociologist Thorstein Veblen in 1899, this trend featured the construction of opulent mansions in elite urban districts such as New York’s Fifth Avenue, Chicago’s Lake Shore Drive, and San Francisco’s Nob Hill, as well as in exclusive summer retreats like Newport, Rhode Island. Wealthy families like the Vanderbilts and Astors competed to see who could throw the most extravagant balls, weddings, and parties.

 “There is many a palace in Europe that would hide its diminished roof beside the sheer luxury of Fifth Avenue homes.” EDGAR SALTUS One of the most famous was a ball hosted on March 26, 1883 by Alva Vanderbilt, wife of tycoon William K. Vanderbilt, to celebrate the opening of their new $3 million mansion on upper Fifth Avenue. The elite of New York arrived in costume (17.13). Many dressed as Marie Antoinette, Queen Elizabeth, and Louis XV. This choice of an ostentatious royal theme reflected the belief by the nation’s wealthy elite that they constituted an American aristocracy—a notion that ran counter to the longstanding American fear and loathing for such undemocratic pretensions (see Chapters 4 and 5). Labor activists and social critics castigated the ball and high society’s rejection of republican simplicity, but Mrs. Vanderbilt’s guests paid no heed. They reveled past dawn in a party that cost $250,000—in an age when an average worker could expect to earn less than $700 per year. By the mid-1880s, most newspapers featured “society” columns that devoted extensive coverage to the lives of the wealthy. While Americans followed the exploits of the rich with a certain wonder, the public would accept only so much extravagance before expressing

 How did varied forms of leisure reflect class differences?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 revulsion. That finally occurred in February 1897, when the Bradley Martin family hosted a $400,000 party in which 800 guests arrived in costumes depicting European royalty. One society reporter described “a gorgeous, superb, and wonderful spectacle.” But in 1897, when the nation was suffering from a severe depression, public criticism of the ball erupted, including indignation from public officials, clergymen, and workers,. The Bradley Martins fled to Europe and settled permanently in England, ending the days of diamondnecklace party favors.

 “[Y]ou rich people put next to nothing in the collection plate, and yet you’ll spend thousands of dollars on Mrs. Bradley Martin’s ball.” Sermon of a minister outraged over the Bradley Martin Ball

17.13 Imagining an American Aristocracy
 Wealthy Americans in the Gilded Age competed to throw the most expensive and decadent balls, weddings, or parties. At Mrs. William K. Vanderbilt’s 1883 ball, New York’s elite arrived in costumes depicting figures of European royalty.

 How did the great displays of wealth in the Gilded Age represent a break with America’s republican traditions?

 Read the Document Thorstein Veblen, excerpt from The Theory of Leisure Class

THE CHALLENGE FROM BELOW



 The Challenge from Below The revulsion expressed over the Bradley Martin Ball in 1897 reflected rising discontent. Many farmers and industrial workers felt exploited by powerful corporations. When they turned to elected officials to address these problems, they found them unresponsive. Most politicians remained committed to a laissez-faire philosophy, which argued against government intervention in the economy. As a result the period was marked by some of the most bitter and violent strikes in American history and by the rise of a third party comprised mainly of farmers, workers, and reformers—the People’s Party—to challenge the Republicans and Democrats.

Out of Touch Politics
 Popular enthusiasm for politics reached extraordinary heights in the Gilded Age. Indeed, American voters turned out in astonishing numbers, averaging 79 percent between 1876 and 1896 (as compared with between 50 and 60 percent in recent decades). Despite such intense interest, politicians made little progress in resolving the major issues that dominated national politics in this period. This political stalemate

 stemmed from several factors. First, as indicated in (17.14), the electorate was evenly divided between the two major parties, resulting in remarkably close presidential elections. For example, the five presidential elections between 1876 and 1892 were decided by tiny margins of 1 to 3 percent. Indeed, in 1876 and 1888, the candidate with the highest popular vote total lost because his opponent tallied more electoral votes. No incumbent president won reelection, and only twice (Republicans, 1889–1891 and Democrats, 1893–1895)

Year


Candidate


Party


Popular Vote


Electoral Vote




Rutherford B. Hayes*


Republican


4,036,298 (48%)




Samuel J. Tilden


Democrat


4,300,590 (51%)




James Garfield


Republican


4,454,416 (48.5%)




Winfield S. Hancock


Democrat


4,444,952 (48.1%)




Grover Cleveland


Democrat


4,874,986 (48.5%)




James G. Blaine


Republican


4,851,334 (48.2%)




Benjamin Harrison*


Republican


5,439,853 (47.9%)




Grover Cleveland


Democrat


5,540,309 (48.6%)




Grover Cleveland


Democrat


5,556,918 (46%)




Benjamin Harrison


Republican


5,176,108 (43%)




James B. Weaver


 People’s

1,041,028 (9%)












17.14 Deadlocked
Presidential
Politics in the
Gilded Age
 With an electorate evenly divided between the two major parties, Gilded Age politics were often marked by stalemate on key issues.

 Winner in bold * = winner despite losing popular vote

Read the Document Mary Elizabeth Lease,
“The Popular Crusader” (1892)


 Why were election results in the Gilded Age so close?



 CHAPTER 17

17.15 Liberty
Suffocated by
Big Business
This 1889
Thomas Nast
 cartoon captured the concerns of many, that trusts threatened democracy, equality, and liberty by monopolizing the necessities of life.

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 did one party control both houses of Congress and the presidency. Political inaction in the Gilded Age also reflected the conservatism of most politicians who clung to longstanding political traditions that celebrated small, nonintrusive government, especially at the federal level. For many leaders government regulation of business appeared socialistic and harmful to both the economy and republican principles. Political paralysis stemmed from the power of corporate interests to use huge donations to political parties and bribery of lawmakers to stymie legislation they deemed harmful to their interests. For example, big business interests blocked efforts to lower the tariff because a high tariff protected their manufactures from foreign competition. The record for 1890, the year Congress took up the big issues of tariff, currency reform, and corporate regulation, provides a particularly vivid example of this ineffective political system. Support for corporate regulation reflected rising concern from many

 Why did Congress in this period fail to address major social issues?

 corners of American society. Industrial workers saw themselves as victims of corporate power that demanded long hours of dangerous toil for low wages. Many other Americans, as suggested by this 1889 Thomas Nast cartoon, The Rising of the Usurpers and the Sinking of the Liberties of the People (17.15), viewed trusts as a threat to democracy and equality. By monopolizing the necessities of life, trusts literally threatened to smother American liberty. The Sherman AntiTrust Act of 1890 promised to empower the federal government to crack down on business practices that diminished competition (see Chapter 16), but opposition from pro-business legislators weakened the law to such a point that it did little to slow the growth of big business. Indeed, the 1890s saw record numbers of mergers, and big business used the Sherman Act to weaken labor unions by arguing that strikes amounted to restraint of trade. In 1890, Congress also took up the contentious issue of currency reform to determine what constituted the proper basis for American currency. Advocates of “hard money,” which included most Republicans, businessmen, and the wealthy, argued for basing currency solely on the amount of gold in the U.S. Treasury. They opposed issuing paper money, popularly known as “greenbacks,” or minting more silver coinage, arguing that it contributed to inflation and lowered interest rates. “Soft money” proponents like farmers, workers, and Democrats, however, argued that the supply of gold, and thus of a currency based exclusively on it, was insufficient to meet the needs of an expanding commercial economy. They advocated the issuance of greenbacks and expanded coinage of silver, which was more plentiful than gold. More money in circulation would lead to inflation, but debtors, especially farmers, welcomed inflation because it promised to raise the prices of their goods and diminish the burden of their debts. In 1890, they supported the Sherman Silver Purchase Act, which required the Treasury to purchase 4.5 million ounces of silver every month and issue notes (paper money) redeemable in either silver or gold. Republicans opposed the bill but wanted a higher tariff. Democrats opposed a higher tariff, arguing that it amounted to a huge subsidy paid by American consumers to business. Both sides therefore compromised, and both the silver act and a higher tariff became law. Neither bill, however, had the desired effect. The higher tariff caused consumer prices to

THE CHALLENGE FROM BELOW

 surge, producing widespread discontent. The silver program caused the price of silver to fall, so most of the people holding the notes redeemed them for gold, which depleted the nation’s gold reserves and contributed to the Panic of 1893 and four years of severe depression. The one notable exception to the politics of stalemate was a civil service law to open certain government jobs only to those who demonstrated their competency on a civil service exam rather than those who merely possessed strong political connections. Neither party favored the law, since it threatened to undermine their ability to reward friends and campaign contributors. It took the assassination of President James A. Garfield in 1881 by a frustrated and apparently deranged office seeker to pass the Pendleton Act in 1883, which placed ten percent of federal jobs under civil service.

 The People’s Party Anger against the political system’s corruption and failure to act on critical issues like corporate regulation and currency and tariff reform gradually produced a popular reaction. In the late 1870s, farmers’ alliances, successors to the Granger movement (see Chapter 15), formed to alleviate the plight of farmers beset by rising costs and falling prices for their products. The Southern Farmers’ Alliance (1877) and Northern Farmers’ Alliance (1880) grew in the 1880s to a combined membership of more than five million. Excluded by the segregationist doctrines of the post-Reconstruction South, black farmers formed the Colored Farmers’ Alliance in 1886 and soon had more than 1.25 million members. The alliances argued that the economic woes of the American farmer were due to exploitive bankers who charged farmers exorbitant interest rates for farm mortgages, to railroads that charged them extortionate rates to transport farm produce to market, and to commodity brokers on Wall Street, who bought their crops at rock bottom prices and then resold them at many times the original price paid. To combat this injustice, the alliances promoted the establishment of cooperatives that combined the buying and selling power of farmers to gain them better prices for their produce and lower rates for loans and crop insurance. They also promoted education on agricultural topics. In 1889, the Northern Farmers’ Alliance and Southern Farmers’ Alliance united to form the

 Read the Document N.A. Dunning, ed., Alliance’s Vision of Community (1891)



 National Alliance. One year later, convinced that the only way to combat the power of the monopolies and trusts was to transform the National Alliance into a political movement to elect pro-farmer candidates to office, delegates gathered in Ocala, Florida, and drew up a manifesto listing their grievances and proposed reforms. That fall National Alliance-backed candidates won complete or partial control of 12 state legislatures and elected 6 governors. They also sent 50 representatives and 3 senators to Congress. Because most of these men were Democrats, Republicans lost control of the House. These victories convinced many National Alliance activists like Ignatius Donnelly of Minnesota and Tom Watson of Georgia that they needed to form a third party and run a slate of candidates in the 1892 presidential contest. A National Alliance convention in St. Louis in early 1892 led to the formal creation of the People’s Party (its followers would be known as “Populists”) and the adoption of a platform that emphasized the plight of the American farmer and worker at the hands of greedy businessmen and corrupt politicians (see Competing Visions: Progress or Peril?). By now the People’s Party movement had begun to alarm the leaders of the mainstream political parties. Worried about the party’s potential to determine the winner in 1892 by taking votes from them, the major parties launched a campaign to discredit the Populists. In this political cartoon (17.16), which appeared on the cover of Judge, a pro-Republican magazine, the artist ridicules the Populists as a “patchwork” of strange and dangerous political and ideological movements like socialism and prohibition. The balloon’s basket, labeled “Platform of Lunacy,” carried the party leaders, depicted as eccentric fools. In July 1892, the Populists nominated Union Army veteran James B. Weaver for president and Confederate veteran General James G. Field of Virginia for vice president. Their convention adopted a platform aimed at the following: eliminating monopolies (abolition of national banks and government ownership of railroads and telegraphs); protecting small producers (free silver coinage and “sub-treasuries” to store surplus farm produce during times of low prices and to allow farmers to borrow money against it at low interest); strengthening democracy (the popular election of U.S. senators and the referendum and initiative); and promoting fairness (a graduated income tax to make the rich pay more of the tax burden). To create a national base of support among all struggling people, not just

 What grievances led to the rise of farmers’ alliances?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

Competing Visions
PROGRESS OR PERIL?
Americans in the Gilded Age interpreted the economic, political, and social developments of the era in very different ways. Some looked about them with enthusiasm at the sight of a nation growing in size, wealth, population, and international prestige. President Benjamin Harrison, in his inaugural address in 1889 reflects this optimistic view. Other Americans, however, especially many farmers and industrial workers who sympathized with the People’s Party, expressed alarm and dismay over the state of the nation. What key signs of progress and national strength does President Harrison cite? What dangers to American ideals such as equality and democracy do the authors of the People’s Party Platform identify? How do we account for these starkly different visions? President Benjamin Harrison, Inaugural Address, March 4, 1889 [O]ur growth has not been limited to territory, population and aggregate wealth, marvelous as it has been in each of those directions. The masses of our people are better fed, clothed, and housed than their fathers were. The facilities for popular education have been vastly enlarged and more generally diffused. The virtues of courage and patriotism have given recent proof of their continued presence and increasing power in the hearts and over the lives of our people. The influences of religion have been multiplied and strengthened. The sweet offices of charity have greatly increased.… We have not attained an ideal condition. Not all of our people are happy and prosperous; not all of them are virtuous and law-abiding. But on the whole the opportunities offered to the individual to secure the comforts of life are better than are found elsewhere and largely better than they were here one hundred years ago. No other people have a government more worthy of their respect and love or a land so magnificent in extent, so pleasant to look upon, and so full of generous suggestion to enterprise and labor. God has placed upon our head a diadem and has laid at our feet power and wealth beyond definition or calculation. But we must not forget that we take these gifts upon the condition that justice and mercy shall hold the reins of power and that the upward avenues of hope shall be free to all the people. I do not mistrust the future. Dangers have been in frequent ambush along our path, but we have uncovered and vanquished them all. Passion has swept some of our communities, but only to give us a new demonstration that the great body of our people are stable, patriotic, and lawabiding.… The peaceful agencies of commerce are more fully revealing the necessary unity of all our communities, and the increasing intercourse of our people is promoting mutual respect.… 
 How did the People’s Party platform reflect the concerns of farmers and industrial workers?

 Platform of the People’s Party, July 4, 1892 [W]e meet in the midst of a nation brought to the verge of moral, political, and material ruin. Corruption dominates the ballot box, the Legislatures, the Congress, and touches even the ermine of the bench. The people are demoralized … The newspapers are largely subsidized or muzzled, public opinion silenced, business prostrated, homes covered with mortgages, labor impoverished, and the land concentrating in the hands of capitalists. The urban workmen are denied the right to organize for self-protection, imported pauperized labor beats down their wages, a hireling standing army, unrecognized by our laws, is established to shoot them down, and they are rapidly degenerating into European conditions. The fruits of the toil of millions are boldly stolen to build up colossal fortunes for a few, unprecedented in the history of mankind; and the possessors of those, in turn, despise the Republic and endanger liberty. From the same prolific womb of governmental injustice we breed the two great classes—tramps and millionaires. … A vast conspiracy against mankind has been organized on two continents, and it is rapidly taking possession of the world. If not met and overthrown at once it forebodes terrible social convulsions, the destruction of civilization, or the establishment of an absolute despotism. We have witnessed for more than a quarter of a century the struggles of the two great political parties for power and plunder, while grievous wrongs have been inflicted upon the suffering people. We charge that the controlling influences dominating both these parties have permitted the existing dreadful conditions to develop without serious effort to prevent or restrain them. Neither do they now promise us any substantial reform.…

THE CHALLENGE FROM BELOW



17.16 Discrediting the
Populists
 Concerned about the potential of the People’s Party to determine the outcome of the 1892 presidential election, the major parties ridiculed them as a “patchwork” of dangerous political and ideological movements like socialism and prohibition.

 farmers, the platform also expressed sympathy with industrial workers. In the end, the People’s Party was no match for the established parties. Democrat Grover Cleveland won the election with 46 percent of the vote to Republican incumbent, Benjamin Harrison’s 43 percent. Yet Weaver garnered more than one million votes (9 percent) and won Kansas, Colorado, Idaho, and Nevada. Results on the local and state levels were

 even more impressive, as Populists elected almost 1,500 candidates to state legislatures, three governors, and five senators and ten representatives to Congress. People’s Party leaders hoped to build on this achievement in 1896, but they faced severe challenges. In 1892, the party had performed poorly among Midwestern farmers and industrial workers who stayed with either the Republicans or Democrats. In addition, a campaign by conservatives to equate

 Read the Document The People’s Party Platform (1892)

 How did opponents try to discredit the Populists?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 support for the People’s Party with attacks on white supremacy severely weakened the party in the South.

Industrial Conflict
 and Depression Events soon highlighted the unchecked power of big business and the severe consequences of a laissez-faire economy. Many People’s Party activists hoped the anger and suffering produced by the Homestead strike and Panic of 1893 would prompt workers and farmers to reject the mainstream political parties and join the Populists. Workers at the Homestead Steel Works, a mammoth plant near Pittsburgh owned by Andrew Carnegie, for years enjoyed a strong union (the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers), high wages, and decent living conditions. But in 1892, Carnegie decided to rid the company of the union to cut costs by introducing labor-saving machinery and reducing wages. To protect the public persona of a benevolent capitalist that he had worked for years to develop (see Chapter 16), Carnegie went on vacation in Scotland, leaving his hard-nosed business partner, Henry Clay Frick, to do the dirty work. On June 29, Frick announced a lockout and closed the mills. After a week the standoff turned violent when

 workers exchanged gunfire with heavily armed professional strikebreakers of the Pinkerton Detective Agency, whom Frick had brought by boat to the Homestead complex. Six strikers and five Pinkertons were killed. The national press gave extensive coverage to the strike, and its tone was surprisingly pro-worker, probably due in part to the Pinkertons’ negative reputation. Carnegie, despite his attempt to separate himself from the conflict, drew some of the harshest criticisms. His critics challenged his reputation as the great philanthropist who handed out libraries to communities in the United States and Europe by depicting him as a two-faced hypocrite who funded his philanthropic largesse by grinding down his workers with wage cuts (17.17). But the tide of public opinion soon shifted against the strikers, for on July 23 anarchist Alexander Berkman burst into Frick’s office and shot him. Remarkably Frick survived the assassination attempt. Even though Berkman had no connection to Homestead workers, his actions brought widespread condemnation upon the strikers. In September state officials arrested 33 members of the union’s leadership and charged them with treason against the state. On November 20, 1892, with nearly all the jobs at Homestead filled by replacement workers, the union ended the strike. Six months later, on May 5, 1893, a financial crisis rocked the nation, leading to the most severe economic depression in American history

 17.17 Carnegie’s Reputation Takes a Hit The Homestead strike tarnished Carnegie’s image as a benevolent capitalist and friend of labor. This cartoon from the July 9 issue of the Utica, New York, Globe accuses him of being a two-faced hypocrite, who funded his philanthropy by cutting his workers’ salaries.

 Why did critics accuse Carnegie of hypocrisy during the Homestead Strike?

THE CHALLENGE FROM BELOW

 to that time. Within a year the Panic of 1893 led to the failure of thousands of farms and businesses, including almost 200 railroads and 600 banks closed, throwing millions out of work and pushing the unemployment rate to 20 percent. The depression produced two vivid images of the widespread suffering endured by millions and the unwillingness of public officials to do much about it. The first came from an Ohio Populist named Jacob Coxey, who called for the government abandon laissez-faire and create public works projects such as building roads to alleviate mass unemployment and stimulate the economy (programs the federal government adopted in the Great Depression of the 1930s). To draw attention to this idea, he organized 100 unemployed men in Massillon, Ohio, to march to Washington, D.C. (the first such march on the capital). Setting out on March 25, 1894 Coxey’s Army, as it came to be known grew in size as as various groups joined along the route. As this photograph (17.18) and nearly every other one taken of the march shows, Coxey and his followers sought to portray an image of patriotism, earnestness, and moderation. Dressing as decently as their poverty permitted and marching with dozens of



 American flags, Coxey and his men rejected the accusations of their critics that they were violent radicals determined to attack the government. Rather, they asserted, theirs was a campaign to save the republic from the trusts and laissez-faire policies. Most of the men and women who joined Coxey walked for only part of the march to Washington. Nonetheless, about 600 accompanied him when he entered the nation’s capital on April 30, 1894. Denied entry into the Capitol, Coxey delivered an impassioned address on its steps. We stand here to-day in behalf of millions of toilers whose petitions have been buried in committee rooms, whose prayers have been unresponded to, and whose opportunities for honest, remunerative, productive labor have been taken from them by unjust legislation, which protects idlers, speculators, and gamblers. Coxey and other activists were arrested for “disturbing the peace” but convicted only for walking on the Capitol lawns. Other groups of unemployed workers staged similar protest marches, but all met with frustration and inaction.

 17.18 Coxey’s Army Emphasizes Its Patriotism Aware that critics denounced them as violent radicals, Coxey and his “army” of protesters emphasized their patriotism and moderation by marching with American flags.

Read the Document Jacob S. Coxey, Address of Protest (1894)


 What did Coxey and his followers want from the federal government?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 This sensibility informs the drawing of Pullman’s A second image of government indifference to widespread suffering arose in Chicago. The World’s vision of the future town (since it was still under construction in 1881) as a model community of neat Columbian Exposition had opened on May 1, houses, schools, churches, stores, open spaces, and, of 1893, just four days before the panic on Wall Street. The fair’s emphasis on American progress and course, the factories that made it all possible. So long as the company remained profitable, its prosperity, symbolized by the opulence and beauty of its huge complex of white neoclassical buildings, employees considered themselves fortunate. But the soon stood in stark contrast to the growing despair of depression in 1893 hit the railroad industry hard, the city’s tenement districts a few blocks away. When and Pullman laid off hundreds of workers and announced a wage cut of 30 the fair closed in Octopercent for the rest. On ber, thousands of hometop of this devastating less people moved into the news, workers learned vacant buildings that had that Pullman would only recently housed elabonot reduce their rents, rate displays of prosperity. which were deducted That winter of 1893–1894, automatically from their 60,000 Chicagoans per day paychecks. Some workreceived a free meal from ers soon began receiving soup kitchens and missions. checks for less than one Some of the hardest hit dollar per week to cover workers during the depresthe cost of food, heat, sion were employees of the and clothing. Pullman Palace Car ComOn May 11, 1894, pany, located just outside Pullman worker Pullman’s hard-pressed Chicago. Founded by workers went out on George Pullman in 1867, strike. After a six-week the company manufacstandoff during which Pullman refused to negotiate, tured luxury railroad cars. Pullman was an idealist who believed that workers and employers could work Eugene Debs, the leader of the American Railway Union (ARU) announced all of the union’s 125,000 together in harmony for mutual benefit. Acting on members across the country, as an act of solidarity this idea he established the town of Pullman in 1880, with the Pullman workers, would refuse to handle a company town built and owned by the Pullman corporation for its employees, who rented homes and Pullman cars. Within days the Pullman strike caused the nation’s railroad system to slow to a patronized stores owned by the company. As this crawl. 1881 depiction of the town demonstrates (17.19), The heads of more than two dozen railroads Pullman, like Carnegie, prided himself on being a moved to support Pullman and break the ARU by model capitalist, who earned a vast fortune but still hiring thousands of strikebreakers and pressuring managed to provide a decent living for his workers.

 “We are born in a Pullman house, fed from the Pullman shop, taught in the Pullman school, catechized in the Pullman church, and when we die we shall be buried in the Pullman cemetery and go to the Pullman Hell.”

17.19 Capitalism
 and Community George Pullman’s vision of himself as a benevolent capitalist was captured in these plans for Pullman, a company town of neat houses, schools, churches, stores, open spaces, and factories. [Source: i38519. Sepia illustration showing the town and factories of Pullman, with Index to Works on lower left and Index to Town on lower right.]

 Why did the Pullman workers strike?

Read the Document Address to 1894 Convention of American
Railway Union by Jennie Curtis


THE CHALLENGE FROM BELOW

 Governor Richard Altgeld, to send in the state militia. When he refused out of sympathy for the strikers and a desire to avoid violence, the railroads asked President Grover Cleveland to send federal troops (see Choices and Consequences: The Pullman Strike).



17.20 For Silver and the People
 The Democratic Party emphasized Bryan’s commitment to workers and farmers through his advocacy of free silver and his promise to protect Americans from being crucified on a “Cross of Gold.”

The Election of 1896 and
Political Realignment
 The turmoil caused by the depression and Pullman strike greatly affected the 1894 off-year elections. Dissatisfaction with Cleveland’s administration hurt the Democrats, who lost their brief hold on both houses of Congress. The shift in power meant more stalemate for the next two years, with a Republican Congress opposed by a Democratic president. The election of 1896, however, led to a major realignment in political affiliations among the American people. Republicans nominated former Congressman and Governor of Ohio William McKinley for president and affirmed their conservative commitment to the gold standard and a high tariff. The Democrats nominated a young and dynamic congressman from Nebraska, William Jennings Bryan. Just 36 years old, Bryan had earned a reputation for stirring oratory against the tariff and in support of free silver. The latter issue held great symbolic importance in the middle of the depression. Silver was the metal of the common man, argued its supporters, while gold was the metal of elites. In speeches, pamphlets, songs, and images, People’s Party activists had convinced millions of Americans that free coinage of silver (putting more money into circulation and thus lowering the value of the dollar backed exclusively by gold) would both end the depression and curb the monopolies and trusts. Recognizing the popularity of this policy, delegates at the Democratic Party convention made free silver a key plank in the party platform. Bryan then delivered one of the most famous speeches in American history, in which he argued that average Americans were being crucified on a “cross of gold,” forced upon them by Wall Street and big business. Capturing this theme, this campaign poster (17.20) included the text of the famous speech (framed by silver coins) and ribbons bearing two of its most memorable

Read the Document William Jennings Bryan, “Cross
 of Gold” Speech (1896)

 Why did silver hold such political significance in the late nineteenth century?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

Choices and Consequences
THE PULLMAN STRIKE
Grover Cleveland was not the first president to face the choice of whether to send federal troops to quell a labor dispute. Andrew Jackson had dispatched troops in 1834 to end a strike by canal workers. Rutherford B. Hayes had sent troops to crush the great railroad strike of 1877. Despite these precedents, Cleveland was aware that many considered the use of the army against American citizens a violation of the key republican principles of limited federal power. He also worried that the public would condemn such use of federal power if violence ensued as it had in 1877. He spent days in late June and early July 1894, consulting with advisors and mulling over his options. 
Choices




 Take no action, allowing Illinois and its pro-labor governor to handle the matter.

Continuing
Controversies
 When is using federal troops in a strike compatible with republican principles? Subsequent presidents, including Woodrow Wilson, also ordered military intervention during labor disputes. In 1916, the National Security Act empowered the president to federalize a state’s National Guard to quell a disturbance like a natural disaster, riot, or strike. The two most notable uses of this law, however, came in 1957 (Little Rock, Arkansas) and 1963 (Tuscaloosa, Alabama) to enforce federal desegregation orders.



 Intervene as a neutral and insist that both sides negotiate an equitable settlement.



 Send in the army to break the strike and allow the railroads to use strikebreakers to operate the trains.

Decision
 Despite misgivings Cleveland was a pro-business conservative. He authorized Attorney General Richard Olney, a man with extensive ties to the railroad industry, to obtain a court injunction declaring the ARU boycott of Pullman cars a “conspiracy in restraint of trade” that unlawfully blocked the U.S. mail. When the union defied the injunction, Cleveland ordered the army to end the boycott and get the trains moving again. Debs and other ARU leaders were arrested.

 Federal troops sent by President Cleveland to break the Pullman strike escort the first meat train out of the Chicago stockyards.

Consequences
 Cleveland’s decision touched off violence. Workers destroyed railroad property, and soldiers killed 13 workers and wounded scores more. The boycott collapsed in mid-July and with it the ARU. The Pullman strike ended in early August in complete defeat for the workers. Public opinion, however, turned against Pullman for his obstinate refusal to negotiate with his workers. A government investigation later criticized him and argued that labor unions and government regulation were needed to curb corporate power. Yet in 1895, the Supreme Court (In re Debs) upheld the use of injunctions to end strikes.

 How did President Cleveland justify using federal power to break the Pullman strike?

THE CHALLENGE FROM BELOW

 lines: “You shall not press down upon the brow of Labor this Crown of Thorns” and “You shall not crucify mankind upon a Cross of Gold.” A youthful Bryan flanked by his wife and children tops the poster, while images of a worker and farmer flank the speech text. That left the People’s Party facing a dilemma. Most of its activists had expected the Democrats to follow the Republicans and support the gold standard, leaving the silver issue to the Populists. Now the People’s Party had to decide whether to nominate their own candidate and divide support for the silver issue with the Democrats, or, as was common practice among small parties in the nineteenth century, to nominate Bryan as their candidate, a move that would diminish their standing as an independent party concerned with issues other than silver. In July the People’s Party nominated Bryan. But they nominated their own candidate for vice president, Populist leader Tom Watson of Georgia. Rejecting a longstanding tradition that considered campaigning by presidential candidates unseemly, Bryan embarked on one of the most remarkable campaigns in American history, traveling more than 18,000 miles through 27 states and delivering more than 600 stump speeches to three million people.



 Bryan’s campaign generated a lot of commentary and excitement, but not enough votes on Election Day. McKinley, backed with an unprecedented amount of corporate money, won with 51 percent of the vote to Bryan’s 47 percent. The most significant outcome of the contest was a new and enduring political alignment. The Republican Party became dominant in the Midwest and Northeast and dominated national political power for the next three decades. Republicans would portray themselves as the party of economic prosperity (the economy recovered under McKinley) and international power. The Democrats became the party of the South and West. They retained the Populist belief that government needed to do more to secure the wellbeing of the average citizen and limit the power of big business. Given its base in the South, however, the Democratic Party also upheld a states’ rights philosophy that protected white supremacy. The People’s Party disintegrated after 1896, but many of its core ideas, such as the graduated income tax and the direct election of U.S. senators, remained popular and were eventually adopted during the next two decades, a period known as the Progressive Era.

 “If they dare to come out in the open field and defend the gold standard as a good thing, we will fight them to the uttermost. Having behind us the producing masses of this nation and the world, supported by the commercial interests, the laboring interests and the toilers everywhere, we will answer their demand for a gold standard by saying to them: ‘You shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns! You shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold!’” WILLIAM JENNINGS BRYAN

View the Closer Look Republican Campaign Poster
 of 1896, William McKinley

 What factors led to the demise of the People’s Party?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900



1874–1877


1882–1883




 Boss Tweed’s corruption ring exposed

 Women’s Christian Temperance Union established

Charity Organization
 Society founded

The Home Insurance Building
 completed in Chicago

 Shows the rising influence of political machines in cities and efforts to limit their power

 An early indication of growing women’s activism in the Gilded Age

 Founded by wealthy reformers who feared that too much charity was actually harming the poor

 Considered the world’s first skyscraper, it signaled the transformation of the modern urban landscape.

The Southern Farmers’ Alliance
 established in Texas

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Reflects growing discontent of American farmers that eventually leads to the formation of the People’s Party

The Vanderbilt Ball
 A lavish exhibition of “conspicuous consumption” attended by the richest families in America

The Pendleton Act
 becomes law Intended to diminish nepotism and corruption, it required Civil Service exams for 10 percent of federal jobs

 Josiah Strong publishes, Our Country A best-selling book written in an alarmist style, it warned Americans that cities and immigrants posed a grave threat to the republic.

Review Questions
 1. Why did cities grow in the late nineteenth century? 2. Who supported political machines and why? Why did reformers dislike political machines so much? 3. How did the approach to poverty by reformers like Jacob Riis and Jane Addams differ from traditional approaches?

 4. How did the roles and expectations for middleclass women change in the Gilded Age? What social and economic developments made this possible? 5. What were the primary grievances of people who supported the People’s Party? How did they propose to resolve them? 6. What was the long-term impact of the 1896 election?

Key Terms
 Gilded Age The name for the period 1877–1900 that suggested the amazing achievements of the period were like a thin gold layer that covered many unresolved social problems. Tenement Multiple family dwelling of four to six stories housing dozens of families that became the most common form of housing for poor city dwellers by the 1860s. Political machine Powerful urban political organization that mobilized large blocs of working-class and immigrant voters and often engaged in corrupt and illegal activity.

 People’s Party A third party effort launched in 1890 by a coalition of farmer organizations, reformers, and labor unions and dedicated to curbing corporate power and increasing the voice of the masses in politics. Farmers’ alliance Organization in the 1870s and 1880s dedicated to helping farmers struggling with rising costs and falling crop prices by advocating farmer cooperatives and laws to regulate banks and railroads.

 Settlement house Institution established in cities beginning in the 1880s and dedicated to helping the poor by providing a wide range of social and educational services.

 Coxey’s Army A protest march from Ohio to Washington, D.C., organized by Jacob Coxey in 1894 to publicize demands for the federal government to alleviate the suffering brought on by the Panic of 1893.

 City Beautiful Movement A movement begun in the 1880s that advocated comprehensive planning and grand redesign of urban space to eliminate pollution and overcrowding.

 Company town A town built and owned by a corporation and rented to its employees, reflecting both the corporation’s desire to help their workers and to control them.

 New Woman A phrase used to describe young women in the 1890s and early 1900s that reflected their rising levels of education, economic independence, and political and social activism.

 Pullman strike A bitter strike that began on May 11, 1894, at the Pullman Palace Car Company and soon spread nationwide, paralyzing the railroad system. President Cleveland sent in federal troops and broke the strike.

CHAPTER REVIEW

1887–1889




1892–1893


1894–1896


American Protective
 Association founded

 Women’s suffrage activists form NAWSA

 People’s Party established

 Coxey’s Army marches on Washington, D.C.

 Signals a rise in anti-immigrant sentiment

 Brings together two separate women’s organizations to concentrate on securing the vote for women

 Hull House founded in Chicago Settlement house movement provides a wide range of social services to poor and immigrants city dwellers

 Jacob Riis publishes How the Other Half Lives A shocking exposé of urban poverty that builds support for reform measures

 Sherman Anti-Trust Act passed

 A coalition of farmers, workers, and reformers committed to curbing the power of big business

 The Homestead strike A bitter and highly publicized defeat for workers

 Columbian Exposition opens in Chicago Celebrates American progress and promotes cleaner, healthier, and more beautiful cities



 Economic depression prompts many to demand relief by the federal government

 The Pullman strike President Cleveland breaks the strike by sending in federal troops

Election of 1896
 Republican William McKinley defeats Democrat William Jennings Bryan

 Reflects growing concern over corporate power, but fails to curb it

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Becoming a Modern Society.

Questions for Analysis
 1. What role did immigration play in the rise of large cities? View the Closer Look Immigration to the U.S. 1870–1915, p. 501

 2. Why did political machines grow so powerful in the late nineteenth century? Read the Document Lincoln Steffens, The Shame of the Cities, p. 504

 3. How did reformers offer a new interpretation of the causes of poverty?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • Adna Weber, “The Growth of Cities,” p. 500 • George Waring, “Sanitary Conditions in New York” (1897), p. 503 • Josiah Strong, “Anglo-Saxon Culture Under Siege” (1885), p. 505 • Proposal to Buffalo, New York, Park Commission (1888), p. 506 • Jane Addams, Twenty Years at Hull House, p. 508 • Susan B. Anthony, “The ‘New Departure’ for Women” (1873), p. 512 • Thorstein Veblen, excerpt from The Theory of Leisure Class, p. 516 • Mary Elizabeth Lease, “The Popular Crusader” (1892), p. 517 • N.A. Dunning, ed., Alliance’s Vision of Community (1891), p. 519 • Jacob S. Coxey, Address of Protest (1894), p. 523 • Address to 1894 Convention of American Railway Union by Jennie Curtis, p. 524 • William Jennings Bryan, “Cross of Gold” Speech (1896), p. 525

Read the Document Jacob Riis, How the Other Half Lives,


View the Closer Look


 p. 507

• Competing Visions: How Best to Help the Poor?, p. 504
• The Bowery at Night, p. 511
 • Republican Campaign Poster of 1896, William McKinley, p. 527

 4. What led to the emergence of new forms of leisure in the Gilded Age? Read the Document Coney Island Frolics, p. 514

 5. What did Populists identify as major threats to American values like democracy and equality? Read the Document The People’s Party Platform (1892), p. 521

View the Map Atlas Map: Changing Lives of American Women,
1880–1930, p. 513


 What factors led to the emergence of Progressivism?

Reining in Big
Business p. 535


 How did the federal government tackle the problem of monopolies and trusts in the Progressive Era?

Competing Views
 on Transforming the Workplace p. 541

 How did industrialists, workers, and Progressive reformers differ in their approaches to ending labor conflict?

Protecting Women
 and Children p. 546

How did Progressive Era
 reforms change the lives of women and children?

Reforming the
Government p. 552


 How did the role of government change during the Progressive Era?

Source: Victor Joseph Gatto/
Museum of the City of New York


 CHAPTER

The Progressive
Impulse p. 532




 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 18

Creating a
Democratic
Paradise
The Progressive Era, 1895–1915
 Female employees of the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory, many recently arrived from Italy and Eastern Europe, worked on sewing machines 6 days a week, 12 hours a day, making blouses. On March 25, 1911, a fire engulfed the top floors of the building that housed the factory in New York City’s Lower East Side. As bundles fell to the street, onlookers below assumed that workers were throwing their best cloth out the window to save it. They soon realized their mistake. Female workers were jumping by twos and threes to escape the flames. In the end, 146 women and men perished. The memories of this horrific scene never left 18-year-old Victor Gatto, who stood on the corner and watched as women plunged directly onto the pavement. In 1944 Gatto, a self-taught artist, painted Triangle Fire: March 25, 1911. His painting depicted a woman plunging to her death past unprepared firefighters atop ladders too short to reach the victims above. On the ground indifferent police officers stand near the neat row of shroud-covered corpses that lined the sidewalk. By the time Gatto provided this visual indictment of the government’s inability to protect workers, Americans’ expectations of their government had radically changed. This new vision took hold during the Progressive Era, partially in response to events like the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory Fire. In Gatto’s painting the immense stone buildings tower above the lifeless workers, the artist’s way of representing the complete domination of big business over labor at the beginning of the twentieth century. On the day of the fire, employers had locked the workshop doors from the outside to prevent the women from stealing materials or leaving early. With the doors bolted and flimsy fire escapes collapsing under the weight of fleeing workers, the windows offered the only means of escape for the rest. To many Progressive Era reformers, the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory Fire illustrated the tragic consequences of capitalist exploitation and the government’s lack of interest in the plight of workers. Middle-class activists championed an array of reforms that envisioned using local, state, and federal governments to protect Americans from the greed and indifference of big business. Their agenda aroused considerable criticism, but Progressives, aided by three reform-minded presidents, Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and Woodrow Wilson, found enough common ground to construct cross-class alliances that sought to end exploitive business practices and class conflict. Progressive-led coalitions also tackled pressing political and social issues. From the mid1890s to the mid-1900s, Progressives transformed the role of government in American society and laid the foundation for the liberal reform movements of the twentieth century.

 “We have reached the point in our history when we realize that the nation has tremendous social, economic, and industrial problems.” THEODORE ROOSEVELT, 1912





 CHAPTER 18

CREATING A DEMOCRATIC PARADISE: THE PROGRESSIVE ERA, 1895–1915

The Progressive Impulse
 The tide of reforms that swept across America at the turn of the twentieth century had its roots in a range of middle-class concerns. Middle-class dismay over the dismal living and laboring conditions for most workingclass people turned to alarm as strikes and the appeal of socialism increased. The Progressives had unprecedented success building alliances that transcended class and political party affiliation, winning the support of three consecutive presidents. Dramatically reshaping the nation within a decade, the Progressive vision of an activist government that used regulation to safeguard the public challenged the prevailing laissez-faire notion that the government should not interfere with market forces. began to dominate the economy. Smaller businesses, many run by middle-class proprietors, found it increasingly difficult to compete with these immense corporations. From 1897 to 1904 a wave of business At the dawn of the twentieth century, middle-class mergers reduced 1,800 firms to just 157 in key ecoAmericans looked around the nation and did not like nomic sectors. Leading captains of industry vertiwhat they saw. The upper 2 percent of the populacally integrated businesses to control the production tion controlled the nation’s banks and industry. Even and distribution of their products from start to finworse during the Gilded Age (see Chapter 17), they ish (see Chapter 16). Industrialists also integrated flaunted their prodigious wealth by leading pleasurehorizontally to eliminate competition from comfilled lives replete with mansions, yachts, and private panies manufacturing similar items. Through such art collections. The upper class embraced an ethos measures Rockefeller created the Standard Oil Trust of individualism that made each man responsible and eventually produced and distributed 90 percent for his and his family’s wealth or poverty. “Failures of refined oil in the United States, giving him the which a man makes in his life are due almost always sole power to set prices for consumers and making to some defect in his personality, some weakness him the richest man in the country. of body, mind, or character, will, or temperament,” American factories employed a large wageproclaimed John D. Rockefeller, the billionaire titan earning working-class population whose members of Standard Oil. In the nineteenth century many had little chance of improving their circumstances, middle-class Americans had uncritically echoed no matter how hard they worked. More than half these same sentiments. Increasingly, however, these (18.1) of the nation’s population toiled at manual words rang hollow as the middle class watched the labor in mines, factories, docks, and farms owned rich discard the tenets of self-discipline, frugality, by others. Low wages, seasonal layoffs, sickness, and and charity that had prevented individualism from workplace accidents created a life filled with inseturning into outright selfishness. curity for most workers. “Father, does Big business came of everyone in America live like age at the turn of the this?” asked an 11-yearProfessionals Farm Laborers century, as huge 4% old Russian Jewish 12.6% conglomerates Farmers 21% immigrant, “Go to work early, come Industrial Proprietors home late, eat Laborers 3.8% 13% and go to sleep? And the next day Managers/ officials/clerks again work, eat, 6% 18.1 Occupational and sleep?” For Distribution, 1900 most of the naAmerica was a Domestic and Sales Workers primarily workingCraft Workers tion, the answer Service Workers 3.6% and Operatives 11% class society during was a painful “yes.”

The Angst of the
Middle Class


 the Progressive Era.

25%


 What economic challenges did the nation face at the end of the nineteenth century?

THE PROGRESSIVE IMPULSE

 Large corporate bureaucracies also employed middle-class clerks whose ranks grew from 4 percent of the working population in 1900 to 8 percent by 1920. Most earned enough to maintain an acceptable middle-class lifestyle, but the middle class worried that the growing divide between the “haves” and “have-nots” put them in a precarious position. Press reports focusing on the dire living and working circumstances of the working class aroused middle-class sympathies, but fear motivated them to act as well. The popularity of radical political ideologies, unions, saloons and dancing halls within working-class neighborhoods— each in its own way offering the promise of a better, easier life—alarmed the middle class. The classless paradise without private property championed by working-class radical leaders horrified most middle-class professionals, who owned their own homes and businesses. This 1912 image of state militia confronting a parade of striking textile workers in Lawrence, Massachusetts, underscored the reality that strikes often turned violent ( 18.2). This photo’s suggestion of an imminent offer. Progressivism, a broad term used to describe clash between troops enforcing martial law and a shared philosophical approach rather than a fordefiant workers offered visual evidence to midmal organized movement, provided an answer to dle-class Progressives that class tensions were this threat. tearing the nation apart. While sympathetic to Like the Populists (see Chapter 17) and Sociallabor unions’ demands, middle-class Progresists, Progressives formed their own political party sives valued law and order. They wanted to find to advance their agenda. Theodore Roosevelt, for a way to end both industrialist exploitation and example, made a failed bid to regain the presithe steady stream of strikes that disrupted their dency by running as the candidate of the shortdaily lives. lived Progressive (Bull Moose) Party in 1912. Progressives aspired to change other aspects of Mainly however, Progressives, built cross-class working-class culture as well. They deplored what political coalitions that transcended party lines. they saw as the twin evils of drink and prostitution Lacking the wealth that the upper class possessed, rampant in working-class neighborhoods. In the or the sheer numbers that gave the working class Progressive imagination the relentless pursuit of tremendous economic clout, the middle class pleasure by both the upper class and the working needed the support of other classes for their reclass signaled the overall moral decay of American forms to succeed. society. Women played a particularly visible and active role in Progressive causes. Female settlement house workers (see Chapter 17) and women’s civic club members, usually white, middle class, and college educated, embraced the notion of “municipal houseGlaring problems on both sides of the class keeping,” the Progressive conviction that women divide—an idle and exploitive upper class on one side and an increasingly radicalized and impover- could not adequately protect their children without help from the government. Female trade unionists ished working class on the other—threatened the middle-class vision of what life in America should agreed, but they also wanted to empower female



18.2 Troops and
Striking Workers
Face Off, Lawrence,
Massachusetts 1912
 When the governor proclaimed martial law to prevent mass union rallies, protesting workers took to the streets carrying large American flags. Middle-class Progressives hoped their reforms would end strike-related violence, like the mayhem threatening to unfurl in this scene.

The Progressive Vision


Read the Document Eugene V. Debs, “The Outlook for
Socialism in America” (1900)


 How did a mix of sympathy and fear spur middle-class interest in reform?



 CHAPTER 18

CREATING A DEMOCRATIC PARADISE: THE PROGRESSIVE ERA, 1895–1915

 workers by organizing unions to improve wages and working conditions. Tragedies like the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory Fire brought these diverse female factions together, even winning support from appalled upper-class women. In the wake of the fire, this cross-class female coalition focused on bolstering city safety regulations, but only the labor activists emphasized the need for unions to end employer exploitation. One particularly effective cross-class female alliance lobbied for legislation to ensure that mothers had clean, disease-free milk for their children. These women succeeded in their quest for local laws that prevented distributors from using chalk to make dirty milk appear white. They successfully rallied for mandatory pasteurization to kill germs, and for milk to be transported in refrigerated containers. Femaleled reform campaigns also injected new energy into the suffrage movement.

 “Children need pure milk and good food, good schools and playgrounds, sanitary homes and safe streets.” A female trade-union activist on why women needed the vote Many middle-class female Progressive reformers and working-class labor organizers became convinced that without the right to vote, women lacked an essential tool they needed to keep themselves and their families safe. The National Woman Suffrage Association (NWSA) achieved notable successes between 1910 and 1917, winning the right to vote in Washington, California, Arizona, Kansas, Oregon, and New York. Defeats in other states, however, convinced the NWSA to seek a constitutional amendment guaranteeing all women the right to vote, a campaign that succeeded in 1920 (see Chapter 20). In a general sense the Progressives wanted to turn America into a middle-class paradise where economic security, education, health, and civility flourished. The tradition of Christian charity also helped shape the Progressive agenda. In the 1880s, Protestant ministers like Josiah Strong began preaching the Social Gospel, the religious belief that Christians had a responsibility to create an ethically sound and morally upright society. The settlement house movement, begun in the spirit of Christian charity, became the incubator for strategies

 How did the Progressive vision take shape?

 Progressives developed to attain these goals. As they confronted the problems of the poor at Hull House, a settlement house in a Chicago immigrant neighborhood, Jane Addams and Florence Kelley articulated the middle-class values that would form the cornerstone of the Progressive ethos. Foremost among these was an emphasis on how the environment, as well as individual traits, shaped the lives of the poor. Progressives argued that poor living and working environments created many of the social problems troubling the nation. Exhibiting a typical Progressive faith in the scientific method, Addams and Kelley compiled a statistical portrait of disease, over-crowding, and crime in their Chicago neighborhood that helped Hull House devise solutions to these problems. Improving sanitation and garbage collection, creating playgrounds for children, eliminating saloons, limiting the hours spent at work, reducing workplace accidents—these were all ways to improve the environment in working-class neighborhoods so that individuals could flourish. Personal responsibility also remained a bedrock principle for Addams and Kelley. While offering more respect for immigrant cultures than many past reformers, Addams and Kelley still believed strongly in teaching immigrants the importance of thrift, temperance, and self-discipline—lifestyle changes that some immigrants resisted. Finally, Progressives embraced a new vision of governmental power, one that Americans from many different walks of life challenged. Their notion that governmental regulation should protect workers and curtail the excesses of big business put them at odds with industrialists and unions. Industrialists embraced the laissez-faire ethos that they had the right to control their businesses as they saw fit without government interference. Unions also viewed potential government intervention with unease, mindful that during labor conflicts the government usually sided with industrialists. Labor leaders preferred using collective action, including strikes, to win concessions from industrialists. To socialists, who wanted to nationalize all major industries, the Progressive emphasis on regulation was too timid. Essentially the Progressives sought the middle ground between these competing views. They wanted to establish a balance that avoided the excesses of unfettered laissez-faire economics, unending class conflict, or complete government control of the economy. Their aim was notable—the creation of a socially just, capitalist America.

View the Closer Look Triangle Fire: March 25, 1911


REINING IN BIG BUSINESS



Reining in Big Business
 When three consecutive presidents—Theodore (Teddy) Roosevelt, William Taft, and Woodrow Wilson—embraced components of the evolving Progressive reform agenda, Progressivism entered the mainstream with a vengeance. What to do about big business aroused considerable debate within Progressive circles. Progressives held competing visions of whether to regulate, dismantle, or accept the trusts, making it hard to rally public opinion around one clear solution. Presidents Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson devised differing regulatory and antitrust strategies to reform business practices, and openly disagreed on how to tackle the problem. Curtailing big business’s access to the nation’s environmental riches also provoked debate. Did business have the right to fully exploit the country’s forests and water, or should these resources be preserved?

 Roosevelt’s Trust-Busting Roosevelt enthusiastically supported turning the government into a “steward of the public welfare.” While serving as New York City police commissioner from 1895 to 1897, Roosevelt had become friendly with pioneering photojournalist Jacob Riis (see Chapter 17). “The midnight trips that Riis and I took” to the tenements, Roosevelt later acknowledged, showed him “what overcrowding means, some hot summer night.” Roosevelt’s feats during the 1898 Spanish-American War made him a national hero, catapulting him into winning the New York governorship. In 1900, President William McKinley selected Roosevelt as his running mate for his successful reelection bid. On September 5, 1901, anarchist Leon Czolgosz shot McKinley with a pistol wrapped in a handkerchief while the president was shaking hands at the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York. When McKinley died eight days later, the 42-year-old Roosevelt became the youngest president in American history. A robust man who appeared to be in perpetual motion dictating letters, lecturing visitors, playing tennis, or having pillow fights with his younger children in the White House, Roosevelt captured the public’s affection. When Teddy Roosevelt saved a bear cub during a 1902 hunting expedition, a toymaker felt inspired to name a new children’s toy after him, and so the teddy bear was born. Like many Progressives Roosevelt believed that the country stood at a crossroads—either reform or face the end of democracy. He established his credentials as a Progressive reformer, and won public approval, by mediating the 1902 coal strike and

 filing suit against the Northern Securities and Standard Oil Trusts. On May 12, 1902, 140,000 northeastern Pennsylvanian miners walked off their jobs. They demanded an eight-hour day, a 20 percent wage increase, and recognition of their United Mine Workers (UMW) union. The mine owners refused to negotiate. “‘The public be damned,’ appears to be their motto,” decried one Illinois newspaper as coal shortages forced factories to close, and the poor began cooking food with oil-soaked asbestos. President Roosevelt viewed the miners’ predicament sympathetically. “I strongly favor labor unions,” he declared. “If I were a wage worker in a big city I should certainly join one.” Fearing widespread suffering and urban riots, Roosevelt threatened to use troops to take over the mines unless the owners agreed to let a government commission fashion an agreement. For the first time a president had stood up publicly against big business, winning him accolades in union circles. The resulting resolution reduced miners’ hours from ten to nine and awarded them a 10 percent pay hike without forcing the owners to recognize the union. “I wish the capitalists would see,” the president privately remarked, that the government-ordered compromise “is really in the interest of property, for it will save it from the danger of revolution.” Roosevelt also joined the Progressive campaign to remove the stranglehold that some trusts had on parts of the economy. In 1902, journalist Ida Tarbell began publishing a multipart series, “The History of the Standard Oil Company,” in McClure’s Magazine, a popular and influential middle-class news periodical. In her scathing critique Tarbell detailed the illicit deals that John D. Rockefeller had made with railroad companies to build his oil trust. Secret rebate

View the Image Teddy Roosevelt as “Jack the Giant Killer” (1904)


 Why did Roosevelt’s personality and behavior captivate the public?



 CHAPTER 18

CREATING A DEMOCRATIC PARADISE: THE PROGRESSIVE ERA, 1895–1915

 agreements meant that Rockefeller paid considerably less than his competitors to ship oil. Many could not even get the railroads, which feared incurring Rockefeller’s wrath, to transport their oil. Tarbell had firsthand experience with Rockefeller’s cut-throat practices: They had bankrupted her father’s oil business. She was convinced that Rockefeller’s tactics would drive other small producers out of business, leaving a handful of industrialists in control of the economy. The titans of industry offered a competing vision. There was nothing wonderful about economic competition, Rockefeller contended. Destructive pricecutting drove down wages, over-production created depressions, and duplication of services wasted valuable resources. Rockefeller defended his railroad agreements as beneficial to all concerned. Standard Oil got lower rates while the railroads received guaranteed freight. Preventing too much oil from flooding the market stabilized prices and kept men in all oil-related industries profitably employed. The richest man in America also disputed claims that trusts made economic advancement impossible for average Americans, noting that he needed intelligent and skilled men to run his subsidiaries. President Roosevelt agreed with much of Rockefeller’s assessment. “The corporation has come to stay,” he conceded, acknowledging that the nation benefited from the economies of scale that “good” trusts offered. Nonetheless, Roosevelt maintained, the government needed to break up “bad” trusts when consolidation threatened the public interest. The president soon singled out the Northern Securities Trust for dissolution, earning a reputation for trust-busting by taking steps to break up the monopoly. In 1901, the financier J. P. Morgan had joined with two other powerful trust-builders, James J. Hill and E. H. Harriman, to form the Northern Securities Trust. The new transportation conglomerate meant “that you can ride from England to China on regular lines of steamships and railroads without once passing from the protecting hollow of Mr. Morgan’s hand,” announced journalist Ray Stannard Baker. With his eye on the 1904 presidential election, Roosevelt filed an antitrust suit charging the Northern Securities Trust with violating the 1890 Sherman Anti-Trust Act. A shocked Morgan rushed to the White House to broker a deal with the president. “If we have done anything wrong, send your man to my man and they can fix it up,” suggested Morgan, an offer for a backroom deal that Roosevelt refused. In 1904, the Supreme Court upheld a Justice

 What competing visions did Roosevelt, the Supreme Court, and leading industrialists offer on the trust issue?

 Department order to dissolve the Northern Securities Trust into independent railroad companies, earning Roosevelt public acclaim. After Roosevelt easily defeated the lackluster Democrat Alton B. Parker to win reelection in 1904, one newspaper called him “the most popular man that has come into public life within recent times.” Standard Oil was next. In 1906 the Justice Department filed suit claiming that the trust had violated the Sherman AntiTrust Act. This political cartoon (18.3) depicts Standard Oil as a frenzied octopus that has consumed the entire oil industry. Tentacles grasp overweight steel and copper businessmen in suits on one side and steamboats on the other, symbolizing how Standard Oil’s control of the supply and price of oil strangled transportation and manufacturing industries. In the caricature state legislatures and Congress have succumbed to the monster’s strength, and a leg now reaches for the White House. When the Supreme Court finally ordered Standard Oil to dissolve in 1911, the justices avoided a blanket ruling that all trusts were illegal. The Court instead invoked a “rule of reason,” stating that only unreasonable restraints of interstate trade violated the law. The Court’s ruling aptly described expresident Roosevelt’s own trust-busting philosophy. Roosevelt launched highly visible assaults on the Northern Securities and Standard Oil Trusts. He did nothing, however, when Morgan bought Andrew Carnegie’s steel empire in 1901 to create U.S. Steel, a trust that employed nearly one million workers. Roosevelt balanced trust-busting with regulation to ensure that big business behaved responsibly. He strengthened the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC), created in 1887 to address Western farmers’ criticism of high railroad freight rates and rebates (see Chapter 17). By 1900, Supreme Court rulings

 Read the Document Louis Brandeis, from Other People’s Money and How Bankers Use It (1913)

REINING IN BIG BUSINESS

 had essentially stripped the ICC of real authority. During his second administration, Roosevelt reinstated the power of the ICC to regulate railroad monopolies, convincing a reluctant Congress to pass the 1906 Hepburn Act. Four years later the Mann-Elkins Act further bolstered the rate-setting powers of the ICC and put the telegraph and telephone communication industries under its purview as well.

Taft and Wilson: Competing
Progressive Visions
 Having promised not to run again for president in 1908, Roosevelt helped his secretary of war, William Howard Taft, secure the Republican nomination.

View the Image John D. Rockefeller Cartoon (1901)


 Roosevelt believed that Taft would continue his efforts to create a stronger, regulatory federal government. The Democrats countered by nominating the fiery William Jennings Bryan for a third time (see Chapter 17), trying to siphon Progressive votes away from a tepid Taft. Roosevelt’s tireless campaigning for his chosen successor undercut Bryan’s claim that he was the only real Progressive in the race. The Republican campaign slogan, “Vote for Taft now, you can vote for Bryan anytime,” reminded voters of Bryan’s two previous attempts to win the presidency and portrayed him as a perennial loser. Taft won easily, handing Bryan his worst electoral defeat. Once Taft became president important philosophical differences between Roosevelt and Taft emerged. Like Roosevelt, Taft had to work with a divided



18.3 Standard
 Oil’s Tentacles In this political cartoon Standard Oil is an octopus, consuming everything in its path.

 How did exposés and caricatures in the popular media shape public views of Standard Oil?



 CHAPTER 18

18.4 1912
Presidential
Election Results
 Strong third-party challenges from the Progressive Party and Socialists split the national vote four ways, but Democrat Wilson prevailed to win the presidency in 1912.

CREATING A DEMOCRATIC PARADISE: THE PROGRESSIVE ERA, 1895–1915

 Republican party that controlled Congress. Roosevelt had sided with the Progressive faction, while Taft gravitated to the conservatives. Unlike Roosevelt Taft viewed the president as an executor of law and protector of existing social institutions, not someone who spearheaded new reforms. A stickler for the law, Taft proved less willing than Roosevelt to make any distinction between good and bad trusts, filing more antitrust cases over four years than Roosevelt had in eight. Taft’s decision to file charges against U.S. Steel enraged Roosevelt, who saw it as a personal attack on his earlier choice to leave this “good” trust alone. Unhappy with his successor Roosevelt decided to run for president again in 1912. When Roosevelt’s bid for the 1912 Republican nomination failed (the party renominated the incumbent Taft), Republican Progressives bolted and formed the short-lived Progressive (Bull Moose) Party, which nominated Roosevelt as their presidential candidate. The split in Republican ranks offered the Democrats an opportunity to capture the presidency for the first time since the election of 1892. They nominated New Jersey Governor Woodrow Wilson, a Virginia-born politician with Progressive ideals. In contrast to the divided Republican Party, Wilson’s candidacy kept the Southern base happy and prevented Progressively inclined Northern Democrats from joining the Progressive Party.





















8 3










































 Electoral vote by state

Electoral Vote (%)


Popular Vote (%)


435 (82)


6,296,547 (41.9)


Theodore Roosevelt
(Progressive)


88 (8)


4,118,571 (27.4)


William H Taft
(Republican)


8 (0)


3,486,720 (23.2)


Eugene Debs
(Socialist)


0 (0)


900,672 (6.0)


Woodrow Wilson
(Democrat)


 What clear philosophical differences separated the four candidates in the 1912 presidential election?

7 5








 Taft, Roosevelt, and Wilson supported different degrees of federal activism, competing views that gave voters a clear choice in the election of 1912. Taft was willing to zealously enforce existing Progressive reforms but had no intention of initiating new ones. Roosevelt embraced a governing philosophy that he called “New Nationalism,” a vision that emphasized increased federal regulation and widespread political reform. In contrast to Roosevelt, who wanted to regulate but not destroy big business, Wilson’s “New Freedom” promised to restore a competitive marketplace where small businessmen and farmers thrived. The 1912 slate also included Socialist Party candidate Eugene V. Debs, a railway trade union leader who had become a socialist after being jailed during the Pullman Strike of 1894 (see Chapter 17). Formed in 1905 the Socialists had won numerous local elections and grown to over 100,000 dues-paying members. Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson believed that with regulations in place (although each favored different amounts of regulation), capitalism would operate more fairly. Debs offered a competing view. He proposed transferring ownership of existing railroad, oil, and steel trusts to the government to ensure fair prices and wages. Government-run monopolies would be the first step toward ending the free-market system altogether. Most voters agreed that the time had come to reform how the economy operated, but they overwhelmingly chose Progressivism over Socialism. Wilson won the presidency in 1912 (18.4) by a landslide in the Electoral College, while receiving only 41.9 percent of the popular vote. Roosevelt came in second with 27.4 percent of the popular vote, followed by Taft’s 23.2 percent. Over 900,000 Americans, 6 percent of the electorate, voted for Debs. Nearly 70 percent of those who voted cast their ballots for Wilson or Roosevelt, a resounding public endorsement of Progressive principles and reforms. Once he entered the White House, President Woodrow Wilson went beyond trust-busting to weaken monopolies. He accepted the Democratic orthodoxy of cutting the tariff so foreign businesses could market lower-priced goods in the United States, thereby creating a more competitive marketplace where smaller businesses could thrive. By 1913, most industrialists had dropped their longstanding opposition to lowering the tariff. The heads of Singer Sewing Machines, Eastman Kodak, and U.S. Steel believed that other nations would reciprocate, allowing American captains of industry to conquer foreign markets as well. Wilson offset the lost tariff

REINING IN BIG BUSINESS

 revenue (which the government needed to fund its operations) with the first federal income taxes, now constitutional thanks to the newly ratified Sixteenth Amendment (1913). Only people making more than $4,000 a year paid federal income taxes (less than one percent of the population) at a time when many workers felt lucky to make $1,000 a year. Wilson also tried to help small businesses by improving the flow of credit. Most small and big businessmen agreed with Wilson that the time had come to reform the country’s chaotic banking system. They vividly remembered the Panic of 1907 when financial giant J. P. Morgan had used his own funds and those of other bankers to shore up the national banking system. The nation’s 7,000 banks operated with complete independence, issuing all forms of currency, some backed by gold and silver, others backed by government bonds. No centralized authority existed to expand or contract the currency supply as the economy demanded, or to move money around the country to stave off panics. Conflicting visions soon arose over whether private financiers or the government should control the nation’s financial institutions. Southern and Western Populists wanted a federally run banking system that would destroy the Wall Street “money trust.” Eastern bankers likened government oversight to socialism. After much debate Congress passed the Federal Reserve Act (1913), creating a federally run Federal Reserve to serve as a “banker’s bank” that held a portion of bank funds in reserve to help member banks in time of crisis. The Federal Reserve also set rates for business loans and issued a new national paper currency. Wilson beefed up federal regulation of trusts as well. In 1914, the Clayton Anti-Trust Act prohibited interlocking directories, the practice of setting up shadow companies that appeared to compete but were actually run by the same board of directors. The law exempted trade unions from prosecution under the 1890 Sherman Anti-Trust Act, eliminating a tactic that businessmen had used to undercut the labor movement. The Federal Trade Commission (1914) had the power to order companies to cease unfair trading practices, although its decisions were subject to court review.

 forests, water, and minerals provoked another set of competing visions within Progressive circles. In 1867, John Muir suffered an eye injury that caused temporary blindness while working as a mechanic. After his eyes healed Muir walked 1,000 miles from Indianapolis, Indiana, to the Gulf of Mexico to rejuvenate his spirit. Like Muir, Roosevelt had turned to the revitalizing power of nature while recovering from personal tragedy when he retreated to his North Dakota ranch in 1884 after both his mother and 22-year-old first wife died on the same day in their New York City home. In 1903, President Roosevelt went camping with Muir in Yosemite, an area of the California Sierra Nevada Mountains filled with spectacular waterfalls, massive rock formations, and Giant Sequoia trees nearly 200 feet high and 3,000 years old. A photo of the pair on Glacier Point (18.5) before Yosemite Falls, the largest waterfall in North America, commemorated the trip. The two men dominate the frame, suggesting the power they had to decide the fate of such national treasures. This moment of unity was fleeting. Despite their mutual love of unspoiled forests, Muir and Roosevelt became formidable opponents who embraced different environmental visions. Muir was a preservationist who championed preserving nature in its unspoiled state as a refuge for a “tired, nerve-shaken, over-civilized people.” He accused businessmen of ravaging forests, polluting water, and destroying meadows with little regard for the long-term social costs of ruining the environment. Muir’s condemnation resonated well with members of the middle class, who wanted to escape the



18.5 President
Roosevelt and
John Muir in
Yosemite, 1903
 Despite their camaraderie during a camping trip, Roosevelt and Muir embraced competing environmental visions.

 Preservation versus Conservation Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson prescribed differing amounts of regulation and federal activism to rein in the trusts. Business’s access to the nation’s

View the Map Interactive Map: Resources
 and Conflict in the West

 How did Wilson’s economic vision and policies differ from those pursued by the Roosevelt and Taft administrations?



 CHAPTER 18

18.6 Chief and
 his staff, 1904 This image of Crow warriors riding away into the mist captured the prevailing sentiment that Indian cultures were on the verge of disappearing.

CREATING A DEMOCRATIC PARADISE: THE PROGRESSIVE ERA, 1895–1915

 stress of urban life with holidays in the pristine wilderness. His influential writings led to the 1890 establishment of Yosemite as a national park and the creation in 1892 of the Sierra Club, an environmental group dedicated to preserving wilderness. Muir’s antibusiness message fit well with the Progressive determination to put the social good ahead of individual self-interest. Roosevelt agreed that a few unscrupulous entrepreneurs should not unfairly consume what belonged to the entire nation. To this end Roosevelt created 5 national parks, 18 national monuments, and bird reserves that placed millions of acres off-limits to development. The president parted company with Muir, however, by choosing to regulate, not ban, public access to other federally controlled lands, waterways, and mineral deposits. Roosevelt embraced a conservationist vision that tried to balance two goals: meeting present economic needs and conserving natural resources for future generations. When the U.S. Forestry Service Director Gifford Pinchot allowed timber companies to harvest trees in designated areas, the new regulations enraged both preservationists, who wanted all economic development to cease, and Western businessmen, who demanded unfettered access to federally controlled forests. Taft was sympathetic to Western complaints that Roosevelt had overstepped his authority. When

 How did Americans disagree about the environment during the Progressive Era?

 Taft fired Pinchot in 1910, Roosevelt and his Progressive followers took it as a sign that Taft had abandoned conservation, deepening the split between the two former colleagues. Environmentalists expressed great admiration for Native Americans’ ecologically friendly farming and hunting practices, fueling mainstream curiosity about Indian cultures at the turn of the century. In 1900, photographer Edward Curtis began a 30-year multivolume ethnographic project entitled The North American Indian, which recorded images of 80 different Indian civilizations. Many Indians willingly participated in Curtis’s photography project, proud of the beautiful portraits he took of them in their best festive dress. Curtis wanted to capture the variety and richness of Native American cultures before they completely disappeared. Considering himself a friend to the Indian, Curtis believed (like most of his generation) that to survive Native Americans needed to assimilate into mainstream American society. Curtis often photographed groups of Indians riding off into the distance ( 18.6 ) to symbolically convey the notion that, as Curtis wrote, “the Indians as a race, already shorn in their tribal strength and stripped of their primitive dress, are passing into the darkness of an unknown future.” Neither preservationists nor conservationists had any interest in reversing official policies of forced assimilation that divided collective reservation lands into individual farms, banned native languages, and sent Indian children to white-run boarding schools (see Chapter 15). Preservationists inadvertently hastened the demise of some Indian cultures by enticing Americans to visit national forests. Tourism undercut Indians’ access to traditional hunting grounds so that their economic survival increasingly depended on selling crafts to tourists and charging them to see performances of native dances.

View the Closer Look Images as History:
Envisioning a Vanishing Race


COMPETING VIEWS ON TRANSFORMING THE WORKPLACE



Competing Views on Transforming
 the Workplace In 1900, the United States earned the questionable distinction of being one of the most strike-torn nations in the world. To end class conflict and introduce more social harmony, Progressives wanted to transform the workplace into an environment where workers labored a reasonable number of hours in safe conditions for decent wages. Industry and labor each presented a competing view that challenged the Progressive vision as they sought the upper hand in their decadeslong class struggle.

Capitalist Visions of
Industrial Harmony
 Industrialists differed on how to rid the workplace of labor conflicts that interfered with the smooth operation of their businesses. The National Civic Federation brought together moderate industrialists and labor union leaders dedicated to seeking industrial peace through compromise. Ohio Senator Mark Hanna, who made his fortune in coal, argued that industrialists should turn labor into “the ally of the capitalist, rather than a foe.” In return for a few minimal concessions, factory owners could demand that union leaders discipline their membership and keep workers on the job, thus ending the constant strife that permeated the industrial sector. Hanna’s voice was a decided minority. Most industrialists refused to compromise their authority. Staunchly antiunion they employed a host of methods to undercut unions. If forced to accept a union, they insisted upon an “open shop” that let workers choose whether to join a union, then used intimidation to stop workers from enrolling. Industrialists hired private security forces to spy on workers, fired identified union members, and put them on blacklists that prevented union members from getting another job. During strikes factory owners expelled families from company-owned housing and hired substitute workers (called scabs) to replace striking workers. To protect union members from these discriminatory industrialist policies and build strength, labor organizers fought to establish a “closed shop,” which required all workers in the same company to join the union. Other industrialists embraced benevolence to dissuade workers from organizing. Welfare capitalism, the notion of using benefits to gain workers’

 loyalty, aimed to improve worker morale and weaken interest in unions. Some large firms instituted free medical care, pensions, kindergartens, and even baseball leagues, but these services typically evaporated at the first sign of economic downturn. Unions did not want to leave it up to the employer to decide whether to offer benefits. They preferred using collective bargaining to negotiate a contractual agreement between workers and their employers that established such benefits as a permanent right. The drive for efficiency, a goal that many Progressives shared, was another way that industrialists undercut workers’ collective power. Henry Ford’s innovations in automobile manufacturing demonstrated how industrialists could boost profits by reducing manufacturing costs. The son of a prosperous Irish immigrant farmer in Dearborn, Michigan, Ford built his first car in 1896 in a shed behind his Detroit home. Forming the Ford Motor Company, Ford introduced the Model T in 1908, a moment when 515 separate companies were manufacturing automobiles. Ford standardized parts and constantly improved machinery—innovations that let him produce more cars for less money. Ford passed these savings on to consumers, lowering the price of his “car for the great multitudes” from $825 in 1908 to $345 in 1916. By then Ford had captured half the market for new cars. In 1914 Ford created headlines by offering male factory workers a five-dollar daily wage for nine hours of work (extended to female and male office employees two years later). Ford paid twice the standard wage rate, because he recognized that the common practice of paying workers subsistence wages limited the markets for many consumer goods. Ford wanted his workers to be able to afford his automobiles. Working nine instead of ten hours a day, Ford reasoned, reduced fatigue-induced mistakes and worker

 What different methods did industrialists use to end labor conflict?



 CHAPTER 18

CREATING A DEMOCRATIC PARADISE: THE PROGRESSIVE ERA, 1895–1915

 “The men do their work and go home—a factory is not a drawing room.” HENRY T. FORD on his rule prohibiting workers from talking to each other as they assembled automobiles

18.7 The
Assembly Line
 Ford’s innovative mass production techniques included a welllit and ventilated environment that relieved workers of backbreaking tasks. The assembly line also deadened the mind, as constant routine movements eliminated the need for decision making.

 turnover, giving the company a loyal and experienced workforce. The moving conveyor belt in Ford’s assembly lines (18.7) meant that workers no longer had to lift or move the chassis as they assembled a car. Ford admitted that he “could not do the same thing day in and out,” but he condescendingly believed that the average worker “wants a job in which he does not have to think.” To keep workers focused and productive, Ford prohibited sitting, talking, singing, or whistling in his factories. Fearful of losing their jobs, workers only dared to criticize Ford’s iron control over the production process in private.

 How much did Ford’s innovations and paternalism benefit workers?

 Ford’s five-dollar/nine-hour-day came with strings attached. Ford instituted many reforms that Progressives sought because they made business sense, but he staunchly resisted government regulation and attempts to organize a union, retaining the right to make his own factory rules. Ford also firmly subscribed to industrialists’ long-standing belief that they had the right, and the duty, to interfere in the private lives of their employees. For Ford this meant offering benefits only to employees who met certain moral criteria. Married men, for instance, had to live with their families. Thirty investigators working for Ford’s Sociological Department visited workers’ homes and sometimes imposed other requirements, such as mandatory English classes for immigrants. Gambling, excessive drinking, or having sexual relations with a prostitute were all grounds for dismissal. A Ford Motor Company investigator had to verify that a male worker was morally upright (and not trying to organize a union) before he and his family could move into a spacious two-story home built by the company.

Read the Document Frederick Winslow Taylor, “A Piece-Rate System”
 from The Principles of Scientific Management (1911)

COMPETING VIEWS ON TRANSFORMING THE WORKPLACE

 Progressives valued efficiency and expertise, and Frederick Winslow Taylor took the drive for efficiency further than Ford by popularizing scientific management, the effort to use scientific knowledge to maximize output and profit. Taylor used stopwatches to evaluate how long each part of the manufacturing process should take. He then outlined the steps laborers should replicate to lay bricks without any wasted energy, and determined the perfect shovel size and the exact amount of rest workers needed to lift the maximum amount of pig iron each day. After establishing the optimal time and method for a specific task, Taylor argued, industrialists could then fine or fire unproductive workers who failed to maintain an acceptable pace. Taylor admitted that his system, dubbed “taylorism,” intentionally eliminated workers’ independence and creativity. Each man, he asserted, must “grow accustomed to receiving and obeying directions covering details, large and small, which in the past have been left to his individual judgment.”

Working-Class
Labor Activism
 The working class had long fashioned its own solutions to surviving difficult living and working conditions. Fraternal associations assisted those who lost their jobs or needed to bury a loved one, while urban political machines (see Chapter 17) secured voters’ loyalty by helping families endure personal tragedies such as fires or illness. Meanwhile unions tried to negotiate better wages and shop floor rules for dues-paying members, but organizing the working class so it could speak with one voice proved impossible. Ethnic and racial prejudices kept the working class fragmented. Italian strikebreakers, for instance, had few qualms about walking across a picket line manned by Slavic strikers. The craftbased American Federation of Labor (AFL), led by Samuel Gompers, organized only skilled, mostly white workers, refusing to let unskilled laborers, women, or blacks into its unions. Only a handful of industrial unions like the UMW and International Longshoreman’s Union adopted a big umbrella approach that organized all workers in one industry into the same union. Middle-class Progressives supported many union goals but deplored their methods. Strikes continually disrupted normal life by shutting down railroad lines, street cars, and coal mines.

Read the Document Profiles: Samuel Gompers




 Government regulation, they maintained, would improve workers’ lives and ensure that the economy functioned smoothly. Nevertheless, many unions remained skeptical about relying on the government to solve their conflicts. The AFL preferred using its collective economic power to force industrialists to negotiate. Its members had unhappy memories of what happened when state or federal officials intervened in labor conflicts, as during the 1894 Pullman Strike. The Roosevelt administration occasionally chose to aid labor, but Progressive Era courts nearly always favored industrialists. In 1908, the Supreme Court stopped workers from launching sympathy strikes or boycotts to support fellow workers, labeling them “restraints of trade” barred under the 1890 Sherman Anti-Trust Act, a law originally intended to curtail the creation of business monopolies. Another 1908 decision allowed employers to fire workers who joined unions. Reducing government interference in labor conflicts therefore remained the AFL’s primary goal. Radical trade unionists rejected the AFL vision of working within the free market system. The Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), formed in 1905, envisioned “one big union” that welcomed all workers regardless of sex, race, ethnicity, or skill, which would one day take over all means of production in the United States. “It is the historic mission of the working class to do away with capitalism,” declared the founders of the IWW, whose members were nicknamed “Wobblies.” The founding group included 75-year-old Mother Mary Jones, a tireless white-haired organizer for the UMW, and William D. “Big Bill” Haywood, an organizer for the Western Federation of Miners. Their drive to abolish private property and formal government struck many Progressives as anarchy. Government harassment of the IWW limited its formal membership to around 10,000.

The Progressives’
Limited Progress
 Employers had traditionally held employees responsible for workplace accidents, maintaining that workers knowingly accepted all job-associated risks. Carelessness caused most mishaps, they argued. Progressive organizations undertook detailed sociological studies to refute these self-serving generalizations. Lewis Hine’s photographic investigation into the lives of injured Pittsburgh workers

 What conflicting visions divided working-class union activists?



 CHAPTER 18

18.8 An Injured
Pittsburgh Worker
Portraits of
 maimed workers helped generate a groundswell of support for state workers’ compensation laws.

CREATING A DEMOCRATIC PARADISE: THE PROGRESSIVE ERA, 1895–1915

 suggested that few were responsible for their accidents. This young man (18.8) had his leg crushed when he fell under a coal car in a Pittsburgh coal mine. The company paid the hospital expenses for his amputation, but nothing else. In the image a nicely dressed passerby avoids making eye contact with the injured boy who stands idle on the street, suggesting that the well-off preferred to ignore the plight of disabled workers. The boy’s tidy appearance reveals an effort to maintain personal dignity while relying on private charity to survive. Studies like Hine’s convinced many states to establish worker compensation programs that provided employer-funded disability payments and medical care to injured workers. As a result employers began paying more attention to workplace safety. The drive to limit hours for male workers was less successful. Employers had traditionally maintained that as property owners they had the sole power to decide the terms of employment. In the 1874 Slaughter-House cases, the Supreme Court had ruled that a state could not deny individuals control over their own labor. Industrialists claimed that this decision granted individual workers the constitutionally protected right to negotiate wages, hours, and workplace rules. According to this line of reasoning, state laws or unions that tried to impose restrictions on individual workers violated their right to control their own labor.

 How effective were the different strategies that Progressives and unions employed to reform the workplace?

 The Supreme Court, however, proved willing to abridge this right to protect public health and safety. In 1898, the Court upheld an eight-hour day for Utah miners, deciding that guarding the health of workers engaged in a dangerous occupation served the public interest. Progressives failed in their efforts to extend these protections to the entire workforce. In Lochner v. New York (1905), the Court ruled that unless long work hours directly jeopardized workers’ health, the government could not abridge an employee’s freedom to negotiate his own work schedule with his employer. This decision is explored more fully in Choices and Consequences: Regulating Workers’ Hours. Miserable and unsafe working conditions also persisted. The Colorado mining town of Ludlow sat along the Purgatory River, a telling name that suitably described what working in a mine was like. In Ludlow, the Rockefeller-owned mining company paid miners $2 a day in company-issued currency (called scrip) redeemable only in the company-run store. The mining company required that workers live in company-owned housing, and claimed no responsibility for accidents that killed 200 miners between 1904 and 1914. In 1913, 12,000 miners, mostly Italian, Greek, and Serbian immigrants, went on strike to protest these conditions and demand company recognition of their UMW union. When the company expelled the strikers and their families from their homes, the workers erected tent cities in the nearby hills. After armed company detectives failed to dislodge the miners, the Colorado governor sent in state troops, whose wages Rockefeller agreed to pay. The Ludlow Massacre ensued on April 20, 1914 when troops set fire to one striking miners’ camp, and thirteen women and children suffocated to death in a shallow underground shelter where they had sought refuge. Throughout the nation outraged laborers temporarily put their ideological divisions aside to stage protest marches in every major city. The UMW issued “a call to arms,” and hundreds of neighboring miners flooded into Ludlow to defend their comrades against the state militia. Faced with the prospect of all-out class war, the governor requested federal troops, and President Wilson immediately complied. Federal intervention left the union in tatters and Rockefeller free to run his mining town as he saw fit. Incidents like these convinced many unions that the Progressive proposal to rely solely on the government to solve their problems was not the answer. Throughout the twentieth century union folklore and songs used the memory of Ludlow to inspire workers to organize.

View the Image Logo for the Industrial Workers of the World


COMPETING VIEWS ON TRANSFORMING THE WORKPLACE



Choices and Consequences
REGULATING WORKERS’ HOURS
Most city residents, especially tenement-dwellers who did not have ovens, bought their bread from bakeries. Bakers worked long hours in hot, poorly ventilated kitchens, sleeping and washing where they baked bread. In 1895, New York State passed a law that set sanitary standards and limited bakers to ten hours of work per day, 60 hours per week. Joseph Lochner, a bakery owner in Utica, challenged the law after New York fined him $50 for making an employee exceed these limits. The Supreme Court faced three choices when it heard the case in 1905. 
Choices




 A state could use its police powers to protect workers’ health and safety.



 A state could not limit an individual’s right to buy or sell labor in nonhazardous occupations such as baking.



 States had the right to enact any laws not expressly forbidden by the Constitution to promote the general well-being of society.

Decision
 The Court ruled 5 to 4 that the Fourteenth Amendment, which declared that “no state shall … deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of the law,” prevented states from using their police powers to regulate work that did not imperil the health or safety of the public.

Consequences
 The decision curtailed Progressives’ attempt to use regulation to transform the workplace. During the subsequent 32-year “Lochner” era, the Court struck down maximum hour, minimum wage, and child labor laws if no clear risk to the public existed. Dismayed Progressives noted that many state laws restricted an individual’s ability to buy or sell labor, such as mandatory school laws or Sunday closures, to promote the general welfare. They also accused the Court of ignoring the disproportionate power that employers wielded over workers to set the terms of employment.

Continuing Controversies
 Should the government limit work hours or set a minimum wage? Lochner remained the law of the land until 1937, when the Supreme Court ruled that it was “reasonable” for Washington State hotel owners to pay female hotel maids the state-mandated minimum wage because the state had a right to protect its residents. Defining an acceptable standard for work and pay has been controversial ever since. Is a reasonable day’s work six, eight, ten, or twelve hours? Does it matter if the work involves strenuous physical labor or is sedentary? Is it better for unions to negotiate the terms of employment or for the government to step in? How does regulating hours of work or setting a minimum wage hurt or benefit the general public? These are questions that Americans have debated for more than 70 years.

 Lochner bakery

 What competing views existed concerning a state’s right to regulate the workplace?



 CHAPTER 18

CREATING A DEMOCRATIC PARADISE: THE PROGRESSIVE ERA, 1895–1915

Protecting Women and Children
 Progressives never convinced unions to give up strikes, but together they demanded laws protecting women and children. Relying on mountains of sociological data and heart-rending photographs, female activists helped secure protective legislation that reduced the hours women worked and kept children in school longer. Working-class men offered more resistance when female reformers tried to make temperance the law of the land.

Women at Work


18.9 Carry A.
Nation Portrait and
Hatchet Pin
Carry A. Nation
 cultivated her notoriety as a Bibletoting, ax-wielding saloon smasher by selling portraits and pins to her admirers.

 In 1908, Curt Muller, a laundry owner in Portland, Oregon, challenged a recent state law granting a ten-hour workday for female laundry workers. In making his case before the Supreme Court, Muller followed the same line of reasoning used in the Lochner case, arguing that the law deprived his workers of their right to control their own labor. He disputed the reformers’ claim that scrubbing all day in a hot, wet workplace posed a serious risk to laundry workers’ health. In its unanimous 1908 Muller v. Oregon ruling, the Supreme Court upheld maximum hour laws for female workers, accepting lawyer Louis Brandeis’s argument that protecting women’s reproductive health served the public good. “As healthy mothers are essential to vigorous offspring, the physical well-being of woman becomes an object of public interest and care in order to preserve the strength and vigor of the race,” the Supreme Court declared. Reactions to the ruling among women were mixed. Middle-class Progressive reformers and female trade unionists celebrated it as a victory for female workers, unperturbed by the Court’s emphasis on the biological inferiority of women to men. Feminists who believed in total equality were disappointed with the ruling, creating a fissure in the women’s movement that soon widened into an open split. The male-dominated AFL embraced the decision,

 Why did the campaign for maximum work hour laws succeed for women, but fail for men?

 believing it reduced employers’ incentive to hire women instead of men. As if to prove this point, Muller responded by firing his female workers and hiring Chinese men to take their place. Cross-class alliances between middle-class and working-class women flourished around other efforts to help working women. In 1898, the National Consumers’ League (NCL) formed to coordinate local consumer boycotts of department stores that mistreated their female clerks. The NCL made the long hours and low pay endured by female working-class clerks the responsibility of every middle-class female shopper. The group soon expanded its boycotts to include stores that sold clothing made in sweatshops or with child labor. Compiling “blacklists” of stores to boycott was illegal, so the NCL instead worked with female garments’ unions to create “white lists” of shops with equitable labor policies where socially conscientious women could shop without remorse.

Stamping
Out Vice
 Local and state reformers also took aim at alcohol, believing that prohibition would improve women’s lives by reducing domestic violence and bolstering family income. The Woman’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU; see Chapter 17) viewed the saloon as a haven for gambling, prostitution, corrupt city political machines, and excessive alcohol consumption. The WCTU crusade took a surprising turn on June 6, 1900, when a deeply religious 64-year-old woman named

PROTECTING WOMEN AND CHILDREN

 Carry A. Nation strode into a southwestern Kansas bar with a bag of bricks and smashed the liquor bottles, glassware, and mirrors, then calmly left. Nation’s tactics were extreme, but many Progressives shared her sense of urgency. Drinking was on the rise in America. From 1885 to 1900, beer consumption nearly doubled from 590 million to 1.2 billion gallons. Hundreds of inspired “Home Defenders” throughout the nation organized similar attacks on neighborhood bars, hoping to convince their communities to go dry. As her fame grew, Nation raised funds by selling miniature hatchet pins, her new weapon of choice (18.9), along with photos of herself holding her bible and hatchet. She spent time in jails from New York to Los Angeles publicizing the temperance cause before collapsing on a stage in 1911 and dying shortly thereafter. Working-class men resolutely defended their freedom to drink, and many upper-class men were reluctant to give up a pleasure-based lifestyle that included ready access to alcohol. Attacking on multiple fronts the nonpartisan Anti-Saloon League, founded in 1893, and the WCTU established an effective coalition that included Progressives, rural Americans, and industrialists. Prohibitionists linked ridding the nation of alcohol to the broader Progressive desire to eliminate the corrupting influences of big-city



 political machines. Saloons, temperance advocates maintained, served as the headquarters where dishonest city politicians paid immigrants for votes and dispersed favors to supporters. Temperance advocates drew rural folk into the movement by addressing their concerns about the growing cultural influence of urban pleasures and the beer-drinking immigrants who lived in the cities. Molding their message to appeal to industrialists, temperance advocates CARRY A. NATION explains her blamed saloons saloon-smashing ways for contributing to the nation’s labor troubles by giving unions a place to meet and recruit. Working through churches in the South and the West, the Anti-Saloon League and WCTU urged supporters to focus on making their state or county “dry” by banning the sale of alcohol. The “Prohibition 1904 and 1917” map (18.10) traces the rapid success of this strategy as the number of dry states grew from three to 23. Many western women had already secured the right to vote, and they flocked to approve prohibition in large numbers.

 “You refused me the vote and I had to use a rock.”

 MAINE

WASHINGTON MONTANA

NORTH DAKOTA

 VERMONT

 MINNESOTA

O R EG O N


NEW YORK

WIS CO NS IN IDAHO W YO M I N G

PENNSYLVANIA IOWA

N E V A DA


O HIO
 ILLINOIS

 INDIANA

CONNECTICUT NEW JERSEY

MARYLAND WASHINGTON DC VIRGINIA

COLORADO KANSAS

MISSOURI KENTUCKY

NORTH CAROLINA

CALI F O R N I A TENNESSEE NEW

RHODE ISLAND

 DELAWARE

WEST VIRGINIA

 UTAH

 ARIZONA

 MASSACHUSETTS

 MICHIGAN

SOUTH DAKOTA

NEBRASK A

NEW HAMPSHIRE

 OKLAHOMA

 ARKANSAS

SOUTH CAROLINA

MEXICO ALABAMA GEORGIA MISSISSIPPI T E X A S LOUISIANA FLORIDA

 Dry states with state-wide prohibition States with dry towns and counties Wet states with alcohol legal state-wide



Read the Document Report of the Vice Commission,
Louisville, Kentucky (1915)


18.10 Prohibition, 1904 and 1917
 Only three states were dry in 1904, but by 1917 over half the people in the country lived in either a state or county that had gone dry—momentum that led to nationwide prohibition in 1919.

 What diverse concerns about alcohol helped the temperance movement gain momentum?



 CHAPTER 18

CREATING A DEMOCRATIC PARADISE: THE PROGRESSIVE ERA, 1895–1915

Restoring Childhood
18.11 “Models
 of 1898” The middle class believed that children should engage in healthy and creative play, not work in dangerous and dreary factories.

 Middle-class Americans believed that childhood should be devoted to education and play, not work. This advertisement (18.11) from an 1898 Sears and Roebuck catalog portrayed the type of idyllic childhood that many middle-class families tried to give their children. In the ad an immaculately dressed young girl rides joyfully in the sunshine on a new bicycle, a portrait of health and happiness. The reality for

 working-class children offered a stark contrast. Census records revealed nearly 1.75 million children ages 10 through 15 worked in factories full time, a figure that did not include children employed in home sweatshops or on family farms. To Progressives child labor epitomized the greed of employers who eagerly sent children into mining crevices where adults could not fit, used children to harvest crops in the Midwest, or dispatched an army of small

 What does this advertisement reveal about middle-class ideals of childhood?

PROTECTING WOMEN AND CHILDREN

 boys to hawk newspapers in northern cities. Organized labor joined this crusade, certain that child labor drove down adult wages. Industrialists offered a competing vision, arguing that jobs provided valuable training for working-class children who needed to learn the importance of punctuality and hard work to become successful adult workers. Many working-class families shared employers’ beliefs that their children should work. In Chicago Hull House cofounder Jane Addams discovered that most immigrants, having worked themselves as children, found nothing wrong with putting their own children to work. “A South Italian peasant who has picked olives and packed oranges from his toddling babyhood, cannot see at once the difference between the outdoor healthy work which he has performed in the varying seasons, and the long hours of monotonous factory life which his child encounters when he goes to work in Chicago,” she noted, adopting the Progressive tendency to gloss over the drudgery of farm work. Rather than banning child labor, working-class parents often preferred making factories safer places for their children to work. They were not hardhearted, but pragmatic. Child labor provided onetenth of family income in the early twentieth century, and a family’s survival often depended on children’s meager wages. Recently arrived immigrant men, especially unskilled, non-English speakers, realized with dismay that their English-speaking children were more apt to be hired than they were. Children in these families became the breadwinners, while their fathers stayed at home. This reversal of normal family relations often created tensions within working-class households. “I left Europe and I was a man, and here I am a what?” lamented one Russian Jewish immigrant. The drive to end child labor gained momentum when the National Child Labor Committee formed in 1904 to lobby for state and federal laws prohibiting child labor. The group hired photographer Lewis Hine to help them build a scientific, legal, and moral case against child labor. In one photo-story, Hine paired images of children who worked in two textile mills owned by the same company. The company’s mill in Huntsville, Alabama, hired children as young as eight years old, Hine noted, while Massachusetts law prohibited the Lowell factory from employing children under the age of 14. The National Child Labor Committee presented such regional discrepancies as evidence that the nation needed a federal child labor law. Images as History: Exposing the Evils of Child Labor, page 550, explores Hine’s images more fully. The pervasiveness of child labor in the South particularly troubled him. In 1900, nearly 25 percent of

Watch the Video Video Lecture: What was the
Progressive Education Movement?




 the workers in Southern textile factories and cotton mills were white children ages 10 to 16. Some reformers viewed child farm work as a healthier alternative to long days in a factory. Hine disagreed. “The sunshine in the cotton fields has blinded our eyes to the monotony, overwork and the hopelessness of their lives,” he wrote. In 1916, President Wilson signed a law banning the interstate sale of products made by child labor that protected only about 150,000 industrial child laborers out of nearly 1.75 million. Two years later the Supreme Court sided with a father who argued that the law deprived him of his parental right to control his sons’ labor and declared the law unconstitutional. Progressives responded by trying to amend the Constitution. In 1924 Congress approved an amendment giving the federal government the power to regulate child labor, but southern opposition to any curtailment of states’ rights prevented its ratification. A nationwide ban on child labor did not come until the 1930s, when the Court upheld a New Deal federal child labor law. Ultimately child labor declined as states began to mandate school attendance. Embracing the notion that all children had the right to an education, local women’s groups pushed hard to ensure that their neighborhood schools received appropriate funding, provided free books, offered kindergarten, paid teachers adequately, and were equipped with satisfactory fire escapes. Throughout the Progressive Era school enrollments, the number of days in a school year, and money spent per pupil all rose. Other Progressive endeavors also aimed to improve the lives of working-class children. The allure of pleasure and hunger at home sometimes became too strong for children, who resorted to stealing to meet their needs. “Most of these premature law breakers are in search of Americanized clothing and others are only looking for playthings,” Jane Addams maintained. Some, she pointed out, were simply “eager to take home food or fuel which will relieve the distress and need they so constantly hear discussed.” Reformers spearheaded the creation of a juvenile criminal system that focused on rehabilitating young offenders. To keep young children safely off the streets when their parents went to work, Progressive activists established urban playgrounds with adult supervisors. To divert female teenagers from tempting dance halls and male adolescents from saloons or brothels, Progressives created local boys and girls clubs that included organized sports teams and art classes. Not every child appreciated becoming the object of reform. “I can’t go to the playgrounds now,” complained one 11-year-old boy. “They get on me nerves with so many men and women around telling you what to do.”

 What obstacles did reformers face while trying to eliminate child labor?



 CHAPTER 18

CREATING A DEMOCRATIC PARADISE: THE PROGRESSIVE ERA, 1895–1915

Images as History
EXPOSING THE EVILS OF CHILD LABOR
Trained as a sociologist, photographer Lewis Hine took nearly 5,000 photographs as a staff photographer for the National Child Labor Committee from 1908 to 1918. Hine visited factories, canneries, textile mills, farms, and mines snapping photos and recording the experiences of each child, evidence the Committee used to argue that full-time work damaged children’s health, deprived them of an education, and ruined their childhood. Hine often posed as a factory inspector or salesman to gain access to factories or mines. When a factory owner guessed his real Sadie Pfeifer was a spinner in a South Carolina cotton mill, charged with repairing breaks or snags as the machines spun the cotton into yarn or thread. 
 purpose and refused to let him in, Hine took pictures of child laborers arriving at daybreak or leaving covered in grime. He carefully recorded the children’s names, ages, and stories to counter industrialists’ accusations that he staged his photos. His notes for this image of a young girl tending machines in a South Carolina cotton mill read, “Sadie Pfeifer, 48 inches high, has worked half a year. One of the many small children at work in Lancaster Cotton Mills.” Are Hine’s photographs best understood as historical evidence, propaganda, or both? The electric lights indicate her long hours, beginning before daybreak and extending after dark.

 The closed windows helped the factory maintain the hot and humid conditions that prevented thread from breaking.

•
•


•
•
 The long row of machines underscores how much work she had to manage on her own, dangerous work that could cost her a finger.

•


•


 The photograph does not convey the deafening noise that left some workers partially deaf.

 The adult supervisor in the background represented Sadie’s future and underscored her subservient position in the mill.

Lewis Hine, “Sadie Pfeifer, Lancaster Cotton Mills, South Carolina”


 How did the composition of this photograph reinforce Hine’s message about child labor?

View the Closer Look Images as History: Exposing
 the Evils of Child Labor

PROTECTING WOMEN AND CHILDREN

 Wise beyond their years, these tough-looking newsboys emulate their elders by learning to enjoy pipes and cigarettes. Newsboys also gambled, swore, and began visiting houses of prostitution at shockingly young ages.



 Camaraderie among newsboys helped make a difficult and lonely job more enjoyable.

•
•
 This photo of hardened newsboys warned that lacking a proper education, these boys contributed to the moral breakdown of society.

•


 By innocently buying a daily paper from one of the hundreds of newsboys who hawked newspapers on city corners from dawn to dusk, the middle class helped perpetuate an insidious form of child labor. The National Child Labor Committee distributed Hine’s “Making Human Junk” poster nationwide to send the message that child labor ruined individual lives and hurt the entire society.

•
•
Lewis Hine, “Newsies Smoking on a Monday
Morning, St. Louis, Missouri, 1910”


•


 Appealing to middle-class self-interest, this poster suggested that sickly child workers contaminated the materials used to make clothing for the middle class.

 The poster showed a group of healthy children entering a harsh and dangerous factory environment where they were powerless to control their own fates.

•


 Hine directly refuted industrialists’ claims that work benefited children. “The object of employing children is not to train them, but to get high profits from their work,” he wrote.

•


•


 Long days in the mill turned children into broken pieces of industrial “junk” that factory owners discarded, burdening society with their care.

Lewis Hine, “Making Human Junk”


 Did these images offer similar or different reasons to oppose child labor?



 CHAPTER 18

CREATING A DEMOCRATIC PARADISE: THE PROGRESSIVE ERA, 1895–1915

Reforming the Government
 Progressives recognized that passing laws governing the workplace or protecting women and children was not enough. Ensuring their enforcement through the establishment of regulatory agencies required reforming how local, state, and federal governments functioned. Only then could the government become a positive force in workers’ lives. Socialists agreed that the government should act, but ultimately wanted to give state and national governments control of all major industries. gave federal inspectors the authority to condemn meat unfit for consumption and established federal Progressives discovered an unexpected ally in their sanitary standards for meatpacking plants. drive to turn the government into a guardian that Reformers also wanted manufacturers of patent actively protected the public. Both Progressives and medicines to list their ingredients. Lydia E. Pinkham’s socialists championed the creation of city-run utiliVegetable Compound, a widely popular patent medities to provide streetcar service, gas, water, and eleccine, circulated advertising cards (18.12) with images tricity. Progressives viewed such arrangements as an of rosy-cheeked children to create the impression efficient way to deliver reliable, fairly priced public that the company used the purest ingredients in its services to city residents, prevent disruptive strikes, syrup. The flipside of this card touted the medicine and improve conditions for utility workers. Socialists as “a positive cure for all those painful complaints believed that municipaland weaknesses so comrun utilities would bemon to our best female come the opening wedge population,” including that led to eventual public headaches, depression, ownership of railroads, ovarian troubles, and mines, and banks. menopause. In 1906, the In 1904, the novelPure Food and Drug UPTON SINCLAIR laments America’s ist and socialist Upton Act levied fines for misreaction to his novel, The Jungle Sinclair lived with worklabeling food or mediers in Chicago for nearly cine. To their dismay two months, learning firsthand about their work in many female temperance advocates who had avidly the meatpacking industry. This experience became consumed Lydia E. Pinkham’s Vegetable Compound the basis for his novel, The Jungle, which told the discovered that it contained 15 percent alcohol. story of a Lithuanian immigrant family, who came Ultimately the Progressive vision of governto America full of hope only to discover crushing ment oversight prevailed over the socialist view of poverty and horrific working conditions. Sinclair complete government control. Most cities balked wanted his exposé to convince Americans that social- at direct ownership of public utilities, preferring to ism offered the only way to end the rampant capitalcreate regulatory boards that set rules for the private ist exploitation that ground down the working class. companies that continued to run streetcars or gas Instead readers focused on his vivid descriptions of lines. The subsequent improvement in city services rotten meat, workers’ fingers, and rat excrement bereduced the appeal of socialism in many workinging tossed into the hopper to produce the sausage class neighborhoods. that Americans enjoyed each morning for breakfast. When a federal investigation confirmed Sinclair’s account, the public demanded federal regulation to ensure that the nation’s meat supply was safe. Faced with plummeting meat sales, packing-house owners understood that government certification of their Progressives knew that meaningful regulation remeat as disease-free could help them regain conquired eliminating corruption within all levels of sumer confidence. The Meat Inspection Act (1906) government. For an enticing bribe, city officials often

Containing Socialism


 “I aimed at the public’s heart, and by accident I hit it in the stomach.”

Ending Government
Corruption


 What importance did the socialist movement have during the Progressive Era?

 Read the Document Upton Sinclair, from The Jungle (1905)

REFORMING THE GOVERNMENT

 18.12 Marketing Lydia E. Pinkham’s Vegetable Compound Ads for the patent medicine promised to cure practically every ailment and restore youthful vigor.

 proved willing to look the other way when businesses broke the law. Political parties sometimes stole elections, creating fictitious lists of voters that let individuals use multiple aliases to vote as often as they liked. Progressives disagreed over how to eliminate corruption. One answer was to get rid of politicians and instead rely on nonpartisan commissions of experts or city managers to run city services. Over 400 municipalities turned to commission-style governance, an approach that reflected the broad faith placed in expertise during the Progressive Era. Other Progressives replaced the ward system that let each neighborhood select its own councilman with city councils elected at large. Voters expected their ward representative to “bring home the bacon,” patronage that Progressives felt encouraged parochialism and corruption. Impoverished working-class residents offered a competing vision. Their ward representatives provided needed job opportunities or relief. Envisioning Evidence: The Family Economy (page 554) illustrates the hand-tomouth existence for many working-class families.



 In the absence of a comprehensive social welfare system, the patronage-based ward system gave many working-class urban residents a way to survive hard times. On the state level Progressives tried to reduce the power of corrupt political parties. Many states eliminated the practice of handing voters different colored ballots marked “Republican” or “Democrat” to stuff into the ballot boxes as party officials looked on. The secret ballot removed the threat of payback or shunning if one broke with the neighborhood party boss. Instead of letting party leaders choose candidates, some states introduced direct primaries that allowed party members to pick the candidates. A reform measure called the “initiative” provided a way, usually by gathering signatures on petitions, for the electorate to introduce legislation before state legislatures. The referendum put legislative proposals on the ballot, letting the voting public decide whether a measure became law. Finally, the recall used special elections to remove unpopular or corrupt officials from office before their term expired. Wisconsin, one of the most Progressive states, adopted all these measures under the leadership of Governor Robert Lafollette. In 1906, journalist David Graham Phillips detailed the close ties between big business and federal senators in a series of magazine articles entitled “The Treason of the Senate.” Phillips viewed this alliance as threatening to “the American people as any invading army could be.” Roosevelt charged Phillips with exaggerating the extent of corruption and urged the “men with the muckrakes” to avoid stirring up needless controversy. Roosevelt’s rebuke gave a new nickname to investigative journalists, “muckrakers.” Subsequent corruption scandals solidified public support for the Seventeenth Amendment (1913), which enabled voters, rather than state legislatures, to elect federal senators.

 What reforms did Progressives introduce to improve the democratic process?



 CHAPTER 18

CREATING A DEMOCRATIC PARADISE: THE PROGRESSIVE ERA, 1895–1915

Envisioning Evidence
THE FAMILY ECONOMY
Stiff employer resistance to labor unions and the unions’ tendency to organize only skilled workers meant that few workers could use collective bargaining to increase their wages. Instead, working-class families relied on themselves or, if the main breadwinner fell ill, on community charities to survive. This working-class family’s expenses outweigh the income of one male wage earner, a common problem. Less than 3 percent of married women worked outside the home, but wives supplemented the family income by doing laundry for others or taking in boarders who paid for a room and meals. Putting children to work (at the expense of their schooling) helped families make ends meet even though children earned much less than adults. This responsibility never ended for some. Adult children continued to contribute to their family’s financial well-being by delaying marriage or supporting aging parents who could no longer work. 
 Monthly income: $23.67

 Monthly 1892 budget for a married accountant with no children. Monthly income: $66.50

Food


$6.51


$13.22


Rent


$9.02


$9.88


Furniture


$3.61


$0.30


Taxes and
Insurance


$3.32


$7.11


Utilities


$2.94


$4.99


Sundries


$1.09


$2.10


Liqour and
Tobacco


$0.66


$0.42


Medicine


$0.29


$0.27


Clothes


$0.21


$0.19


Dry Goods


$0.16


$2.45


Postage


$0.10


$0.00


Transportation


$0.08


$1.71


Reading
Material


$0.00


$0.53


Total Expenses


$27.99


$43.17


 Monthly 1891 budget for a married laborer with a baby.

 The average laborer ate a more monotonous and less nutritious diet than a white-collar professional– consuming less meat, prepared foods (canned and dry goods), fruits, vegetables and sweets.

 Buying life insurance from a local fraternal organization ensured that if the father died, the laborer's family could afford his funeral and survive in the short term.

 The accountant drank and smoked less than the worker, leading to charges that the poor squandered their money. The similar amounts paid for rent do not mean comparable living circumstances. The accountant’s higher transportation costs indicate that he lived farther out of town, probably in a new suburb. The worker lived close to work, nearer to industrial pollution. High demand for tenement apartments meant landlords often charged laborers exorbitant rents.

 The accountant had an extra $23.33 a month to save, or give to his aged mother, along with $931 in household goods (including musical instruments and jewelry) that he could sell if necessary. This working-class family’s expenses outweigh the income of one male wage-earner, a common problem. Less than 3 percent of married women worked outside the home, but wives supplemented the family income by doing laundry for others or taking in boarders who paid for a room and meals.

Source: Michigan Bureau of Labor and Industrial Statistics.Tenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Labor and Industrial Statistics
MI:
The Bureau, 1893), pp. 1043-1047. 

 What do these budgets reveal about urban lifestyles?

View the Closer Look Envisioning Evidence: The Family Economy


REFORMING THE GOVERNMENT

Accepting Separate but Equal
 The Progressive campaign to remake the government into a champion of the common man did not include challenging the legal edifice constructed in the wake of the Supreme Court’s 1896 “separate but equal” ruling in Plessy v. Ferguson (see Chapter 14). By 1900, southern states had rushed to pass laws that formally segregated every public facility from railroad waiting rooms to cemeteries, parks, beaches, and water fountains. Use of poll taxes and literacy tests to disenfranchise blacks also exploded. When southern-born Woodrow Wilson took office in 1913, he let the heads of federal agencies segregate their offices. African American leaders cultivated their own reform impulse during the Progressive Era. Unlike white Progressives black leaders had little faith that government would solve their social problems. The most

 prominent African American of the Progressive Era, Booker T. Washington, instead embraced self-help as the best way to end poverty among African Americans. Born a Virginia slave in 1859, after the Civil War Washington developed an almost fanatical desire to get an education, arriving penniless at the doorstep of Virginia’s Hampton Institute, a vocational high school founded in 1868 to educate freed slaves and Indians. He passed his entrance exam—sweeping a floor—with flying colors. Hampton taught practical skills such as brick-making, blacksmithing, and shoemaking along with more traditional academic subjects like reading and math. This staged photograph (18.13) of a Hampton Institute carpentering class, taken 20 years after Washington attended, encapsulated the school’s educational philosophy. The photo underscored that these perfectly groomed, hard-working, and well-trained students had the skills they needed to advance step-bystep up the ladder (in this case staircase) of success.



18.13 Hampton
Institute Students
Building a
Staircase, 1900
 Black educators distributed images of tidy black students working industriously to counter stereotypes that portrayed blacks as lazy or dangerous.

 How does this photograph convey the Hampton Institute’s educational philosophy?



 CHAPTER 18

CREATING A DEMOCRATIC PARADISE: THE PROGRESSIVE ERA, 1895–1915

 Washington followed the Hampton model when he established his own school in 1881, the Tuskegee Institute in Tuskegee, Alabama. A captivating orator, Washington popularized the notion that blacks should focus on economic advancement first, politics and civil rights later. Washington’s apparent willingness to accept social segregation, as long as blacks and whites worked together toward their common economic goals, won him a large white following. Roosevelt even invited him to dine in the White House, the first African American to ever receive this honor—an invitation that provoked howls of protest throughout the South. Washington’s private behavior, however, was often at odds with his public persona. Publicly he reassured whites that most blacks had little interest in demanding equality as long as they could prosper economically. Privately Washington helped fund court challenges to Plessy v. Ferguson and sent his own children to northern white colleges. Washington believed that American race relations would gradually improve. Methodist Bishop Henry McNeal Turner offered a competing vision, telling blacks to immigrate to Africa. Black journalist Ida B. Wells-Barnett also disagreed with Washington. Rather than striving to prove their economic worth to whites, Wells-Barnett urged African Americans to use boycotts to win equal treatment from white-owned railroads. She also advocated armed resistance to lynch mobs. “A Winchester rifle should have a place of honour in every black home, and it should be used for that protection which the law refuses to give,” she declared. Wells-Barnett began lobbying for a federal anti-lynching law after a white mob in Memphis, Tennessee, lynched three friends of hers who had opened a grocery store that drew customers away

 from white businesses. With her life threatened Wells-Barnett moved to Chicago, where she worked with Jane Addams to prevent the segregation of city public schools and continued her anti-lynching campaign. The most powerful challenge to Washington’s vision came from the northern-born sociologist W. E. B. Du Bois, the first African American to attend Harvard University. Du Bois argued that individuals should receive the education that best suited them, regardless of their race. He emphasized that the African American community needed an educated elite of professionals and teachers, the so-called “Talented Tenth.” Economic progress was not possible without the right to vote, Du Bois contended, pointing out that discriminatory laws made it difficult for black sharecroppers or craftsmen to get ahead. Competing Visions: Seeking Racial Uplift offers more detail on the debate between Washington and Du Bois. In 1909, Du Bois joined with Wells-Barnett and Jane Addams, among others, to establish the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). This interracial civil rights organization demanded an immediate end to racial discrimination, beginning a decades-long struggle for racial justice that would eventually overturn Jim Crow laws in the 1950s and 1960s. Few white Progressives followed Addams’s lead in denouncing racial discrimination. Most northern Progressives remained content to let the South handle the “race problem” as it saw fit. They essentially chose social peace over racial justice, asserting that segregation would quell racial conflict. “Good fences make good neighbors,” declared southern Progressive leader Edgar Gardner Murphy.

 “In all my teaching I have watched carefully the influence of the toothbrush, and I am convinced that there are few single agencies of civilization that are more far-reaching.” BOOKER T. WASHINGTON, noting the importance of personal discipline, hygiene, dress, and decorum to racial advancement

 What alternatives did critics of Booker T. Washington offer to improve life for African Americans?

Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Conflict Between
 Booker T. Washington and W.E.B. DuBois

REFORMING THE GOVERNMENT



Competing Visions
SEEKING RACIAL UPLIFT
In 1895, Booker T. Washington delivered his most famous speech, “The Atlanta Cotton States and International Exposition Address,” before an audience that was composed mostly of Southern whites. The speech proposed a compromise that accepted social segregation in return for white support of blacks’ economic advancement. In 1903, W. E. B. Du Bois accused Washington of sending blacks down a path that ensured their permanent enslavement to white America. How does Washington take into account the racially hostile climate that prevailed in the South during the Progressive Era? Is Du Bois’s criticism of Washington accurate? In this passage from his 1895 “Atlanta Exposition Address,” Washington outlines his plan for racial progress and peaceful race relations. 
 In this excerpt from his book, The Souls of Black Folk (1903), Du Bois explains why Washington’s ideas would not work.

 Our greatest danger is that in the great leap from slavery to freedom we may overlook the fact that the masses of us are to live by the productions of our hands, and fail to keep in mind that we shall prosper in proportion as we learn to dignify and glorify common labour and put brains and skill into the common occupations of life…. No race can prosper till it learns that there is as much dignity in tilling a field as in writing a poem. It is at the bottom of life we must begin, and not at the top. In all things that are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual progress…. Nearly sixteen millions of hands will aid you in pulling the load upward, or they will pull against you the load downward. We shall constitute one-third and more of the ignorance and crime of the South, or one-third its intelligence and progress. The wisest among my race understand that the agitation of questions of social equality is the extremest folly, and that progress in the enjoyment of all the privileges that will come to us must be the result of severe and constant struggle rather than of artificial forcing. No race that has anything to contribute to the markets of the world is long in any degree ostracized. It is important and right that all privileges of the law be ours, but it is vastly more important that we be prepared for the exercises of these privileges. The opportunity to earn a dollar in a factory just now is worth infinitely more than the opportunity to spend a dollar in an opera-house.

 Mr. Washington distinctly asks that black people give up, at least for the present, three things,— First, political power, Second, insistence on civil rights, Third, higher education of Negro youth, and concentrate all their energies on industrial education, the accumulation of wealth, and the conciliation of the South.… Is it possible, and probable, that nine millions of men can make effective progress in economic lines if they are deprived of political rights, made a servile caste, and allowed only the most meager chance for developing their exceptional men? If history and reason give any distinct answer to these questions, it is an emphatic No. And Mr. Washington thus faces the triple paradox of his career. 1. He is striving nobly to make Negro artisans business men and property-owners; but it is utterly impossible, under modern competitive methods, for workingmen and property-owners to defend their rights and exist without the right of suffrage. 2. He insists on thrift and self-respect, but at the same time counsels a silent submission to civic inferiority such as is bound to sap the manhood of any race in the long run. 3. He advocates common-school and industrial training, and depreciates institutions of higher learning; but neither the Negro common [elementary] schools, nor Tuskegee itself, could remain open a day were it not for teachers trained in Negro colleges, or trained by their graduates. His doctrine has tended to make the whites, North and South, shift the burden of the Negro problem to the Negro’s shoulders and stand aside as critical and rather pessimistic spectators; when in fact the burden belongs to the nation.

Charles Keck, Booker T. Washington
Lifting the Veil of Ignorance


View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Seeking Racial Uplift


 Was Washington a sell-out, as Du Bois implies, or a master strategist?



 CHAPTER 18

CREATING A DEMOCRATIC PARADISE: THE PROGRESSIVE ERA, 1895–1915

1901–1902


1903–1904






 McKinley assassinated, Roosevelt becomes president

 Roosevelt and Muir camp together in Yosemite

Lochner v. New York


Pure Food and Drug Act and
 Meat Inspection Act passed

 Progressivism gains presidential advocate

 They later champion competing conservationist and preservationist visions

“The History of the Standard
 Oil Company” published

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Exposé of oil trust stokes interest in trust-busting

Northern Securities
 Trust dissolved Earns Roosevelt reputation as a trust-buster

 Stymies Progressive effort to mandate set working hours and wages

Socialist Party of America and
 IWW formed Unlike Progressives, Socialists and IWW emphasize working-class solidarity over reform

 Establishes new regulatory role for the federal government

 “Treason of the Senate” exposé Reveals close ties between senators and big business

Review Questions
 1. What social problems did middle-class Progressives identify at the beginning of the twentieth century? How did their solutions differ from those embraced by socialists and laissez-faire industrialists? 2. Why did the Progressive notion of an activist, regulatory government create controversy on both the right and the left?

 3. How did visual images and investigative journalism transform Americans’ views of poverty and corruption? 4. What role did government, including presidents, the Supreme Court, and state and local governments, play during the Progressive Era? 5. In what ways did the Progressive reform agenda succeed? How did it fail?

Key Terms
 Federal Reserve Act (1913) The act creating a federally run Federal Reserve to serve as a “banker’s bank” that held a portion of bank funds in reserve to help member banks in time of crisis, set rates for business loans, and issued a new national paper currency.

 the government could not abridge an employee’s freedom to negotiate his own work schedule with his employer.

 Clayton Anti-Trust Act (1914) The act prohibited interlocking company directories and exempted trade unions from prosecution under the 1890 Sherman Anti-Trust Act.

 Muller v. Oregon (1908) The Supreme Court upheld maximum hour laws for female workers because protecting women’s reproductive health served the public good.

 Scientific management The effort to use scientific knowledge to secure maximum output and profit.

 Pure Food and Drug Act (1906) Law levied federal fines for mislabeling food or medicine.

 Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) This group envisioned “one big union” that welcomed all workers regardless of sex, race, ethnicity, or skill, which would one day take over all means of production.

 Muckrakers Progressive Era term for investigative journalists who wrote exposés on government and business corruption.

 Lochner v. New York (1905) A Supreme Court ruling that unless long work hours directly jeopardized workers’ health,

 Ludlow Massacre (1914) Colorado state troops set a striking miners’ camp ablaze, killing thirteen women and children, an act that outraged laborers throughout the nation.

 Seventeenth Amendment (1913) A constitutional amendment that enabled voters, rather than state legislatures, to elect federal senators.

CHAPTER REVIEW

1908–1909


1911–1912






 Lewis Hine begins photographing child laborers

Triangle Shirtwaist Factory Fire


 Wilson allows federal agencies to racially segregate their offices

 Ford announces nine-hour/ five-dollar workday

 Nationwide campaign to ban child labor fails

Muller v. Oregon
 Upholds maximum work hour laws for women

 Shocking tragedy confirms need to reform workplace

 Supreme Court announces “rule of reason” in breaking up trusts Makes distinction between good and bad trusts

 Reflects lingering impact of Plessy v. Ferguson

Sixteenth and Seventeenth
 Amendments ratified



 Secures competitive advantage through benefits and assembly lines

Ludlow Massacre
 Reveals potency of class conflict during Progressive Era

 Congress authorizes first federal income taxes and popular election of senators

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Creating a Democratic Paradise.

Questions for Analysis
 1. What interpretation did this painting offer of the 1911 Triangle Shirtwaist Factory Fire? View the Closer Look Triangle Fire: March 25, 1911, p. 534

 2. Why did these photographs arouse controversy?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • Eugene V. Debs, “The Outlook for Socialism in America” (1900), p. 533 • Louis Brandeis, from Other People’s Money and How Bankers Use It (1913), p. 536 • Profiles: Samuel Gompers, p. 543 • Report of the Vice Commission, Louisville, Kentucky (1915), p. 547

View the Closer Look Images as History: Envisioning


View the Closer Look


 a Vanishing Race, p. 540

• Images as History: Exposing the Evils of Child Labor, p. 550
• Envisioning Evidence: The Family Economy, p. 554


 3. How did Taylorism transform the workplace? Read the Document Frederick Winslow Taylor, “A Piece-Rate System” from The Principles of Scientific Management (1911), p. 542

• Competing Visions: Seeking Racial Uplift, p. 557


View the Image
• Teddy Roosevelt as “Jack the Giant Killer” (1904), p. 535
• John D. Rockefeller Cartoon (1901), p. 537
• Logo for the Industrial Workers of the World, p. 544


 4. What insights does Sinclair offer on workers’ lives and food safety? Read the Document Upton Sinclair, from The Jungle (1905), p. 552

View the Map Interactive Map: Resources and Conflict in the
West, p. 539


Watch the Video Video Lecture: What was the Progressive
Education Movement?, p. 549


 5. How did Washington and DuBois differ? Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Conflict Between Booker T. Washington and W.E.B. DuBois, p. 556

 NEWFOUNDLAND

St. Pierre and
Miquelon


U N I T E D S TAT E S


Azores


OF AMERICA
Bermuda Ri o 
Madeira


 nde Gra

A T L A N T I C
Canary Islands


O C E A N


Bahamas


M E X I CO


RIO D

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

CUBA HAITI

Jamaica


LEEWARD ISLANDS

BRITISH HONDURAS HONDURAS GUATEMALA SALVADOR

 NICARAGUA

Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands
St. Martin


We s t I n d i e s
 Curaçao

Guadeloupe
Martinique




