 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 21

A
Turbulent Decade
The Twenties


 What cultural conflicts dominated the era?

Racial Violence and
Civil Rights p. 638


 How was the civil rights movement transformed?

The New Woman
 p. 644

 What was “new” for women in the 1920s?

Ensuring Peace:
Diplomacy in the
Twenties p. 647


 What ideals informed American foreign policy in the 1920s?

 On a cold December afternoon in 1926, two young women posed for the camera as they danced on the ledge of a Chicago hotel. With their short skirts, bobbed hair, and heel-kicking dance steps, they displayed a carefree lifestyle that defied the stricter morals embraced by their mothers’ generation. The pair embodied the high spirits of a generation ready to put the tragedy of World War I behind them and move forward into the modern era. Novelists and journalists referred to these women as flappers, an old slang term for young girls. Now it was used to describe independent young women who smoked, drank, danced to jazz, and flaunted their sexual liberation by wearing revealing clothes. Rebellious postwar writers made flappers a cultural icon. Their youthful exuberance and daring behavior excited some Americans and created a sense of moral outrage in others. The flapper controversy was one of many cultural conflicts that turned political in the turbulent twenties. Flappers and the equally controversial birth control movement championed the right of women to take control of their bodies. Other Americans preferred using the government to control behavior. Prohibition of the manufacture and sale of alcoholic liquors became the law of the land in 1920, promising to rid the nation of poverty, crime, and disease. To prevent the communist-inspired Russian Revolution of 1917 from spreading to the United States, the government arrested suspected political radicals and drastically reduced the flow of European immigration. Meanwhile religious fundamentalists argued that the country was morally adrift and launched a well-publicized crusade against teaching evolution in public schools. African Americans, too, played an important role in changing America’s cultural landscape, creating new artistic centers and political movements that challenged the methods of established civil rights leaders. Putting the Progressive Era faith in trust-busting aside, the government allowed large industrial conglomerates to dominate key industrial sectors, such as steel and automobiles. Still staunchly antiunion, some factory owners nonetheless became more responsive to workers’ grievances to reduce labor strife. Mass production, accompanied by mass consumption, spurred the decade’s economic prosperity. Cars, suburbs, and asphalt highways soon dotted the American horizon, changing the living habits of millions. In the twenties domestic cultural conflict dominated political discourse, yet a distinct foreign policy also took shape. Despite its refusal to join the League of Nations, the country remained active in world affairs. By exerting rising international influence through diplomacy and foreign aid, Republican presidential administrations offered an alternative way to maintain world peace. How much of the old order would America jettison or protect as it entered the postwar age? Throughout the twenties Americans held competing visions of what modernity had to offer.

 “Was every decent standard being overthrown?” Journalist FREDERICK LEWIS ALLEN, commenting on youthful rebellion in the twenties





 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

Cars and Planes:
The Promise of the Twenties
 During the twenties America became a car culture. Car registration jumped from 9.2 million in 1920 to 26.5 million ten years later. By 1927, 80 percent of the world’s cars were in the United States. Conflicting ideas soon emerged, however, over how much car-based commerce should transform the American landscape and whether all Americans could be trusted with the new freedom their cars bestowed. The push to produce cars and other consumer goods more efficiently caused industrialists to change how they treated their workforce. Competing visions of industrial work culture between industrialists and workers emerged alongside ongoing clashes over wages and hours. Could man and machine coexist harmoniously?

The Car Culture


21.1 Cottage
Gas Station
 Many businessmen built gas stations that looked like country cottages to assure passing motorists that their establishments were safe and clean.

 At the turn of the century, cities were smelly, dirty places. In New York City alone, horses dumped 2.5 million tons of manure and 60,000 gallons of urine on streets yearly. The car seemed to offer a clean, flexible solution to city transportation problems. Paving the streets with asphalt would remove the dust that often forced dwellers to keep their windows shut. No one foresaw that a fleet of privately owned cars would soon clog city streets, or that their exhaust would become a public health hazard. Although initial expectations focused on the improvements that cars would make in cities, farmers also benefited from the new technology. Tractors made plowing easier, while trucks transported produce more quickly to market. Whole families piled into cars on Saturday morning to head into town, ending the isolation that had characterized farm life.

 A car represented a significant purchase for a family. Cars cost between 20 and 45 percent of a non-farm family’s annual income, and between 50 and 100 percent of a farm household’s yearly earnings. Credit plans required that purchasers pay one-third in cash as a down payment and spread the remaining payments over one year. Most plans also came with hefty interest rates averaging around 16 percent. Besides enriching automobile manufacturers, the explosion in car ownership meant boom times for numerous other industries. To satisfy the unquenchable thirst for gasoline, the petroleum industry underwent a major expansion with new oil wells appearing daily in Texas and California. The building trades saw their business take off, when millions took advantage of the mobility that cars afforded and moved to the suburbs. An acute need soon developed for tunnels and bridges to link cities by car to ever-dispersed commuter suburbs. In 1927, the Holland Tunnel, the nation’s first underwater motor vehicle tunnel, opened between New York City and New Jersey. On its first day of operation, nearly 50,000 people paid 50 cents to drive through the tunnel that ran under the Hudson River.

On the Road
 The ease of car travel encouraged many Americans to take vacations away from home for the first time, and to satisfy their wanderlust, the public demanded good roads through rural areas. The government responded with a massive

 How did cars transform urban and rural lifestyles?

Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Rise and Fall of
 the Automotive Industry

CARS AND PLANES: THE PROMISE OF THE TWENTIES

 road-building and paving program. Following the precedents set in the nineteenth century when the federal government had funded canal construction and given railroad companies huge land grants to build railroads (see Chapter 15), the federal government now helped states build a new national highway system. Car travelers also needed food, lodging, and gas. To entice tourists to stop at their establishments, rural businessmen erected eye-catching signs and buildings. A revolution in commercial roadside architecture was soon underway. Small clusters of cottages where tourists could spend the night on long road trips, forerunners of today’s motels, appeared in remote areas. The miniature house (21.1) emerged as the most popular type of commercial roadside building in the twenties, a way to assure the passersby that the restaurant, store, or gas station was a safe and respectable establishment. Other retailers used surreal images to entice motorists to stop. An array of giant milk bottles, toads, and hot dogs soon lined the highways of America. The Teapot Dome Service Station (21.2), built in 1922 along a highway in Zillah, Washington, humorously reminded patrons of the Teapot Dome political scandal that rocked the Harding

 White House in the early twenties. The Republicans had selected Warren Harding, an unassuming senator from Ohio, as their 1920 presidential candidate because his easygoing nature and call for “a return to normalcy” presented the electorate with a welcome respite from Democrat Woodrow Wilson’s stern wartime leadership. Winning 60 percent of the popular vote, Harding easily defeated Democrat James Cox, who suffered when he stood by Wilson and his failed League of Nations crusade (see Chapter 20). Harding’s two years in office (he died of a heart attack in 1923, making his vice president Calvin Coolidge president) were, however, tarnished by scandal. The largest scandal involved Secretary of the Interior Albert B. Fall, who went to jail for accepting bribes from two wealthy businessmen to lease government-controlled oil reserves in Teapot Dome, Wyoming. The enterprising owner of this service station gave his customers a laugh at the president’s expense by selling oil and gasoline in a teapot-shaped gas station. Cars also transformed recreational habits. Ministers complained that instead of spending Sundays in church,



21.2 Teapot
Dome Gas Station,
Zillah, Washington
Roadside
 architecture in the twenties often included whimsical structures designed to entice passing motorists to stop. This gas station shaped like a teapot made a joke of the Teapot Dome scandal.

 What messages did the architecture of roadside gas stations convey?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

 many families chose to take all-day drives. Cars let teenagers take their courting out of the family parlor and into the backseat of the family automobile, to the dismay of parents everywhere. “The best way to keep children home is to make the home atmosphere pleasant—and let air out of the tires,” quipped author Dorothy Parker. Automobiles also made it harder for town officials to regulate red-light districts, causing one judge to declare that “the automobile has become a house of prostitution on wheels.”

Welfare Capitalism and
Consumer Culture
 During World War I the government had mandated that industrialists with wartime contracts pay high wages, provide clean and safe working conditions, and allow unions to organize within their factories (see Chapter 20). In return for this official protection, the government demanded a no-strike pledge from unions. When the war ended in 1918, the government abruptly canceled its orders and withdrew from managing worker-industrial relations. The government’s handsoff attitude emboldened many industrialists to reinstate low wages, long hours, and blacklists for union members. To protect their war-time gains, unions orchestrated the greatest wave of strikes in American history in 1919. Although they rallied millions of workers to the picket lines, out-matched unions lost this battle. Industrialists accused unions of following in the footsteps of the recent Russian Revolution and trying to spread communism in the United States. These accusations won industrialists the support of local governments, who again forcefully broke up many picket lines. Defeated steel, coal, and garment unions, however, did not give up organizing and continued to attract members. In the early 1920s, union ranks grew to five million, the largest to date. When faced with the dismal vision of unending labor strife, Progressives had crafted government regulation to rein in business and improve working conditions (see Chapter 18). In the 1920s, industrialists used the guarantee of government noninterference to pursue a different vision. Throughout the decade the Harding and Coolidge administrations left industrialists free to fashion their own solutions to such labor troubles, adopting an openly pro-business stance. The Wall Street Journal exulted that “never before, here or anywhere else, has a government been so completely fused with business,” referring to Commerce Department workshops that helped businesses

 How did welfare capitalism promise to help industrialists run their factories more efficiently?

 eliminate wasteful practices, a Justice Department that largely stopped enforcing anti-trust laws, and a high protective tariff that made imported goods more expensive than American industrial products. The Progressive Era effort to improve industrial efficiency, however, remained popular. Envisioning Evidence: Scientific Management in Action shows how industrialists tried to standardize hiring practices by relying on the “scientific” insights of Social Darwinism. Innovative industrialists also tried to put aside the prevailing idea that the interests of capitalists and workers inevitably clashed. Rather than driving their workers relentlessly to secure a profit, advocates of welfare capitalism suggested that industrialists offer a wide range of benefits such as medical insurance, pensions, and stock ownership plans to create a loyal workforce. As the vogue for welfare capitalism spread, many industrialists began to change their management practices. To develop a stable, well-trained workforce, industrialists introduced fringe benefits (including paid vacations and sick pay), created industrial committees where workers could air grievances, and offered bonuses for workers who exceeded production quotas. A worker usually needed at least 25 years with one company to qualify for a pension, so this policy alone could potentially keep workers from leaving to pursue other job opportunities. Industrialists also experimented with offering employees stock options, hoping to dilute class antagonism by making each worker an investor who would share in the company’s profits. Despite workers’ enthusiasm for welfare capitalism, the reality rarely matched the rhetoric. Seasonal layoffs continued, wage rates fluctuated constantly, and long hours in unhealthy factories persisted. As one worker complained, “we had to wait five years for one week’s vacation. And I’ve seen men work four and one-half years and then get laid off.” Industrialists’ promises ended up simply whetting workers’ appetites for stable well-paid jobs with benefits. During the Great Depression in the 1930s (see Chapter 22), the labor movement would demand that the government fulfill the hopes that industrialists had raised in the twenties. Increased industrial productivity and efficiency created an unprecedented abundance of affordable goods in the twenties. Blue-collar workers toiling in dead-end jobs in factories staffed with salaried whitecollar employees performing unsatisfying clerical tasks produced these items. Frustrated at work, many working- and middle-class Americans used their growing leisure time and access to material goods to create more fulfilling lives. A modern consumer culture arose

CARS AND PLANES: THE PROMISE OF THE TWENTIES



Envisioning Evidence
SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT IN ACTION

P
 ic k a C on nd cr sh W e he te ove l el ba H od rr o Ta ca w nk rri e Tr cl r uc ea ni k C ar er ( ng ba ry Tr ing rr el ac k ma s, c re te R a oa pa ria se s, ir ls S dr s ho (lu et e c. ve pa m ir C be ) le ling s r, an st m e B ee at ui rs e l) l a C din nd rial oa g in c l p de ar b S til as mo eta ulk se ls lit ke r a r io R n s ig nd an ge fu d f B i r r re n ’s oi le he ace ma r n s M l ac ma pe ke r hi B la nis r’s c t’ h C ksm s h elp ar e i pe th lp er er ’s nt P ip he er e fit ’s h lpe E ng te r el r i p M ne ’s h er er is ce ’s elp lla he er ne lp ou er s he lp er

 Scientific management, the effort to use scientific knowledge to maximize output and profit, took many forms in the 1920s. Mirroring how army psychologists had used intelligence tests to rank the aptitudes of different racial and ethnic groups in World War I (see Chapter 20), the Central Tube Company in Pittsburgh devised a chart to assess the abilities of various nationalities to perform skilled and unskilled jobs. The new profession of psychology accepted pseudoscientific social Darwinian ideas that “race” determined aptitude and the factory owner devised his own “scientific” chart to organize and run his business more efficiently. Rather than assessing the experience or capabilities of an individual, an employment agent only had to consult this chart to match the right man with the right job.

 Unsurprisingly, given the prevailing racial climate, white Americans topped the list as good in nearly all tasks.

Americans, White
Irish
Lithuanians
Hungarians


 In the mid-nineteenth century anti-Irish sentiment prevented many Irish from getting factory jobs, but by the 1920s this Pittsburgh employer saw them as valuable skilled workers.

Slovaks
Finns
Austrians
Canadians, Fr.
Italians
Canadians, Br.
Ukranians
English
Russians
Poles


 American blacks were considered only suited for unskilled jobs.

Scandinavians
Americans, Black
Germans


 While social Darwinists usually viewed northern Europeans as superior to southern and eastern Europeans, in the factory’s ethnic hierarchy Italians and Poles actually outscored Germans and French as desirable skilled workers.

Chinese
French
Japanese
Filipinos
Greeks
Spaniards
Portuguese
Belgians


 The chart portrayed Jews as bad at every job.

Mexicans
Jews


Good


Fair


Poor


Racial Adaptability to Various Types of Plant Work


View the Closer Look Envisioning Evidence: Scientific
Management in Action


 What kind of job could you have gotten in this factory?



 CHAPTER 21

21.3 The End of
Silent Films
By the end of the
 decade, Hollywood began advertising “all talking-singing” movies like “Cocoanuts.”

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

 that deemphasized traditional Victorian values of thrift and restraint. Americans instead increasingly relied on credit to buy cars, radios, and household appliances. Radio played a key role in forging a national mass culture. Over 60 percent of American homes acquired radios in the twenties, which until 1924 required headphones. Americans from all walks of life now simultaneously gathered around their radios to learn election results. Baseball fans throughout the nation listened to the play-by-play of the World Series, radio broadcasts that made New York Yankee player Babe Ruth a national hero. Farmers closely followed weather reports, and bankers digested the day’s financial news. “There is radio music in the air, every night, everywhere,” one

 newspaper observed. Big companies like Walgreen Drugs and Palmolive Soap started sponsoring nationally syndicated radio shows to boost sales of their products. These weekly comedies and dramas, filled with plugs for the sponsor’s merchandise, cultivated shared tastes in entertainment and products. Americans increasingly bought the same brand-name toothpaste at a chain store like Woolworths. Big business was not alone in recognizing the power of radio, however. Local radio shows designed specifically for union members, religious groups, immigrant communities, or African Americans helped strengthen bonds within these subcultures as well. Movie stars and athletes enjoyed nationwide adulation in the twenties. Silent-film actors like the comedian Charlie Chaplin, the sex symbol Rudolph Valentino, and “America’s Sweetheart” Mary Pickford became household names among a movie-going public that avidly purchased fan magazines filled with glossy photos of their favorite stars. By the end of the decade, Hollywood was producing films with sound, a novelty highlighted in this 1929 poster (21.3) for the Marx Brothers’ first film. The verbal repartee of the comedy trio delighted audiences. As silent films disappeared, so did the careers of many silent-film stars whose artistic talents lay in physical, not vocal, expression. Meanwhile professional sports gave rise to a slew of national sports heroes, such as the boxer Jack Dempsey. In an era dominated by cultural heroes, none rose to greater prominence than the pilot Charles A. Lindbergh.

The Age of Flight:
Charles A. Lindbergh
 The feats of pilot Charles A. Lindbergh ushered the nation into the age of flight. Commentators called the sky the new frontier, a label loaded with potent historical significance for Americans. By the late twenties, a time when machines seemed to matter more than people, the image of the lone pilot against the vast blue sky recalled the pioneer spirit of the nineteenth century. Lindbergh piloted his plane, the Spirit of St. Louis, on the first-ever nonstop solo flight from New York to Paris on May 21, 1927. Flying without the radio or radar that help modern pilots navigate, Lindbergh relied on a few navigational instruments and looking out the window to locate his position on a paper map as he flew. Sitting in a wicker chair with sandwiches and water under it, Lindbergh had a rubber raft on board in case he was forced to land in the cold Atlantic and a flashlight to examine his wings for ice.

 How did a mass popular culture emerge in the twenties?

 Watch the Video Video Lecture: 1920s Media

CARS AND PLANES: THE PROMISE OF THE TWENTIES



 “The Spirit of St. Louis is a wonderful plane. It’s like a living creature, gliding along smoothly, happily, as though a successful flight means as much to it as to me.” CHARLES A. LINDBERGH, evoking the perfect symmetry between man and machine Lindbergh’s flight lasted 33.5 hours, enough time to make him the hero of the decade. This photomontage (a composite photo made by pasting together separate images) of the Spirit of St. Louis passing the Eiffel Tower combined the symbol of Paris with the image of Lindbergh’s iconic plane (21.4). “Had we searched all America we could not have found a better type than young Lindbergh to represent the spirit and high purpose of our people,” the jubilant American ambassador wired President Coolidge amid the celebrations that followed Lindbergh’s landing in Paris. Lindbergh’s triumph assured Americans that individual initiative still mattered and that technological advancement benefited humankind at a time when the recent industrialized slaughter on the Western Front (see Chapter 20) suggested otherwise. The vision of planes serving a peaceful purpose by transporting mail and tourists replaced wartime images of aerial dogfights. Lindbergh toured the nation tirelessly to promote commercial air travel, and in 1931 also flew flood relief missions in China with his wife, the author Anne Morrow Lindbergh, to demonstrate the humanitarian good that planes made possible. In exalting Lindbergh’s achievement Americans channeled their own conflicting visions of the modern age. Some praised Lindbergh for exhibiting the same adventurous spirit that had propelled American pioneers across the West in the nineteenth century, values that seemed increasingly at risk in a machine-dominated age. “Charles Lindbergh is the heir of all that we like to think is best in America,” opined Outlook magazine. Others, including Lindbergh, rejected the idea that his flight epitomized a return to the past. Lindbergh asserted that his flight illustrated the nation’s industrial march forward, “the culmination,” he said, “… of all that was practicable and best in American aviation.” Although differing on whether the flight represented the revival of traditional values or the modern ethos of industrial might, Americans agreed that his flight renewed faith in the benefits of technology. Lindbergh suffered, however, in the public spotlight. The 1933 kidnapping and murder of his firstborn son became the most reported tabloid story

 of the day. Later in the decade Lindbergh tarnished his image by expressing anti-Semitism and admiration for Nazi Germany and joining with those who argued against American intervention in World War II. After Japan’s bombing of Pearl Harbor in 1941, Lindbergh changed his position. He flew combat missions against the Japanese, and his reputation recovered among many, when he took a strong anticommunist stand during the Cold War in the 1950s.

View the Image Charles Lindbergh and Spirit of St. Louis


21.4 Photo
Montage of the
Spirit of St. Louis
Flying Near the
Eiffel Tower
 In this imagined scene an unnamed photographer celebrated the moment that pilot Charles Lindbergh arrived in Paris by pasting an image of his famous plane flying past Paris’s most recognized monument.

 Why did Americans celebrate Lindbergh’s solo flight to Paris?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

Cultural Unrest
 Celebrating Lindbergh’s achievement was a unique moment of national unity in a decade dominated by cultural turbulence and strife. During the 1920s, societal-wide debates reflected competing visions over what values the nation should embrace as it entered the modern age. Cultural conflict turned political in the twenties as Americans debated the need for legislation to protect the nation’s morals, ethnic purity, and capitalist economy.

The Lost Generation
 “I’ve kissed dozens of men. I suppose I’ll kiss dozens more,” declared the flapper heroine of F. Scott Fitzgerald’s novel This Side of Paradise (1920), announcing a new attitude of living for the moment that defined the era’s youth culture. With his wife Zelda by his side, Fitzgerald put this philosophy into practice, moving from party to party in his fast-paced life as an expatriate in Europe. The Parisbased American writer Gertrude Stein coined the term “the Lost Generation” to describe white intellectuals and artists like Fitzgerald who rebelled against Victorian values in the twenties and lived primarily overseas. Lost Generation writers used Austrian psychologist Sigmund Freud’s theories to justify their revolt against “repressive” codes of conduct. Freud believed that subconscious sexual impulses drove human behavior and that repressed desires sometimes found expression in dreams. Fitzgerald was one of a host of writers including Ernest Hemingway, e. e. cummings, and John Dos Passos who championed sexual liberation as one way to escape the sterile and deadly confines of modern life. Men and women “spend their lives going in and out of doors and factories … they live their lives and find themselves at last facing death and the end of life without having lived at all,” asserts a character in Sherwood Anderson’s Many Marriages (1923) who, in the throes of a passionate extramarital affair, is preparing to end his marriage and leave his job. The hedonistic lifestyles depicted in many Lost Generation novels, while rarely bestowing lasting happiness on the protagonists, still rankled more traditionally minded Americans. Agreeing that modern culture was flawed, these Americans wanted to bolster, rather than reject, traditional values. These clashing cultural visions had strong political overtones. Alcohol remained central to

 What critique did the Lost Generation offer of American society?

 the Lost Generation ethos of pleasure-seeking, an indulgence that became illegal in the twenties, thanks to temperance reformers who felt that drinking threatened the moral fabric of American society.

Prohibition
 Temperance, one of the nation’s longest lasting reform movements (see Chapters 17 and 18), took on a new life during World War I. Wartime temperance propaganda claimed that “German brewers in this country have rendered thousands of men inefficient.” Organized “wet” opposition to the “dry” campaign materialized slowly, partly because critics of the temperance movement could not easily counter its emphasis on health, thrift, and morals. Some wets focused on personal freedom. Senator James Wadsworth contended that it seemed unfair to tell exhausted workers at the end of the day “you shall not have a glass of beer.” Other critics felt uneasy about increasing the power of the federal government so it could enforce prohibition. They argued that a proposed constitutional amendment prohibiting alcohol would violate states’ rights. The middle-class AntiSaloon League’s highly structured propaganda and lobbying campaign, however, easily overpowered this disjointed wet response on the local, state, and national level. Evangelical preacher Billy Sunday converted many churchgoers to the temperance cause, delivering impassioned sermons on the evils of alcohol. Sunday, a former professional baseball player, littered his sermons with slang, winning a large following among the rural poor and urban working class, who flocked to his revival meetings throughout the Midwest. The political elite also embraced the preacher. Sunday often dined at the White House and considered the oil tycoon John D. Rockefeller a friend. In his most famous

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Post-War
 Disillusionment in the 1920s

CULTURAL UNREST

 temperance speech, Sunday urged his listeners in 1908 to “get on the water wagon; get on for the sake of your wife and babies, and hit the booze a blow.” On December 18, 1917, Congress approved the Eighteenth Amendment, which banned the sale, manufacture, and transportation of intoxicating liquors. By January 16, 1919, the required 36 states had ratified it. By the time every state had voted, only Rhode Island and Connecticut had rejected it. When prohibition went into effect in 1920, Congress clarified what constituted an intoxicating beverage in the Volstead Act (1919), which defined any beverage with more than 0.5 percent alcohol as intoxicating liquor and established criminal penalties for manufacturing, transporting, or possessing alcohol. Congress never appropriated enough money for wide-scale enforcement, hampering Justice Department efforts to curb illegal drinking. The police raided working-class neighborhoods to shut down illegal distilleries, but the well-to-do drank their bathtub gin or homebrewed beer without interference. Many reform goals of the temperance movement remained unmet. Belying the expectation that it would create a more virtuous, law-abiding society, prohibition gave birth to a much more insidious form of crime. Organized crime syndicates ran profitable bootlegging operations that financed beer breweries and liquor distilleries, bribed cops, and stocked the shelves of illegal bars throughout major metropolitan areas. Trafficking in forbidden alcohol, the publicity-crazed gangster Al Capone became a powerful figure in the Chicago underworld, a position he maintained with unprecedented violence. In the 1929 St. Valentine’s Day Massacre, Capone’s men, posing as cops, pretended to arrest rival gang members and then lined them up against a wall and mowed them down with machine guns. Tabloid papers vividly recounted every detail of Capone’s “new technique of wholesale murder” to a shocked public. Suffering from syphilis that he contracted from a prostitute in one of his own brothels, Capone became increasingly unstable and violent before he went to prison for tax evasion in 1931. Secret bars called speakeasies proliferated. To demonstrate Americans’ widespread disrespect for prohibition, federal agent Izzy Einstein timed how long it took him to find alcohol in most major cities. It took him 21 minutes in Chicago, and only 31 seconds in New Orleans, when he asked a taxi driver where he could get a drink and the man replied, “right here,” as he pulled out a bottle. Einstein

Hear the Audio Prohibition is a Failure


 personally shut down over 4,000 speak easies nationwide, prompting bartenders to post his picture with the caption “watch for this man.” Illicit drinking became fashionable among the young urban elite, whose escapades Lost Generation writers helped glamorize. This image of a welldressed woman barhopping with her male companions (21.5) revealed new social acceptance for public drinking by respectable middle- and upper-class women. Americans had previously viewed saloons as male establishments that only women of low moral character, like prostitutes, dared to enter. The competing visions of whether illegal drinking was harmless fun or a vice that destroyed families kept the political debate over prohibition alive throughout the 1920s. Drys credited prohibition for the prosperous economy. By putting alcohol aside, they claimed, workers had become more productive, could afford to buy cars and furniture, and had more savings. Wets argued that the amendment generated



21.5 Well-Dressed
Trio Entering a
Speakeasy
 Frequenting speakeasies, which patrons entered by giving a secret password to the doorman, became fashionable for women during prohibition. Gone was the stigma that had stopped respectable women from drinking in public.

 Why did Americans eventually conclude that national prohibition was a failed experiment?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

 disrespect for the law as it became socially acceptable for Americans to commit a crime by purchasing alcohol. States’ rights advocates increasingly resented the arrival of federal officials trying to track down bootleggers. Picking up the Anti-Saloon League’s longstanding emphasis on protecting women and children, the wet lobby emphasized the dangers of teenagers drinking contaminated “moonshine” (a slang term for illicitly manufactured alcohol) in speakeasies run by the mob. Better to have them drink safely in public cafes, they argued. The beginning of the Great Depression in 1929, which thrust the nation into an unprecedented financial crisis, undermined the dry claim that prohibition brought prosperity. Wets made headway with the argument that enforcing the law drained the federal treasury. When Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt entered the White House in 1933, he immediately asked Congress to repeal prohibition. With lightening speed the states ratified the Twenty-First Amendment (1933), which repealed the Eighteenth Amendment. The temperance vision remained regionally popular, however, especially in the rural South and Midwest which continued to enforce local prohibition statutes. A few states also passed minimum-age drinking laws in the 1930s, but most states did not enact such laws until the 1980s.

The First Red Scare and
Immigration Restrictions
 The vision of America as the land of opportunity for peoples worldwide came under attack in the 1920s. Debates over immigration were not new, but for the first time the nativist vision prevailed. In the early twenties the United States underwent a historic shift, changing from a nation that admitted over one million immigrants a year in the decade leading up to World War I to one that grudgingly allowed fewer than 200,000 to enter the country annually. World War I was the catalyst that turned longstanding nativist attacks against immigrants into a mandate for dramatic change. Alarm over German Americans’ continued ties to Germany linked concerns about assimilation to the more potent political question of national security. The 1921 Emergency Immigration Act temporarily allowed 350,000 European immigrants to enter the country each year and set limits on how many immigrants could come from each European nation. Three years

 Why did the nation enact strict immigration restrictions in the twenties?

 later Congress made these quotas permanent. The Immigration Act of 1924 allowed unrestricted immigration from the Western Hemisphere, curtailed all Asian immigration, and used quotas to control how many immigrants emigrated from individual European nations. The law authorized a total of 165,000 immigrants from Europe, a figure that Congress reduced to 150,000 in 1929 at the start of the Great Depression. Assumptions about the racial superiority of northern Europeans strongly influenced the new national quotas portrayed in the “Immigration Act of 1924” chart (21.6). In this new quota system, Germany received the highest quota. If Americans no longer feared German immigrants, then why did the country feel compelled to adopt immigration restrictions? The answer: the communist-inspired Russian Revolution of 1917, a critical event that some Americans envisioned immigrants from Russia and Eastern Europe recreating in the United States. To meet this threat, the Justice Department arrested and deported alien anarchists and Communists suspected of trying to destroy American democracy and capitalism during the First Red Scare (1919–1920). Like Communists, anarchists believed that capitalist exploitation of the working class created widespread social suffering. While Communists wanted to create a workers’ government that controlled property, anarchists viewed all governments as corrupt. The anarchist movement’s most famous spokesperson was Emma Goldman, an eloquent speaker who had emigrated from Russia as a young girl. Anarchism, she wrote, “stands for the liberation of the human mind from the dominion of religion; the liberation of the human body from the dominion of property; liberation from the shackles and restraint of government.” Some anarchists felt justified using violence to advance their cause (one had assassinated President William McKinley in 1901). Goldman, however, disavowed armed conflict and instead tried to popularize the anarchist philosophy through lectures and the magazine that she founded, Mother Earth. In 1919, post office clerk Charles Kaplan helped avert disaster. Reading a newspaper account, as he rode the subway home, of two anarchist mailbomb attacks, one against the mayor of Seattle and another against a senator from Georgia. Kaplan realized that the description of the booby-trapped

Read the Document A. Mitchell Palmer on the
Menace of Communism


CULTURAL UNREST



 packages matched that of 16 parcels he had Northwest Europe and Eastern and Other Countries Scandinavia Southern Europe recently set aside for insufficient postage, including one addressed to oil tycoon John Quota Quota Country Country Quota Country D. Rockefeller. Kaplan’s discovery triggered a 5,982 1,100 Africa (other Poland 51,227 Germany than Egypt) nationwide investigation that netted 18 more Great Britain and 3,845 34,007 Italy Northem Ireland Czechoslovakia 3,073 Armenia mail bombs. Australia Irish Free State (Ireland) 28,567 2,248 Russia As anxiety mounted, terrorists exploded Yugoslavia Sweden Palestine 9,561 dynamite outside the home of Attorney GenNorway Syria 6,453 Romania eral A. Mitchell Palmer, the man heading the Portugal France Turkey 3,954 Justice Department’s hunt for Bolshevik and Egypt 2,789 Denmark Hungary Switzerland New Zealand & 100 anarchist terrorists. Palmer warned that “on Lithuania 2,081 Pacific Islands Netherlands Latvia 1,648 a certain day which we have been advised of,” 1,900 All others Austria Spain radicals were planning “to rise up and destroy Belgium Estonia the Government at one fell swoop.” To head Finland Albania off this revolutionary uprising, Palmer raided Free City of Danzig Bulgaria Iceland Greece the homes and offices of suspected radicals Luxembourg and deported hundreds of immigrants with ties to radical organizations, including Emma Total (Number) 142,483 Total 3,745 Total 18,439 (Number) (Number) Goldman. 2.3 Total (%) 11.2 Total (%) Total (%) 86.5 While the government focused on the need to ensure public safety, radicals asserted their rights to freedom of speech and peace21.6 Immigration Recent findings suggest that Sacco and Vanzetti ful assembly. Without concrete evidence of their of 1924 participation in any criminal activity, they argued, were indeed dedicated anarchists with close con- Act The United States nections to those who planned the spate of 1919 the government was prosecuting them merely for enacted a quota system in the 1920s bombings, but no conclusive evidence ties them their beliefs. Coming on the heels of wartime arthat allotted most to the 1920 murder. rests under the Espionage and Sedition acts, the slots to immigrants The First Red Scare ended quickly. As the angovernment’s harassment of radical activists durfrom northern archist attacks ceased, the press began to poke fun Europe. ing 1919–1920 made it practically impossible for at Palmer’s “hallucinations” of a mass uprising radical groups to organize, distribute literature, or and accused him of exaggerating the “revolutiongive public speeches championing their political ary menace” as part of a failed campaign to win ideals. the Democratic presidential nomination in 1920. Radicals tried to fight back by taking up the Although the arrests and deportations stopped, cause of anarchists Nicola Sacco and Bartolothe First Red Scare gave credence to the antimeo Vanzetti, two Italian immigrants arrested immigration argument that the country needed in Massachusetts for the robbery and murder protection from foreigners who might import of a payroll guard in 1920. Poor Italian immidangerous radical political theories. grants and left-leaning union members made Other arguments also helped tip the balance in numerous small donations to the Sacco-Vanzetti favor of immigration restriction. Urban elites and Defense Committee, which sponsored picnics rural folk worried about protecting the “racial puand wrestling matches to raise funds for their rity” of American stock, while unions and African defense. Many intellectuals also supported the Americans feared competition from immigrant pair, including Roger Baldwin, who had recently laborers. By the early twenties industrialists had founded the American Civil Liberties Union dropped their complaint that immigration restric(ACLU), to protect constitutional liberties. The tions would deprive business of a traditionally portrait that prosecutors painted of Sacco and inexpensive labor source. Many now believed that Vanzetti—foreign-born, openly radical, and machines would increasingly replace unskilled in possession of guns and anarchist pamphlets immigrant workers in factories and felt confident when arrested—epitomized the terrorist threat that there were enough African American many Americans feared. Sacco and Vanzetti’s or Mexican workers to alleviate any labor shortradical and liberal supporters embraced a comage. With the consensus moving toward immigrapeting vision, blaming growing xenophobia for tion restrictions, immigrant associations sought to the pair’s conviction and 1927 electrocution.

View the Closer Look Immigration to the United States,
1870–1915


 What competing visions over radicalism emerged during the Sacco-Vanzetti trial?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

 ensure that their nationality received the highest quota possible. Official quotas, however, do not reveal the exact numbers of immigrants who entered the country. If denied entry under the quota system, which remained intact from 1924 through 1965, determined immigrants exploited loopholes. The 1924 law contained two key provisions that have remained staples of American immigration legislation: the principle of family reunification, which let resident immigrants bring in members of their immediate families, and the desirability of certain skills. The law, for example, established exemptions for trades facing worker shortages in the United States, such as domestic service. Other savvy European immigrants simply entered the country illegally, often by way of Mexico or Canada, two nations that still enjoyed unrestricted immigration to the United States.

Fundamentalism
 The cultural debates surrounding prohibition and immigration restrictions assumed a decidedly political edge in the 1920s. Christian Fundamentalists added to the decade’s cultural turbulence when they initiated a campaign to stop the teaching of biologist Charles Darwin’s views on evolution. Religious conservatives felt that Darwin’s theories contradicted the Bible’s depiction of God creating the world and humankind in seven days. They instead subscribed to the tenets of fundamentalism, an evangelical Christian theology that viewed the Bible as an authentic, literal recounting of historical events and the absolute moral word of God. By critiquing Darwin, Fundamentalists offered a conservative alternative to modernism, a liberal Christian theology embraced in many urban areas that emphasized the ongoing revelation of divine truth. Offering competing religious visions Fundamentalists accepted the Bible as errorless, while Modernists reinterpreted the Bible when confronted with new scientific knowledge (such as fossil evidence of evolution). Believing that “monkey men mean monkey morals,” the World Christian Fundamentals Association lobbied for state laws that prohibited teaching evolution in public schools. In 1925, Tennessee made it a crime to teach “any theory that denies the story of the Divine Creation as taught in the Bible, and to teach instead that man has descended from a lower order of animals.” Passed

 Why did Fundamentalists object to teaching evolution in public schools?

 mostly to make sweeping school reforms more palatable to Fundamentalist voters, the state made no effort to enforce the law and even adopted a biology textbook that included an extended discussion of Darwin’s ideas. The ACLU viewed the law as a violation of the First Amendment’s guarantee of free speech. Hoping to test its constitutionality, the ACLU offered to help any teacher in Tennessee who wanted to challenge the law in court. Civic boosters in Dayton, Tennessee, responded to the offer. A trial highlighting the clash between science and religion was bound to attract huge crowds, they reasoned, and by hosting this national extravaganza, Dayton expected to draw an influx of visitors with cash to spend. John Scopes, a 24-year-old science teacher and part-time football coach, agreed to step forward, so officials in Dayton could arrest him. The infamous Scopes trial was underway. Interest in Scopes, the ACLU, and Dayton faded once William Jennings Bryan agreed to prosecute the case and Clarence Darrow arrived to defend Scopes. Bryan was the former leader of the Democratic Party, who had unsuccessfully run for president three times and resigned as secretary of state when President Woodrow Wilson abandoned complete neutrality during World War I. The devout Bryan blamed Germany’s embrace of evolutionary notions like “survival of the fittest” for causing the brutal global war. Darrow was an agnostic, famous for defending both radical labor leaders, such as the socialist Eugene Debs, and wealthy murderers. Hundreds of journalists descended on the town to observe the courtroom confrontation between Bryan and Darrow. Their dispatches helped build publicity for the “monkey trial,” a reference to evolutionists’ claim that humans had descended from apes. Urban-based reporters billed the case as a conclusive struggle between modern America and the ignorant rural masses (few of whom shared in the general prosperity of the 1920s) whose alleged backward thinking threatened to impede the country’s progress. In his widely read reports, nationally syndicated columnist H. L. Mencken regularly referred to Fundamentalists as hillbillies and yokels. Fundamentalists fought back. The carnival-like atmosphere outside the courtroom soon included Fundamentalist revival meetings and performances by trained chimpanzees that mocked evolutionists. Vendors did a brisk business selling

View the Closer Look Immigration Quotas


CULTURAL UNREST



 Dueling newspaper headlines during the Scopes Trial: “‘They Call Us Bigots When We Refuse to Throw Away Our Bibles,’ Bryan says.” “We say ‘Keep Your Bible,’ but keep it where it belongs, in the world of your conscience.” monkey dolls, like the one held by Lena Ruffner (21.7), who announced her support of Bryan by pinning a sign “they can’t make a monkey out of me” to her dress. Both Bryan and Darrow argued that they were protecting American democratic institutions. Bryan maintained that the Tennessee legislature had the right to pass any law that the majority wanted; Darrow contended the state had violated the constitution by establishing Christianity as an official religion and limiting freedom of expression. The mainstream press viewed the trial as a showdown between science and religion, with science winning a decisive victory. In their account, the climatic moment came when Darrow called Bryan to the witness stand and trapped him into confessing he did not accept the entire Bible as the literal truth. “We have the purpose of preventing bigots and ignoramuses from controlling the education of the United States,” Darrow declared in court, expressing Modernists’ view of fundamentalism. The national press labeled Bryan a broken man when he died in his sleep five days after Scopes was found guilty and fined. The courtroom, however, had burst into applause when during his crossexamination Bryan had thundered, “I am simply trying to protect the word of God against the greatest atheist or agnostic in the United States.” Southern folk songs popularized this competing heroic image of Bryan as someone who “fought for what was righteous and the battle it was won / Then the Lord called him to heaven for his work on earth was done.” After Scopes’s conviction the ACLU appealed to the Tennessee Supreme Court, which upheld the law’s constitutionality and then overturned the verdict because the judge rather than the jury had imposed the fine. Scopes’s acquittal meant that the ACLU had to find a new case to take before the U.S. Supreme Court. After the ridicule heaped

 on Dayton, however, no town or teacher was willing to help the ACLU try again. Tennessee did not repeal the law until 1967. A year later the U.S. Supreme Court declared anti-evolution laws unconstitutional. Although soon forgotten by mainstream America, throughout the twentieth century Fundamentalists created a thriving minority subculture of churches, schools, universities, publishers, radio ministries, and missionary societies. Fundamentalists rejoined the cultural and political mainstream in the 1970s and are generating headlines again with their challenges to teaching evolution in public schools. In one striking break from the past, Fundamentalists now use Darrow’s line of reasoning to argue that keeping the biblical theory of creation out of high school biology classes violates the constitutional guarantee to freedom of expression.

21.7 Young
Woman Holds
 Monkey Doll during the Scopes Trial A supporter of prosecutor William Jennings Bryan wears a sign ridiculing the theory of evolution and displays the monkey doll she bought from a vender outside the courthouse.

 What cultural and religious tensions were exposed during the Scopes trial?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

Racial Violence and Civil Rights
 Advocates of prohibition, immigration restrictions, and fundamentalism had varying degrees of success reshaping American society after the war. African Americans were also active, employing new strategies to advance racial equality. A new generation of black political activists emerged, determined to fight back when whites attacked. The Harlem Renaissance, an outpouring of African American artistic expression in the 1920s and 1930s, also stirred debate within the African American community over the best way to improve the lives of African Americans.

21.8 Souvenir
Postcard, Thomas
Shipp and Abram
Smith Lynching,
Marion, Indiana
 After witnessing the lynching of two black men, smiling men and women had their pictures taken as a memento. The two girls to the left clutch pieces of the victims’ hair. The photographer sold thousands of copies for 50 cents each.

Lynching, Racial Rioting,
 and the Ku Klux Klan Lynch mobs tortured and killed nearly 5,000 victims between 1880 and 1930, roughly two per week. The souvenir postcard (21.8) by studio photographer Lawrence Beitler depicted the lynching of Thomas Shipp and Abram Smith, a disturbing relic from this grisly past. Professional photographers often attended lynchings and sold hundreds of picture postcards

 What does this souvenir postcard reveal about the ritual of lynching?

 to perpetrators and witnesses, who put them in family scrapbooks or sent them to friends and relatives. Besides buying souvenir postcards, whites sometimes took other relics from the victim, including hair, clothing, fingers, and ears. Both the existence of this postcard and the scene it depicts raise chilling questions about the ritual of lynching. Rather than viewing their murderous act as shameful or believing that they needed to conceal their identities to avoid prosecution, these participants smile openly for the camera. Police rarely arrested anyone for a lynching, preferring to claim that the victims died “at the hands of persons unknown.” Trumped-up accusations that the victim had raped or murdered a white person usually fueled a lynching frenzy. Police had arrested Shipp and Abram for robbery, murder, and rape. The purpose of lynching, however, went beyond administering extralegal justice. Lynching also created a climate of terror that helped whites maintain social control over all blacks, not just thosee killed. James Weldon Johnson, a well-regarded poet who served as director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in the twenties,

RACIAL VIOLENCE AND CIVIL RIGHTS

 coined the term “The Red Summer of 1919” to describe the wave of vicious assaults against black communities that left at least 43 African Americans dead. Some whites also used organized violence to prevent blacks from competing with whites economically. Mobs attacked thriving black business centers and middle-class homes in Tulsa, Oklahoma, in 1921, and in Rosewood, Florida, in 1923. A headline in a Tulsa newspaper even helped mobilize whites by issuing the call “To Lynch A Negro Tonight.” In both the Tulsa and Rosewood race riots, African Americans fought back, but enraged white crowds still burned both communities to the ground. Officials in Tulsa declared martial law and imprisoned one-half of the city’s black population in internment camps. After gaining their freedom a few weeks later, 1,000 families spent the winter in tents before beginning the huge task of rebuilding their community. In 1994, Florida awarded survivors of the Rosewood race riot $150,000 each in reparations. For the first time African Americans received compensation for past racial injustices, raising the question of whether victims of other racially motivated attacks deserved financial settlements. With the states unwilling to prosecute the members of lynch mobs, the NAACP lobbied to make lynching a federal crime. Hoping to shock the nation into supporting an anti-lynching law, the NAACP used graphic images of lynchings in their pamphlets, parades, and posters. Southern congressmen, however, blocked passage of a federal anti-lynching bill by claiming that it violated the constitutional right of states to police themselves. This photograph of Shipp and Smith “haunted me for days,” recalled Abel Meeropol, a Jewish schoolteacher from New York active in leftist politics. It inspired him to compose “Strange Fruit,” a song denouncing lynching that Billie Holiday recorded in 1939. Meeropol’s stanzas painted a gruesome picture: “Southern trees bear strange fruit/Blood on the leaves and blood at the root/Black body swinging in the Southern breeze/Strange fruit hanging from the poplar trees.” The lyrics also partly misinterpreted the image. Although most lynchings took place in the South, the attack pictured here occurred in Marion, Indiana. Indiana was home to the largest chapter of the Ku Klux Klan in the 1920s, enrolling nearly one-half of the

Read the Document The “Creed of Klanswomen” (1924)


 state’s white male population even though only three percent of the state’s population was black. The federal government had suppressed the original Ku Klux Klan during Reconstruction (see Chapter 15). The Klan revived in the 1910s and became a national organization that drew members from all parts of the country with membership fluctuating between three and six million throughout the twenties. The new Klan organized their call for white Protestant supremacy under the banner of 100 percent Americanism, and their list of enemies included any group that threatened the traditional order. Anxieties aroused by blacks’ wartime migration to northern and midwestern industrial centers, the Red Scare, women’s suffrage, mass immigration, prohibition, and postwar strikes caused many conservative whites to listen sympathetically to Klan outbursts against blacks, Jews, Catholics, immigrants, radicals, feminists, and bootleggers. The 1925 Klan march in Washington, D.C. (21.9), exposed the group’s national appeal. City officials required the 40,000 assembled Klan members to march from the White House to the Capitol without their masks. Like lynch mobs these Klan members were unafraid to reveal their identities as they proudly unfurled an American flag that championed the Klan’s “patriotic” slogan of “Native, white, Protestant supremacy.” The march represented the high tide of Klan power in the twenties. As fears of social upheaval diminished, Klan membership also decreased.



21.9 Ku Klux Klan
 in Washington, D.C., 1925 Klan members unfurl a giant American flag on the steps of the Capitol, equating patriotism with white supremacy.

 Why did membership in the Ku Klux Klan surge in the twenties?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

Marcus Garvey


21.10 Marcus
Garvey
 The leader of the UNIA often appeared in full military dress to project an image of strength and racial pride. He challenged prevailing racial stereotypes of black subservience by adopting regalia usually worn by kings.

 The African American community had long debated how to end racial attacks and segregation. In the 1890s, Booker T. Washington squared off against W. E. B. Du Bois over whether blacks should focus first on improving their economic position or demanding political rights (see Chapter 18). Washington died in 1915, and in the 1920s, Jamaican immigrant Marcus Garvey took up his idea of empowering blacks economically. Garvey founded the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) to encourage economic self-sufficiency by creating black-owned businesses. The UNIA organized the Black Star Line, a short-lived capitalist venture that sold $5 stock certificates to finance the world’s only black-owned and staffed fleet of steamships. Garvey’s working-class followers, native-born African Americans and recently arrived immigrants from the West Indies, purchased stock enthusiastically. Poor management, however, forced the Black Star Line to dissolve in 1922. Despite their shared message of economic empowerment, the black nationalist Garvey was much more militant than Washington. There was nothing shameful in being black, Garvey told

 his audiences, criticizing African Americans who used skin lighteners and hair straighteners to make themselves appear more white. “God,” Garvey said, “made no mistake when he made us black with kinky hair. We have outgrown slavery, but our minds are still enslaved to the thinking of the Master Race. Now take these kinks out of your mind, instead of out of your hair.” Like Washington, Garvey rejected the political goal of dismantling Jim Crow that dominated other civil rights organizations. But unlike Washington, who wanted to improve life for blacks within the United States, Garvey spoke often of acquiring enough economic power to establish an independent African nation that could reunite the world’s dispersed black peoples. Pageantry was a hallmark of the UNIA. Its meetings often included a uniformed male African Legion dressed in blue, and female Black Cross Nurses in white. To give these gatherings an official air, participants waved tri-color flags that Garvey described as,“Black for our race, red for our blood, and green for our hope.” Black middleclass detractors ridiculed Garvey’s tendency to appear, as pictured here (21.10), wearing a plumed hat and military regalia. These critics called him “a clown” in a “gaudy uniform” who led “big parades of ignorant people down the street selling pie in the sky.” Garvey, however, believed that seeing a black man dressed as an aristocrat inspired confidence among his followers and challenged the stereotype of black subservience perpetuated by white America. The Justice Department took note of Garvey’s theatrics. Worried that his movement was sowing the seeds of a violent black rebellion, government spies monitored his activities. Competing Visions: Debating Garveyism explores Garvey’s vision for black America and the criticism of W. E. B. Du Bois, a leader in the NAACP who supported immediate integration. Some of Garvey’s black critics organized a “Garvey Must Go” campaign and helped the government convict him of fraudulent use of the mails in 1923. He served four years in prison and was then deported. Without Garvey the UNIA collapsed. Garveyism, however, offered African Americans an alternative to the integrationist vision of the NAACP and introduced separatist ideas that Black Power advocates would resurrect in the 1960s (see Chapter 27).

 Why did Garvey elicit such strong emotions among both followers and critics?

RACIAL VIOLENCE AND CIVIL RIGHTS



Competing Visions
DEBATING GARVEYISM
Many of the traditional civil rights elite despised Marcus Garvey, whom they accused of swindling the poor of their hard-earned money and stirring up racial animosity within the United States. Garvey in turn accused lightskinned African American leaders of racial prejudice, arguing that they could not accept the dark-skinned Garvey as their equal. In the following excerpts Garvey lays out his reasons for urging black Americans to go “Back to Africa,” while W. E. B. Du Bois, one of the light-skinned elites Garvey attacked, criticizes Garvey’s vision. How does Garvey propose to stop “crimes against the race”? What portrait does Du Bois offer of Garvey? In “The True Solution of the Negro Problem” (1922) Marcus Garvey argued that creating a homeland in Africa could solve the problem of racial violence in the United States. 
 In this 1923 biographical sketch, “Marcus Garvey,” W. E. B. Du Bois views Garvey as misguided and inept.

 Garvey soon developed in America a definite and in many respects original and alluring program. He proposed to establish the “Black Star Line” of steamships under We cannot allow a continuation of these crimes [lynching Negro ownership and with Negro money, to trade between and disenfranchisement] against our race. As four hundred the United States, the West Indies, and Africa. He proposed million men, women and children, worthy of the existence to establish a factories corporation which was going to given us by the Divine Creator, we are determined to solve build factories and manufacture goods both for local our own problem, by redeeming our Motherland Africa consumption of Negroes and for export.… When from the hands of alien exploiters and found there Mr. Garvey brought his cohorts to Madison a government, a nation of our own, strong Square Garden, and when, ducking his dark enough to lend protection to the members of head at the audience, he yelled, “We are our race scattered all over the world, and going to Africa to tell England, France and to compel the respect of the nations and Belgium to get out of there,” America sat races of the earth. up, listened, laughed, and said here at Do they lynch Englishmen, Frenchmen, least is something new.… Thus the Germans or Japanese? No. And Why? Black Star Line arose and disappeared, Because these people are represented and with it went some $800,000 of the by great governments, mighty nations savings of West Indians and a few and empires … ever ready to shed the American Negroes.… last drop of blood and spend the last penny His African program was made impossible by in the national treasury to protect the honor his own pigheadedness. He proposed to make a and integrity of a citizen outraged anywhere. Button won by Marcus start in Liberia with industrial enterprises. From Garvey supporters Until the Negro reaches this point of national this center he would penetrate all Africa and independence, all he does as a race will count for gradually subdue it. Instead of keeping this plan hidden naught, because the prejudice that will stand out against and working cautiously and intelligently toward it, he yelled him even with his ballot in his hand, with his industrial and shouted and telegraphed it all over the world. Without progress to show, will be of such an overwhelming nature consulting the Liberians, he apparently was ready to assume as to perpetuate mob violence and mob rule.… partial charge of their state.… [H]is talk about conquest and If the Negro were to live in this Western Hemisphere for “driving Europe out,” aroused European governments.… another five hundred years he would still be outnumbered The present generation of Negroes has survived two by other races who are prejudiced against him. He cannot grave temptations, the greater one, fathered by Booker T. resort to the government for protection for government Washington, which said, “Let politics alone, keep in your will be in the hands of the majority of the people who are place, work hard, and do not complain,” and which meant prejudiced against him, hence for the Negro to depend on perpetual color caste for colored folk by their own cooperation the ballot and his industrial progress alone, will be hopeless and consent … and the lesser, fathered by Marcus Garvey, as it does not help him when he is lynched, burned, jimwhich said, “Give up! Surrender! The struggle is useless; back crowed and segregated. The future of the Negro therefore, to Africa and fight the white world.” outside of Africa, spells ruin and disaster.

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Debating Garveyism


 How did Garvey and Du Bois link the U.S. Civil Rights Movement to international politics?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

The Harlem Renaissance
 Claude McKay

“If We Must Die”
(1919)


 If we must die, let it not be like hogs Hunted and penned in an inglorious spot, While round us bark the mad and hungry dogs, Making their mock at our accursed lot. If we must die, O let us nobly die, So that our precious blood may not be shed In vain; then even the monsters we defy Shall be constrained to honor us though dead! O kinsmen we must meet the common foe! Though far outnumbered let us show us brave, And for their thousand blows deal one deathblow! What though before us lies the open grave? Like men we’ll face the murderous, cowardly pack, Pressed to the wall, dying, but fighting back!

Countee Cullen


“Incident”
(1924)


 Once riding in old Baltimore, Heart-filled, head-filled with glee, I saw a Baltimorean Keep looking straight at me. Now I was eight and very small, And he was no whit bigger, And so I smiled, but he poked out His tongue, and called me, “Nigger.” I saw the whole of Baltimore From May until December; Of all the things that happened there That’s all that I remember.

 In these poems how do responses to racism vary?

 Garvey based the UNIA in Harlem, a thriving African American neighborhood in New York City that became the hub of black politics and culture in the 1920s. African American artists, photographers, musicians, and writers celebrated the distinctiveness of black culture. Many writers published their works in black magazines such as The Crisis and The Messenger. White literary figures like Carl Van Vechten also helped black writers publish their works with commercial presses, exposing white America to black artistic endeavors. The African American philosopher Alain Locke captured the creative impulse of the Harlem Renaissance in 1925, when he published The New Negro, an anthology of essays and poems by emerging literary voices. According to Locke the New Negro embodied a spirit of black racial pride and militancy that set a younger generation of African American artists and civil rights leaders apart from their predecessors, who had emphasized assimilating into white culture. Harlem Renaissance writers took up themes previously absent from serious works of literature. Poet Langston Hughes discussed black Americans’ aspirations; Jean Toomer’s novel Cane explored the rhythms of working-class life in the countryside and city; Zora Neale Huston exposed the power of female sexuality in her novel Their Eyes Were Watching God; poet Countee Cullen confronted the psychological impact of racism; and Claude McKay celebrated manly violence in his poems and novels. The poems displayed here show how McKay, Cullen, and Hughes protested racial discrimination. The Harlem Renaissance also included the jazz music innovations of trumpeter Louis Armstrong, pianist and arranger Fletcher Henderson, and pianist and composer Ferdinand “Jelly Roll” Morton. Jazz was an original American musical style that melded African American and European musical traditions. White and black patrons flocked to Harlem to listen to black bands at venues like the Cotton Club and the Savoy, while white musicians nationwide formed jazz bands of their own. Thanks to new commercial radio stations and the growing record industry, jazz became so popular that Americans began calling the twenties “The Jazz Age.” Jazz music, the white conductor Leopold Stokowski rejoiced, was “an expression of the times, of the breathless, energetic, superactive times in which we are living.” James Weldon Johnson’s poem “The Prodigal Son” highlighted the dangers awaiting recent southern migrants, unschooled in big-city ways,

 Hear the Audio “If We Must Die,” poem and reading by Claude McKay

RACIAL VIOLENCE AND CIVIL RIGHTS

 who flocked to Harlem’s jazz clubs. In the twodimensional drawing by African American artist Aaron Douglas that accompanied the poem (21.11), female dancers surround a young man and gyrate to the music provided by a hovering jazz trombone. The fragments of a dollar, playing card, and gin label evoke the temptations confronting this young man. Johnson’s poem echoed the rhythms of sermons that folk preachers delivered to their rural southern congregations about the evils of city life: “With the sweet-sinning women of Babylon / And they stripped him of his money / And they stripped him of his clothes / And they left him broke and ragged / In the streets of Babylon.” As Johnson’s poem suggested, African Americans expressed conflicting views about jazz. Many artists celebrated the music’s originality and exuberance. Like Southern preachers, however, the urban black middle class viewed jazz as “the devil’s music,” believing that its syncopated rhythms aroused sexual impulses and encouraged lewd behavior. Jazz clubs often served illegal alcohol purchased from organized crime rings, linking jazz music to the immoral lifestyle that many black middle-class prohibition



 I, too, sing America.

Langston Hughes


“I, Too, Sing
America”
(1925)


 I am the darker brother. They send me to eat in the kitchen When company comes, But I laugh, And eat well, And grow strong. Tomorrow, I’ll be at the table When company comes. Nobody’ll dare Say to me, “Eat in the kitchen,” Then. Besides, They’ll see how beautiful I am And be ashamed— I, too, am America.

 advocates wanted to eradicate. The middle class preferred religious spirituals, a distinctive African American musical tradition that they felt projected a more respectable image of black culture to mainstream America. The literature of the Harlem Renaissance also drew fire. Du Bois criticized Claude McKay for depicting black working-class culture as a collection of pimps, criminals, drunks, and whores in his 1928 novel Home to Harlem. Du Bois lambasted McKay for reinforcing the negative stereotypes that white America held of African American culture, thereby undermining the possibility of using art to challenge the racial status quo. Defending New Negro aesthetics and the principle of artistic freedom, Langston Hughes countered, “We younger Negro artists who create now intend to express our dark-skinned selves without fear or shame. If white people are pleased we are glad. If they are not, it doesn’t matter. We know we are beautiful.”

21.11 Prodigal Son, 1927
 Aaron Douglas’s innovative angular style evoked the fast pace of modern life in an illustration that both portrayed and epitomized the artistic innovations of the Harlem Renaissance.

 Hear the Audio “I Too,” poem and reading by Langston Hughes

 What competing views arose over the purpose of art during the Harlem Renaissance?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

The New Woman
 Women began the decade with a significant political victory when the Nineteenth Amendment gave them to right to vote in 1920. Female reformers expected newly enfranchised women to care deeply about issues affecting their gender, but the much-anticipated “women’s vote” never materialized. Throughout the twenties Americans offered competing visions of women’s proper place in American society. Former suffragists envisioned modern women playing an active role in politics. Popular culture, however, consistently defined the “new woman” as someone who kept herself thin, pretty, and lively for her husband.

Women in the Twenties
 When women got the right to vote nationwide, an aging generation of feminists tried immediately to organize the female vote behind causes that particularly affected women. Black women had supported suffrage as a step toward politically empowering the African American community. Southern authorities, however, used poll taxes, literacy tests, and intimidation to stop black women from registering to vote. The League of Women Voters, created by the National American Women Suffrage Association in 1920, drew up a list of issues that it expected to resonate among female voters including child labor, protective legislation for female workers, and cleaning up city politics. This list did not include demanding that the Nineteenth Amendment be enforced for black and white women alike. Responding to studies that revealed high rates of infant and mother mortality in childbirth, the League of Women Voters lobbied Congress for the nation’s first major social welfare measure to help impoverished women and children. The SheppardTowner Act (1921) offered eight years of matching funds to states for classes that taught poor mothers about nutrition, hygiene, and prenatal care. It also provided visiting nurses for low-income pregnant women and new mothers. By 1929, however, it became clear that women did not vote as a bloc. Therefore despite the law’s success, Congress did not renew the program. Rather than rallying to gender-specific causes, the best predictor of how a woman would vote was how her husband voted. Feminists also failed to amend the constitution by adding an Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), which stated that “equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex.” The radical

 What strategies did women develop to improve their lives in the twenties?

 National Women’s Party, chaired by Alice Paul, argued that such an amendment would eradicate in one fell swoop all the legal barriers that a dizzying array of archaic state legislation created for women. These laws, Elsie Hill noted, denied a woman “control of her children equal to the father’s; they deny her, if married, the right to control her earnings; they punish her for offenses for which men go unpunished,” such as adultery. Moderate Progressive reformers, who dominated the League of Women Voters, like future first lady Eleanor Roosevelt, worried that the ERA might endanger the protective legislation for women that they had so carefully crafted in recent years, such as the maximum hour laws designed to shield mothers from overwork (see Chapter 18). They opposed the amendment, arguing that it was better to remove troubling laws individually, like those that prevented women from serving on juries or inheriting property. In the twenties, younger women displayed little interest in the social movements championed by their elders. Instead many women in their twenties and thirties focused on their economic prospects. Women made up 23.6 percent of the work-force by 1920, although they remained restricted to professions considered appropriate for their gender. During the decade women were primarily employed as secretaries and telephone operators. Rapid expansion of corporate bureaucracies created a new need for office workers, a demand that the growing numbers of white female high school graduates filled. Women earned less than men, but companies were certain that married women made most of the purchasing decisions in American households. Product advertising in the 1920s, therefore, targeted female consumers. Images as History: Advertising the New Woman explores how advertisements in the popular media also helped define the feminine ideal in the twenties.

 View the Image Feminine Tippler’s Ankle Flask (1922)

THE NEW WOMAN



Images as History
ADVERTISING THE NEW WOMAN
Popular advertising characterized the “new woman” as an efficient homemaker, devoted mother, high fashion sophisticate, and engaging spouse with the time and energy for a dizzying circle of friends and club activities. Manufacturing discontent about a woman’s lifestyle and insecurity about her looks was another advertising strategy designed to get women to purchase products. Advertisements that featured attractive women to entice potential customers, as in the Fisher car ad pictured here, reflected changing ideas about 
 The slim Fisher girl appeared liberated from the confines of the home and the physical incapacity caused by too much weight. She seemed to be a modern woman on the move.

 the ideal female body type. In the nineteenth century upper-class women proudly displayed their corpulence as evidence of their wealth and health. In the twenties, the popular media depicted the vigorous, alert modern woman as thin and tall. But according to a 1928 study, only 17 percent of American women were both slender and over 5 feet 3 inches tall. How does this Fisher car ad both celebrate the new freedoms that women enjoyed in the twenties and perpetuate traditional stereotypes about women? These tall, elongated figurines depicted an ideal female body that was slim and youthful with legs that formed a straight line from toe to thigh, pointed toes, and a giraffe-like neck. These proportions suggested the women were nearly 9 feet tall!

•


•


•


•


•


 This female silhouette more closely resembled the body of an adolescent girl than a mature woman, encouraging a female preoccupation with dieting and self-denial that continues today.

 Most ads of the time displayed men with both feet firmly on the ground. This woman’s offbalance pose with one knee bent suggested tentativeness and instability, putting limits on her independence and strength.

 The presence of the maid behind the Fisher girl indicates that she is rich as well as thin—an enviable combination to many women.

•


•


 Her sleek body, like that of the car being advertised, served mostly as a commodity or decorative object suitable for a modern man.

“Body by Fisher”


View the Closer Look Images as History: Advertising
 the New Woman

 How did the popular media define “the new woman”?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

Margaret Sanger and the
Fight for Birth Control
 Advertisers promised that modern electrical appliances would give women more time to spend with their children, and women’s popular magazines offered a plethora of articles on how to use this

 “No woman can call herself free who does not own and control her own body.” Birth control advocate MARGARET SANGER 21.12 Margaret Sanger Protests When officials in Boston refused to let Sanger speak publicly about birth control, she appeared before a crowd with her mouth bandaged to protest their censorship. Her ploy garnered headlines across the nation, giving the birth control cause a boost.

 additional time to raise children properly. Birth control advocate and trained nurse Margaret Sanger viewed the mother’s plight differently. Too many children, Sanger argued, ruined women’s health and relegated them to the ranks of the poor. In her view providing women with information on safe and reliable contraception was more important than dispensing advice on how to raise children. In 1916, Sanger opened the nation’s first birth control clinic in Brooklyn, New York, where she passed out flyers to advertise the benefits of contraception over illegal and dangerous back-alley abortions. For nine days Sanger dispensed information on diaphragms, condoms, douches, and withdrawal to women who waited in long lines to enter the clinic. The police then shut the clinic down and arrested Sanger for distributing information about birth control. Since 1873, the Comstock Act had prohibited sending information about contraception, abortion, or pornography through the mails, and by 1878, every state except New Mexico banned all means of circulating material about contraception. Sanger served 30 days in jail, one of many unsuccessful attempts to silence her. In 1929, after she spoke on birth control before the Harvard Liberal Club in Boston, the mayor threatened to revoke the license of any hall that allowed her

 What arguments did Sanger make to support her campaign for legal contraception?

 to speak again. In response Sanger appeared with her mouth bandaged before an audience in Boston’s Ford Hall Forum (21.12). Her silent protest won headlines across the nation, helping Sanger publicize her cause even more widely. By openly discussing birth control, Sanger made public the private contraception practices of middle-class couples. Poor mothers, she said, pleaded for her to share “the secret the rich have.” Studies suggested that at least twice in their lifetimes, women living in poverty pulled their shawls over their heads to visit the five-dollar abortionist down the street. Sanger often told the story of Sadie Sachs (whose authenticity was never verified), a woman whom Sanger, as a young nurse, met when she accompanied a physician into the tenements to care for Sadie after she fell ill from a botched self-induced abortion. When Sadie begged the middle-class doctor to give her the information she needed to avoid another pregnancy, he replied, “Tell Jake to sleep on the roof.” The next time Sanger saw Sadie, she lay in a coma dying from another abortion. Sanger used the story to personalize the extent of the abortion problem (nearly one million abortions that resulted in 50,000 female deaths each year) and to dispel the misguided belief that no “decent” woman needed information about contraception. Rather than counseling women to avoid sex, Sanger asserted that women had as much right as men to enjoy sexual intercourse without fearing for their lives. Contraception would not make women more promiscuous, she predicted. Once freed from the constant strain of childbearing, women would become more interesting spouses by developing their intellectual, political, and cultural interests much as popular advertising encouraged them to do. Through her arrests, clinics, and public lectures, Sanger gradually helped change attitudes toward birth control. Although laws censoring information about birth control remained part of the legal code until the 1970s, enforcement became rarer and rarer. By the late 1920s, 30 birth control clinics operated nationwide. Eugenicists, who wanted to improve the human race by controlling its hereditary qualities, also developed an interest in birth control. For eugenicists, contraception could prevent those they viewed as “unfit” from reproducing. Under their influence many states authorized compulsory sterilization of the institutionalized mentally handicapped, criminals, and epileptics until the 1960s.

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Marriage and Birth Control


ENSURING PEACE: DIPLOMACY IN THE TWENTIES



Ensuring Peace:
Diplomacy in the Twenties
 Leaders in the birth control movement developed close ties with women’s right groups in other countries, just one example of the global presence that Americans maintained throughout the twenties. Although the nation focused mostly on domestic concerns, international issues sometimes dominated the headlines. In 1920, the Senate refused to ratify the Versailles Treaty, which officially ended the war with Germany, or to join the League of Nations, which President Woodrow Wilson had championed to protect world peace. Rejection of Wilson’s vision of collective security through the league did not signal a withdrawal from world affairs. Presidents Warren Harding and Calvin Coolidge tried instead to use disarmament and dollars to prevent armed conflict.

Disarmament
 The high point of the disarmament movement came when Republican President Warren Harding convened the Washington Conference (1921–1922) in Washington, D.C., to negotiate agreements that would limit warships. The conference also reaffirmed America’s Open Door Policy (see Chapter 19) that kept Chinese trade open to all and secured pledges of cooperation among the world’s leading military powers, including Britain, Japan, Italy and France. The White House and press referred to the meetings in Washington as a “peace conference”” to cultivate the image that the negotiations would d correct Wilson’s blundering in Paris during the Versailles Treaty proceedings. The opening ceremonies underscored the symbolic comparisons that the Harding administration wanted to draw between the two international conferences by inviting delegates to the solemn burial of an unidentified American soldier who had fallen on the he battlefields of France. The Tomb of the Unknown Soldier (21.13) memorialized all deceased soldiers who went missss-ing or unidentified during the war. On the morning ing of November 11, 1921 (the third anniversary of the th he Armistice that ended the war), thousands of Americans lined the streets as a horse-drawn carriage carried a flag-draped coffin from the U.S. S. Capitol to Arlington National Cemetery. Harding, ng,, the entire Congress and Supreme Court, along with witth

 foreign dignitaries, followed the procession. After the Unknown Soldier was laid to rest, millions of Americans across the nation observed two minutes of silence to honor the fallen warrior and pray for a peaceful future. The nation subsequently buried unknown soldiers in the same tomb after World War II, and the Korean and Vietnam Wars. In 1999, DNA genetic testing determined the identity of the Vietnam serviceman, and it is unlikely that the nation will ever have another “unknown” soldier.

21.13 The Tomb
 of the Unknown Soldier The allegorical figures of Peace, Valor, and Victory on the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier encapsulated the Harding and Coolidge administration’s diplomatic goals in the early 1920s.

 How did Harding’s foreign policy vision differ from Wilson’s?



 CHAPTER 21

21.14 Looking
 into the Black Hole of Ruin This 1927 political cartoon forecast disaster if the world powers failed to reach a second naval disarmament agreement. In the cartoon the world is in disarray after a naval gun had showered it with gun powder.

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

Through the
Washington Conference, Harding
 reshaped the political vision of his Democratic predecessor, Woodrow Wilson. Harding rejected Wilson’s idea of using an open-ended commitment to the League of Nations to ensure world peace. He agreed with other Republicans who felt membership in this world body would restrict America’s ability to set its own foreign policy. Harding instead sought to prevent another war by convincing all major powers to disarm and agree to mediation when disputes arose. Harding knew that Congress’s pennypinching mood meant certain rejection of any administration proposal to maintain a large military or embark on a major shipbuilding campaign. What better way to balance this domestic reality with the need to protect American shores from heavily armed naval competitors than by negotiating multinational disarmament treaties? To contain Japan in the Pacific and Britain, which still controlled the world’s largest navy, Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes proposed scrapping 30 American, 23 British, and 17 Japanese battleships. One thrilled observer noted that Hughes had single-handedly sunk more British battleships “than all the admirals of the world had destroyed in a cycle of centuries.” Japan’s 1905 victory in the Russo-Japanese War had signaled its emergence as the premier military power in East Asia. The Japanese, who unlike the British and Americans had only one ocean to patrol, accepted a naval tonnage ratio of 5:5:3 among the United States, Britain, and Japan. This meant that for every five tons of naval shipping that America and Britain maintained, Japan retained three. Besides arms limitation, negotiations focused on settling potentially explosive issues in the Pacific.

 What benefits and drawbacks did the Washington Conference agreements offer the United States?

 There American objectives included curtailing Japanese expansion in East Asia and preserving the Open Door in China. The American delegation met these goals, but at some cost. Japan accepted a smaller navy in return for a pledge that the others would refrain from improving their naval bases or fortifications in the western Pacific. Experts warned that this concession would leave American Pacific possessions vulnerable to a Japanese attack. Hughes, who doubted that Congress would approve funds to improve naval defenses, accepted the deal. The resulting Five Power Treaty (which included smaller tonnage limits for France and Italy) set a ten-year moratorium on battleship construction and limited the guns that ships could carry. The treaty, however, did not set limits for submarines, light cruisers, aircraft, or land forces. In an accompanying Four Power Treaty, France, the United States, Britain, and Japan agreed to respect one another’s Pacific possessions and consult if any dispute arose. The Nine Power Treaty was the conference’s final achievement. In this agreement the above five nations and Portugal, the Netherlands, Belgium, and China all agreed to respect the Open Door in China, a policy advocated by the United States since the turn of the century (see Chapter 19). The resulting agreements essentially protected the United States, Britain, and Japan from an aggressive naval attack. They left Britain in control of the European seas, gave the United States charge of the Americas, and recognized Japanese predominance in East Asia. For the time being, avoiding an arms race and maintaining the status quo served the interests of the world’s major powers. Calvin Coolidge, Harding’s successor in the White House, continued the Republican effort to find alternative ways to maintain world peace. Leading powers met again in Geneva in 1927 to broker another disarmament pact. This 1927 political cartoon (21.14) offered support for the proceedings by showing a disheveled world covered with gunpowder from a naval gun. This time, however, the leading powers failed to reach an agreement. Secretary of State Frank Kellogg had more success negotiating the Kellogg-Briand Pact (1928), whose signatories renounced aggressive war as an instrument of national policy and agreed to resolve their disagreements through peaceful means. Choices and Consequences: Preventing War

ENSURING PEACE: DIPLOMACY IN THE TWENTIES



F IN LAN D
$8


AT L A N T I C OCEAN
a 
 ESTONIA $14

Se


Nor t h
Sea


 ic

 lt B R I TAI N $ 4 ,2 7 7

B


 a

RU SSIA
$187 
 LATVIA $5

 LITHUANIA $5

POLAN D
$160 
 BELGIUM $349

 CZECHOSLOVAKIA $62 AUSTRIA $24 HUNGARY $1 ROM AN IA $25

FR ANCE $ 2
,9 9 7 
 p

 i

 n

Se


Black Sea


 a

YU GOSLAVIA
$25 
 as

 a

 ITALY $1,640

C


 ARMENIA $12

Med


 ite

 n

 a

 Principal loans by US, 1914-1918 US loans for relief and reconstruction, 1919–1925

GREEC E
$15 
 rr

 ea

 Note: dollar amounts in millions

 n S ea

21.15 American Loans to Europe, 1914–1925
 The United States demanded that Europe repay loans given to help nations defeat Germany and rebuild after World War I.

 in Europe (page 650) examines why Coolidge chose to support a multinational treaty that outlawed war.

Wartime Debts
 World War I revealed the importance of European trade to American prosperity, but in the twenties the politically sensitive question of securing repayment from Allied nations for American wartime loans threatened to undermine Europe’s economic recovery. From 1914 to 1925, the United

 States had loaned the Allies nearly $10 billion to finance war-time purchases of American goods and rebuild war-torn Europe (21.15). In the 1920s, the Allied governments urged the United States to cancel the loans. How, they asked, could America insist on repayment when the Allies had sacrificed a whole generation of men to the joint cause of defeating Germany? Americans had supplied money while the Allies gave their blood, they argued. The United States, the Allies claimed, could easily afford to cancel the loans as the country had profited enormously from the war.

 Which nations received the greatest financial aid from the United States during and after World War I?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

Choices and Consequences
PREVENTING WAR IN EUROPE
In 1928, France invited the United States to sign a treaty renouncing war between the two nations, hoping to coax the American government into playing a more active peacekeeping role in Europe. President Coolidge faced four choices on how to respond. Americans had conflicting visions of the best way to avoid another war, and vocal supporters backed each option. 
Choices




 Adopt a noninterventionist policy that kept the United States out of European affairs.



 Sign a nonaggression pact with France as the first step toward creating a formal defensive alliance that would recreate the pre-World War I balance of power system in Europe.



 Reject bilateral agreements and join the League of Nations.



Negotiate a
 multinational nonaggression pact.

Decision
 Coolidge refused to join the League of Nations but knew that outlawing war had strong appeal at home. Consequently he agreed to let Secretary of State Frank Kellogg meet with French Foreign Minister Aristide Briand to fashion a multinational nonaggression pact. By opening the treaty up to other nations, Coolidge avoided the impression that the United States was allying itself with France. The resulting KelloggBriand Pact was eventually signed by 62 nations, including Germany and Japan.

Consequences
 The Kellogg-Briand Pact proved popular with Americans because its vagueness allowed it to be all things to all people. Non-interventionists saw the pact as insulating the country from ever fighting another war overseas. They liked the U.S. resolution to stay peaceful yet make no binding commitments to defend other nations. Internationalists, who wanted the United States to play a more active role in maintaining world peace, saw the treaty as the first step toward creating an American presence in international arbitration bodies like the World Court and the League of Nations.

“A Christmas Carol: Peace on Earth,
Good Will Towards Man”


Continuing Controversies
 What value did the Kellogg-Briand Pact have? Critics dismissed the treaty as a “letter to Santa Claus,” and “not worth a postage stamp,” pointing out that the major powers signed the agreement but continued to arm for war. The Kellogg-Briand agreement allowed for wars of “self-defense,” a slippery term that nations could easily manipulate. As if to prove the point, when the Senate

 Did the Kellogg-Briand Pact represent a new path in American foreign policy?

 ratified the treaty with only one dissenting vote, it added a reservation stating that preserving the Monroe Doctrine constituted self-defense. Others acknowledge that the treaty did not prevent World War II but point out that it allowed the victors to convict Nazi officials of violating the Kellogg-Briand Pact in postwar war crimes trials.

ENSURING PEACE: DIPLOMACY IN THE TWENTIES

 Americans vehemently opposed canceling reparations. In 1924, Secretary of State Hughes the debt. “They hired the money, didn’t they,” sent Chicago banker General Charles G. Dawes retorted President Coolidge in the mid-twenties, and General Electric Company head Owen D. expressing a common American view that Europe Young to Europe. The resulting Dawes Plan (1924) had a moral obligation to repay its debts. loaned Germany $200 million in gold to Coolidge did, however, agree to lower pay a reduced reparation bill and gave the interest rate on the loans, it more time to meet its debt. GREAT BRITAIN which reduced the total Certain that a German reAllied War Debt amount due by 43 percovery was imminent, Payments cent. Further compliAmerican bankers WALL STREET cating the debate, eagerly provided Reparations BANKERS the high American half the funds for Debt Payments tariff enacted in the Dawes Plan 1922 made it difficult and made private U.S. TREASURY GERMANY for Allied nations to U.S. INVESTORS loans and investsell manufactured goods ments that helped Allied War Debt FRANCE Payments in the United States, deprivGermany even more. Dawes ing them of revenue that they became Coolidge’s vice president Reparations needed to repay their war loans. in 1925 and won the Nobel Peace Prize. Using a high tariff to protect American In 1929, the Young Plan further reduced Gerindustries from foreign competition had tremen- many’s final bill to $8 billion and restructured the dous domestic appeal, and the United States repayment schedule. fused to lower it. American money kept the whole system afloat. The Allies consequently relied on reparation Between 1923 and 1930, American banks loaned payments from Germany (authorized in the Ver$2.6 billion to Germany; Germany made $2 billion sailles Treaty) to repay their U.S. war loans. This in reparation payments; and the Allies repaid $2.6 punitive aspect of the Versailles Treaty troubled billion of their American war loans (one-fifth of the many Americans, who viewed the $33 billion repaamount owed). The “Global Flow of Reparation ration bill imposed on Germany as excessive. The Payments” (21.16) details the journey that AmeriUnited States denied any connection between war can money took through Germany, France, and loans and reparation payments, seeing the first as Britain until it landed back in American coffers. an honest debt and the latter as blood money. The When the stock market crashed in 1929, American Allies, however, refused to reduce the reparation bill bankers drastically reduced their overseas loans, as long as the United States insisted on collecting and the whole arrangement collapsed. First GerAllied war loans. many, then the Allied governments defaulted on In 1923, skyrocketing inflation caused Gertheir payments. In 1931, President Herbert Hoover many to miss a reparation payment, and in resuccessfully called for a one-year moratorium on all taliation France and Belgium occupied the Ruhr international debts. With the connection between Valley, a German industrial center. This crisis reparation payments and war loans now formally threatened to undermine American economic inacknowledged by the United States, the Allied govterests by thrusting Europe into recession. Having ernments canceled most of Germany’s remaining ruled out lowering the tariff or canceling Allied reparation payments. By 1934, all governments war loans to foster Europe’s economic recovery, except Finland had defaulted on their wartime the United States resolved to help Germany make American loans. Finland was the only nation that its reparation payments. Twice in the decade finally repaid its entire debt of $8 million to the international committees of experts discussed United States by 1969.



21.16 The Global
Flow of Reparation
Payments
 American capital kept the reparation system created by the Versailles Treaty afloat in the twenties.

 “I do not approve in any remote sense of the cancellation of the debts to us.” President HERBERT HOOVER, 1931

 How did lingering financial issues from World War I shape relations between the United States and Europe?



 CHAPTER 21

A TURBULENT DECADE: THE TWENTIES

 Margaret Sanger opens first birth control clinic

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Sanger champions birth control to improve female health and eliminate poverty





1921–1922


First Red Scare


F.
Scott Fitzgerald publishes This Side of Paradise 
 Washington Conference held

 Anti-communist campaign destroys radical political organizations

 Eighteenth Amendment ratified

 Popularizes flapper revolt against traditional codes of conduct

 Initiates era of national Prohibition

 Disarmament becomes a major goal of American foreign policy

UNIA
Black Star Line founded Short-lived black-run steamship operation line embodies Marcus Garvey’s ideal of economic self-help 
Review Questions
 1. What features and controversies characterized America’s transformation into a car culture in the 1920s? How did lifestyles and labor relations also change during the decade? 2. Compare the various manifestations of cultural conflict in the twenties. What similar impulses motivated Americans to enact prohibition, immigration restrictions, and laws prohibiting the teaching of Darwin’s theory of evolution? How did these various reforms affect American society?

 3. Why were the Harlem Renaissance and Marcus Garvey controversial? 4. Were the 1920s a time of political, economic, and social liberation for women? What traditional concerns or ideas remained intact? 5. How did the United States fashion a new role for itself in world affairs in the twenties?

Key Terms
 Eighteenth Amendment (1919) Constitutional amendment that banned the sale, manufacture, and transportation of intoxicating liquors. Twenty-First Amendment (1933) Constitutional amendment that repealed the Eighteenth Amendment. Immigration Act of 1924 Law that allowed unrestricted immigration from the Western Hemisphere, curtailed all Asian immigration, and used quotas to control how many immigrants emigrated from individual European nations. First Red Scare (1919–1920) Period when the Justice Department arrested and deported alien anarchists and Communists suspected of trying to destroy American democracy and capitalism. Fundamentalism An evangelical Christian theology that viewed the Bible as an authentic, literal recounting of historical events and the absolute moral word of God.

 Modernism A liberal Christian theology embraced in many urban areas that emphasized the ongoing revelation of divine truth. Harlem Renaissance An outpouring of African American artistic expression in the 1920s and 1930s. Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) Organization founded by Marcus Garvey to spread his message of racial pride, economic self-sufficiency, and returning to Africa. Washington Conference (1921–1922) Meeting of world powers that resulted in agreements that limited naval arms, reaffirmed America’s Open Door policy that kept Chinese trade open to all, and secured pledges of cooperation among the world’s leading military powers. Kellogg-Briand Pact (1928) Treaty that renounced aggressive war as an instrument of national policy.

CHAPTER REVIEW



GREAT BRITAIN
Allied War Debt Payments 
ALL STREET BANKERS

Reparations


Debt Payments
 INVESTORS

U.S. TREASU

 GERMANY

 FRANCE

Allied War Debt
Payments










Immigration Act of 1924


Scopes Trial


Kellogg-Briand Pact


 Severely reduces immigration and establishes nationality-based quota-system

 Highlights cultural conflict between religion and science

 Charles A. Lindbergh flies nonstop from New York to Paris

Dawes Plan


 Ku Klux Klan marches in Washington, D.C.

 Reassures Americans that man and machine can coexist harmoniously

 United States uses financial aid to stabilize postwar European economies

 White-instigated racial violence surges as the Klan becomes a national organization

 First feature film with sound

 America uses world influence to secure global pledges of peace

 Hastens the creation of mass, celebrity culture

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan to build your knowledge of A Turbulent Decade.

Questions for Analysis
 1. What economic and cultural impact did the auto industry have? Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Rise and Fall

 Other Resources from This Chapter Hear the Audio • Prohibition is a Failure, p. 633 • “If We Must Die,” poem and reading by Claude McKay, p. 642 • “I Too,” poem and reading by Langston Hughes, p. 643

 of the Automotive Industry, p. 626

Read the Document A. Mitchell Palmer on the Menace of


 2. What did it mean to be part of the “lost generation”? Watch the Video Video Lecture: Post-War Disillusionment

Communism, p. 634


View the Closer Look


 in the 1920s, p. 632

 3. How did the Klan define “Americanism”? Read the Document The “Creed of Klanswomen”

• Envisioning Evidence: Scientific Management in Action, p. 629
• Immigration to the United States 1870–1915, p. 635
• Immigration Quotas, p. 636
• Competing Visions: Debating Garveyism, p. 641
• Images as History: Advertising the New Woman, p. 645


(1924), p. 639


View the Image Charles Lindbergh and Spirit of St. Louis, p. 631


 4. What attributes of the “New Woman” are portrayed in this image? View the Image Feminine Tippler’s Ankle Flask (1922), p. 644

 5. What disagreements arose over the compatibility of birth control and marriage? View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Marriage and Birth Control, p. 646

 Watch the Video Video Lecture: 1920s Media, p. 630

 What caused the Great Depression?

A
New President and  a New Deal p. 662

 CHAPTER

The Early Days of the
Depression p. 656




