 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 8

Democrats
 and Whigs Democracy and American Culture, 1820–1840 George Caleb Bingham’s painting, Stump Speaking or the County Canvass (1853), captures the drama of a new democratic style of politics that transformed American life starting in the 1820s. The term stump speech referred to politicians’ practice in some remote parts of the nation of addressing the electorate by using the nearest tree stump as a rough-hewn platform from which to speak. Bingham, a Whig opponent of the Democratic Party, used the painting to express his reservations about what he considered the dangers posed by too much democracy. Bingham wrote that the politician on the platform in the painting was a “wiry” fellow who had “grown grey in the pursuit of office and the service of his party” and literally bends to the popular will. Across from the speaker, seated amid the crowd, a man in a top hat and light-colored suit listens thoughtfully, refusing to be swayed by the politician’s words. Bingham described this figure as an “outstanding citizen” whose noble features not only set him apart from the crowd but also contrast noticeably with the shifty look of the Democratic politician standing at the rostrum. The painting suggests that the “outstanding citizen,” a true Whig leader, refuses to pander to the mob. As this scene reveals, democracy did not yet embrace all Americans; it excluded women, African Americans, and Indians. The crowd Bingham depicts is overwhelmingly male and, apart from a lone African American in the background, all white. Although the white men participate in the political life of the nation, the lone black figure labors on a wagon selling refreshments to the crowd. No figure better personified this new age than Andrew Jackson, the country’s leading Democrat. Jackson’s 1828 election changed American politics, forcing his opponents to make more effective use of the tools of democratic politics and the symbols of democracy in their campaigns. Eventually adopting the name, Whig, by 1840 they outdid the Democrats, portraying their candidate William Henry Harrison, as a simple man born in a log cabin who drank hard cider like an ordinary farmer. Although the Whigs may have learned valuable political lessons from the Democrats about how to campaign, their party steadfastly opposed Jacksonian policies on every major issue of the day. From economic issues to American Indian rights, the two parties offered the American people competing visions and clear choices. Political participation in this period rose as Americans responded to the messages of the two parties and voted in unprecedented numbers.

 “American society is essentially and radically a democracy…. In the United States the democratic spirit is infused into all national habits, and all the customs of society.” French traveler MICHAEL CHEVALIER, Society, Manners, and Politics in the United States (1839)





 CHAPTER 8

DEMOCRATS AND WHIGS: DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN CULTURE, 1820–1840

Democracy in America
 Between Thomas Jefferson’s election in 1800 and Andrew Jackson’s victory in his presidential bid in 1828, American culture and politics were transformed. Travelers to America during this period consistently remarked about the democratic character of its society. Democracy appeared to suffuse every aspect of culture and politics. Whereas in 1800 most states had some type of property requirement for voting, within three decades most of these restrictions had been swept aside. Many of the new Western states that entered the Union in the intervening years adopted constitutions with no property requirements. As population shifted westward, the nation’s center of political gravity also shifted. Many of the politicians who dominated the national scene came from Western states such as Tennessee and Kentucky, not the older, settled regions such as Virginia and Massachusetts.

Democratic Culture
 In 1835, a young French nobleman, Count Alexis de Tocqueville, published an account of his recent trip to America. “No novelty in the United States struck me more vividly during my stay there,” he wrote, “than the equality of conditions. It was easy to see the immense influence of this basic fact on the whole course of society.” Democracy in America (1835), Tocqueville’s analysis of the influence of democracy on American life, remains one of the most important books ever written about American society. The young French aristocrat was hardly the only foreign visitor drawn to America. In the 1820s and 1830s, America attracted the interest of many other foreigners who were impressed by the democratic character of American life. “The term democrat, which elsewhere would fill even republicans with terror,” Michael Chevalier, another French visitor, noted, “is here greeted with acclamations.” Frances Trollope, an English observer, was shocked to see Americans talking to complete strangers “on terms of perfect equality.” Democracy nurtured a more egalitarian culture that astonished Europeans. In colonial America a bow or doffed hat and lowered head were all signs of deference to one’s social betters. Many of these customs persisted in Europe. Americans, however, had abandoned most of them by the 1830s, preferring to shake hands, a far more egalitarian form of greeting. One English commentator complained that in America he had to “go on shaking hands here, there, and everywhere, and with everybody.” Another Englishman confessed his astonishment that travel in America meant mixing with men and women of different classes: “There is but one conveyance, it may be said, for every class of people—the coach, railroad, or steamboat, as well

 How did the frontier nurture the growth of democracy?

 as most of the hotels, being open to all; the consequence is that the society is very much mixed.” A significant political consequence of the growth of democracy was the expansion of suffrage to include virtually all white men. As the maps (8.1) show, most of the new Western states that entered the Union after the War of 1812 adopted democratic constitutions that rejected property qualifications for suffrage. Their constitutions generally embraced this ideal from the beginning. When older states such as New York revised their constitutions in the 1820s, the question of suffrage became one of the most contentious. See Competing Visions: Should White Men Without Property Have the Vote? on page 224.

Davy Crockett and
 the Frontier Myth Tocqueville commented that “in the Western settlements we may behold democracy arrived at its utmost limits.” He may well have been thinking of figures like the legendary frontiersman and politician Davy Crockett (1786–1836) when he made that statement. No figure in American public life did more to associate the West with democracy than Davy Crockett. Born in Tennessee, Crockett served under Andrew Jackson during the Creek Wars (1813–1814), where he distinguished himself as a soldier. His home state voters elected him to the Tennessee state legislature and to Congress, where he supported his former commander, Andrew Jackson, another symbol of frontier democracy. Crockett’s achievements in the state legislature and Congress paled in significance to the stories about his exploits as a frontiersman and Indian fighter, myths that Crockett helped shape and market to

Read the Document Profile: Davy Crockett


DEMOCRACY IN AMERICA

 MAINE (Mass.)

 MAINE

VERMONT NEW HAMPSHIRE NEW MASSACHUSETTS YORK

VERMONT NEW HAMPSHIRE NEW MASSACHUSETTS YORK

RHODE ISLAND PENNSYLVANIA OHIO TERRITORY

RHODE ISLAND PENNSYLVANIA

NEW CONNECTICUT JERSEY OHIO

 DELAWARE

INDIANA TERRITORY

ILLINOIS VIRGINIA

 MARYLAND

KENTUCKY NORTH CAROLINA TENNESSEE

 TENNESSEE

SOUTH CAROLINA

SOUTH CAROLINA

 GEORGIA

 DELAWARE

VIRGINIA MISSOURI

NORTH CAROLINA

MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY

NEW CONNECTICUT JERSEY

 INDIANA

 MARYLAND

 KENTUCKY



AT L AN TIC

 MISSISSIPPI

 GEORGIA

ATL ANTI C

 ALABAMA

O CEAN

OC EA N LOUISIANA FLORIDA

Gulf of Mexico


Gulf of Mexico






 Property qualifications

 Property qualifications

 Taxpayer qualifications

 Taxpayer qualifications

 Universal white male suffrage

 Universal white male suffrage

 8.1 Changes in Suffrage Requirements between 1800 and 1828 Many of the Western states that entered the Union after 1800 did not impose property requirements for voting. By 1828, most states had eliminated such requirements.

 a growing audience of readers eager to learn of his daring exploits. As one contemporary English magazine noted: “Democracy and the far west made Crockett: he is a product of forests, freedom, universal suffrage, and bear hunts.” In his own colorful account, Crockett becomes a politician almost by accident. When coming to town to sell his pelts and furs, he exchanges a few words with local politicians, who immediately recognize him as a natural leader and draft him for the state legislature. Crockett’s career in Congress was brief, but his fame grew as literary treatments recounted stories about his exploits. Crockett’s Almanac, for example, a cheap magazine-like publication, vividly described the frontiersman-politician, whose honesty as a stump speaker and legendary adventures wrestling alligators, hunting bears, and fighting Indians captivated audiences. For Crockett delivering a stump speech meant literally standing on the nearest tree stump, as shown in this illustration from the A Narrative of the Life of David Crockett (8.2). Although Crockett was a big hit on the stump and celebrated in popular literature, the most important

 political figure to make use of the association of the West with democracy was Andrew Jackson. The Tennessee-born Jackson earned a reputation as a fierce Indian fighter during the Creek Wars and distinguished himself as the victor of the Battle of New Orleans. He also served as both a United States representative and senator from Tennessee. A supporter of Jackson described his political style as typical of the Western United States, where democratic values and egalitarian ideals flourished: “In Europe” custom “decreed that kings shall rule and the people submit. In this wilderness, as if by magic, a new and different order of things has appeared.” Jackson’s effort to link his Western origins with his democratic values became a key component of his political message for the rest of his career in public life.

8.2 Crockett
 as Politician Crockett the frontiersmanpolitician addresses a crowd outside a rural tavern. Crockett reflected and helped shape the myth of frontier democracy in the new Republic.

 What aspects of Davy Crockett’s life made him a symbol of frontier democracy?



 CHAPTER 8

DEMOCRATS AND WHIGS: DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN CULTURE, 1820–1840

Competing Visions
SHOULD WHITE MEN WITHOUT PROPERTY HAVE THE VOTE?
In 1821, New Yorkers gathered to revise their state’s 1777 constitution. The issue of property requirements for elections proved to be one of the most heated in the convention. James Kent, a conservative lawyer and judge who began his career as a Federalist, defended property requirements. His vision of politics was deeply hierarchical, which led him to oppose an expansion of suffrage. Kent was opposed by a group of younger politicians. Nathan Sanford, a man who entered politics fully a decade later than Kent, began his career as a Jeffersonian democrat. Jefferson’s election to the presidency in 1800 had not ushered in the reign of terror that his Federalist enemies predicted, and Sanford embraced the growing enthusiasm for democracy that marked politics in the early nineteenth century. Which man has a more optimistic view of human nature? Which theory of politics seems closer in spirit to the ideas behind the Federal Constitution? The most eloquent champion of retaining property requirements was James Kent, a former State Supreme Court judge and Chancellor of the State of New York (an English-style judicial office that no longer exists). Kent warned that an unchecked democracy in which the property-less and working classes enjoyed the same power as the propertied would threaten political stability and the rights of private property. The tendency of universal suffrage is to jeopardize the rights of property and the principles of liberty. There is a constant tendency in human society, and the history of every age proves it; there is a tendency in the poor to covet and to share the plunder of the rich; in the debtor to relax or avoid the obligation of contract … there is a tendency in ambitious and wicked men to inflame these combustible materials. The notion that every man that works a day on the road, or serves an idle hour in the militia, is entitled as of right to an equal participation in the whole power of government is most unreasonable and has no foundation in justice… . Society is an association for the protection of property as well as life, and the individual who contributes only one cent to the common stock ought not to have the same power and influence in directing the property and concerns of the partnership as he who contributes his thousands. 
 Nathan Sanford was a lawyer from Long Island who entered politics as a Jeffersonian, holding various state offices before being elected as a U.S. senator from New York. Rather than focus on the need to protect property, Sanford argued that those who bore the burdens of government had earned a right to have a say in it. The question before us is the right of suffrage—who shall, or who shall not, have the right to vote … the principle of the scheme now proposed, is, that those who bear the burthens of the state, [paid taxes, served in the militia, or consented to volunteer to work on public works projects such as roads] should choose those that rule it… . To me, and the majority of the committee, it appeared the only reasonable scheme that those who are to be affected by the acts of the government, should be annually entitled to vote for those who administer it.

Fourth of July in Center Square
 by John Lewis Krimmel, 1819

 Why did James Kent oppose eliminating property requirements?

ANDREW JACKSON AND HIS AGE



Andrew Jackson and His Age
 The new democratic spirit of American politics helped elevate Andrew Jackson’s political career, and he in turn did everything in his power to promote his vision of democracy. Jackson’s democratic ideas stopped well short of the most radical egalitarian ideas of his day. Indeed, Jackson’s vision of democracy had no room for blacks, Indians, or women. Still his invocation of the will of the people marked a turning point in American political development. After Jackson, politicians from across the political spectrum would outdo each other in affirming their commitment to democracy and praising the wisdom of the people. Jackson’s long road to the presidency began with his narrow defeat in 1824, which led to his decisive victory in 1828. Unlike earlier presidents who were drawn from the nation’s elite, Jackson was a self-made man. An orphan who became a rich planter and influential political figure in his home state of Tennessee, Jackson became a symbol for American democracy. Indeed, one of his supporters characterized the presidential election of 1828, in which Jackson squared off against John Quincy Adams for the second time, as a struggle in which “the Aristocracy and Democracy of the country are arrayed against each other.” Others viewed Jackson’s democratic leanings in a less positive light, however, seeing his election as the start of the “reign of King Mob.” Jackson’s presidency was marred by deep divisions within his own administration and challenges from outside. In particular South Carolina’s decision to respond to federal tariff policy by calling a convention to nullify federal law forced a showdown between Jackson and a new radical version of the theory of states’ rights.

The Election of 1824 and
 the “Corrupt Bargain” James Monroe, the fourth Virginian to occupy the presidency since the adoption of the Constitution (1817–1825), anointed no political figure to be his successor and carry forward his policies and ideas. Following Washington’s model Monroe had sought out a talented but diverse collection of men for his cabinet who represented a broad spectrum of political and economic views. Three of these cabinet ministers sought the presidency in 1824: William Crawford, secretary of the treasury; John Quincy Adams, secretary of state; and John C. Calhoun, secretary of war. A fourth candidate was Henry Clay, Speaker of the House of Representatives. Andrew Jackson, hero of the Battle of New Orleans, also joined the race. Jackson had served in Congress, as a judge in Tennessee, and as the appointed governor of the Florida territory. Crawford, born in Virginia but raised in Georgia, was heir to the old Jeffersonian republican vision of politics with its emphasis on states’ rights and strict construction of the Constitution. Crawford opposed Monroe’s National Republican synthesis

View the Image 1824 Election Cartoon


 of Jeffersonian politics with Hamiltonian economics (see Chapter 7). In contrast to the other candidates in the crowded field, Crawford opposed using federal power for economic development. Public expenditures for internal improvements, such as roads and canals, and charters for banks were government functions that the Constitution, Crawford argued, had wisely left to the individual states. John Quincy Adams, the son of President John Adams, was a New Englander who had been a professor at Harvard and spent considerable time in Europe as a diplomat, serving in Holland, Prussia (part of modern Germany), Great Britain, and Russia. As secretary of state he had not only negotiated the Treaty of Ghent that ended the War of 1812 but also was largely responsible for formulating the Monroe Doctrine (see Chapter 7). A short, balding, intellectual figure, Adams was neither charismatic nor politically astute; he even admitted that he could seem dogmatic and pedantic. Before entering the race for president, his primary experience had been in foreign, not domestic, politics. John C. Calhoun, the other Southerner in the race, had been a prominent War Hawk during the War of 1812. An astute politician, Calhoun

 What were the strengths of John Quincy Adams as a presidential candidate?



 CHAPTER 8

8.3 Our Country …
Home Industry
 This election broadside links John Quincy Adams with Clay’s American System. The images at the top—the loom, ship, and plough—symbolize the way the American system would help manufacturing, commerce, and agriculture.

DEMOCRATS AND WHIGS: DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN CULTURE, 1820–1840

 decided to withdraw from the crowded race and soon emerged as the strongest candidate for vicepresident. Calhoun expected to bide his time until the moment was more auspicious to mount another try for the presidency. Henry Clay, the vivacious speaker of the house from Kentucky, began his career as a War Hawk during the War of 1812. On economic issues Clay had the most clearly developed vision of America’s future. Clay built on Monroe’s neoHamiltonian policies, pushing them in a more nationalistic direction. As a matter of policy, Monroe favored federal support for internal improvements such as roads and canals, but he maintained some of the same constitutional reservations about such policies that his predecessors Jefferson and Madison had articulated. Clay was an unapologetic champion of aggressive federal involvement in economic development. The American System, Clay’s plan for using the power of the federal government to encourage American industry, included tariffs to

 What role did Clay’s American System play in the election of John Qunicy Adams?

 help protect American industry by keeping cheap foreign goods from undermining American producers, continuing support for a national bank, and an ambitious program of federal funding for internal improvements. Clay’s theory sought a harmonious interplay among agriculture, industry, and commerce. Adams endorsed the essence of Clay’s American System. This election broadside (8.3) reflects his support for Clay’s economic policies. The central image of a ship symbolizes commerce, while the two smaller figures depict a farmer at the plow and a worker at a loom. The name of the ship, John Quincy Adams, symbolizes Adams’s claim to be a proven leader who could pilot the nation to a prosperous future. Of the major candidates for the presidency in 1824, Andrew Jackson’s agenda was the least defined. Clay and Adams sought to portray Jackson as an opponent of the American System, and Jackson tried to finesse the issue by stressing that he wished to support commerce, agriculture, and industry. His campaign focused less on issues and more on character and underlying political values. Jackson fashioned himself as a frontier democrat whose honesty and courage were his primary credentials for the presidency. In the divided field Jackson won 44 percent of the popular vote and the most electoral votes, but he fell short of the majority in the Electoral College necessary to win the election (8.4). Under such circumstances the Constitution directed that the House of Representatives choose from among the top five candidates. Clay had only come in fourth, but as speaker of the house, he was a key player in determining the outcome. Given the choice among Crawford, an old-style Jeffersonian who opposed Clay’s vision for America’s future; Jackson, whose support for a more nationalist economic program was lukewarm at best; and Adams, who was sympathetic to Clay’s American System, the choice was easy for Clay. With Clay’s support Adams won. Having secured the presidency, Adams then chose Clay to be his secretary of state, which in this era functioned as the stepping-stone for aspiring future presidential candidates. (Since World War II, the vice presidency has sometimes served the same function.) Jackson and his supporters charged that Clay had traded his support for the office of secretary of state in a “corrupt bargain” that deprived

Read the Document Michel Chevalier, Society Manners
 and Politics in the U.S.

ANDREW JACKSON AND HIS AGE



 Adams appointed men on the basis of merit, with little concern for their political loyalties or even their commitment to his agenda or 8 4 to him personally. Adams proudly proclaimed his intention to “discard every element of rancor” and “yield to talents and virtue.” One exasperated supporter complained that “the friends of the administration have to contend not only against their enemies,” but “against the Administration itself, which leaves its power in the hands of its own enemies.” Adams sought to move beyond partisanship at a time when America was becoming more politically polarized. Electoral vote by state Electoral Vote (%) Popular Vote (%) Adams made another tactical error 84 (32) 108,740 (31) John Quincy Adams when he chastised Congress for refusing (Democratic-Republican) to embrace his economic agenda. He ac153,544 (44) 99 (38) Andrew Jackson cused legislators of being hampered “by (Democratic-Republican) the will of their constituents.” Seen in William H. Crawford 41 (16) 40,856 (12) light of his republican belief in the need (Democratic-Republican) for virtuous leadership, Adams was invitHenry Clay 37 (14) 47,531 (14) ing Congress to lead rather than follow (Democratic-Republican) the nation. For his opponents, however, States that split the remark smacked of condescension and elitelectoral votes ism. His comments were out of step with the rising tide of democratic sentiment that had swept over 8.4 Electoral and Popular Votes 1824 American society. For those who supported this Although Jackson won the most votes, no candidate new, more democratic ethos, Adams had maligned gained a majority in the Electoral College. After the House of Representatives decided the outcome, Jackson claimed that the people. Jackson and his supporters used AdAdams and Clay had struck a “corrupt bargain” to deprive him ams’s gaffe to highlight their own commitment to of the presidency. democracy. Jackson extolled “the voice of the people” and attacked Adams for his apparent haughty contempt for the popular will. Jackson of the presidency and gave the election to Adams. Adams embraced Clay’s American System. In addition to supporting Clay’s plan for public expenditures on internal improvements, including new roads and canals, Adams hoped to create a naThe election of 1828, which saw Andrew Jackson tional university and an astronomical observatory. squaring off with John Quincy Adams for a secYet while he embraced the forward-looking nationond try at the presidency, was a pivotal moment in alist vision of economic development associated American politics. Jackson trumpeted his humble with Clay’s American System, Adams was an eighorigins, military career, and support for democratic teenth-century politician when it came to thinking values. His supporters applauded their candidate’s about the role of the president as a virtuous leader commitment to democracy and lambasted Adams’s who stood above partisan bickering. He believed aristocratic pretensions. Adams’s supporters dethat Monroe’s goal of rising above party was not fended his traditional republican ideals and support only laudable but achievable. Rather than use his for the American System and warned voters that patronage powers as president to reward his political Jackson was a demagogue who would undermine friends and consolidate his administration’s power, America’s constitutional system.

The Election of 1828:
 “Old Hickory’s” Triumph

 Why did Jackson view the election of 1824 as a “corrupt bargain”?



 CHAPTER 8

8.5 “Some
Account of the
Bloody Deeds of
General Jackson”
 This pro-Adams broadside dubbed the “Coffin Handbill” features the images of coffins prominently. It casts Jackson as a brutal despot whose military record demonstrated that he was unfit to be president. The coffins symbolized militiamen Jackson executed for desertion during the Creek Wars (1813–1814).

DEMOCRATS AND WHIGS: DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN CULTURE, 1820–1840

 At a more fundamental level, Jackson rejected the antiparty sentiments of Monroe and Adams. Jackson set out to win the presidency in 1828, forming an alliance with Crawford and Calhoun to defeat Adams and Clay. New York’s Martin Van Buren formulated the strategy for this new alliance. Van Buren was an influential Republican who had served both as a state senator and a U.S. senator. His supporters were nicknamed “Bucktails” because they wore deer tails on their hats instead of feathers. Van Buren embraced the idea of party with a passion. His goal was to re-create the old Jeffersonian coalition, which united “the planters of the South and the plain Republicans of the North.”

 How did the “Coffin Handbill” attempt to discredit Andrew Jackson?

 Jackson felt personally aggrieved by the result of the election of 1824. Charges that Adams had “stolen” that election colored the rhetoric of the 1828 campaign, which marked a new low in the use of personal attacks and negative campaigning. Jackson’s campaign portrayed Adams as an aristocrat of dubious morality, pointing out that Adams had installed a billiard table in the White House. Although now considered a popular recreation, originally billiards was an aristocratic pastime. Perhaps the most sensational claim the Jackson campaign made was that during Adams’s time as a diplomat in Russia he had “made use of a beautiful girl to seduce the passions of the Emperor.” The Jacksonians charged that Adams was a licentious aristocrat with perverse sexual values. The attack on Adams’s character was more than matched by the ferocious assaults on Jackson’s morality. The smear campaign also charged Jackson with sexual immorality, challenging the legality of his marriage. Supporters of Adams claimed that Jackson had seduced a married woman and lived with her in “open and notorious lewdness” before she had divorced her first husband. Jackson, they claimed, was a violent, brawling frontiersman who could not be trusted with the nation’s highest office. The Adams campaign even attacked Jackson’s military record. Philadelphia printer John Binn’s “Coffin Handbill” (8.5) detailed the “bloody deeds of General Jackson,” who had in fact executed six militiamen during the wars against the Creek Indians. Binn warned Americans against putting “at the head of our government, a man who was never known to govern himself.” In Jackson’s defense his supporters cast the general as “Old Hickory,” a rough-and-tumble democrat and latter-day George Washington whose plain frontier code of ethics contrasted with Adams’s elitist eastern values. To call attention to Jackson’s reputation as the hero of the Battle of New Orleans, his supporters gathered on the anniversary of the victory to plant hickory trees and raise liberty poles made of hickory wood. They ridiculed Adams’s bookish temperament, chanting “Adams can write” but “Jackson can fight.” Adams’s supporters answered the smears by praising “his long and varied public services, his great experience, his talent, his learning.” To get out their message, Jackson’s supporters developed a sophisticated campaign apparatus. A central committee in Nashville directed local and state Jackson committees, who in turn worked with

ANDREW JACKSON AND HIS AGE

 local “Hickory Clubs.” In addition to these innovations in campaign organization, Jackson’s supporters created a network of pro-Jackson newspapers to get out the word about their candidate. Eighteen new pro-Jackson newspapers sprouted up in Ohio alone. The Jacksonians also pioneered new fundraising tactics to pay for their campaign, including public banquets and other ticketed events in which supporters celebrated the achievements of their candidate. They developed an astonishing range of campaign knick-knacks, and mementos, including badges, plates, sewing boxes, and ceramics. Jacksonians also used rallies and parades to spark enthusiasm for their candidate. The tactics of Jackson and his supporters galvanized the electorate. In 1824, only about one-fourth of the eligible voters had participated; in 1828, more than half of the electorate turned out to vote. In the end Jackson garnered more than twice as many electoral votes as Adams.

The Reign of “King Mob”
 Andrew Jackson’s inaugural in 1829 captured the new democratic spirit of the age. His supporters poured into Washington for the event, shown in this contemporary print of the crowds who thronged the White House (8.6). Margaret Bayard Smith, a Washington socialite, described the scene in detail: “Thousands and thousands of people, without distinction of rank, collected in an immense mass around the Capitol.” She was shocked not only by the composition of the crowd but also by its rowdiness. The boisterous attendees, she recounted, broke “glass and bone china to the amount of several thousand dollars.” Smith was clearly ambivalent about the inauguration of the “people’s president.” She was impressed by the “majesty” of the people assembled at the swearing-in ceremony but disturbed by the rude and disorderly behavior of Jackson’s supporters at the reception that followed at the White House. This print of the inaugural confirms Smith’s impressions that



 Jackson’s inaugural was a popular affair, drawing a much more diverse crowd than previous inaugurals. Not everyone was as impressed by the people’s majesty. Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story complained that Jackson’s inaugural had ushered in the “the reign of King Mob.” In contrast to Adams, who refused to use his powers of appointment to reward his political supporters, Jackson was unabashed in appointing his supporters to office. In his first inaugural Jackson defended the need for rotation in government offices. Jackson rejected the traditional republican notion, advanced by John Quincy Adams, that government offices were best reserved for a small elite, typically drawn from the ranks of the wealthy and well educated. “The duties of all public officers,” Jackson maintained, were “plain and simple.” One Jackson supporter proudly proclaimed that he saw “nothing wrong in the rule that to the victor belong the spoils of the enemy.” Opponents mocked Jackson’s appointments as “men of narrow minds” who were “hardly gentlemen” and attacked Jackson’s system of replacing government officeholders with those loyal to him as the spoils system.

 8.6 “President’s Levee, or all Creation going to the White House” This image of the boisterous crowd in front of the White House during Jackson’s inaugural reception, or levee, captures the fear that his presidency would usher in the “reign of King Mob.”

Read the Document John Adams, A Corrupt Bargain or Politics as Usual


 How did the spoils system promote Jackson’s democratic agenda?



 CHAPTER 8

DEMOCRATS AND WHIGS: DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN CULTURE, 1820–1840

8.7 Office Seekers
 In this attack on the spoils system, a demonic Andrew Jackson dangles the spoils of victory before eager office seekers.

 This cartoon (8.7) shows Jackson dangling the spoils of victory before eager office seekers. Jackson’s practices, however, were less radical than his rhetoric. Only 20 percent of federal officeholders lost their jobs because of his new policy. Apart from his appointment of Martin Van Buren as secretary of state, Jackson’s cabinet comprised undistinguished men selected for their loyalty to him. Shortly after Jackson had assembled his cabinet, a sexual scandal engulfed his administration. The controversy swirled around his new secretary of war, John Eaton, a close friend of the president. Washington society, prone to gossip, began spreading rumors that Eaton’s wife, Peggy, the daughter of a Washington tavern keeper, was a promiscuous woman who had engaged in a clandestine affair with Eaton before their marriage. That Peggy’s first husband had allegedly committed suicide further besmirched her reputation. Still angry over the attacks on the legitimacy of his own marriage (his wife died before Jackson took office), the president defended Peggy Eaton’s reputation and ordered his cabinet members to do likewise. The Eaton scandal, which some contemporaries described as “Eaton Malaria,” consumed Jackson’s presidency for months, preventing him

 What was the theory of states’ rights?

 from focusing on pressing public matters. Because Floride Calhoun, the wife of the vice president had been one of the most prominent women to snub Peggy Eaton, the Eaton affair also strained the already tense relations between Jackson and Vice President John C. Calhoun. The disruption forced the president to ask most of his cabinet to resign in 1831.

States Rights and the
Nullification Crisis
 Even if Jackson and Calhoun had not fallen out over the Eaton affair, the two men were on a collision course. The rift between them widened as the politics of states’ rights divided the nation. Calhoun’s home state of South Carolina became a hotbed of radical states’ rights doctrine, and Calhoun had to embrace the doctrine or retire from public life. Choosing to take up the cause, Calhoun became one of its leading spokesmen. The issue that vexed South Carolina was federal tariffs on imported goods. In 1828, Congress enacted high import duties on a variety of goods, including textiles. The South objected to the tariff, believing that Britain would retaliate by raising tariffs on imported cotton, which would hurt Southern

Read the Document South Carolina Refuses the Tariff


ANDREW JACKSON AND HIS AGE

 agriculture. The objections of the South Carolina legislature were outlined in A Protest, and the underlying political and constitutional theory was elaborately described anonymously by Calhoun in his manifesto, the Exposition. Calhoun took the theory of states’ rights to a new level, defending South Carolina’s right to nullify, or make legally void, the 1828 tariff. His manifesto developed ideas first articulated by Jefferson and Madison in the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions into a radical theory of states’ rights (see Chapter 6). According to Calhoun the Union was a sovereign compact among the people of the states. When the states and the national government disagreed over the constitutionality of a federal law, he asserted, the states were entitled to judge the constitutionality of federal laws. This position challenged both the supremacy of the federal government and the power of the federal courts to be the final arbiter on the constitutionality of federal laws. Asserting that a state could call special conventions to nullify federal laws, Calhoun’s doctrine of nullification went further than either Jefferson or Madison’s earlier defenses of states’ rights. The issue of states’ rights resurfaced in 1830 when Congress debated a proposal to limit sales of Western lands. Samuel Foot, a senator from Connecticut, proposed to slow Western expansion by cutting back on the public sale of Western lands, a decision that would have also robbed the government of revenues and made it even more dependent on tariffs. Prompting Foot’s resolution was a report from the land office that 72 million acres of land already surveyed remained unsold. Senators Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri and Robert Hayne of South Carolina denounced Foot’s resolution. Benton and Hayne saw an opportunity to forge a Southern and Western alliance against New England’s commercial interests. Benton saw Foot’s proposal as a means for New England’s industrialists to maintain their supply of cheap labor by making it harder for laborers to settle on Western lands. Hayne took a different tactic; framing the issue in terms of South Carolina’s theory of states’ rights, he moved beyond the specifics of Foot’s proposal to suggest that federal control over Western lands was itself a source of danger since it encouraged the growth of federal power. Senator Daniel Webster of Massachusetts attacked the South Carolinian’s theory of states’ rights. The ensuing debate between Hayne and Webster was a brilliant display of oratory. One observer



 “Every seat, every inch of ground, even the steps, were compactly filled, and yet not space enough for the ladies—the Senators were obliged to relinquish their chairs of the State to the fair auditors who literally sat in the Senate.” MARGARET SMITH’S recollections of the Senate Chamber during Webster’s reply to Hayne recalled: “It was a day never to be forgotten by those who witnessed the scene in the Senate Chamber and a day destined to be forever memorable in the Annals of the Senate.” In a riveting speech Webster denounced the theory of states’ rights and asserted the supremacy of the Union over the individual states: “Liberty and Union, now and forever, one and inseparable.” Building on ideas developed by Hamilton and John Marshall (see Chapters 6 and 7), Webster’s constitutional nationalism denied that the states could judge the constitutionality of federal laws and rejected the theory of nullification. Webster’s speech was widely reprinted and became an instant classic; schoolchildren would recite it throughout the Northeast for generations. This meticulous historical painting by George Healy (8.8) immortalized the debate. Webster,

 8.8 Webster’s Reply to Hayne George Healy’s painting of Webster’s famous speech is reminiscent of Bingham’s Stump Speaking. Calhoun is presented as a wiry character, while Webster stands tall, a model of virtue.

 How did Webster’s theory of the Union contrast with Calhoun’s theory of states’ rights?



 CHAPTER 8

8.9 Despotism
 In this anti-nullification cartoon Calhoun ascends a platform that leads from nullification to despotism.

DEMOCRATS AND WHIGS: DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN CULTURE, 1820–1840

 pausing for a moment’s reflection, stands in a hushed Senate chamber. Onlookers crowd the galleries, transfixed by his oratory. Although senators had given up their seats in the chamber to accommodate the many women who attended to hear the speech, Healey placed all the women in the Senate gallery, a decision likely motivated by his belief that viewers would have been shocked to see women on the floor of the Senate. With the Webster-Hayne debate fresh in everyone’s memory, supporters of states’ rights gathered in Washington to honor the memory of Thomas Jefferson. Hayne and Calhoun both attended this dinner as did President Jackson. When Hayne concluded a long defense of states’ rights, attention turned to Jackson, who was expected to propose a toast to Hayne’s pro-states’ rights sentiments. Having always been a moderate supporter of states’ rights, Jackson would surely support Hayne, the crowd thought. They were shocked, however, when he lifted his glass and proclaimed, “Our Federal Union. It must be preserved.” Rather than support Hayne, the president appeared to echo Webster. Vice President Calhoun, who had become an outspoken defender of states’ rights, responded with his own toast, “The Union, next to our liberties, the most dear.” Realizing that he could not effectively defend South Carolina and promulgate the cause of states’ rights from the vice presidency, Calhoun

 How does the political cartoonist represent Calhoun’s nullification theory in the cartoon Despotism?

 resigned. South Carolina promptly elected him to the Senate. The issue of states’ rights and nullification moved to the center of American political life as the controversy over tariffs heated up again. Congress intended the Tariff Act of 1832, which President Jackson signed, to be a conciliatory gesture to South Carolina. Although the new act lowered import duties, South Carolinians continued to view tariffs as an effort by one section of the nation to wage economic war against another. South Carolina called a convention and issued a declaration nullifying the tariff. Jackson denounced these actions as “subversive of the Constitution.” Privately he warned that if South Carolina spilled a drop of blood in “defiance of the laws of the United States,” he would, “hang the first man of them I can get my hands on to the first tree I can find.” Missouri Senator Thomas Hart Benton, warned that when President Jackson “begins to talk about hanging, they can begin to look out for ropes.” This contemporary cartoon attacking nullification (8.9) highlights Jackson’s tough stance. The president, restraining one of Calhoun’s supporters, declares, “Stop you have gone too far. Or by the Eternal I will hang you all!” Congress passed a Force Bill that gave the president the power to use military force to collect revenues, including tariffs. While Jackson was adopting a public tough stance, Henry Clay was working behind the scenes to avert a confrontation. On the same day that Congress passed the Force Bill, it also scaled back tariffs. In response to this conciliatory gesture, South Carolina rescinded its act of nullification, but not before nullifying the Force Act. Clay’s compromise had narrowly averted a constitutional crisis in which the states and the federal government had nearly come to blows. For the moment the conflict between states’ rights and a more nationalist vision of the Constitution had been settled in favor of the latter. Although Jackson adopted a hard line with South Carolina, he would prove to be far more flexible when federal and state power collided over other issues, notably Indian rights. Jackson’s democratic nationalism had little room for anyone but white men. Its narrowness would become increasingly clear during his two terms as president.

Read the Document Andrew Jackson, the Force Bill


WHITE MAN’S DEMOCRACY



 White Man’s Democracy The democratic ideas that swept Andrew Jackson into the presidency were premised on a vision of society that was not truly inclusive: It excluded blacks and Indians, and showed little interest in women’s rights. The new state constitutions drafted in the Jacksonian era expanded rights for nonproperty-owning white men but stripped voting rights from propertyowning African Americans. The plight of American Indians also became a major issue during Jackson’s presidency. Jackson and his supporters sought to restrict Indians’ rights and expropriate their lands. Although the revised state constitutions systematically stripped away rights from free blacks, African Americans created a network of thriving communities in the free states of the North and the old Northwest (the modern states of Ohio, Indiana, Michigan, and Illinois). However, harassment of African Americans in the nation’s cities also increased during the Jacksonian era. Indeed, the struggles of African Americans to achieve economic and social respectability prompted vicious attacks in the popular press and might even lead to violence. Pressure to find more land for white settlers also intensified, which increased tensions with American Indians who were eager to defend their lands against further encroachments. Jackson and his supporters showed little regard for the rights of Indian peoples. The Cherokee fought a valiant effort to defend their rights within the rules established by the Constitution and learned that the rule of law provided scant protection against racism and a rapacious desire for Indian land.

Race and Politics in
 the Jacksonian Era While many states were expanding the suffrage for white men, other states were imposing new restrictions on black men. The 1821 New York state constitutional convention that had abolished property requirements for white men adopted a high property requirement for African Americans that effectively disenfranchised most blacks. Thus, while the state’s African-American population numbered some 30,000 in 1825, fewer than 300 black men were eligible to vote. New York’s actions were part of a broader pattern of racial exclusion that limited the rights of African Americans throughout the North and West. African Americans lost the right to vote in Rhode Island in 1822 and Pennsylvania in 1838. Most of the new states that entered the Union after 1819 denied suffrage to African Americans. Many states also regulated the conduct of free African Americans. In 1831, Indiana required that “Negroes and mulattoes emigrating in the state” be required to post a bond (much like prisoners awaiting trial) or be deported. Illinois not only barred blacks from voting but prohibited them from testifying in court or bringing civil suits. Ohio barred

 African Americans from access to the courts in “any controversy where either party to the sale is a white person” and declared that African Americans “have no constitutional right to present their petitions to the General Assembly for any purpose whatsoever.” Gradual emancipation schemes increased the number of free blacks in the North and West. In part the intensification of racism reflected concern over economic competition from the growing number of free blacks. Yet despite the legal barriers placed in the way of African Americans’ economic progress, vibrant communities grew in the North. The most obvious measure of the success of these communities was the rise of a rich array of African American cultural and economic institutions, including churches, fraternal organizations, and benefit societies. African Americans published their first newspaper, Freedom’s Journal, in New York in 1827. The efforts of free blacks in the North and West to improve their conditions became a subject of widespread comment in the press. Typically the press lampooned the efforts of African Americans to attain cultural and economic respectability. Exploiting this popular racism, artist Edward William Clay

 What types of legal disabilities did free blacks face outside the slave South?



 CHAPTER 8

A
Black Charge
 From a series of racist caricatures of black life in Philadelphia, this image lampoons African-American aspirations to respectability. A church official disciplines a church member for alleged misconduct. [Source: The Library Company of Philadelphia]

DEMOCRATS AND WHIGS: DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN CULTURE, 1820–1840

 published 14 cartoons ridiculing Philadelphia’s African-American community. In A Black Charge (8.10), Clay mocks a black church official who must attempt to discipline a disorderly member of his community. As was typical in this era, the artist has exaggerated the physical appearances of African Americans and caricatured their speech, suggesting that blacks could only speak a distorted form of English. Jackson’s vision of white man’s democracy had tragic consequences for American Indians. His dealings with Indian peoples during his presidency were also consistent with his view that they were culturally inferior to whites, and that their civilization was on the path toward extinction. In Jackson’s political calculus white settlers’ need for land was paramount and the rights of Indians carried little if any weight. These beliefs shaped his response to the conflict between the state of Georgia and the Cherokees. The President’s views of Indians had been formed during his early military career, in which he was well known as an Indian fighter. At the conclusion of the Creek Wars (1812–1813), he had seized 23 million acres of Creek land, more than half of present-day Alabama and part of Georgia. Jackson treated the Indians as conquered subjects, not as a sovereign people. Rather than continuing to mount violent resistance, a number of Indian tribes adopted American ways. The Cherokee were among the Indian peoples who white Americans described as

 the “Five Civilized Tribes:” Cherokees, Choctaws, Seminoles, Creeks, and Chickasaws. These five tribes had to varying degrees chosen the path of cultural assimilation rather than resistance to America’s expansionist policies. These tribes together numbered some 75,000 people spread out over the Carolinas, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and Tennessee. Adopting the agricultural practices of their white neighbors and converting to Christianity were two major efforts the tribes made to accommodate to American culture. No tribe was more committed to accommodation than the Cherokee. They converted to Christianity, established schools, and practiced American-style agriculture; a few prosperous Cherokees even kept slaves to work on their cotton plantations, mimicking their white neighbors in Georgia. They also abandoned their traditional tribal governance, declared themselves an independent republic, and adopted a constitution modeled on the Federal Constitution. As a sovereign nation they claimed to enjoy all the legal privileges that all nations enjoyed and were therefore not subject to the laws of the state of Georgia. However, the Cherokee effort to become an independent nation within the territorial confines of Georgia did not sit well with the government of the state. When Georgians discovered gold on Cherokee land in 1828, a horde of white prospectors tried to stake out claims on Indian lands, a clear violation of tribal authority and law. Declaring tribal law null and void, Georgia passed a law that stripped the tribe of any legal authority over their lands. Henceforth Georgia law, not Cherokee law, would govern the Cherokee. The state also created a special police force, the Georgia Guard, to patrol Indian territory. The tribe lobbied sympathetic opponents of Jackson and turned to the federal courts for protection, arguing that Georgia’s actions violated treaties between the Cherokee and the United States. While the Cherokee awaited their day in court, Jackson turned up the pressure on them. The president refused the Cherokee’s plea for federal troops to protect them. Because Indians could not testify in Georgia courts, the Cherokee were left without any legal means of defending their rights under the laws of Georgia. Jackson seized the opportunity provided by the crisis to advance a plan to remove the Cherokee from Georgia and relocate them beyond the Mississippi River. He cast himself as benevolent father, intervening to rescue the Cherokee from extinction. His program would not force Indians to leave, but it made it very unattractive for anyone to remain

 What does Indian policy reveal about the limits of Jacksonian democracy?

WHITE MAN’S DEMOCRACY

 behind. Indians who refused to relocate were relegated to the status of free blacks, who had only minimal legal rights under Georgia law. Jackson presented the Cherokee with two equally disastrous choices: accept the legal destruction of their tribal identity and live as second-class citizens in Georgia, or relocate to a distant territory far from their ancestral homes. Jackson’s opponents in Congress, many of whom had close ties to Protestant churches and missionary societies that had helped convert the Cherokees to Christianity, attacked his proposals. New Jersey’s Senator Theodore Frelinghuysen wondered if “it is one of the prerogatives of the white man, that he may disregard the dictates of moral principles, when an Indian shall be concerned.” Others attacked the president’s proposal as a sham that offered Indians no legal protections if they stayed and allocated few resources to allow them to make a safe journey west. In this cartoon critical of Jackson’s Indian policy (8.11), the president leads a parade that includes the devil and caged Indians. The Protestant clergymen who led the opposition to Jackson’s policy and who opposed removal were not great champions of Indian culture. Indeed, the religious defense of Indian rights shared many of the racist assumptions about Indians and their cultures that Jackson and others eager to dispossess them espoused. Yet these supporters of

 Indians’ rights believed that the supposed “inferiority” of Indian culture did not sanction unjust treatment or the violation of Indian rights. Women’s reformers also rallied to the cause of Indian rights. Women’s groups touted themselves as disinterested guardians of public morality who were not subject to the “blinding influence of party spirit.” Jackson’s aggressive removal policy threatened the ongoing effort to Christianize and civilize the Indians. Building on a tradition that extended back to the Revolutionary era (see Chapters 4 and 5), women invoked their moral authority as the guardians of the Republic’s values, and opposed Jackson’s policies as an affront to church, school, and the family. Such appeals were so effective that Martin Van Buren, Jackson’s chief lieutenant, was shocked that his own niece opposed Jackson’s policy and hoped that the president would lose his bid for reelection in 1832. The Jacksonians passed their removal bill by a narrow margin. The Indian Removal Act of 1830 gave President Jackson the authority to exchange Indians lands within the borders of the existing states for land west of the Mississippi. Federal officials put substantial pressure on Indian tribes to accept this offer and stressed that the federal government would not be able to protect Indian rights against state action if Indians did not agree to relocate. In essence, the federal government

View the Map Interactive Map: Native American Removal




8.11 The Grand
National Caravan
Moving East
 In this attack on Jackson’s Indian policy, the president leads a parade that includes the devil playing a fiddle and caged Indians.

 How does the Grand Caravan represent Jackson’s Indian policy?



 CHAPTER 8

DEMOCRATS AND WHIGS: DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN CULTURE, 1820–1840

 “We wish to remain on the land of our fathers. We have a perfect and original right to remain without interruption or molestation.” Address of a council of the Cherokee nation to the people of the United States, written in July of 1830.

 informed Indians that if they chose to remain, the government would tacitly allow the states to run roughshod over Indian rights. Although some tribes reluctantly accepted the inevitability of relocation, others resisted. The Cherokee eloquently protested against their forced relocation. Their leaders stated their desire to remain on the land of their ancestors and reminded Americans that their existing treaties with the United States guaranteed them this right. Rather than concede to the unfavorable terms presented by the federal government, or accede to the pressure from state governments, the Cherokee decided to seek a legal remedy in federal court. When Georgia violated Cherokee rights, the tribe sued, and the case ended up in the Supreme Court.

The Cherokee Cases
 The struggle between Georgia and the Cherokee raised important constitutional questions. The Cherokee claimed to be a sovereign nation not subject to the laws of the state of Georgia. As was true of any sovereign nation, they claimed the right to govern themselves by rules that their own legislature enacted and to deal with the United States as a sovereign power. Georgia argued that Indians were subjects of the United States and that the idea of an independent Indian state within Georgia was an absurdity. The status of Indian nations in American constitutional law came before the Supreme Court in two separate cases related to the claims of the Cherokee nation. In the Cherokee Cases, Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1830) and Worcester v. Georgia (1832), the Supreme Court determined that Indian tribes retained certain rights traditionally associated with sovereign nations, including the right to govern themselves by their own laws, but lacked other rights, such as the ability to sue the state of Georgia. The latter case came to the Supreme

 What do the Cherokee cases reveal about the limits of judicial power?

 Court because Georgia had imprisoned two Protestant missionaries, Samuel Worcester and Elizur Butler, charging them with residing on Indian land without obtaining a license from the state. As both men were citizens of the United States, clearly they were entitled to sue in federal courts. Writing for the Court, Chief Justice John Marshall found that the missionaries had been wrongly imprisoned and were entitled to protection by the federal courts. Moreover, Marshall gave the Cherokee an important victory when he held that “the laws of Georgia can have no force” on Cherokee territory. Although the Cherokee did not enjoy all the privileges accorded foreign nations by U.S. law, they did retain the right to make laws within their own lands. One Cherokee leader, Elias Boudinot, greeted Marshall’s ruling in Worcester enthusiastically. Andrew Jackson was dismissive and wrote a supporter that the decision was unenforceable. Georgia refused to accept the Court’s ruling and did not release the imprisoned missionaries. President Jackson was unwilling to antagonize Georgia, and was ill-disposed to Indians rights, so he refused to enforce Marshall’s decision. The case might have precipitated a major constitutional crisis: A president refusing to follow a Court decision would have undermined the legitimacy of the entire federal judiciary. To avoid such a showdown, Jackson persuaded the governor of Georgia to simply pardon Worcester and Butler. Once the men were freed, the legal issue vanished, and Jackson and Marshall were no longer pitted against one another.

Resistance and Removal
 The release of the two missionaries eliminated any legal issues and cleared the way for the Jackson administration to pursue its policy of removal. The Cherokee now faced the painful choice of accepting the inevitability of removal or continuing to resist Jackson and the state of Georgia. (See Choices and Consequences: Acquiesce or Resist? The Cherokee Dilemma.) In 1835, a minority of the Cherokee leadership signed a treaty agreeing to relocate west of the Mississippi. Many Cherokee denounced the treaty and hoped that their leaders could avert relocation. In 1838, federal troops began rounding up Cherokee and placing them in stockades to await deportation. The squalid conditions in the stockades took a heavy toll, and many of the most outspoken Cherokee

WHITE MAN’S DEMOCRACY



Choices and Consequences
ACQUIESCE OR RESIST? THE CHEROKEE DILEMMA
Should the Cherokee have resisted Jackson’s removal policy? The Cherokee nation faced a difficult decision regarding how to deal with the increasing pressure to abandon their land and relocate to what is now Oklahoma. The tribal leadership was divided. Most Cherokee supported Principal Chief John Ross, who believed that there was enough support among Jackson’s political opponents to block relocation. A minority within the tribe supported Elias Boudinot, who argued that it was better to relocate than oppose the inevitable. 
Choices




 Agree to the treaty and relocate; seek the best possible terms from the U.S. government to facilitate the removal process.



 Reject the treaty and resist removal, by force if necessary.

Decision
 A small but vocal minority of the Cherokee, including Elias Boudinot, believed that continued residence in Georgia would only result in further harassment. They reasoned that it would be more prudent to try to obtain the best deal from the United States and relocate west. However, most Cherokee supported John Ross, who believed that it was still possible to rally support among



 Boycott the vote on the treaty and continue to rally support and lobby Congress to protect Indian rights against Georgia.

 religious groups and other whites sympathetic to Indian rights. Ross also recognized that Senators Daniel Webster and Henry Clay, two of the most powerful figures in the Senate opposed Jackson and were eager to use the plight of Indians to attack him. Most Cherokees refused to participate in the referendum held on the treaty. Supporters of the treaty accepting relocation won, but the treaty was not widely accepted by most Cherokee who had boycotted the vote.

Consequences
 Bolstered by popular opposition to the treaty among the Cherokee, John Ross lobbied the Senate hard to reject it and came within one vote of defeating it. Having won a narrow victory, Jackson signed the treaty and the Cherokee

 were given two years to leave their homes or face military deportation. After relocation, prominent Indian supporters of the treaty, including Elias Boudinot were assassinated.

Continuing Controversies
John Ross


Elias Boudinot


 Was it realistic for the Cherokees to think that they might win support for their cause? Most scholars agree that Jackson’s Indian policy was racist and unethical, particularly the violation of existing treaties. There is, however, disagreement over how to make sense of the Cherokee response to the dilemma Jackson’s policy created. Supporters of John Ross note that he was a savvy politician whose calculation that opposition to Jackson and sympathy for the plight of Indians made continued resistance a reasonable strategy. Opponents of Ross argue that Boudinot and others who voted in favor of the treaty were more realistic in their assessment of the political situation.

 Was resistance to removal a viable strategy for the Cherokee?



 CHAPTER 8

DEMOCRATS AND WHIGS: DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN CULTURE, 1820–1840

 SAUK

Iowa
Territory


 WYANDOT and DELAWARE

 OTO and MISSOURI IOWA

 OHIO

Nebraska
Territory


 FOX



 OMAHA

 SAUK and FOX

 ILLINOIS

 INDIANA

 KICKAPOO

 SHAWNEE

Kansas Territory
POTAWATOMI CHEROKEE NEUTRAL LANDS

 VIRGINIA

MISSOURI WEA
and PIANKASHA PEORIA and KASKASKIA MIAMI NEW YORK INDIANS 
 KENTUCKY

NORTH CAROLINA

QUAPAW CHEROKEE OUTLET

CHEROKEE CREEK
and SEMINOLE 
 SENECA

INDIAN TERRITORY

 TENNESSEE

 ARKANSAS

SOUTH CAROLINA

 CHEROKEE

 CHICKASAW and CHOCTAW



 CHICKASAW



 CHOCTAW

 GEORGIA

 CREEK

 MISSISSIPPI

ATL A N TIC OC EA N

ALABAMA TEXAS FLORIDA LOUISIANA
New Orleans 
Gulf of Mexico


 SEMINOLE



 Indian tribes’ home territories Land granted to Indians west of the Mississippi River

 Date and route of removal

8.12 Indian Removal
 This map shows the path taken by Indian tribes who were relocated under Jackson’s Indian Removal plan. Thousands died during the forced migration.

 opponents of removal recognized that further resistance was futile. Indian leaders who had continued to protest were joined by a broad coalition that included clergymen, women reformers, and constitutional nationalists such as Henry Clay and Daniel Webster, who were horrified at Jackson’s behavior toward the Cherokee. The two men were particularly outraged by Jackson’s disregard for treaty obligations, and his disrespect for the authority of the federal courts. Opposition to Indian removal provided a rallying point for a diverse collection

What was the “Trail of Tears?”


 of opponents who believed Jackson had become a tyrant who showed little regard for justice or the rule of law. During the long and arduous march westward to what is now Oklahoma (8.12), thousands of Cherokee men, women, and children died. Harsh weather, a shortage of supplies, and poor sanitation contributed to a staggering death toll. Estimates vary but as many as 4,000 of the 12,000 Cherokee who were relocated perished in the trip. For the Cherokee and their descendants, the move west became known as “the Path Where They Cried,” or the “Trail of Tears.”

Read the Document The Cherokee Treaty of 1817


DEMOCRATS, WHIGS, AND THE SECOND PARTY SYSTEM



Democrats, Whigs, and the
Second Party System
 Unlike previous partisan movements Jackson’s Democratic Party operated as an efficient and nationally integrated political organization. The new party organization called for a new party name. In the election of 1828, Jackson’s supporters had described themselves as Democratic-Republicans, whereas Adams’s supporters opted for the name National Republicans. These two labels testify to the transitional nature of the election. Both names harked back to political labels that were associated with the partisan struggles of Jefferson’s and Monroe’s administrations. By the election of 1832, Jackson supporters were simply calling themselves Democrats. By contrast Jackson’s opposition was still defining itself. A third political party, the AntiMasonic party, organized in response to the undue influence of the Masonic Order—a fraternal organization whose members included many of the nation’s most prominent politicians—capturing the imagination of voters briefly, but then disbanded. During Jackson’s second term a new political party, the Whigs, rose out of the ashes of the old National Republicans, stressing the need for a talented, virtuous elite to shape the nation’s future. Evoking the name of the seventeenth-century English opponents of absolute monarchy and the Patriot leaders who had opposed George III during the American Revolution, the Whigs saw themselves as defenders of the Constitution against executive despotism. Opposition to Jackson’s Indian policy provided a common issue around which many disaffected groups had rallied early in Jackson’s presidency. Economic policy, as defined by Clay’s American System (which included support for the national bank), and a general opposition to the new vision of executive power personified by Jackson, particularly his Bank Veto, helped define the core issues of the new Whig Party. Once voters aligned with one of the two main parties, they tended to remain loyal to it during their lifetimes. This intensified the divisions between the two new parties.

Third Party Challenges:
Anti-Masonic and
 Workingmen’s Parties In the election of 1832, Andrew Jackson, aiming at a second term as president, faced Henry Clay, who still saw himself as the heir to James Monroe and John Quincy Adams’s National Republicans. Another candidate, William Wirt, a talented lawyer who had argued the Cherokee cases before the Supreme Court, entered the fray as the choice of the Anti-Masonic party. The presence of a third party worked against Clay, splitting the anti-Jackson vote. The Anti-Masons emerged in New York state as a reaction against the power of the Masonic Order, a secret fraternal organization that included many of

 the nation’s most powerful figures, including Jackson and Clay. Freemasonry had a long history in America. Many members of America’s founding generation had been Freemasons, including George Washington and Benjamin Franklin. The Freemasons championed Enlightenment ideals, but they also drew some of their rituals and symbols from mystical traditions. The best-known Masonic symbol, an eye suspended over an unfinished pyramid, appears on the reverse side of the Great Seal of the United States (and also on the modern dollar bill). Several characteristics of the Freemasons made them a target of popular suspicion. Secret handshakes, rituals, passwords, and other Masonic practices aroused unease. That so many prominent politicians were Masons encouraged conspiracy theories about the organization. Freemasonry’s support for the Enlightenment also angered

 Why was Masonry a cause for concern among some Americans?



 CHAPTER 8

8.13 Parody of
 an Anti-Masonic Apron This parody of the Anti-Masons contrasts their values, “Persecution, Intolerance, Hypocrisy,” with the Masons’ Enlightenment ideals: universal benevolence, equal rights, tolerance, and scientific inquiry.

DEMOCRATS AND WHIGS: DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN CULTURE, 1820–1840

 religious groups, especially evangelicals, who believed that Masons were anti-Christian. These suspicions and resentments provided the backdrop to a sensational crime involving the Freemasons. In 1826, a disgruntled ex-Freemason, William Morgan, threatened to expose the order’s secret rituals. When Morgan was kidnapped and disappeared, a clamor arose against the order. The Anti-Masonic party capitalized on this sensational crime. Meanwhile, the Freemasons did not remain silent. In this image emblazoned on an apron, the Anti-Masons are cast as the mythical monster the hydra. The image also links Anti-Masons with a host of vices. Freemasons, by contrast, are associated with Enlightenment values, such as science and equality. The apron also makes use of a pyramid, a common Masonic symbol (8.13). The Anti-Masons proved to be innovative politicians, building an effective popular political movement. Although short-lived, their party, the first third-party movement in American history, helped pioneer new political techniques that mainstream parties soon adopted. The Anti-Masonic party used

 What lasting contributions did the Anti-Masons make to American politics?

 “As long as property is unequal: or rather, as long as it is so enormously unequal, as we see it at present… those who possess it, will live on the labor of others.” THOMAS SKIDMORE, The Rights of Man to Property! 1829 a national nominating convention to select a presidential candidate. It was also the first party to adopt an official platform, so that voters could judge the party’s position on important questions. This party also energized religious voters who were drawn into public life and politics by the party’s efforts. At the same time that the Anti-Masonic party was organizing, workers in Philadelphia (1828) and New York (1829) formed their own political parties. The Workies, as they were called, won seats in the state legislatures. Among the political reforms they achieved was the abolition of imprisonment for debt. In this pro-Workie cartoon (8.14), an honest working man exercises the ballot freely, while a corrupt tool of the moneyed interest serves the devil. The most radical voice of working class radicalism was that of the artisan Thomas Skidmore, who advocated a comprehensive program to use inheritance taxes to equalize wealth. In his book The Rights of Man to Property! (1829), Skidmore tackled the problem of economic inequality head on by proposing that wealth be subject to a huge inheritance tax. Although citizens would be free to accumulate as much wealth as they could during their lifetime, they would not be able to pass it on to their children. The goal was to prevent the creation of a monied aristocracy. Revenue from this inheritance tax would be used by the government to provide each new generation of citizens with a basic economic stake, so that each citizen would start life with the same economic advantages. This radical proposal to redistribute wealth went nowhere.

DEMOCRATS, WHIGS, AND THE SECOND PARTY SYSTEM



8.14 No More Grinding the Poor—But
Liberty and the Rights
 of Man The devil hands money to buy a rich man’s vote, telling him to “grind the Workies.” A virtuous working man invokes Liberty and the Rights of Man and casts his vote independently, while the goddess of Liberty holds out the ballot box.

 But although the Workies were unable to create a national labor party, some of their proposals were popular enough to be picked up by mainstream Democrats. In particular the Workies’ attack on banking resonated with Jackson and his followers. The class-conscious rhetoric of the Workies would affect how Democrats framed their message for the American people.

The Bank War and the
Rise of the Whigs
 Jackson’s growing opposition to Clay’s American System, including a visceral hatred for the Bank of the United States, emerged as a defining feature of his presidency. The political war that arose over the Bank helped Jackson’s opponents to define their identity and create a new political party, the Whigs. Henry Clay and Daniel Webster, two influential figures within the anti-Jackson National Republican party, believed that the president’s hatred for the Bank could be used to defeat him in the election of 1832. Clay reasoned that Jackson’s opposition to the Bank would alienate most voters because they would recognize the importance of a national bank. Clay approached Nicholas Biddle, the head of the Bank of

Hear the Audio Van Buren


 the United States, to petition Congress for an early renewal of the Bank’s charter in 1832. Clay knew that Jackson was opposed to the Bank and might veto the new charter, which Clay believed would turn the public against the President. Jackson confided to Martin Van Buren his intention to destroy the Bank. “The Bank, Mr. Van Buren, is trying to kill me, but I will kill it!” When Congress renewed the Bank’s charter in 1832, Jackson vetoed it, and Clay lacked the votes to override the veto. The Bank then became the central issue of the presidential campaign of 1832. Although the Bank had many supporters, including some in Jackson’s administration, the veto turned out to be popular. Jackson had managed to convert opposition to the Bank into support for democracy itself. In his Bank Veto Speech, Jackson not only explained why he opposed re-chartering the Bank of the United States but also laid out his own vision of American democracy and constitutional government. Jackson attacked “the rich and powerful” who “too often bend the acts of government to their selfish purposes.” His speech appealed to “the humble members of society—the farmers, mechanics and laborers.” Jackson portrayed the Bank as a tool of the rich and powerful, who had obtained a charter by corrupting Congress. Thus, while the Bank Veto Speech sounded

 How did Jackson use democratic rhetoric to rally support for his Bank Veto?



 CHAPTER 8

DEMOCRATS AND WHIGS: DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN CULTURE, 1820–1840

 “The Bank Veto … falsely and wickedly alleges that the rich and powerful throughout the country are waging a war of oppression against the poor and the weak.” Boston Daily Atlas, editorial, 1832

 democratic themes, it avoided the most combative class-conscious rhetoric radicals in the Workingmen’s movement had employed. Jackson did not attack wealth or the wealthy, but only those who used their wealth and influence to gain unfair advantages. Democratic newspapers echoed Jackson’s view of the Bank: “The Jackson cause is the cause of democracy and the people against a corrupt and abandoned aristocracy.” Jackson also used the Veto Speech to defend his view that federal courts were not the final judges of what the Constitution meant. In his view each branch of the federal government had an obligation to interpret the Constitution for itself. Opponents attacked the veto as an assault on the Constitution. The press charged that Jackson had become “a DICTATOR.” His veto, one newspaper claimed, was the act of a tyrant who had contempt for Congress. Rather than a victory for democracy, Jackson’s recklessness was a sign of his corruption. For his opponents Jackson became the embodiment of tyranny. Jackson’s war against the Bank of the United States inspired a rich assortment of political cartoons, both critical and supportive of his policies. Democratic cartoonists cast Jackson as the champion of the common man, while supporters of the bank depicted him as a reckless tyrant. These images are explored in Images as History: King Andrew and the Downfall of Mother Bank (see pages 244–245).

Andrew Jackson, the Whigs,
 and the Bank War In the election of 1832, Jackson defeated Clay by 200,000 votes and by a roughly 4-to-1 margin in the Electoral College. Clay’s strategy of making the Bank the central issue in the campaign had backfired, and Jackson’s attack on it had increased his popularity. Still the Bank War helped Jackson’s opponents define their political identity and create a new political party, the Whigs. Having defeated its supporters, Jackson might have opted to let the Bank die a natural death by simply allowing its charter to expire. However, fearing that his enemies would try to revive the Bank during the next

 How did Whigs interpret the Bank Veto?

 congressional session and vote it a new charter, he decided to withdraw all federal funds from the Bank, a move that would have made its revival financially impossible. Jackson ordered his secretary of the treasury to remove the government’s deposits, but even his own secretary thought such a move rash and damaging to the economy. The president had to fire two men before he could find one willing to become secretary of the treasury and follow his orders. Jackson justified this unusual step by noting that his reelection had given him a popular mandate to destroy the Bank. No previous president had ever cast his election in such terms. Even some congressional Democrats believed that Jackson had risked the economic well-being of the country to satisfy his personal vendetta against the Bank. Jackson’s enemies in Congress condemned his actions as additional proof that he was a tyrant who sought “a total change of the pure republican character of the Government and the concentration of all powers in the hands one man.” For the Whigs, Jackson was little better than George III, whom America’s own Whig Patriots had opposed more than 50 years before.

Economic Crisis and
 the Presidency of Martin Van Buren Jackson’s decision to remove funds from the Bank and deposit them in state banks damaged the economy. State banks were far less cautious than the Bank of the United States in loaning money, particularly for speculative land ventures. The resulting expansion of credit led to a speculative frenzy. By 1836, land sales mushroomed, increasing almost tenfold in five years to $25 million. To slow down the overheated economy, Jackson adopted a hard money policy, the Specie Circular, which required that land purchased from the government be paid for with specie—hard currency (before this policy individuals had purchased land with bank notes that were not guaranteed by gold or silver).

DEMOCRATS, WHIGS, AND THE SECOND PARTY SYSTEM

 Martin Van Buren had become the most influential figure in Jackson’s inner circle and was the Democrats’ candidate for president in 1836. In most respects Van Buren was nearly the opposite of Andrew Jackson. Political caricaturists made much of the physical and personality differences between the two. Jackson was tall, thin, impulsive, and headstrong, whereas Van Buren was short, stout, cautious, and compromising. The nicknames of the two underscored the differences. Jackson was the “Hero of New Orleans” or “Old Hickory,” whereas Van Buren was the “Little Magician” or the “Slippery Elm.” Van Buren won by a narrow margin in 1836, garnering 50.2 percent of the popular vote. He also inherited a weak economy. Within a year of taking office, he was forced to deal with the Panic of 1837, an economic crisis that plunged the nation into economic depression. Unemployment rose dramatically, as did the number of farm foreclosures and business failures. Wages dropped by as much as 50 percent, and a third of the workforce was out of work in hardhit areas, such as Philadelphia. The cartoon The Times

 illustrates the hardships associated with the Panic of 1837 and links them with Jackson’s economic policies (8.15). The images of idle workers staggering drunk, while a respectable-looking woman and child beg for coins, show the plight of the working class. Although Whigs blamed Jackson’s war against the Bank, the economic causes of the panic were largely foreign. In 1837, the Bank of England decided to raise its interest rates and restrict the flow of credit to British banks investing in America. This constriction of credit forced American banks to restrict their loans and call in many outstanding debts. Without access to additional credit, many businesses and farms defaulted on their loans. When these loans went bad, many banks, caught short, had to close. These bank failures led to a further constriction of credit, which then triggered another round of foreclosures and business failures. To make matters worse, the price of cotton on the world market plummeted in 1837, leaving many speculators without the funds to cover their loans and causing more bankruptcies. Critics of the president gave him a new nickname—“Martin Van Ruin.”



8.15 Panic
 of 1837 This political cartoon highlights the hardships caused by the Panic of 1837. The spirit of Andrew Jackson, symbolized by his hat, glasses, and clay pipe, hovers over the suffering and despair.

 What are the signs of economic distress in this political cartoon on the Panic of 1837?



 CHAPTER 8

DEMOCRATS AND WHIGS: DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN CULTURE, 1820–1840

Images as History
KING ANDREW AND THE DOWNFALL OF MOTHER BANK
as proof that the president had become a corrupt tyrant. Reaching back more than a half century to the colonists’ struggle against King George III, Jackson’s opponents sought to shift attention away from the Bank and focus it on his abuse of executive power. By portraying him as a corrupt monarch, 
 Andrew Jackson’s war on the Second Bank of the United States provided political cartoonists with an excellent subject for satire. Jackson’s enemies seized on his veto of the bill renewing the Bank’s charter and his decision to withdraw federal funds from the Bank and deposit them in state banks

•


 Jackson wears a royal crown and holds a scepter

 The president holds a copy of the Bank Veto in his other hand

•
•


 Jackson crushes the Constitution beneath his feet.

•


 Why is Jackson portrayed as a monarch in this political cartoon?

DEMOCRATS, WHIGS, AND THE SECOND PARTY SYSTEM

 who had trampled on the Constitution and recklessly distributed government funds to political cronies, the president’s opponents found a potent rhetorical theme that was easily translated into powerful visual images. The Whig view of Jackson is beautifully illustrated in “King Andrew the First.” In this cartoon, he not only sports a crown and scepter, two obvious symbols of monarchy, but is adorned in rich robes fit for a king. Jackson holds a copy of the Bank Veto in one hand and tramples on the Constitution.



 Jackson’s supporters also found fertile subject for visual treatment. In this cartoon, “the Downfall of Mother Bank,” Jackson and a popular cartoon character, Major Jack Downing (a forerunner of the character Uncle Sam) bring down the pillars of the Bank by announcing the withdrawal of Government Funds. The Bank’s President, rendered with a demonic head, flees the scene. Jackson’s enemies, the Whigs Henry Clay and Daniel Webster also rendered in an unflattering light. Clay begs Webster to save him from the collapse of the Bank’s columns.

 Nicholas Biddle, the Bank’s president, is rendered as a demonic figure and flees the collapse.

 Lighting bolts emanating from Jackson’s order to withdraw funds from the bank topple its columns.

•


•


•


 Henry Clay lies helpless and calls out for fellow Senator Daniel Webster to rescue him.

Read the Document Andrew Jackson, Veto of the Bank Bill


 How does this pro-Jackson cartoon portray the Whigs?



 CHAPTER 8

DEMOCRATS AND WHIGS: DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN CULTURE, 1820–1840

Playing the Democrats’ Game:
Whigs in the Election of 1840
 Largely because the Whigs split their vote among different regional candidates in 1836, they lost the election to Van Buren. However, the failure of the Whigs also reflected their problem communicating their message to the American people. Millard Fillmore, a young Whig from upstate New York (who would later become president), lamented the “heterogeneous mass” of the Whig Party, which included “old national republicans, and Jackson men in revolt, Masons and Anti-Masons, Abolitionists, and pro-Slavery men.” Fillmore hoped that his party could find some “crucible … to melt them down into one mass of pure Whigs of undoubted good metal.” In 1840, the Whigs did unite and learned how to frame their message to appeal to the American people. Drafting a popular military figure, William Henry Harrison, the Whigs reshaped their campaign using the tools and rhetoric that had made the Democrats so successful, especially their direct appeals to the people. In brief they learned to play the Democrats’ game. The Whigs also pioneered new techniques for mobilizing voters and made an unprecedented effort to involve women in their cause.

The Log Cabin Campaign
 Democrat Martin Van Buren’s supporters derided the Whig candidate in 1840, General William Henry Harrison, as “Old Granny” or “Old Tippecanoe.” The nicknames alluded to the general’s age— he was almost 70—and to his victory over Shawnee Indians at the Battle of Tippecanoe in 1811. One Democratic editor in Baltimore suggested that given his advanced age it might be best to “give him a barrel of hard cider” and let him “sit out the remainder of his days in his log cabin.” The effort to ridicule Harrison backfired, however: The Whigs seized on the twin images of hard cider and log cabins as the symbols for their campaign. The new campaign message transformed Harrison’s public persona almost overnight: He was no longer the well-educated son of a wealthy Virginia planter (his real background), but was instead a simple farmer born into a log cabin who enjoyed a glass of hard (alcoholic) cider like all common folk. Eager to take advantage of the Democratic mistake, the Whigs plastered log cabins and barrels of hard cider onto an astonishing array of items: badges, banners, buttons, belt bucklers, hair brushes, pewter spoons, lithographed prints, quilts, and song sheets. The Whigs also used miniature wooden log cabins as floats, transforming what had been marches into festive parades.

 What political innovations helped the Whigs out-democrat the Democrats?

 Whig slogans became two of the most successful campaign slogans in U.S. history: “Tippecanoe and Tyler too” to support Harrison, and “Van, Van is a used up man” to taunt their opponent, Martin Van Buren. The Democratic Review, capturing the irony of the election of 1840, noted that “we have taught them how to conquer us.” Whigs not only adapted the Democrat’s campaign techniques for mobilizing the popular vote but also developed their own innovative campaign style. With parades and campaign music such as “General Harrison’s Log Cabin March & Quick Step,” one of several popular campaign songs, the Whigs orchestrated a brilliant campaign and trounced their opponents (8.16). One Democratic paper complained: “We could meet the Whigs on the field of argument and beat them.” But how were Democrats to respond when the Whigs “lay down the weapons of argument and attack us with musical notes”? While Whigs cast Harrison and his running mate John Tyler as men of the people, they made Van Buren out to be a dissipated aristocrat who gorged himself on expensive French cuisine and champagne while Americans suffered economic hardship. Although charges of sexual misconduct were not new in American politics—Jefferson had been tarnished by the Sally Hemings scandal

 View the Closer Look General Harrison’s Log Cabin March—Sheet Music

PLAYING THE DEMOCRATS’ GAME: WHIGS IN THE ELECTION OF 1840



8.16 Harrison Log Cabin and Hard Cider Sheet Music
 This piece of sheet music includes the two most common symbols of Harrison’s campaign, a log cabin and a barrel of hard cider. To highlight Harrison’s military accomplishments, the artist shows him greeting a disabled veteran.

 (see Chapter 7)—the smears of the Jacksonian era sunk even lower. Eager to discredit him, the Whigs spread rumors that Van Buren was a sexual pervert who had instructed the groundskeeper at the White House to create a mound in the shape of a breast.

Gender and Social Class:
The Whig Appeal
 Another innovative aspect of the Whig’s electoral strategy was their mobilization of women. Although women could not vote, the Whigs hoped to get them to deliver their husbands’ votes. The Whig appeal to women relied on two elements: a defense of morality against corruption and an appeal to economic interest. Whig newspaper editor Horace Greeley’s description of the choice Americans faced in the 1840 election captures the appeal of the Whigs to many women. Greeley characterized the Whigs as supporters

 of the family and Christian morality and accused the Democrats of being atheists and sexual perverts: “Wherever you find a bitter, blasphemous Atheist and enemy of Marriage, Morality, and Social Order, there you may be certain of one vote for Van Buren.” Although such appeals to traditional family values and morality motivated some women to support the Whig cause, other women were inspired by economic arguments that Whigs directed at male voters.

 “The ladies they flock’d to their windows, In numbers, I say not a few, And held out their starspangled banners All to the honor of Tippecanoe. ” Harrison campaign lyric, 1840

 Why were women drawn to the Whig message?



 CHAPTER 8

DEMOCRATS AND WHIGS: DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN CULTURE, 1820–1840

 Democratic policies had left the American economy in shambles, and Whig policies promised to bring back prosperity. Whigs sponsored all-female rallies in support of Harrison, including a meeting in Ohio in which Whig women raised cups of tea in toasts to “Old Tippecanoe.” Democrats complained about the Whigs “making politicians of their women,” which was “something new under the sun.” Whigs also attacked Democrats for fanning class resentments. Thus one Whig chided the Democrats for their “incessant and unrelenting assaults” that tore “asunder the good feelings which bind men to each other.” Rather than highlight the struggle between democracy and aristocracy, a favorite rhetorical theme of Democrats, Whigs stressed the essential harmony of all economic classes. An observer at a Whig rally proudly noted that “all classes” had rediscovered that “their interests were the same.” Calvin Colton, a leading Whig, evoked the notion that “This is a country of self-made men.” Whig policies would promote prosperity for all hard-working Americans. The election clearly energized the voters, who turned out in record numbers, nearly four-fifths of eligible voters casting a vote. Harrison defeated Van Buren by 150,000 votes and a 4-to-1 margin in the Electoral College. President Harrison’s inaugural speech was the longest in American history, 105 minutes long. His term in office, however, was the shortest. Within a month of becoming president, he contracted pneumonia and died. Vice President John Tyler then became the tenth President of the United States. Some dubbed him “His Accidency” because he inherited his position after Harrison’s death.

Democrats and Whigs:
Two Visions of Government
 and Society The Whigs and Democrats represented opposing political visions. The Whigs favored a strong central government, encouragement for industry, and defense of Indians’ rights; in the North and parts of the Midwest, they aligned themselves against slavery. Rejecting the views of old-style conservatives such as Chancellor James Kent, an heir to the Federalist vision of politics, the Whigs adopted the more popular style of politics pioneered by the anti-Masonic party, using it to reach out to voters. Whigs embraced Clay’s American System, arguing that would help all Americans so that the rich and poor would each see their fortunes rise. Whigs

 What were the most important differences between Whigs and Democrats on economic issues?

 emphasized the harmonious interaction of different elements of the economy and attacked Democrats for preaching an ideology that fostered class conflict. The Whig version of democracy was not egalitarian. It recognized the need for a talented and virtuous elite to guide the nation. The Whigs’ frank acceptance of inequality allowed them to find a place in their ranks for African Americans, Indians, women, and any other group who needed guidance or protection by an enlightened elite. Although slightly paternalistic in outlook, the Whigs believed they had a duty to protect these groups. Thus Whigs championed the rights of Indians against the efforts of Jackson and other Democrats to forcibly remove them from their lands. Although Southern Whigs supported slavery, Whigs outside the South often supported its abolition. Finally Whigs actively cultivated women’s involvement in their campaign efforts. The Whig Party drew from the Old National Republican Party of John Quincy Adams, adding to their ranks Democrats who opposed Jackson’s Bank War. Anti-Masons and the more commercial Southern planters were also drawn to the Whig message. Whiggery also had a significant ethnic and religious basis. Individuals of English origin were also more likely than others to be Whig in sympathy, and mainstream Protestant denominations such as the Congregationalists, Presbyterians, and Episcopalians were more likely to vote Whig. Democrats’ vision of white men’s democracy was more egalitarian than that of the Whigs, but it was also more exclusive. Although Democrats often couched their appeals in egalitarian terms, this rhetoric was not inclusive when it came to racial equality. Instead, Democrats reached out to workers, small farmers, and the planter class. Democrats attracted voters who were suspicious of the burgeoning market economy, including those who blamed banks, especially the Bank of the United States, for their economic problems. They asserted their support for the sanctity of private property and for the doctrine of states’ rights, meaning that they were the party best suited to protect the interests of Southern slaveholders. Obtaining more land for white farmers, including Southern planters, was the primary goal of Democrats. Promoting this old Jeffersonian ideal of an expanding nation of yeoman farmers meant having to sacrifice the rights of Indians. From Jeffersonianism, Jacksonian Democrats inherited a fear of centralized government and large concentrations of financial power. Thus Democrats opposed Clay’s American

 View the Image Matty’s Dream

PLAYING THE DEMOCRATS’ GAME: WHIGS IN THE ELECTION OF 1840

Democrats


Whigs


 Oppose tariffs

 Favor tariffs

 Oppose federal support for internal improvements

 Favor federal support for internal improvements

Oppose Bank of the United States


Support the Bank of the United States


 Favor Indian removal

 Oppose Indian removal

 States’ rights

 Support strong central government



8.17 Democrats and Whigs: Major Beliefs


 System and the Whig’s emphasis on a powerful federal government involved in economic development. Although not opposed to economic growth, Democrats believed that the individual states, not the federal government, ought to guide economic development. Rural farmers and urban workers flocked to the ranks of the Democrats. Religious affiliation also dictated Democratic affiliation. Democrats were more popular among the less affluent evangelical Protestant sects such as the Baptists and Methodists, who found Jackson’s egalitarian message appealing. Democrats also attracted free thinkers and Catholics who feared that the Whigs were trying to impose Protestant morality on them. For a summary of the ideas of the Democrats and Whigs, see the chart (8.17). Democrats hailed the majesty of the people and attacked aristocracy, particularly artificial privilege and monopolies. Whigs embraced a more measured view of democracy. They warned Americans of the threat posed by demagogues, tyrants who flattered the people but who willingly sacrificed the common good, the rule of law, and the rights of the individual as they pursed their own quest for power and glory. The expansion of democracy in America was accompanied by profound changes in the economy. The Whigs and the Democrats each grappled with these

 changes in different ways. Developments in technology, the growth of the factory system, and the burgeoning market would produce changes no less profound than the democratization of politics. Taken together these interrelated changes helped usher in an economic and cultural transformation historians describe as the “market revolution.” The Whigs would become the great champions of the market revolution, believing that government, including the national government, could help expand the market economy and promote American prosperity. Democrats accepted the necessity of the market, but were more wary of its changes, and were particularly concerned that government not manipulate the market economy to further the interests of a wealthy elite. They were especially suspicious of the national government, and believed that the states could better promote growth. Whigs and Democrats would also come to view the geographical expansion of the United States in radically different ways. For Democrats, more land meant the fulfillment of the old Jeffersonian dream of creating a nation of independent farmers. Whigs worried about the political side effects of expansion. They sought to improve America, not expand it. Economic development and reform, not geographical expansion, would become the key to the Whigs’ very different vision of the American future.

 “The aristocracy of our country … continually contrive to change their party name. It was first Tory, then Federalist, then no party … then National Republican, now Whig. … But by whatever name they reorganize themselves, the true democracy of the country, the producing classes, ought to be able to distinguish the enemy.” FREDERICK ROBINSON, Democrat, 1834

View the Closer Look Images as History: Old Hickory
 or King Andrew: Popular Images of Andrew Jackson

 What role did ethnic politics play in the contest between Whigs and Democrats?



 CHAPTER 8

DEMOCRATS AND WHIGS: DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN CULTURE, 1820–1840

1824–1826




1829–1830


1831–1832


Tariff of 1824


Andrew Jackson
 elected president

 Thomas Skidmore publishes Rights of Man to Property!

 Jackson’s Bank Veto

 In a bitter election campaign, Jackson defeats Adams and claims a broad popular mandate for his democratic agenda

 Skidmore’s book energizes Workingmen’s movement

 Congress adopts protective tariff, a key element of Clay’s American system

 John Quincy Adams elected president

CHAPTER REVIEW

 House of Representatives decides presidential election. Jackson charges Adams and Clay with a “corrupt bargain”

Publication of South Carolina
Exposition and Protest
 asserting states rights

Webster-Hayne Debate
 In dramatic speech to a crowded Senate chamber, Daniel Webster defends the Union against supporters of states’ rights

 South Carolina forcefully states the theory of states’ rights and nullification

 Jackson vetoes renewal of Bank of the United States while attacking privileged elites

Cherokee Nation v. Georgia
 decided by Supreme Court Supreme Court rules against Cherokees in the first of two cases concerning their status as a sovereign nation

Review Questions
 1. What were the main features of Clay’s American System?

 Indians allow him to reconcile his policy with his ideals?

 2. How did states’ rights affect Andrew Jackson’s presidency?

 4. How did Democratic and Whig cartoonists represent Jackson during the Bank War?

 3. Was Jackson’s Indian policy consistent with his democratic ideals? How did Jackson’s perception of

 5. How did the Whigs out-democrat the Democrats in the election of 1840?

Key Terms
 American System Henry Clay’s comprehensive national plan for economic growth that included protective tariffs for American industry and government investment in roads and other internal improvements. “Corrupt bargain” Term presidential candidate Jackson’s supporters used to attack the alliance between John Quincy Adams and Henry Clay that deprived him of the presidency. “Old Hickory” The nickname that General Andrew Jackson earned for seeming as stout as an “Old Hickory tree” in fighting against the British in the War of 1812. Spoils system The name applied to Jackson’s system of replacing government officeholders with those loyal to him. Nullification A constitutional doctrine advanced by supporters of states’ rights that held that individual states could nullify unconstitutional acts of Congress.

 Indian Removal Act of 1830 Legislation that facilitated the removal of Indians tribes to lands west of the Mississippi. Bank Veto Speech Jackson’s veto of a bill to re-charter of the Bank of the United States, in which he explained why he opposed the bank and laid out his own vision of American democracy and constitutional government. Whigs (American, 19th Century) Anti-Jackson political party; the name evoked the seventeenth-century English opponents of absolute monarchy and the Patriot leaders who had opposed the tyranny of George III during the American Revolution. Whigs supported Clay’s American System and a stronger central government.

CHAPTER REVIEW



1836–1837






 South Carolina nullifies federal tariff

 Martin Van Buren elected president

Cherokee Removal
(Trail of Tears)


William Henry Harrison
 elected president

 South Carolina becomes the first state to invoke the doctrine of nullification

 Democrats retain control of the White House after Jackson’s retirement from office

 Jackson’s policy of pressuring Indians to give up their lands and homes and relocate to Western lands is approved and implemented

 Whigs exploit new methods of democratic politics to elect their candidate to the presidency

Panic of 1837
 Economic downturn is blamed on Jackson’s policies

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Democrats and Whigs.

Questions for Analysis
 1. Why did so many commentators on American life discuss the democratic character of Jacksonian America? Read the Document Michel Chevalier, Society Manners and Politics in the U.S., p. 226

 2. Who was Davy Crockett and why did his life become a symbol of America during the Jacksonian period?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Hear the Audio File • Van Buren, p. 241

Read the Document
• John Adams, A Corrupt Bargain or Politics as Usual, p. 229
• South Carolina Refuses the Tariff, p. 230
• Andrew Jackson, the Force Bill, p. 232
• The Cherokee Treaty of 1817, p. 238


Read the Document Profile: Davy Crockett, p. 222
View the Closer Look


 3. How did images of Jackson represent him and what do they reveal about political life in the 1820s and 1830s? View the Closer Look Images as History: Old Hickory or King Andrew: Popular Images of Andrew Jackson, p. 249

 4. What role did race play in Jacksonian political rhetoric? View the Map Interactive Map: Native American Removal, p. 235

 5. Was the Bank Veto an example of radical democracy? Read the Document Andrew Jackson, Veto of the Bank Bill, p. 245

 • General Harrison’s Log Cabin March—Sheet Music, p.246

View the Image
• 1824 Election Cartoon, p. 225
 • Matty’s Dream, p. 248



What was the Market
Revolution?


The Spread of
Industrialization
 p. 260

 How did early industrialization change the nature of work?

The Changing Urban
Landscape p. 264


 How did the growth of cities affect American society?

Southern Society
 p. 270

 How did race and class shape Southern society?

Life and Labor Under
Slavery p. 274


How did African-American
 culture adapt to the hardships imposed by slavery?

 CHAPTER

The Market
Revolution p. 254




