 proposal that the federal government investigate racial discrimination in voting and employment, many conservative southern Democrats supported Governor Strom Thurmond of South Carolina in his presidential bid as a segregationist candidate for the States’ Rights Party. Meanwhile liberal Democrats, upset with Truman’s tepid reform agenda (see Chapter 25), formed the Progressive Party and nominated Henry A. Wallace, who championed national health insurance. The former vice president’s downplaying of the Soviet threat brought charges that Wallace had communist sympathies. Dewey, who had run against FDR in 1944, was a moderate Republican and, like Truman, supported civil rights and containing communism. Many believed that the president’s unpopularity and the three-way split within the Democratic Party assured Dewey’s election. Determined to “give them hell,” Truman traveled nearly 22,000 miles during the campaign, appealing to the New Deal coalition of farmers, northern blacks, Catholics, unions, and liberals, who had secured FDR’s victory in 1936. Dewey’s unwillingness to attack the president’s foreign policies during this time of international crisis also helped Truman. In summer 1948, Truman issued an executive order desegregating the military to prevent the defection of black voters to

24.6 The Berlin
Airlift, 1948–1949
Photographs of
 German children welcoming American food planes convinced Americans that their help was both needed and welcomed overseas.

View the Image Truman Ends Military Jim Crow


 What political impact did this photo have?



 CHAPTER 24

 24.7 Truman’s Triumph Truman celebrated his 1948 election by holding the Chicago Daily Tribune, with its mistaken headline, from his campaign train before supporters in St. Louis, as he traveled back to the White House.

A DIVIDED WORLD: THE EARLY COLD WAR, 1945–1963

 Wallace, who called for an immediate end to Jim Crow. Thanks to votes from African Americans and labor, Truman won a second term, with 303 electoral votes and 49.5 percent of the popular vote, defeating Dewey who received 189 electoral votes and 45.1 percent of the popular vote,

 Thurmond (39 electoral votes; 2.4 percent of the popular vote), and Wallace (no electoral votes; 2.4 percent of the popular vote). This victory surprised many, including the Chicago Daily Tribune, which tried to get a jump on the competition by declaring Dewey the victor on election night before all the votes were counted. In a photo (24.7) that became an instant classic, a jubilant Truman held the paper and its erroneous headline “Dewey Defeats Truman” above his head the next morning when his victory was confirmed. Besides helping Truman win the election, the sight of wave after wave of planes arriving 24 hours a day in Berlin also demonstrated America’s strength and resolve to the Soviet Union. Stalin finally admitted defeat and revoked the

 Why was NATO an important development in the Cold War?

 blockade on May 12, 1949. The capitalist enclave in the heart of the Soviet sector of Germany had survived. By that time the Americans, British, and French had created the Federal Republic of Germany, or West Germany, out of their three occupied zones. In response the Soviets organized a Communist-led German government in their sector, the German Democratic Republic, or East Germany. Germany was now formally divided into two separate states. After the Soviet-backed coup in Czechoslovakia and the blockade of Berlin, the United States refined its policy of containment. These events had shattered any chance of creating consensus within the Truman administration around Kennan’s vision that economic aid through the Marshall Plan could safeguard democracy and prosperity in Western Europe. If peace were to prevail, it would be an armed peace. Western European nations took the first step by allying themselves in the Brussels Pact in 1948. This alliance blossomed into the American-led NATO alliance in April 1949. The Soviet Union responded with their own alliance, the Warsaw Pact, among Eastern European nations. The map of the Cold War in Europe portrays the two alliance systems that divided Europe into capitalist and communist camps (see 24.2). By joining NATO the United States created its first formal military alliance since the Revolutionary War. There would be no repeat of World War I or World War II, when the United States had waited over two years each time before declaring war. As a member of NATO, it was obligated to come immediately to Western Europe’s defense in the event of a Soviet attack. Besides putting American bases and soldiers permanently in Europe, NATO extended the protection of America’s atomic shield to its NATO partners. Like the Marshall Plan NATO was designed to do many things at once. Besides creating a permanent role for the United States overseas and containing communism, NATO also helped keep peace among European nations that had clashed repeatedly in the last hundred years. A popular saying claimed that NATO kept “the Soviets out, the Americans in, and the Germans down” by ensuring that West Germany remained friends with western democracies even after the nation regained its economic vigor.

FIGHTING COMMUNISM: COLD AND HOT WAR



Fighting Communism:
Cold and Hot War
 As the Cold War took shape, the United States did not gain any noticeable advantage from its atomic monopoly in dealing with Stalin. Losing it, nonetheless, caused angst in the United States. In 1949, the Soviet Union successfully tested its own atomic bomb, challenging Americans’ view of their own nation as the world’s dominant military power. Suddenly the chances of an international crisis escalating into nuclear war appeared greater. As Americans digested this news, the epicenter of the Cold War shifted to Asia. By 1950, a Communist government controlled China, and the Korean War had begun. In the Korean War (1950–1953), the United States and its allies fought Communist North Koreans and Chinese to a stalemate, frustrating Americans.

Communism Rising: 1949
 The United States did not have long to celebrate its achievements during the Berlin airlift. Three months after Stalin admitted defeat in Berlin, an American spy plane detected radioactive fallout in the desert of Kazakhstan, a Soviet republic. This could mean only one thing: the Soviet Union had successfully tested its own atomic bomb. The news shattered the American certainty that it would retain a nuclear monopoly for at least ten years. Waiting impatiently for a formal announcement from the Kremlin, Truman finally broke the news to the world in September 1949. The Soviet Union confirmed the American report, but gave no other information about Stalin’s plans for his nuclear program. Fearful that Stalin might use nuclear weapons to expand beyond the iron curtain, the Truman administration broadened the scope of America’s containment strategy beyond NATO and the Marshall Plan. Truman decided to station American troops in Western Europe permanently to both deter and, if necessary, respond to a nuclear attack. The United States also began stockpiling atomic bombs to gain a numerical advantage over the Soviet Union. Finally Truman authorized the development of a “superbomb,” a thermonuclear hydrogen bomb that was 1,000 times more powerful than the uranium-enriched atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima and the plutonium bomb that destroyed Nagasaki. Americans were still recovering from the shock of the Soviet bomb, when they received more bad news. The 25-year-old Chinese Civil War had finally ended with the Communist Mao Zedong victorious over the Nationalist leader Jiang Jieshi (Chiang

View the Image U.S. Hydrogen Bomb Test Over
Uninhabited Pacific Island (1952)


 Kaishek), who fled with his government to Taiwan, an island off the southeast coast of mainland China. Mao was an avid swimmer who refused even as an old man to be deterred by the human waste floating in China’s polluted rivers. A master of staying afloat in water and politics, Mao adopted Stalin and Soviet-style policies as his model, inflicting similarly painful waves of famine and political oppression on the Chinese people that killed more than 20 million. Fearful that the United States intended to attack China and restore Jiang to power, Mao immediately reached out to Stalin. “There should be some division of labor between us,” Stalin suggested, with the

 “There is only one thing worse than one nation having the atomic bomb— that’s two nations having it.” American physical chemist HAROLD ULREY, September 1949 Soviet Union furthering the communist cause in Europe, and Mao doing the same in Asia. Accepting Stalin’s offer Mao spent two months in Moscow devising a joint strategy that resulted in the 1950 Sino-Soviet Treaty, which pledged mutual assistance in the event of an enemy attack. This alliance created a second front in the Cold War that forced the United States to divide its attention between Europe and Asia. In light of these new threats, Truman ordered a full review of American foreign policy. The State Department responded with a document known as

 How did the USSR acquiring nuclear weapons and the rise of communist China change the contours of the Cold War?



 CHAPTER 24

A DIVIDED WORLD: THE EARLY COLD WAR, 1945–1963

 National Security Council Report 68, or NSC-68. Not mincing words NSC-68 declared that “the issues that face us are momentous, involving the fulfillment or destruction not only of this Republic but of civilization itself.” Secretary of State Acheson later admitted that NSC-68’s cataclysmic vision of a Soviet enemy “animated by a new fanatic faith” and bent on worldwide domination was meant to convince the president to use all means “short of war” to halt the apparent Soviet drive for world conquest. NSC-68 crystallized the piecemeal developments of the last four years into one clear vision: The United States must build up “the political, economic, and military strength of the free world to frustrate the Kremlin design of a world dominated by its will.” This message was transmitted to the public through political speeches, films, and novels. Perhaps no writer better encapsulated the public’s fears of worldwide communist domination than George Orwell in his classic novel 1984, which hit bookstores in 1949. Orwell envisioned a future where totalitarianism has triumphed and the people’s loyalty to a Stalin-like dictator “Big Brother,” who watches over everyone and censors their behavior, is ensured by a cycle of endless wars and torture. As the main character Winston Smith undergoes another round of torture, his tormentor tells him, “Imagine a boot stamping on a human face—forever.” This image neatly expressed the American public’s view of communism in the Cold War.

The Korean War
At the end of World War II, the United States
 and the Soviet Union had agreed to divide the former Japanese colony of Korea, a peninsula along the north Asian Pacific Coast, into two zones of occupation. The country was split along the 38th parallel, with the USSR occupying the north and the United States the south. In 1945, partitioning the country seemed like a good way to deprive Japan of Korean resources and prevent the Soviet Union from completely taking over the peninsula. When the Soviet Union organized a Communist government under Kim Il-sung in North Korea and the United States selected Syngman Rhee to head a capitalist government in the south, the previously unified nation appeared permanently divided. By 1949, however, the United States had begun to reevaluate its military commitment in South Korea. The occupation was expensive, and

 Why did the United States decide to fight in Korea?

 Pentagon officials doubted the strategic importance of the peninsula. The State Department agreed, believing that economic aid and political reforms could strengthen South Korea enough to discourage a North Korean attack. In January 1950, Secretary of State Acheson openly questioned the importance of South Korea to the overall defense of American interests in East Asia. In a speech before the National Press Club, Acheson outlined a defensive perimeter in the Pacific that the United States would defend against communist incursions. It included Japan, Okinawa, Taiwan, and the Philippines, but not South Korea. Accordingly Truman began withdrawing American soldiers from South Korea. To deter North Korea from attacking, the United States left a stockpile of conventional weapons and promised continued financial aid. Yet when North Korea launched a surprise invasion of South Korea in June 1950, Truman immediately reversed course. The speed and success of the North Korean attack alarmed him. Within two days North Korean troops had entered Seoul, the capital of South Korea (24.8), and by the end of one week North Korea had pushed the bulk of the South Korean army and its American advisors into the toe of the Korean peninsula around Pusan. Viewing this overpowering offensive as confirmation of NSC-68, Truman believed the USSR was behind the attack. He was partly right. Kim Il-sung had secured reluctant support from Stalin and Mao Zedong for the invasion by promising an easy victory. If the United States intervened in Korea, Stalin saw advantages to diverting American attention away from Europe. By June 1950, many Americans felt that the West was losing the Cold War. China had fallen to communism, and the Soviets had exploded an atomic bomb. At home sensational spy trials fueled continued doubts about Truman’s leadership. In this political climate doing nothing was hardly an option for him. Truman’s intimate understanding of World War I (he had served as an artillery captain in France) and World War II encouraged him to break with the precedent set by these recent conflicts. In each of these wars, Americans had debated the merits of fighting for more than two years before declaring war. “I remembered how each time the democracies failed to act it had encouraged the aggressors to keep going ahead,” Truman noted. Determined to respond quickly this time, he committed American troops to combat within days. Although Truman

FIGHTING COMMUNISM: COLD AND HOT WAR SOVIET UNIO N ( USSR )

North Korea
South Korea


24.8 The
Korean War
 The advantage on the battlefield seesawed during the war’s first year before becoming a stalemate.

 North Korean forces United States (United Nations) forces Chinese forces Capitals

S e a


Chongjin
H


I


N


A


 China attacks, Nov 26, 1950

Hyesanjin


 o f

J a p a n


 lu

R.


C




Ya


Chosin
Reservoir


Chosan
 gR

.


 UN advance toward China, fall 1950

Tokyo


NORTH KOREA

Panmunjom
Seoul
 Inchon landing, Sept 15, 1950

 UN counteroffensive, Sept. 18,1950 Amistice line, July 27, 1953

SOUTH KOREA

Inchon


 Farthest advance of Chinese troops, Jan 1951

.


 ng R

Na


Wonsan


.


Kangnung


 Original boundary at 38th parallel

JAPAN
Farthest advance of North Koreans, July-Sept 1950 
N a k to


Pyongyang


 n R

Taedon


Hungnam


Pusan


 U.S. forces arrive from Japan, summer 1950

Yellow
S ea


PACIFIC OCEAN

 consulted Congress, he never asked for a declaration of war against North Korea. Instead he decided to work through the UN, which authorized the use of force to restore the original 38th-parallel boundary between North and South Korea. Sixteen nations sent troops to Korea to serve in the UN police force, but the United States provided the bulk of troops and commanded military operations. When polled, three-quarters of Americans approved of Truman’s decision to send military aid to South Korea. Americans, for the time being anyway, subscribed to his vision that “the future of civilization depends on what we do.” The situation on the battlefield, however, was grim, with South Korean soldiers holding on precariously around Pusan. To reverse the situation, General Douglas MacArthur, commander-in-chief of the United Nations forces, devised a dramatic and risky strategy. Rather than simply confronting the

View the Map Interactive Map: The Korean
War, 1950–1953


 North Koreans head-on, he staged an amphibious landing at Inchon, a port near Seoul. This attack on the North Koreans’ rear would cut their supply lines and force them to fight on two fronts. The tides at Inchon, however, were the second highest in the world, varying 29 feet between high and low tides. Within minutes, the receding tide could mire a boat in mud. Inchon, MacArthur reasoned, was the right place to attack precisely because it was so uninviting and would take the enemy by surprise. As he predicted, the North Koreans had stationed only 6,500 troops there, and the UN force of 40,000 encountered little resistance in taking the city. This operation turned MacArthur, already famous for his feats in World War II, into a national hero. Following the Inchon invasion UN forces quickly drove North Korean troops out of South Korea. After this victory, Truman pondered giving the war a new purpose. Instead of simply restoring the

 What accounted for America’s initial successes on the battlefield?



 CHAPTER 24

24.9 “The Price of
Victory: A Soldier
Grieves for His
Lost Buddy”
 An American soldier comforts a comrade distraught over the death of a friend during the Korean War in 1950.

A DIVIDED WORLD: THE EARLY COLD WAR, 1945–1963

 status quo of a divided Korea, he decided to try to reunify Korea under an anti-Communist government. Rolling back communism, rather than containing it, became the new goal sanctioned by the UN in October 1950. At that same moment, however, China was preparing to aid North Korea. When American troops crossed the 38th parallel into North Korea, they did not know that Mao was massing Chinese troops and guns along the North Korean-Chinese border. Still unaware of Mao’s intentions, American troops moved swiftly up the peninsula to celebrate Thanksgiving by the Yalu River. Victory seemed assured: MacArthur promised Truman that the troops would be home by Christmas. Then in late November waves of Chinese troops began pouring across the border, shrieking and blowing bugles. Terrified UN forces suffered heavy casualties as they withdrew in the harsh winter. Life photographer David

 How did the entry of the Chinese into the Korean War affect political and military debates within the United States?

 Douglas Duncan, warming his camera in his coat pocket to keep the film from breaking, chronicled the bitter retreat of 10,000 Marines who fought their way to safety. Nearly every soldier suffered frostbite; half the men were wounded or killed. “If I were God and could give you anything you wanted, what would you ask for?” Duncan asked one Marine. After several minutes the Marine replied, “Give me tomorrow.” Military leaders disagreed over how to respond as the Chinese continued their advance, which UN forces eventually contained around the 38th parallel. The Joint Chiefs of Staff urged Truman to seek a negotiated peace, advice he followed. MacArthur, however, publicly endorsed all-out war utilizing nuclear weapons. The president and theater commander now began to pursue two competing visions. As Truman made diplomatic overtures to the Chinese for a ceasefire along the 38th parallel, MacArthur warned the Chinese to surrender or face destruction. “There is no substitute for victory,” MacArthur wrote to Republican Congressman Joseph Martin of Massachusetts, echoing the feelings of countless Americans. This was not, however, Truman’s vision of how to end the war; when Martin read these words on the House floor, he sealed MacArthur’s fate. Truman fired MacArthur the next week, triggering, as Secretary of State Acheson had predicted, “the biggest fight of your administration.” MacArthur came home, not in disgrace, but to great acclaim. Many Americans shared his frustrations with the stalemate on the battlefield. Six years after defeating two great military powers in World War II, the United States found itself unable to reunify Korea under an anti-Communist government. Responding to MacArthur’s vision of total victory, huge crowds greeted the general when his ship docked in San Francisco, and he reveled in a ticker-tape parade held in his honor in New York City. Congress debated impeaching Truman but then opted instead to hold hearings into MacArthur’s removal. During the hearings MacArthur’s critics interrogated the

FIGHTING COMMUNISM: COLD AND HOT WAR

 general about the possibility that using nuclear weapons in Korea might lead to a global nuclear war. MacArthur’s response, “that doesn’t happen to be my responsibility,” caused the general’s popularity to plummet. The cooling enthusiasm for MacArthur’s vision of all-out war did little to bolster public confidence in Truman. In public opinion polls only 24 percent of Americans approved of how he was handling the presidency, reflecting public disappointment over Korea, anger at “losing China,” and well-publicized Soviet spy scandals that together revived the image of Truman as an ineffectual leader. His aggressive support for civil rights and his domestic reform agenda (see Chapter 25), too much for conservatives and too little for liberals, also contributed to his poor rating. Korea was the last American war that the public viewed primarily through photographs. Only 34 percent of American homes had television sets in 1952, rising to 86 percent by 1960. In 1950, Newsweek published the photograph “The Price of Victory: A Soldier Grieves for His Lost Buddy” (24.9). One reader’s suggestion that this image should serve as the iconic photo of the Korean War, just as “Old Glory Goes Up on Mt. Suribachi, Iwo Jima” had served to represent World War II, revealed a significant shift in the public’s attitudes over the last five years (see Images as History: Combat Photography, Chapter 23, page 706). The World War II image of five marines and one navy corpsman raising the flag suggested teamwork, victory, and the triumph of democracy. In sharp contrast “The Price of Victory” looked at the personal cost of war—the sorrow and compassion that drew men together on the battlefield—even as the photograph reaffirmed the willingness of soldiers to die for their country. Photographers and the public were beginning to probe the impact of fighting on soldiers, stoking the ambivalence that the country increasingly felt about the war. With MacArthur gone, General Matthew Ridgway took over command of UN operations in 1951, and armistice negotiations began. Talks were still underway two years later when a new president, Dwight D. Eisenhower, took office. His sunny demeanor offered a sharp contrast to Truman’s more combative and coarse personality. Whereas Truman cussed, told off-color jokes, and picked fights with reporters, Eisenhower was gregarious and friendly to

Watch the Video Ike for President: Eisenhower
Campaign Ad (1952)


 all. Some Democrats had tried to draft Eisenhower as a presidential candidate in 1948. Four years later the Republican “We Like Ike” campaign finally convinced Eisenhower to seek office. The young women adorned here (24.10), with “Ike” dresses and umbrellas, illustrate Republicans’ gusto for Eisenhower on the eve of the nominating convention where delegates enthusiastically selected him as their candidate. Admired by Americans for his command of the D-Day invasion in World War II, Eisenhower’s military experience convinced Americans that he would be a capable leader in wartime. The negotiations remained deadlocked, however, until Eisenhower threatened to reconsider employing nuclear weapons. Finally the two sides agreed to a permanent ceasefire in July 1953. The war was costly on all sides. More than 400,000 Chinese soldiers and nearly two million North and South Koreans (soldiers and civilians) perished. For the first time since the War of 1812, the United States could not claim outright victory over its opponent despite nearly 33,000 men killed in combat and 103,000 men wounded. “What the hell is there to celebrate?” remarked one soldier when news of the armistice reached the front. The silence at home offered a marked contrast to the jubilant demonstrations that had filled the streets eight years earlier, when Japan surrendered. China embraced a competing vision of the stalemate,



24.10
“We Like Ike”
 The enthusiasm displayed by Republicans in 1952 convinced Eisenhower to run for president.

 How did the Korean War compare to World War II?



 CHAPTER 24

A DIVIDED WORLD: THE EARLY COLD WAR, 1945–1963

 reveling in the ability to hold its own against the United States. The Korean War had major geopolitical consequences by turning the Cold War into a global conflict. The war tied South Korea and Japan, economically resurgent thanks to American aid, even more closely to the United States, and both became staunch allies in creating a defensive perimeter against communism in East Asia. Holding the line against communism in Korea increased America’s interest in other regional civil wars, including one underway in Vietnam. The war poisoned relations with China, and the two nations did not reestablish diplomatic relations until 1979. Pledged to defend

 South Korea, the United States still maintains a large military presence along what continues to be the world’s most heavily armed border.

Nuclear Fallout and Fear
 While soldiers fought and died on the battlefield, Americans at home waged their own defensive war against nuclear weapons. The government sponsored atmospheric and underwater tests of nuclear bombs in the 1940s and 1950s both in the United States and on the Bikini Atoll in the Marshall Islands in the Pacific. Even when the United States had a secure monopoly on nuclear weapons, many Americans expressed concern about nuclear fallout, the deadly pollution that descends through the air after a nuclear explosion. In the 1950s, popular science fiction writers and filmmakers tapped into this preoccupation. In the Japanese film classic Godzilla, for example, a nuclear explosion awakens a fire-breathing monster who, as the film’s promotional poster (24.11) illustrated, terrorizes Tokyo. Like the atomic bombs that ravaged Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Godzilla is an unstoppable nuclear force that obliterates everything in his path. Americans, however, saw only an edited version of the film, with all critical commentary on America’s ongoing nuclear testing program in the Pacific excised. Two popular Marvel comic book characters, the Incredible Hulk and Spider-Man, were also spawned by contact with radioactive material. In the Incredible Hulk, a scientist exposed to gamma rays is transformed into a green, 300-pound giant, while a bite from an irradiated spider turns nerdish lab assistant Peter Parker into Spider-Man. Teaching Americans how to live with the constant threat of nuclear war meant convincing citizens to remain vigilant and calm. To combat both indifference and panic, governmental propaganda underscored the seriousness of the threat, while also reassuring the public that they could survive an atomic blast, if they took precautionary measures such as building fortified fallout shelters or remembering to “duck and cover.” Images as History: Surviving an Atomic Bomb Blast explores how government-generated images presented competing visions that both reassured and frightened Americans about the likely effect of a nuclear attack. 24.11 Godzilla A 1954 Japanese horror film used the ravages of a nuclearspawned dinosaur named Godzilla to criticize American use and testing of its nuclear arsenal. This political message was edited out of the version shown in the United States.

 How did popular culture reflect Americans’ concerns about nuclear weapons?

Watch the Video Duck and Cover


FIGHTING COMMUNISM: COLD AND HOT WAR



Images as History
SURVIVING AN ATOMIC BOMB BLAST
How people will react to advice or propaganda can be difficult to predict. Why did the government disseminate images of a possible nuclear attack? What unintended effects could these images have on the Americans viewing them? By 1950, schoolchildren throughout the nation had learned to jump out of their seats and under their desks with their hands clasped firmly over their heads when their teachers shouted “Drop!” during civil defense drills. In government-produced civil defense films and comic books distributed to schools, Bert the 
 The stick of dynamite dangling from a string symbolized a nuclear attack, exactly the kind of danger children needed to learn to recognize.

 A catchy jingle accompanied this lesson in civil defense: “There was a turtle by the name of Bert, and Bert the Turtle was very alert / When danger threatened him he never got hurt / He knew just what to do / He’d Duck and Cover / Duck and Cover.”

•


 The intact shell implies that one could safely survive a nuclear attack by hiding under something.

•


 The “before” blast images portrayed a normal middle-class suburban home and yard.

View the Closer Look Images as History: Surviving
 an Atomic Bomb Blast

 Turtle instructed children to “duck and cover” during a nuclear attack. Advocates of this approach argued that flying debris and shattered windows had killed many victims in Hiroshima and Nagasaki; therefore, teaching children to “duck and cover” was practical advice. To ensure that Americans remained vigilant in preparing for a nuclear attack, the government also released “before” and “after” photographs from a test explosion in the Nevada desert on March 17, 1953. Time magazine estimated that nearly three-quarters of the nation saw these pictures.

•
•


 Authorities advised children— who did not carry their shelters on their backs like Bert—to seek protection beside walls and trees or under tables if an atomic bomb hit.

 The “after” blast photographs showed this suburban house engulfed in flames and blown to bits within two seconds of being hit with a nuclear bomb.

 This image directly contradicted the vision that one could survive a nuclear attack by seeking shelter under a bed as “Bert the Turtle” advised.

 What conflicting messages did these images send about surviving a nuclear blast?



 CHAPTER 24

A DIVIDED WORLD: THE EARLY COLD WAR, 1945–1963

Fallout Shelters
 With the successful test explosion of the hydrogen bomb in 1954, the Eisenhower administration embraced mass evacuation from city centers as the best civil defense against nuclear attack. The president’s decision to construct an interstate highway system changed official policy “from ‘Duck and Cover’ to ‘Run Like Hell,’” the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists concluded. Multilane highways served peacetime needs by linking cities to suburbs and military needs by making the evacuation of civilians and the mobilization of the military easier if the United States was attacked. Practice evacuation runs were not encouraging, however. “Operation Kids,” for example, an effort to move 37,300 schoolchildren in Mobile, Alabama, out of the city without warning, resulted in heavy traffic jams. Eisenhower also urged Americans to build family shelters at their own expense. The government distributed pamphlets with suggested floor plans and advised women to store enough food and medical supplies to sustain their families if a nuclear attack contaminated water supplies or destroyed grocery stores. “Grandma’s pantry was ready” whenever guests unexpectedly arrived; “is your ‘pantry’ ready in event of emergency?” one government pamphlet asked. Given their high cost (even a barebones shelter cost $1,000, about one-fifth an average family’s

 annual income), few Americans could afford to construct their own fallout shelters. During another moment of crisis in 1961 when the United States and the Soviet Union clashed again over the fate of Berlin, Eisenhower’s successor, John F. Kennedy, dedicated public funds to preparing mass underground shelters in schools and public buildings. Signs with three yellow triangles superimposed on a black circle (24.12) that pointed toward underground public fallout shelters became ubiquitous in schools and government buildings. In 1956, the government began constructing secret centers throughout the nation to house officials in the event of a nuclear attack. The government did not make these preparations public, avoiding uncomfortable questions about what would happen to the rest of the country. These secret plans sought to ensure the continued functioning of Congress by transporting legislators and some staff members (without their families) to an underground shelter in White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia. As part of its preparations, the Treasury Department put an eight-month supply of $1 bills and a two-year supply of $5, $10, and $20 bills in bombproof shelters. The military scattered mini-Pentagons throughout the country, including underground facilities for the president and his cabinet near Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. Plans to whisk the government to safety during a nuclear attack remained in place until 1995.

24.12 Fallout Shelter Sign
 In the early 1960s, fallout shelter signs posted in neighborhoods, schools, and public buildings were daily reminders of the nuclear threat that hung over the nation.

 What defensive measures did Americans take against a possible nuclear attack?

View the Closer Look Images as History: Fallout Shelters


SPIES IN OUR MIDST



Spies in Our Midst
 Recently released documents from the former Soviet Union suggest that as many as 300 Americans spied for the USSR during the 1930s and 1940s. Does this justify the attack on civil liberties that occurred during the anticommunist crusade that swept across the country during the 1940s and 1950s? During the Cold War many Americans believed that this anticommunist campaign made the country safer and freer; a minority voiced the competing vision that the government was using spy investigations to limit legitimate political discourse by eliminating the radical left. The government’s crusade against communism in the First Red Scare (1919) after World War I lasted only a few months. The effort to root out Communist spies after World War II lasted for nearly a decade.

The Second Red Scare
 To a country reeling from the loss of China to communism and the detonation of a Soviet bomb, the suggestion that the government was rife with communist spies offered a simple explanation for these complex events. The House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC), which had investigated fascist activities in the United States during World War II, now probed the communist threat. Other measures from World War II also took on new life during the Second Red Scare, including the Smith Act (1940), which outlawed advocating the forceful destruction of the government. Acting on a precedent set by Franklin D. Roosevelt in World War II, Truman created a federal employee loyalty program in 1947 that gave the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the police arm of the Justice Department, the right to investigate the backgrounds of federal workers. Congress tightened restrictions on radical political activity even further with the McCarran Acts in 1950 and 1952, which stopped communists from entering the country and required communist or communist-front organizations to register with the attorney general. Most of the people investigated by HUAC and the FBI had once belonged to the Communist Party, which had attracted many new members during the labor unrest of the 1930s (see Chapter 22). Whether past or even present membership in the Communist Party made one a traitor was another question. When David Wellman was a young boy, his family was under constant police surveillance. Two unmarked cars sat outside their Detroit home and followed him and his sister to school, ball games, and the store. “Trying to turn fear into fun, we made shaking them a game,” he later recalled. Wellman

 maintained that his father, a wounded World War II veteran and leader in the Michigan Communist Party, and his mother, a communist active in trade unions, were not traitors but people who believed that revolution was an American ideal. The constant surveillance took a toll on the family. “It felt as if the government penetrated the deepest recesses of our lives every minute of the day,” Wellman recalled. Paranoia caused the family to censor speech within the home and on the telephone, certain that the police were always listening. As an adult Wellman got access to his family’s police file and was stunned to learn that the reports contained almost no information about his parents’ political activism. The police had discovered little through this constant surveillance, succeeding mostly in terrorizing the family, which, Wellman suspected, was their true intent.

 “They were trying to put the fear of police power in the minds of the people they spied on. To a large degree, it worked.” DAVID WELLMAN, whose family was under police surveillance during the Second Red Scare The two biggest spy cases of the era involved Alger Hiss and Ethel and Julius Rosenberg. In 1948, Whittaker Chambers, a Time magazine editor and former member of the Communist Party, accused Alger Hiss, a high-ranking official during the

 What insights does Wellman’s story offer into the Second Red Scare?



 CHAPTER 24

A DIVIDED WORLD: THE EARLY COLD WAR, 1945–1963

 Roosevelt administration, of being a communist. Hiss denied the charge before HUAC, announcing under oath that “I am not and never have been a member of any Communist front organization.” Chambers responded by charging that Hiss spied for the Soviet Union in the 1930s and as proof produced rolls of microfilm that Chambers had hidden in a hollow pumpkin in his garden. The microfilm contained copies of secret State Department papers from 1938 regarding the Soviet Union, Nazi Germany, and the Spanish Civil War that had been typed on Hiss’s typewriter. The “pumpkin patch” papers corroborated Chambers’s account and recently declassified intelligence documents have confirmed that Hiss worked as a Soviet spy through at least 1945. Because the statute of limitations on espionage had expired, a federal court convicted Hiss of perjury for lying to HUAC about his communist ties. Hiss served four years in jail. Congressman Richard Nixon, a member of HUAC, believed that the “Hiss case, for the first time, forcibly demonstrated to the American people that domestic communism was a real and present danger to the security of the nation.” Nixon’s leading role in the Hiss investigation catapulted him into the national spotlight. His prominence increased when he was elected vice president on the Republican ticket with Eisenhower in 1952.

24.13 The Rosenbergs Spy Case, 1953
 Protesters urge the government to execute convicted spies Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, reflecting the fury many Americans felt toward anyone believed to have betrayed the United States.

 In 1953, another spy case involving Ethel and Julius Rosenberg, the Jewish parents of two young boys, captivated the nation. The federal government charged Julius with passing atomic secrets to the Soviet Union during World War II, information he had supposedly gathered from his brother-in-law, a Soviet spy working for the Manhattan Project, who later testified against the couple. Although Julius’s wife Ethel was never personally implicated in the spy ring, the government charged her with knowing of her husband’s involvement. Arrested to spur her husband into confessing, Ethel went on trial for espionage along with her husband. They each maintained their innocence even when convicted and sentenced to death by electric chair. As the execution date neared, demonstrators from the right and the left took to the streets, offering the public two competing visions of the Rosenbergs and the government’s anti-communist investigations. Men carrying signs that read “Burn All Reds” and “No Mercy for Spies” picketed before the White House (24.13). Supporters who believed that the Rosenbergs were being persecuted for their radical beliefs organized marches for clemency. Radio and television reporters witnessing the execution shared intimate details with a nation riveted on the couple’s final moments, including Ethel’s botched electrocution on June 19, 1953, when it took three tries to kill her. Their two young sons, aged ten and six, also endured intense media scrutiny. Relatives put them in an orphanage, and New Jersey revoked their right to attend public school. Rosenberg supporters Abe Meeropol (the author of the anti-lynching ballad “Strange Fruit,” see Chapter 21) and his wife eventually adopted the boys and changed their names. As adults they were active in leftist causes and until recently steadfastly maintained their parents’ innocence. For decades the right and the left embraced two competing visions of the Rosenbergs case. The right viewed the couple as traitors whose cooperation with the Soviet Union demonstrated the internal threat that the nation faced from Soviet spies. The left, believing the Rosenbergs innocent, felt that mainstream politicians exaggerated the communist menace to gain public support for eradicating all leftleaning political groups from American society. In some respects both portraits were accurate. Newly released Soviet documents reveal that Julius did indeed pass valuable atomic data to the Soviet Union, but it appears that Ethel knew nothing of her husband’s espionage activities, making her, along with countless others in the 1950s, a victim of overzealous investigators, who equated leftist politics with treason.

 What competing visions arose over the Hiss and Rosenbergs spy cases?

SPIES IN OUR MIDST

 HUAC against Hollywood The effort to expose the evildoings of communists went far beyond punishing government officials who spied for the Soviet Union. In 1947, HUAC began an investigation into alleged communist activities in Hollywood. Hundreds of screenwriters, producers, directors, and actors were called to testify. Initial hearings focused on the supposedly subversive plotlines and imagery of selected motion pictures, such as Mission to Moscow, a World War II–era film that presented the Soviet Union as paradise on earth. Jack Warner, the head of Warner Studies, had produced Mission to Moscow after the Roosevelt administration requested a film that would improve the public’s impression of the nation’s wartime ally. This episode in producing leftwing political propaganda was the exception rather than the rule in Hollywood. Most studio heads subscribed to Sam Goldwyn’s view that “if you want to send a message, use Western Union.” The iron grip of the Hollywood studio system allowed directors little independence to include political content in their films that was not approved by the studio bosses. As a result HUAC could find little evidence of “subversive” content in Hollywood films. Rather than abandoning its investigation of Hollywood, however, HUAC shifted focus to the political affiliations and beliefs of the people involved in making movies. After ten screenwriters, dubbed the “Hollywood Ten,” were convicted of contempt of Congress for refusing to cooperate with HUAC investigations and sentenced to a year in prison, studio executives created a Hollywood blacklist of individuals with suspected past or present communist ties, whom film studios refused to hire. The FBI had already infiltrated the Communist Party and provided HUAC with the names of all those in Hollywood with present or past communist affiliations. HUAC nonetheless pressured subpoenaed witnesses to publicly name names, not to gain information, but to test witnesses’ loyalty. Many cooperated with HUAC to salvage their careers. Most of those who refused to testify or to name names never worked in films again. Others, like future president Ronald Reagan, then the president of the Screen Actors Guild, joined the anti-communist crusade by privately providing the FBI with the names of individuals in Hollywood with potential communist connections. Reagan testified before HUAC as a liberal Democrat (his shift to the right came later), where he denied that communists “have ever at any time been able to use the

 Read the Document Joseph McCarthy, “Wheeling, West Virginia Speech” (1950)



 motion-picture screen as a sounding board for their philosophy.” Director Elia Kazan and playwright Arthur Miller used their artistic work to explain the different choices they made when asked to testify by HUAC. Kazan’s film On the Waterfront (1954) starred Marlon Brando as an ex-prizefighter turned longshoreman, who overcomes his aversion to “ratting on your friends” and testifies against his corrupt union bosses. Kazan, who had been a member of the Communist Party in the 1930s, made the film to justify his own decision in 1952 to provide HUAC with the names of eight former Communist Party colleagues (see Competing Visions: Naming Names in Hollywood, page 740). On the Waterfront won Academy Awards for Best Picture, Best Director, and Best Actor. Conversely Miller refused to testify when called before HUAC in 1956 and criticized the hysteria created by the Second Red Scare in his play The Crucible, which likened the HUAC investigations to the Salem witch trials in colonial Massachusetts.

 “We will not knowingly employ a Communist nor a member of any party or groups which advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United States by force or by illegal or unconstitutional methods.” Studio executives’ statement announcing the creation of a Hollywood blacklist, 1947

 McCarthyism The government’s anti-communist crusade during the Second Red Scare also became known as McCarthyism, named for the media-savvy Republican Senator Joseph McCarthy from Wisconsin, who, along with HUAC, spearheaded numerous investigations into communist activities, many of them spurious. Anti-communist spy investigations predated McCarthy, but his flair for the dramatic made the senator an instant media sensation. McCarthy burst onto the scene after waving around a piece of paper during a speech before the Women’s Republican Club in Wheeling, West Virginia, on February 9, 1950, thundering that he

 What was the purpose and impact of HUAC’s Hollywood investigations?



 CHAPTER 24

A DIVIDED WORLD: THE EARLY COLD WAR, 1945–1963

Competing Visions
NAMING NAMES IN HOLLYWOOD
The following opinions, one from former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt who wrote a syndicated magazine column, “My Day,” and the other from film director Elia Kazan, offer opposing views on aiding the HUAC investigations. Consider how Roosevelt and Kazan defined the threat to American democracy in this period. What risks were involved in following the different suggestions each made? Could their two views be reconciled? In a 1947 “My Day” column, Eleanor Roosevelt expressed concerns that HUAC was creating a police state atmosphere that would squash artistic creativity and freedom of expression. I have waited a while before saying anything about the UnAmerican Activities Committee’s current investigation of the Hollywood film industry. I would not be very much surprised if some writers or actors or stagehands, or what not, were found to have Communist leanings, but I was surprised to find that, at the start of the inquiry, some of the big producers were so chicken-hearted about speaking up for the freedom of their industry. One thing is sure—none of the arts flourishes on censorship and repression. And by this time it should be evident that the American public is capable of doing its own censoring…. The film industry is a great industry with infinite possibilities for good and bad. Its primary purpose is to entertain people. On the side, it can do many other things. It can popularize certain ideals, it can make education palatable. However, in the long run, the judge who decides whether what it does is good or bad is the man or woman who attends the movies. In a democratic country I do not think the public will tolerate a removal of its right to decide what it thinks of the ideas and performances of those who make the movie industry work…. What is going on in the Un-American Activities Committee worries me primarily because little people have become frightened and we find ourselves living in the atmosphere of a police state, where people close doors before they state what they think or look over their shoulders apprehensively before they express an opinion…. If you curtail what the other fellow says and does, you curtail what you yourself may say and do. In our country we must trust the people to hear and see both the good and the bad and to choose the good. The UnAmerican Activities Committee seems to me to be better for a police state than for the USA. 
 Many people in Hollywood never forgave Elia Kazan for cooperating with HUAC. In his 1988 autobiography Kazan refused to apologize. Instead he asserted his right to protect his career and the need to defend the country. I believed it was the duty of the government to investigate the Communist movement in our country. I couldn’t behave as if my old “comrades” didn’t exist and didn’t have an active political program. There was no way I could go along with their crap that the CP [Communist Party] was nothing but another political party, like the Republicans and the Democrats. I knew very well what it was, a thoroughly organized, worldwide conspiracy. This conviction separated me from many of my old friends … Did I really want to change the social system I was living under? Apparently that was what I’d stood for at one time. But what s**t. Everything I had of value I’d gained under that system … Why had I taken so long to even consider telling the country—that’s what it amounted to—everything I knew? Was it because of the moral injunction against “informing,” which was respected only depending on which side you were on? … If the situation were reversed, wouldn’t the “comrades” protect themselves without hesitation and by any means? Including naming me…. I began to measure the weight and the worth of what I was giving up, my career in films, which I was surrendering for a cause I didn’t believe in. It seemed insane. What was I if not a filmmaker? … If you expect an apology now because I would later name names to the House Committee, you’ve misjudged my character…. The people who owe you an explanation (no apology expected) are those who, year after year, held the Soviets blameless for all their crimes.

 Hearings before the House Committee on Un-American Activities during the Second Red Scare

 How do Roosevelt and Kazan differ on the best way to protect the right to freedom of expression?

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Naming
Names in Hollywood


SPIES IN OUR MIDST

 had a list of 205 known communists who worked in the State Department. (The paper turned out to be just a prop.) When pressed for the names of the people on his list, McCarthy stalled and announced that he would only show their names to Truman, which he never did. In each subsequent speech the number cited by McCarthy dropped until he finally settled on 57.

 “When a great democracy is destroyed, it will not be from enemies from without, but rather because of enemies from within.” Senator JOSEPH R. McCARTHY, Wheeling, West Virginia, 1950.

 As a Republican attacking a Democratic administration, McCarthy’s accusations had a partisan ring. Taking advantage of the media spotlight, he issued new charges against State Department officials, ruining the careers of many who could not mount an effective defense against his bullying. Reveling in the press attention that every new allegation brought, McCarthy sought bigger targets, even attacking Secretary of Defense George C. Marshall, who had authored the Marshall Plan while secretary of state, for having joined “a conspiracy so immense and an infamy so black as to dwarf any previous such venture in the history of man.” In 1954, a year after the Rosenbergs were executed, the career of Joseph McCarthy as an anti-communist crusader ended, when the senator began investigating the army for subversion. National television broadcast the hearings, and Americans watched aghast for 36 days as McCarthy intimidated witnesses, ignored facts, and made ludicrous charges. The climactic moment in the hearing came when the army’s attorney Joseph Welch rebuked McCarthy, telling him, “You have done enough. Have you no sense of decency, sir, at long last?” Approval ratings for McCarthy plummeted from 50 percent to 35 percent in Gallup polls. The public unraveling of support for McCarthy mirrored growing concerns among his fellow

 Watch the Video on Video Lecture: McCarthyism and the Politics of Fear



 Republicans in Congress. Eisenhower and former HUAC member Richard Nixon were now in the White House. Attacking a Republican-controlled administration yielded fewer political benefits, and fellow Republicans privately urged Eisenhower to rein in McCarthy. Leery of having his own anticommunist credentials challenged, Eisenhower refused to confront McCarthy directly. Instead the president tried to take the high road. “I will not get down in the gutter with that guy,” Eisenhower vowed, reasoning that if he gave McCarthy enough rope, he would eventually hang himself. This hands-off approach allowed McCarthy to run wild until 1954, when, as Eisenhower predicted, he went too far. Eventually it was the mainstream press, not the president, who denounced McCarthy. After the Army-McCarthy hearings, the esteemed journalist Edward R. Murrow exposed McCarthy’s slander and lies in a television documentary. McCarthy, Murrow pointedly told his audience, “didn’t create this situation of fear; he merely exploited it.” However, when the Senate censured McCarthy on December 2, 1954, for violating Senate rules, the legislators chose to depict McCarthy as solely responsible for the excesses of anti-communism. A disgraced McCarthy died from liver failure caused by alcoholism three years later at age 49.

 “No one man can terrorize a whole nation unless we are all his accomplices.” Journalist EDWARD R. MURROW during a 1954 television exposé on McCarthy

 As Murrow suggested, the end of McCarthy’s career as a red-baiter did not stop the government’s anti-communist crusade. Republicans and Democrats alike took their cue from McCarthy and freely attacked any suspected radical working in local or state governments, public schools, or universities. The Smith Act remained in place, as did loyalty oaths, Hollywood blacklists, and police surveillance of suspected radicals. By the 1950s, using the charge of communism to discredit political opponents or liberal activists (such as Martin Luther King Jr.) was commonplace in American politics.

 Is the term McCarthyism a useful or misleading way to characterize the Second Red Scare?



 CHAPTER 24

A DIVIDED WORLD: THE EARLY COLD WAR, 1945–1963

Averting Nuclear War
 The worldwide ideological, political, and military struggle between the United States and the Soviet Union fueled Americans’ fear of communism, both at home and throughout the world. The vision of fighting a nuclear war continued to haunt Americans even after the ceasefire in Korea. Technological advances in long-range ballistic missiles and satellites provoked a new threat in the Cold War standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union. A missile fitted with a nuclear warhead could now reach the United States within half an hour from the Soviet Union. Armed uprisings in Eastern Europe, renewed Soviet demands that the West abandon Berlin, and the Cuban Missile Crisis created a climactic moment when the world teetered on the edge of all-out nuclear war.

Sputnik


24.14 Sputnik,
For Americans
 this small satellite symbolized Soviet technological superiority over the United States, fueling the arms race between the two nations.

On October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union
 sent the world’s first satellite, nicknamed Sputnik (“fellow traveler”), into outer space. The size of a basketball and weighing just 183 pounds, Sputnik (24.14) nonetheless became a symbol of Soviet technological superiority, a satellite that could orbit the earth in 98 minutes. Today satellites serve a host of peaceful functions, transmitting television images and telephone calls around the globe. In 1957, however, Americans focused primarily on the new strategic advantage that satellite technology gave the Soviets. The Soviets could easily fit a missile that sent Sputnik into orbit with a nuclear warhead and launch it at the United States. To help Americans picture another danger, Life magazine traced the hypothetical path of Sputnik over a 24-hour period (24.15), warning “The Orbit Weaves a Web as Whole World Watches.” Several orbits each day (marked in red as a reminder of the communist control of Sputnik) passed directly over the United States, bringing the Soviets ever closer to America’s doorstep as they gradually ensnared the world. Fearing that the United States was losing the “space race,” the government created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) to launch America’s own investigation of space, and the Defense Department scrambled to develop American satellite technology. Predicting how the Soviet Union’s volatile new leader might use this

 Why did the nuclear arms race escalate in the late 1950s?

 technological breakthrough kept Americans on edge. In the power struggle that followed Stalin’s death from a brain hemorrhage in March 1953, Nikita Khrushchev emerged as the new Soviet premier. A poorly educated peasant, who rose through the ranks to become a Stalin protégé, Khrushchev reveled in rhetorical excess. He proclaimed that the USSR was producing missiles “like sausages,” and enjoyed keeping his American visitors offbalance. During a visit by Minnesota Senator Hubert 24.15 Life magazine illustrated the Sputnik threat by showing how its orbits gave the Soviets control of space, including areas over the United States.

View the Image Sputnik I


AVERTING NUCLEAR WAR

 Humphrey to Moscow, Khrushchev stopped his threatening tirade long enough to ask Humphrey where he was from. “That’s so I don’t forget to order them to spare the city when the rockets fly,” he said good naturedly. Eager to catch up with the Soviet Union in missile technology and cut the defense budget (conventional military forces cost more than building nuclear weapons), Eisenhower oversaw a tremendous increase in American nuclear weaponry, which grew from 800 to nearly 8,000 warheads between 1953 and 1960. This build-up was part of a strategic vision called the “New Look.” In 1954, Eisenhower’s tough-talking secretary of state, John Foster Dulles, announced that the United States would focus on developing “massive retaliatory power” to deter Soviet aggression. The National Security Council agreed with Dulles that the country would go bankrupt trying to develop adequate defenses against Soviet nuclear weapons and policing the world with ground troops. Dulles maintained that a strong arsenal of intercontinental missiles (ICBMs) armed with nuclear warheads would allow the United States to “retaliate, instantly, by means and at places of our choosing” when the Soviets stepped out of line. Eisenhower liked the New Look because it offered a way to counter the Soviet manpower advantage while maintaining a small peacetime army. The appeal of “massive retaliation” was simple—it provided “more bang for the buck,” some commentators noted. Getting accurate data on the Soviet arsenal became critical once the United States embraced the doctrine of massive retaliation. The year before the Soviets launched Sputnik, the Americans began using a new U-2 spy plane to photograph Soviet military installations. Soviet radar could detect the U-2, but the plane flew at altitudes out of range for Soviet fighter pilots or antiaircraft missiles. For four years the United States used U-2 missions to collect intelligence about Soviet long-range missiles before turning to spy satellites. The photographs were reassuring. At the end of 1959, the United States learned, the Soviet Union had only six ICBM sites able to launch a missile carrying a nuclear warhead. Because it took 20 hours to fuel each missile, which could travel through space to reach targets 5,000 to 6,000 miles away in half an hour, the United States would have ample time to respond if the Soviet Union launched a first strike with six missiles. Despite Khrushchev’s claims that the Soviets possessed a huge nuclear arsenal, American had far more nuclear warheads and ICBMs.

 INNOVATION

 USA

 USSR

Nuclearpowered
 submarine launched





First Trial
 of ICBM





 ICBM operational





Submarinelaunched
 ICBM operational







24.16 Nuclear
 Arms Race, 1950s The United States and Soviet Union tried to best each other by developing increasingly sophisticated nuclear weapons.

 Having made much of the claim that the Soviet Union possessed more ICBMs than the United States in his successful 1960 presidential campaign against Richard Nixon, President John F. Kennedy waited a few months before revealing the truth in 1961. Calling Khrushchev’s bluff Kennedy announced that the United States had a “second strike capability which is at least as extensive as what the Soviets can deliver by striking first. Therefore, we are confident that the Soviets will not provoke a major nuclear conflict.” The gap only kept growing in America’s favor. Continuing the policy of massive retaliation, Kennedy oversaw an increase in the American ICBM stockpile from 63 to 424 from 1961 to 1963. The attention given to the missile gap during the 1960 presidential campaign revealed the constant pressure that Americans felt to retain the upper hand in the ever-evolving nuclear arms race. The chart (24.16) lists the key developments in early Cold War nuclear weaponry, illustrating the intense competition between the United States and Soviet Union to develop nuclear weapons, including nuclear-powered submarines that could stay submerged for two months and fire nuclear-fitted missiles.

The Berlin Wall
 Americans weighed Kennedy’s reassuring words about the missile gap against recent events that again demonstrated the heavy hand of Soviet authority in Eastern Europe. In 1956, Khrushchev denounced Stalin’s crimes against the Soviet people

 How did the new Soviet Premier Khrushchev compare to Stalin?



 CHAPTER 24

A DIVIDED WORLD: THE EARLY COLD WAR, 1945–1963

 at a Communist Party Congress. His speech, taken as a cue that the new Soviet regime would be more open and tolerant, set off rebellions in Poland and Hungary. The Polish communists reasserted control themselves, but Soviet troops crushed the rebellion in Hungary, revealing that Khrushchev intended to retain Soviet control over Eastern Europe. Khrushchev also moved to consolidate Soviet power over Berlin, twice issuing ultimatums to the West to vacate the divided city. The stark differences between life in East and West Berlin had become a public embarrassment to the Soviet Union. Lavishly rebuilt by West Germany and the Marshall Plan, West Berlin teemed with new housing, industry, and commerce. Moving freely between the more prosperous western half and the areas under Communist control, hundreds of thousands of East Germans voted with their feet. After defecting they traveled easily from West Berlin into West Germany to start new lives. Khrushchev viewed the 44-year-old Kennedy as an inept, inexperienced leader, whom he could intimidate. A botched U.S.-sponsored invasion of Cuba in 1961 (discussed more fully below) only reaffirmed Khrushchev’s low opinion of Kennedy. Believing that Kennedy would crumble under pressure, Khrushchev demanded that the West leave Berlin when the two met in Vienna. To Khrushchev’s surprise the president stood firm. Kennedy left the summit “shaken and angry,” one reporter claimed. He never met with Khrushchev again. Instead he returned home and requested funds for additional nuclear and conventional forces. The public fully supported their president. More than 82 percent favored maintaining American, French, and British forces in Berlin, even if it meant war with the Soviet Union. With Kennedy unwilling to abandon the city, Khrushchev resisted the temptation to erect another blockade. Instead of revoking permission for the West to use roads through East Germany to supply the city, as Stalin had in 1948, he decided to build a wall between West Berlin and East Germany (see 24.5 on page 726). In the twilight hours of August 13, 1961, construction of a barbed wire fence began. East German tanks and troops rolled up to the monumental Brandenburg Gate, the original entry point to Berlin which lay in the Soviet sector of the city, to prevent a popular protest from breaking out in front of this symbol of German nationhood. East German workers quickly laid a thin line of barbed wire in front of the Brandenburg Gate, turning the popular square into a desolate no-man’s land.

 What did the Berlin Wall mean to Americans?

 “Freedom has many difficulties and democracy is not perfect, but we have never had to put a wall up to keep our people in, to prevent them from leaving us.” President JOHN F. KENNEDY, in a speech before the Berlin Wall, 1963

 West Germans flocked to the construction site in shock. Some East Germans made desperate lastminute escapes, jumping from the windows of buildings that straddled the boundary into nets held by West German firefighters. Twelve-foot-high concrete barriers with rounded piping on top (to make scaling the wall more difficult) soon replaced the barbed wire. Envisioning Evidence: The Berlin Wall depicts the complex defensive system that stood until 1989. The wall stopped the flow of people from East to West Berlin without provoking a major confrontation with the United States. As the wall went up in 1961, Kennedy remarked to his aides that “a wall is a hell of a lot better than a war.” When he finally visited the wall in June 1963, he expressed solidarity with the people on both sides of the divided city by announcing, “Ich bin ein Berliner” (which Kennedy thought meant “I am a Berliner,” not realizing that ein Berliner was the name for a popular doughnut).

Bay of Pigs and the Cuban
Missile Crisis
 Americans viewed communist activities in Germany with dismay, but the prospect of a communist Cuba alarmed the government more: Cuba lay just 90 miles south of Florida. In 1959, Fidel Castro had overthrown the dictator Fulgencio Bastista y Zaldívar. Castro quickly consolidated his power. He declared himself a communist, confiscated a billion dollars in American property, and accepted aid from the Soviet Union. In response an alarmed Eisenhower broke off diplomatic relations and imposed economic sanctions, including an embargo that banned the export of American goods to the island. The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) urged more forceful action and began planning the covert

 Read the Document Kennedy’s Address to the People of Berlin (June 28, 1963)

AVERTING NUCLEAR WAR



Envisioning Evidence
THE BERLIN WALL
During the Cold War, the 96-mile long Berlin Wall around West Berlin became an iconic symbol of Soviet oppression to the western world. Initially nothing more than a barbed wire fence, the Berlin Wall quickly evolved into a complex network of 12-foot-high concrete walls, electrified fences, bunkers, land mines, observation towers, spotlights, guard dogs, and sirens. Fugitives’ footprints in the soft sand spread on the eastern side of the wall (raked each day) alerted guards to breaches in the wall’s defenses. Guards had strict orders to shoot anyone they saw attempting to escape. Nearly 5,000 people succeeded in circumventing the wall (some by digging tunnels under it) but over 175 people died trying. 
East Germany
 destroyed buildings to create a 100-yard “dead zone” on the eastern side.

EAST GERMANY

 Tank traps Electrified fence with sirens East German guards shot and killed eighteen-yearold Peter Fechter when he tried to escape to West Berlin in August, 1962.

Guard
 dogs

 Soft sand Civilian viewing platform Anti-vehicle ditch

WEST GERMANY
Checkpoint Charlie was the only crossing point for foreign tourists, diplomats, and military personnel from West to East Berlin. 
View the Closer Look Envisioning Evidence: The Berlin Wall


 Graffiti covered the western side of the Berlin Wall and saboteurs continually tried to destroy parts of it.

 How did the Berlin Wall serve as the front lines of the Cold War?



 CHAPTER 24

A DIVIDED WORLD: THE EARLY COLD WAR, 1945–1963

 “We’re eyeball to eyeball, and I think the other fellow just blinked.” Secretary of State DEAN RUSK, upon receiving word that Soviet ships had turned back during the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962

 Bay of Pigs operation, a failed amphibious invasion by Cuban exiles in 1961 to overthrow Castro. Eisenhower left office before the scheduled invasion, but Kennedy endorsed the plan. Problems arose immediately, however. Two days before the ground attack, American planes (painted to look like stolen Cuban aircraft) bombed Cuban air defenses. On April 17, 1961, 1,400 exiles landed and were immediately killed or captured. Kennedy’s unconvincing public statement that the United States was not involved in this “struggle of Cuban patriots against a Cuban dictator” hurt his credibility at home and overseas. The Bay of Pigs fiasco hardened the resolve of Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro to gain the upper hand in this new Cold War hotspot. The CIA devised schemes for overthrowing Castro that involved sabotage and terrorism. In November 1961, CIA agents and Cuban exiles covertly traveled in speedboats from Florida to Cuba, where they burned sugar plantations and blew up factories and oil depots. The CIA also plotted to assassinate Castro by trying to poison his ice cream and cigars and enlisting Mafia crime bosses to kill him. Castro complained to Khrushchev about America’s murderous intentions, and in return received Soviet economic and military aid. Protecting communism in Cuba now became a major goal for the Soviet Union. On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy appeared on national television to deliver the stunning news that the Soviet Union was building missile launching pads in Cuba for short- and intermediate-range nuclear missiles. U.S. bases in Italy, Britain, and Turkey housed nuclear missiles aimed at the Soviet Union. Putting Soviet missiles in Cuba, a mere 90 miles from the American coast, would teach Americans “just what it feels like to have enemy missiles pointing at you,” Khrushchev told his advisors. The Cuban Missile Crisis, a showdown in 1962 between the United States and the Soviet Union over Khrushchev’s decision to place Soviet missiles in Communist Cuba aimed at America, was underway.

 What was the ultimate significance of the Cuban Missile crisis?

 Instead of accepting the Soviet view that missiles in Cuba simply leveled the playing field, Kennedy responded with a competing vision that the Soviet actions represented “a provocative change in the delicate status quo both countries have maintained.” Short- and intermediate-range Soviet missiles in Cuba threatened to reduce the strategic advantage that America held with its larger long-range nuclear arsenal. This was unacceptable to Kennedy. Intelligence officials estimated that the missile sites would become operational in two weeks, giving Kennedy only a small window of time before the Soviets would double their ability to launch a devastating nuclear strike against the United States. Kennedy ultimately decided to use a naval blockade to prevent Soviet ships from arming the launching sites with nuclear missiles. (Only later would Kennedy discover that missiles were already in Cuba. The president never learned that the estimate of 10,000 Soviet troops in Cuba was wrong—there were actually 42,000). Choices and Consequences: The Cuban Missile Crisis, outlines the options facing Kennedy during this tense fortnight, the closest that the world ever came to fighting an all-out nuclear war. The world waited for 13 days as Soviet ships steamed toward the American fleet guarding Cuban ports. American pilots sat in planes loaded with nuclear weapons, waiting to take off for Cuba at a moment’s notice. Finally Khrushchev called the ships back and offered to negotiate. The public breathed a collective sigh of relief that nuclear war had been averted, but the crisis lingered on behind closed doors for another month. As Soviet engineers continued to work on the missile sites, Kennedy and Khrushchev debated the exact terms of an agreement. In the end the American navy won the right to inspect ships carrying dismantled missiles out of Cuba. In return the United States agreed to dismantle its missiles in Turkey and pledged to respect Cuban independence by not launching another Bay of Pigs–type invasion. Over the next few years, landbased missile sites lost significance as more American and Soviet submarines equipped with nuclear missiles began patrolling the oceans. Having teetered on the brink of nuclear war, both the United States and the Soviet Union opted to deescalate tensions. Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to establish a hotline connection between Washington and Moscow, so they could speak directly in the event of another crisis. In June 1963, Britain, the Soviet Union, and the United States also signed the Limited Test Ban Treaty, which banned atmospheric and underwater testing of nuclear weapons.

View the Image JFK and Krushchev


AVERTING NUCLEAR WAR



Choices and Consequences
THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS
Long-range missiles (4,000–5,000 miles) launched from the USSR could already reach America, but short-range (1,100 miles) and intermediate-range (2,200 miles) nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba would help close the missile gap by giving the Soviets more weapons to use against the United States. Determined to get Soviet missiles out of Cuba, Kennedy and his advisors debated how to respond on October 16, 1962. 
Choices




 Use air and ground forces to attack Cuba and destroy the missile sites.



 Follow up an attack on Cuba with a fullscale invasion to depose Castro.



 Negotiate with the Soviet Union and Cuba.



 Use a naval quarantine to prevent Soviet-supplied missiles from reaching Cuba.

Decision
 Kennedy opted for the quarantine. He sent the American navy 500 miles from Cuban shores to intercept Soviet vessels carrying missiles, and threatened a nuclear attack on the Soviet Union if missiles were launched from Cuba.

Consequences
 For two tense days Soviet ships steamed toward American naval vessels. At the last minute Khrushchev called the ships back and offered to negotiate by removing the missiles if Kennedy pledged not to attack Cuba and the United States dismantled its missiles in Turkey. Kennedy privately agreed to these terms. By

 Distance between Cuba and Major U.S. Cities, 1962

 deciding against an air strike, Kennedy may have averted a nuclear war. Unbeknownst to the president, nuclear warheads were already in Cuba. Soviet commanders on the ground had permission to use them if the United States attacked and considered using them against the blockade.

Continuing Controversies
 Did Kennedy react correctly during the Cuban Missile Crisis? Supporters argue that Kennedy effectively used the threat of an American nuclear attack, traditional naval tactics, and old-fashioned diplomacy to end the crisis without resorting to war. By doing so he maintained America’s strategic advantage against the Soviet Union and improved the nation’s image worldwide after the Bay of Pigs fiasco. Detractors claim that Kennedy provoked a crisis where there was none. Short- and mediumrange missiles in Cuba did not alter the Soviets’ ability to

Watch the Video President John F. Kennedy and
 the Cuban Missile Crisis

 attack with long-range missiles or of the United States to launch a devastating second-strike. Supporters counter that the improved accuracy of shorter-range missiles fired from Cuba posed a real threat. Critics also point out that because Kennedy made concessions privately to Khrushchev, the crisis gave rise to the myth that “brinkmanship,” or threatening nuclear war, rather than diplomatic negotiations, caused the Soviets to back down. Overconfidence after the Cuban Missile Crisis would lead to missteps in America’s growing military involvement in the Vietnam War and elsewhere.

 What political and military considerations influenced Kennedy during the Cuban Missile Crisis?



 CHAPTER 24

A DIVIDED WORLD: THE EARLY COLD WAR, 1945–1963









 Kennan’s Long Telegram

Truman Doctrine


Marshall Plan


 NATO formed

 Makes containing communism a key American goal

 Gives United States a role in helping other nations resist communism

 Grants U.S. aid to rebuild wartorn Europe and prevent spread of communism

 First formal American military alliance since the Revolutionary War

 Berlin airlift

 Provokes fears that communists are winning the Cold War

 HUAC begins investigating Hollywood

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Leads to establishment of blacklist

 Highly visible Cold War victory for the United States

 China falls to communism

Review Questions
 1. What key contributions did Truman, Eisenhower, and Kennedy make to the strategy of containment? 2. How did international crises influence domestic politics from 1945 to 1963? 3. How did images and popular culture shape Americans’ ideas about the Soviet Union and the atomic bomb?

 4. Why did Americans consider West Berlin so important? What key decisions and risks did Truman and Kennedy take in resolving Berlinrelated crises? 5. What competing visions did policymakers offer on how the United States should contain the Soviet threat?

Key Terms
 “Long telegram” An influential 5,000-word missive by diplomat George F. Kennan that outlined why America needed to develop an aggressive foreign policy aimed at containing Soviet expansionist impulses. Containment The label affixed to multiple American foreign policy initiatives meant to prevent the Soviet Union from expanding its influence around the globe. Iron curtain Winston Churchill’s characterization of the military and ideological barrier erected by the Soviet Union that separated Western and Eastern Europe into free and dominated halves. North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) A post-World War II military alliance between the U.S. and Western European powers. Truman Doctrine A foreign policy initiative that gave the United States an active role in stopping the global spread of communism by supporting “free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.”

 Marshall Plan (1948–1952) Aimed to restore Europeans’ faith in capitalism by sending $13 billion ($119 billion in today’s dollars) overseas to rebuild Europe’s ruined roads, bridges, factories, and farms. Berlin airlift (1948–1949) Americans and British used planes to resupply West Berlin to stymie the Soviet blockade of the city. McCarthyism The government’s anti-communist crusade named for Senator Joseph McCarthy from Wisconsin, who, along with the House Committee on Un-American Activities (HUAC), spearheaded numerous governmental investigations into communist activities, many of them spurious. Bay of Pigs operation (1961) Failed attempt to use an amphibious invasion by Cuban exiles to overthrow the Cuban dictator Fidel Castro. Cuban Missile Crisis (1962) A showdown between the United States and the Soviet Union over Khrushchev’s decision to place Soviet missiles aimed at America in Communist Cuba.

CHAPTER REVIEW











 Joseph McCarthy gives Wheeling, West Virginia, speech

 Stalin dies; Khrushchev assumes power

 Bay of Pigs invasion

Cuban Missile Crisis


 Failed attempt to oust Castro in Cuba embarrasses the United States

 Showdown between the United States and the USSR prompts fears of nuclear war

 Begins career as major figure in Second Red Scare

 Korean War begins United States enters fighting; Cold War extends into East Asia

 Ruthless dictator replaced by brash and unpredictable one

Julius and Ethel Rosenberg
 executed

 Berlin Wall built Becomes symbol of communist oppression

 Spy case fuels Second Red Scare

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of A Divided World.

Questions for Analysis
 1. What advice did Kennan give on dealing with the Soviet Union?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • Winston Churchill, “‘Iron Curtain’ Speech” (March 5, 1946), p. 723

Read the Document George F. Kennan, “The Long


 • Joseph McCarthy, “Wheeling, West Virginia Speech” (1950), p. 739

Telegram” (1946), p. 722


 • Kennedy’s Address to the People of Berlin (June 28, 1963), p. 744

 2. How did the Truman Doctrine speech set a new direction for U.S. foreign policy? Watch the Video President Truman and the Threat of Communism, p. 724

View the Closer Look
• Images as History: Surviving an Atomic Bomb Blast, p. 735
• Competing Visions: Naming Names in Hollywood, p. 740
• Envisioning Evidence: The Berlin Wall, p. 745


View the Image


 3. Why did the Chicago Defender urge readers to “save this paper, it marks history?” View the Image Truman Ends Military Jim Crow, p. 727

 4. What advice did Americans receive on constructing their own fallout shelters? View the Closer Look Images as History: Fallout Shelters, p. 736

U.S.
Hydrogen Bomb Test Over Uninhabited Pacific Island (1952),  p. 729 • Sputnik I, p. 742

View the Map Interactive Map: The Korean War, 1950–1953,
 p. 731

Watch the Video
• Ike for President: Eisenhower Campaign Ad (1952), p. 733
• Duck and Cover, p. 734


 5. How does this cartoon depict Kennedy’s actions during the Cuban Missile Crisis? View the Image JFK and Krushchev, p. 746

 • Video Lecture: McCarthyism and the Politics of Fear, p. 741 • President John F. Kennedy and the Cuban Missile Crisis, p. 747

 Why did Americans disagree about New Deal-era laws and programs?

A
Middle-Class America p. 756


 How did postwar prosperity transform American society?

Popular Culture in
 the Fifties p. 760

 How did mass media create teen culture?

Freedom Now:
The Civil Rights
Movement p. 765


Why was the Civil Rights
 Movement successful in the fifties?

 CHAPTER

Securing the New
Deal Legacy p. 752




 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 25

In a Land of Plenty
Contentment and Discord, 1945 –1960
 On September 3, 1957, a young black teenager, Elizabeth Eckford, walked past an angry mob after state troopers refused to let her enter the all-white Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas. This photo captures her harrowing ordeal as a young white woman, Hazel Bryan, her face contorted with rage, screamed at Eckford. In the days that followed, a sympathetic white man put an ad in the local newspaper featuring this photograph. “Study this picture and know shame,” he told his neighbors. Instead, for years Bryan received congratulatory letters from diehard segregationists for her verbal assault on Eckford that day. Five years later Bryan tracked down Eckford in Little Rock to apologize. Eckford went on to graduate from college, served in the army, and then became a probation officer. This photograph challenges the traditional image of the 1950s as a tranquil period of material contentment and ideological consensus. Americans enjoyed unprecedented prosperity during the decade but also experienced domestic discord along racial, generational, and political lines. New energy surged into the Civil Rights Movement in the 1950s. Acts of extraordinary bravery by Elizabeth Eckford and others like her took on new significance in an era when Supreme Court rulings pushed the federal government to take an active role in protecting the civil rights of African Americans. Leadership from black churches and black students infused the movement with an ethos of nonviolent direct action that forced white America to see the injustice of Jim Crow, the Southern legal structure that relegated African Americans to second-class citizenship. A different type of discord permeated American home-life throughout the 1950s. In many respects families were the focus of American society from 1945 to1960. Enjoying a rising standard of living in generally prosperous times, American families grew at an unprecedented rate. Lured to fast-growing suburbs by lowcost loans and affordable housing, an exploding middle class filled their homes with possessions previously out of reach for most Americans. The baby boom generation, those 76.4 million Americans born between 1946 and 1964, who were now coming into adolescence, embraced new standards in dress, music, and movies that distinguished the “teen” generation from their parents. Some teenagers rebelled against authority in more overtly political ways. High school and college students, for instance, were the ground troops in many civil rights demonstrations. Others joined the counterculture Beat movement to express their rebellion against social norms through poetry, novels, and art. From 1945 to 1960, Americans debated the divergent political paths that the country could take domestically during the Cold War era. They pondered the effects of New Deal programs, unions, suburbs, civil rights, and consumption on American society. The changing American way of life created a sense of both contentment and crisis for the nation.

 “It was the longest block I ever walked in my whole life.” ELIZABETH ECKFORD, confronting a mob as she walked from the bus stop to school in Little Rock, Arkansas





 CHAPTER 25

IN A LAND OF PLENTY: CONTENTMENT AND DISCORD, 1945–1960

Securing the New Deal Legacy
 Once prosperity returned after World War II, Republicans tried to undo the New Deal, arguing that these Depression-era programs hampered the free market and deprived industrialists of the freedom to run their companies as they saw fit. Moderate Democrats, like President Harry Truman, focused on preserving past reforms. When labor unions launched unpopular postwar strikes, Republicans joined with conservative southern Democrats to roll back New Deal legislation that had benefited the labor movement. The victory over labor, however, did not provide enough momentum for conservatives to achieve their ultimate goal: dismantling the entire New Deal. 25.1 Striking Steel Workers, 1946 Picketing steel workers carried signs with slogans meant to win sympathy from ordinary Americans, but widespread strikes caused a public backlash against labor unions.

The Labor Movement
Curtailed
 In 1945, the labor movement enjoyed unparalleled strength. Government support for union organizing during the New Deal and World War II, combined with a wave of successful sit-down

 What arguments do these signs make for labor’s demands?

 strikes in the 1930s, had made labor a powerful force in American society. This was the high point of the labor movement in American history. Over 14 million workers belonged to unions, nearly 35 percent of the industrial workforce. Labor flexed its muscle in 1946, when the lifting of wartime price controls sent prices skyrocketing.

SECURING THE NEW DEAL LEGACY

 Nearly 4.6 million workers participated in 5,000 strikes nationwide in 1945–1946, demanding not just higher wages and benefits but also the right to participate in management decisions regarding investments, product lines, production methods, and plant locations. The signs held by striking steelworkers in this photo (25.1) outside a Bethlehem Steel Plant were intended to mobilize public support. The slogans demanded fairness to returning veterans, gave assurances that higher wages would not lead to higher prices, and proposed a living wage for workers who made such a valuable commodity. Black and white steelworkers manned this picket line together, reflecting the success of the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) in mending racial divisions that had previously weakened the labor movement (see Chapter 22). As the labor unrest widened, popular support for strikes diminished. The public had little sympathy for threats to shut down the steel and car industries, which formed the core of the national economy. Strikes in the coal and meatpacking industries also made it more expensive for Americans to heat their homes and eat meat. When railroad workers went on strike, Truman intervened. The railroad strike “threatens to paralyze all our industrial, agricultural, commercial, and social life,” leading to potential starvation at home and abroad, the president proclaimed. Although supportive of New Deal labor legislation, Truman announced he would use the army to run the railroads and draft striking workers into the military if they did not return to work. Moments before he was scheduled to ask Congress to authorize this legislation, the strikers returned to work. Workers in other industries fared a bit better. Negotiated settlements in the steel and auto industries set the benchmark for wages, benefits, and shop floor practices that other companies, even nonunionized ones like the general merchandiser Sears Roebuck, adopted to maintain peaceful labor relations. Industrialists also gained in these agreements. Longer contracts ensured an extended period of tranquility with no strikes, and in all settlements company owners maintained control over management decisions. The Republicans’ successful mid-term campaign slogan, “Had Enough? Vote Republican,” capitalized on voters’ dismay over labor conflicts and higher prices. In 1946, for the first time since 1933, the Republican Party won majorities in both the House and the Senate. Republicans hoped to use this victory as a springboard for



 unseating Truman in 1948. The Eightieth Congress immediately passed strong anti-labor legislation over Truman’s veto. Although dismayed with the strikes of 1946, Truman knew that he would need labor’s vote in the upcoming presidential contest. The Taft-Hartley Act (1947) abolished the closed shop, a practice that required all workers who benefited from a union-negotiated contract to join the union. The law also banned so-called sympathy boycotts, strikes by workers who wanted to support another union’s protest. Finally the requirement that all union officers sign affidavits certifying that they were not members of the Communist Party encouraged unions to purge their most radical members, often those who had pioneered new tactics, like the sit-down strike in the 1930s. The Taft-Hartley Act was a serious blow to the labor movement. The merger in 1955 between the CIO and the more conservative American Federation of Labor (AFL) ushered in a more cautious era of labor organizing that mostly ignored unskilled and Southern workers.

Presidential Agendas:
Truman and Eisenhower
 Conservative Republicans hoped that the TaftHartley Act would spearhead a drive to dismantle the New Deal. Instead the curtailment of labor removed the most visible symbol of what was supposedly “wrong” with the New Deal just as the 1948 presidential campaign got underway. To win, Truman decided that the votes of labor and Northern African Americans were more important than retaining the solid South. The Democratic Party adopted the slogan “Don’t let them take it away,” referring to the minimum wage, unemployment insurance, and Social Security that the New Deal had granted to industrial workers. Liberal Democrats successfully pushed Truman to take a stronger stand on civil rights. In July 1948, for both principled and pragmatic reasons, Truman ordered the desegregation of the armed forces, an important civil rights milestone. Truman’s embrace of civil rights caused Southern conservatives to bolt from the Democratic Party; his earlier confrontations with labor also convinced social progressives to leave the party. Vowing to preserve segregation, conservative Southern Democrats formed the States Rights Party and nominated South Carolina Governor Strom Thurmond to run against Truman and the Republican candidate,

 What differing responses did postwar labor conflicts provoke?



 CHAPTER 25

IN A LAND OF PLENTY: CONTENTMENT AND DISCORD, 1945–1960

 Thomas Dewey. On the political left former Vice President Henry Wallace ran on the Progressive Citizens of America ticket, representing a coalition of liberals and radicals upset about the assault on civil liberties at home and the nation’s aggressive foreign policy as the Cold War took shape. Truman’s campaign assault on big business as “gluttons of privilege,” strong support from labor and blacks, and the success of the Berlin airlift propelled him to a clear victory in the Electoral College (303 to 189), but he led Dewey by just two million in the popular vote (see Chapter 24).

 “The time has come to walk out of the shadow of states’ rights and into the sunlight of human rights.” Minneapolis Mayor HUBERT HUMPHREY, urging Democrats to adopt a strong civil rights stance in the 1948 presidential election

 For much of his second term, Truman focused on managing foreign affairs and fending off assaults on his administration from Senator Joseph McCarthy (see Chapter 24). Abandoning his earlier stance of merely sustaining the New Deal, Truman put forth the Fair Deal, proposals for national health care, public housing, education, and public works projects. The Democratic majority that controlled the Eighty-First Congress funded state school systems and urban public housing, increased the minimum wage, and continued bringing electricity and telephones into rural areas. Proposals for national health insurance stalled, but Congress did vote to build more hospitals and expanded public health facilities for the poor. In June, 1950, North Korea invaded South Korea and political debate shifted to the Korean War (see Chapter 24). Truman, wary of undermining bipartisan support for his Cold War policies and the Korean War, did not push hard for controversial Fair Deal initiatives such as repealing the Taft-Hartley Act, price and wage controls, or universal health care. Only a fraction of Truman’s

 How did foreign affairs influence domestic politics in the postwar era?

 Fair Deal proposals became law, but his program foreshadowed the more successful and extensive liberal agendas of Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, both Democrats. By the end of the Truman administration, most Americans could not imagine a society without Social Security or a minimum wage, expectations that shaped the political vision of the nation’s next president. In 1952 and again in 1956, the Republican candidate Dwight Eisenhower won in landslide elections, both times defeating Democrat Adlai E. Stevenson of Illinois. The virtually unknown Stevenson faced the daunting challenge of overcoming Southern anger at Truman’s civil rights reforms (which Stevenson supported) and America’s affection for Eisenhower, a World War II hero. A gifted orator, Stevenson stuck to traditional stump speeches, while Eisenhower became the first presidential candidate to use televised political ads. He honed his folksy image in short ads that aired during the commercial breaks of popular nighttime TV programs. America voted overwhelmingly for the man they knew and liked, with Eisenhower defeating Stevenson by 422 to 89 electoral votes. In 1956, running on a slogan of “peace and prosperity” that noted his success in ending the Korean War, Eisenhower polled even higher numbers, receiving 457 electoral votes to Stevenson’s 73. Republican critics like Senator Robert Taft of Ohio attacked the Fair Deal as “creeping socialism” because these expensive programs required high taxes and, in Republicans’ view, gave the government too much power. The 1953 editorial cartoon Who Said ‘Creeping Socialism’ (25.2) reflected the conservatives’ fear that Eisenhower would have trouble taming New Deal and Fair Deal programs. The congressman in the cartoon, a symbol of runaway big government, holds a briefcase labeled “Govt. in Business, Housing, Power, Transport,” and his running head start makes it impossible for Eisenhower to catch up. The cartoon actually misrepresented Eisenhower’s intentions. The president liked to say that he was “conservative when it comes to money and liberal when it comes to human beings.” To appeal to the moderates in each party, Eisenhower announced that he had no intention of dismantling popular New Deal programs. “Should any political party attempt to abolish social security and eliminate labor laws and farm programs,

SECURING THE NEW DEAL LEGACY

25.2 Who Said ‘Creeping Socialism,’ 1953
 During the 1952 presidential election, conservative Republicans criticized the New Deal and Fair Deal as “creeping socialism.” This caricature portrays the newly elected Republican President Dwight Eisenhower struggling to catch a sprinting congressman who clutches programs enacted during previous Democratic administrations.

 you would not hear of that party again in our political history,” Eisenhower concluded, to the dismay of Republican conservatives. His “victory of the moderates,” as commentators termed it,



 underscored that New Deal reforms were here to stay. Eisenhower did curb the Fair Deal by vetoing new public housing and public works projects and never offered any new social welfare measures. Fiscally conservative, Eisenhower believed that balancing the budget and limiting government expenditures created a favorable business environment that promoted jobs and prosperity. He also fostered strong ties between government and the defense industry as the Pentagon amassed a huge nuclear arsenal. In the president’s view, a nuclear shield protected the nation more cheaply and effectively than conventional arms or troops. But Eisenhower expressed misgivings about the domestic costs of a large defense budget as early as 1953: “Every gun made, every warship that is launched, every rocket fired, signifies, in the final sense, a theft from those who hunger and are not fed, those who are cold and are not clothed.” Nine years later, as he prepared to vacate the White House, Eisenhower suggested that he had gone too far in promoting the convergence of military and industrial interests. In a well-remembered speech, he urged Americans to keep an eye on the “military-industrial complex,” his term for the close ties between the defense industry and the Pentagon that might unduly influence government policy. “We must never let the weight of this combination endanger our liberties or democratic processes,” Eisenhower warned.

 “I have always assumed that what was good for the United States was good for General Motors, and vice versa.” Secretary of Defense CHARLES E. WILSON, when asked about a possible conflict of interest between his government position and his former job as the head of General Motors, 1953

Read the Document Dwight D. Eisenhower, Farewell
Address (1961)


 Why was Eisenhower’s “victory of the moderates” significant?



 CHAPTER 25

IN A LAND OF PLENTY: CONTENTMENT AND DISCORD, 1945–1960

A
Middle-Class America  By any measure the 1950s were a prosperous decade. From 1945 to 1960, per capita consumption rose 50 percent, wages grew by one-third, and unemployment averaged 4.6 percent. American productivity also boomed. With only six percent of the world population, the United States produced half of the world’s manufactured goods in the 1950s. The 1950s gave the generation raised in the austerity of the Great Depression something they had never known: affluence. For the first time many Americans enjoyed the trappings of middle-class life—a suburban home filled with modern appliances and a car in the garage—previously available only to a small segment of the population. By 1960, the nation crossed a significant historic threshold, when 60 percent of Americans were classified as middle class. The United States was no longer a primarily working-class society.

Postwar Prosperity
 In 1948, Vernon Presley brought his family to Memphis, Tennessee, to escape the grinding poverty of Mississippi. Gladys Presley later recalled that her son, Elvis, “would hear us worrying about our debts, being out of work and sickness and he’d say, ‘Don’t you worry none, Baby. When I grow up, I’m going to buy you a fine house . . . and get two Cadillacs— one for you and Daddy, and one for me.” Elvis Presley fulfilled this promise to his parents when he

25.3 and 25.4
Buying on Credit
“What They Have”
 vs. “What They Own.” The before and after photos of this Life magazine spread demonstrated Americans’ reliance on credit to accumulate the trappings of middle-class life in the fifties.

 Why did standards of living improve for many Americans in the 1950s?

 became the most famous rock-and-roll star of the era. For the rest of his life, Elvis, an extreme example of the era’s conspicuous consumption, gave away cars to friends and family. Few Americans enjoyed this level of financial success, but the kind of deprivation that Elvis experienced as a child became a relic of the past for millions in the 1950s. The typical American “has access to amenities—foods, entertainment, personal transportation, and plumbing—in which not even the rich rejoiced a century ago,” economist John

A MIDDLE-CLASS AMERICA

 Kenneth Galbraith noted. Having discretionary income for a television, vacations, or sending a child to college transformed the lives of American workers. “If what we lived through in the 1950s was not liberation,” Jack Metzgar, the son of Pennsylvania steelworkers, noted, “then liberation never happens in real human lives.” An aggressive union movement seeking higher wages and benefits and the New Deal safety net of guaranteed pensions and unemployment insurance helped fuel this leap into the middle class for many industrial workers. Other government initiatives also helped transform the way Americans lived. In 1944, just 44 percent of Americans owned their homes. By 1960, this figure had risen to 60 percent thanks to the 1944 GI Bill of Rights that offered returning veterans low-interest loans and to a tax code that provided incentives for homeowners. In addition state and federal governments constructed the roads, schools, bridges, and sewers that new suburban developments required. During World War II production of consumer goods was scant, and many Americans had accumulated savings that they were now eager to spend. In 1950 alone, Americans snatched up 6.2 million refrigerators, 14.6 million radios, and 6.2 million automobiles. This represented three-quarters of the appliances purchased worldwide. Installment



 plans helped millions of Americans purchase these key consumer items. Consumer debt rose from $8.3 billion in 1946 to $56.1 billion in 1960, a trend that caught Life’s attention in 1955. To illustrate the newly affluent lifestyle of middle-class Americans, Life photographer Loomis Dean put a couple with their two children in front of their Los Angeles suburban home alongside all their furnishings and car. The first picture (25.3) showed “what they have”: an oven, refrigerator, two television sets, car, and furniture. The second photograph (25.4), “what they own,” put the family in front of the foundations of a house and automobile tires to reflect how far along they were in their mortgage and car payments. The refrigerator, couch, stove, and one television set—all bought on credit—were missing. By purchasing so heavily with credit, this family risked losing nearly everything if a recession hit, and the father lost his job. American leaders felt that their nation’s material abundance demonstrated the superiority of capitalist societies over communist ones, where basic consumer items were often in short supply. Others condemned American materialism. In his biting social commentary The Status Seekers, Vance Packard criticized Americans for jettisoning the frugality of the past in favor of status-seeking conspicuous consumption. Manufacturers helped create this

 Compare this family’s possessions and home life to those of previous generations.



 CHAPTER 25

IN A LAND OF PLENTY: CONTENTMENT AND DISCORD, 1945–1960

 new consumerist orientation. One executive conceded that it was the advertisers’ job to “see to it that Americans are never satisfied.” A middle-class family now considered their car or refrigerator “obsolete after two or three years even though it works well,” financial columnist Sylvia Porter noted.

The Move to the Suburbs
 Suburbs built in the 1920s ringed major cities and remained connected to the metropolitan core by streetcars or rail lines. In the 1950s, suburbs moved farther away from cities, becoming insular communities that depended increasingly on cars to transport people. The roads Eisenhower built to help evacuate urban areas if the nation came under nuclear attack (see Chapter 24) were now filled with suburbanites running errands and commuting to work. Of the 13 million new houses constructed between 1948 and 1958, 85 percent were built in suburban neighborhoods. By 1960, 37 million Americans lived in suburbs out of a total population of 189 million. When developer William Levitt erected thousands of mass-produced houses on the former potato fields of Long Island, in New York State, he pioneered building techniques that transformed the housing market. Applying Henry Ford’s automobile assembly line–style innovations to the housing industry, Levitt built “Levittowns,”—planned suburban communities where developers standardized every part of the construction process. Levitt claimed that his crews could assemble a house in 15 minutes, while it took only three minutes to complete the paperwork to purchase one. Levitt passed these savings onto home-buyers, dropping the prices of new houses from $14,000 to $8,000. When other developers copied his techniques nationwide, the low price of suburban houses, coupled with readily available government-backed financing, brought home ownership within reach of millions of Americans. These new suburban houses typically contained living-room picture windows that developers installed to make their 1,000-square-feet houses feel more spacious. When the curtains were open, these large windows also displayed a family’s possessions and prosperity to the neighborhood. Suburban houses had “living kitchens” where families both prepared and ate their meals and “family rooms” to accommodate the television, toys, and games that brought the family together at the end of the day. A garage sheltered the automobile that every suburban family needed.

 Why did suburbs boom in the 1950s?

 Americans offered competing visions on whether suburban living improved daily life or encouraged mindless conformity. Conflicting interpretations greeted images of idealized suburban life. “For literally nothing down” Americans could purchase a “box” in a suburban development “inhabited by people whose age, income, number of children, problems, habits, conversation, dress, possessions and perhaps even blood type are also precisely like [theirs],” wrote John Keats in The Crack in the Picture Window (1957). Abraham Levitt, the son of developer William Levitt, fought back against these charges: “Houses are for people, not critics . . . — and the people for whom we do it think it’s pretty good.” This debate is explored in Competing Visions: Suburbs—American Dream or Nightmare? The move to the suburbs converged with an explosion of childbearing among couples who had put off having children during the Depression and World War II and younger couples encouraged by boom times to start their families immediately. Between 1935 and 1955, the birth rate jumped nearly 40 percent. Levittown’s nickname, “Fertility Valley,” underscored this link between the suburbs and the baby boom generation. The baby boom generation shaped American society for decades. As babies and children they helped stimulate a huge industry devoted to diapers, baby formulas, and toys. Teenagers, a new term to describe adolescents, formed the backbone of 1950s popular culture and the antiwar movement and cultural upheavals of the 1960s. In the twenty-first century, as the baby boomers begin to retire, the imperative to care for a large aging population poses significant challenges for American society. The 1950s ushered in other key lifestyle changes besides suburban living and an emphasis on family life. As more Americans entered the middle class, they increasingly worked at white-collar jobs ranging from clerks to professionals to corporate executives. The effect of corporate culture on American society was as hotly debated as the impact of suburban life. In an era when McCarthyism eliminated radical discourse as a legitimate form of political expression, social critics worried that suburbs and corporations were bleaching individuality and innovation out of the national character. “When white-collar people get jobs, they sell not only their time and energy but their personalities as well,” sociologist C. Wright Mills contended. Others, including Fortune magazine, regularly defended corporations for extending job security and prosperity to millions.

Hear the Audio Little Boxes


A MIDDLE-CLASS AMERICA



Competing Visions
SUBURBS—AMERICAN DREAM OR NIGHTMARE?
As the suburbs grew social critics debated whether suburban life represented the epitome of the American dream or a nightmarish existence that isolated Americans from one another. To challenge historian Lewis Mumford’s assertion that the suburbs were cultural wastelands, sociologist Herbert J. Gans moved his family into a Levittown to study its residents. As you read the following excerpts from Mumford and Gans, consider how each links the suburbs to changing lifestyles. What positive and negative changes do these writers attribute to suburban life? What different futures do they envision for a suburban-based American culture? Lewis Mumford in The City in History (1961) contended that suburban life bred conformity, loneliness, and alienation. 
 Herbert J. Gans defended suburbanites in The Levittowners: Ways of Life and Politics in a New Suburban Community (1967).

 In the mass movement into suburban areas a new kind of community was produced … a multitude of uniform, unidentifiable houses, lined up inflexibly, at uniform distances, on uniform roads, in a treeless communal waste, inhabited by people of the same class, the same income, the same age group, witnessing the same television performances, eating the same tasteless pre-fabricated foods, from the same freezers, conforming in every outward and inward respect to a common mold … The town housewife, who half a century ago knew her butcher, her grocer, her dairyman, her various other local tradesmen, as individual persons, with histories and biographies that impinged on her own, in a daily exchange, now has the benefit of a single weekly expedition to an impersonal supermarket, where only by accident is she likely to encounter a neighbor.… The cost of this detachment in space from other men is out of all proportion to its supposed benefits. The end product is an encapsulated life, spent more and more either in a motor car or within the cabin of darkness before a television set.

 [Levittowners] are not apathetic conformists ripe for takeover by a totalitarian elite or corporate merchandiser; they are not conspicuous consumers and slaves to sudden whims of cultural and political fashion.… even though Levittowners and other lower middle class Americans continue to be home-centered, they are much more “in the world” than their parents and grandparents were. Those coming out of ethnic working class backgrounds have rejected the ... ethnocentrism which made other cultures and even other neighborhoods bitter enemies. This generation trusts its neighbors, participates with them in social and civic activities, and no longer sees government as inevitably corrupt. Even working class Levittowners have begun to give up the suspicion that isolated their ancestors from all but family and childhood friends. Similarly, the descendants of rural Protestant America have given up the xenophobia that turned previous generations against the Catholic and Jewish immigrant, they have almost forgotten the intolerant Puritanism which triggered attacks against pleasure and enjoyment, and they no longer fully accept the doctrine of laissez-faire that justifies the defense of all individual rights and privileges against others’ needs. These and other changes have come about not because people are now better or more tolerant human beings, but because they are affluent. For the Levittowners, life is not a fight for survival any more; they have been able to move into a community in which income and status are equitably enough distributed so that neighbors are no longer treated as enemies, even if they are still criticized for social and cultural defiance. By any yardstick one chooses, Levittowners treat their fellow residents more ethically and more democratically than did their parents and grandparents. They also live a “fuller” and “richer” life.… superior to what prevailed among the working and lower middle classes of past generations.”

Levittown Street Scene


View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Suburbs—
American Dream or Nightmare?


 What competing visions emerged over suburban living and corporate jobs?



 CHAPTER 25

IN A LAND OF PLENTY: CONTENTMENT AND DISCORD, 1945–1960

Popular Culture in the Fifties
 Television transformed the home life of millions of Americans. So did the emergence of an autonomous youth culture, with its own slang, rock-and-roll music, and dress. Were these harmless expressions of adolescent rebellion or signs of the disintegration of American culture? These stirrings of generational conflict in the 1950s exploded a decade later into full-fledged revolt.

The Television Age Arrives
 The first commercial television transmission in the United States occurred in 1939 when President Franklin D. Roosevelt visited the New York World’s Fair. The war slowed the introduction of televisions into the consumer market, but by the 1950s, the television age had arrived. In 1948, just 178,000 homes had televisions. Seven years later three-quarters of American households owned one. Eisenhower set the tone for the decade with the widely publicized image of the president and his wife, Mamie, eating dinner each night off traytables in front of a television in their private White House parlor. Whereas in the forties Americans had flocked to movie theaters for entertainment, now they stayed home. “Don’t be a Living Room Captive—Step Out and See a Great Movie,” film studios urged. Many Americans, however, appeared to agree with Eisenhower, who wrote in his diary, “If a citizen has to be bored to death it is cheaper and more comfortable to sit at home and look at television than it is to go outside and pay a dollar for a ticket.” Many movie theaters closed, and the studios made fewer films. Only drive-in theaters in suburban towns, where customers sat in their cars next to individual speakers to watch a movie on a giant outdoor screen, thrived. Drive-in theaters appealed to young parents who could pile their children into the car for a night out and teenagers who could escape the watchful eyes of adults for a few hours. What were Americans watching at home? Many early television shows dealt with the social conditions and cultural values of the day, paying particular attention to family and consumerism. In The Honeymooners, the working-class Kramdens lived in a sparsely furnished apartment and often clashed, particularly when one of the getrich-quick schemes devised by bus driver Ralph (played by comedian Jackie Gleason) started to unravel. His wife Alice always stood her ground, even when Ralph threatened her with one of

 What insights do 1950s television shows offer into American culture?

 the show’s trademark lines: “One of these days, Alice … one of these days … POW, right in the kisser.” By the end of each episode, the couple had reconciled, with Ralph often telling his wife, “Baby, you’re the greatest.” I Love Lucy began in a small Manhattan apartment, but eventually Lucy Ricardo (played by Lucille Ball) and her Cuban husband Ricky (Ball’s real-life husband Desi Arnaz) relocated to suburban Connecticut to raise their son. Lucy’s farcical adventures trying to enter show business or best her husband always ended with her realizing that being a caring wife and mother was fulfilling enough. Situation comedies like Father Knows Best and Leave It to Beaver focused on the roles that each member of an ideal white suburban family played: Father worked hard and came home in time to resolve the minor crises of the day; mother kept a spotless home, volunteered, and supported her husband’s career; and children learned to tell the truth, work hard, and obey their parents. Sitcoms in the 1950s provided plenty of escapist fare. Nightly news broadcasts, however, brought glimpses of the wider world into American homes and played an increasing role in politics. Politicians quickly learned to use the new medium to their advantage. Republican vice presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon was the first politician to give a televised speech to defuse a political scandal. During the 1952 presidential election, the press revealed that Nixon had a secret fund financed by California businessmen. Hoping to stem the damage, Nixon appeared on television to refute charges that the money was for his personal use or that these businessmen were buying “secret favors” from him with their donations. Laying out the details of his personal finances, Nixon defiantly told viewers that without campaign donations only the rich could run for office. In the speech’s most famous passage, Nixon mentioned one personal gift that he would not return: “A man down in Texas heard Pat [his wife] on the radio mention the fact

View the Closer Look Choices and Consequences:
Does Father Know Best?


POPULAR CULTURE IN THE FIFTIES

 that our two youngsters would like to have a dog” and surprised the family with the gift of a blackand-white cocker spaniel. “And our little girl Tricia, the six year old, named it ‘Checkers.’ And you know, the kids, like all kids, love the dog, and I just want to say this, right now, that regardless of what they say about it, we’re gonna keep it.” After the speech, Nixon posed with his family and Checkers (25.5). The Checkers speech saved Nixon’s place on the Republican ticket alongside Eisenhower. Like Nixon, John F. Kennedy also astutely used posed photographs, like this one with his attractive young family (25.6). By creating such images Kennedy hoped to distract attention from his inherited wealth and Catholicism, long considered an undesirable religious affiliation for a national politician. On September 26, 1960, Kennedy and Nixon faced off in the first televised presidential election debate. Nearly 77 million Americans, or 60 percent of the adult population, watched this historic event. Nixon, still pale and underweight from a two-week stint in the hospital, squared off against a tan and fit Kennedy, who impressed viewers with his comfortable presence before the cameras. By contrast Nixon refused to wear make-up, looked as if he needed a shave, wore a poorly fitted shirt, and was visibly sweating throughout the exchange. Most Americans

Watch the Video Kennedy-Nixon Debate




 who watched the debate felt that Kennedy had won, while the majority who listened on the radio gave the edge to Nixon. Kennedy went on to narrowly win the election, revealing the power of images to sway political judgments.

Teen Culture and
 Rock-and-Roll Teenagers came into their own in the 1950s. Their parents remained haunted by memories of Depression-era deprivation and the life-and-death struggle of World War II. By contrast in the 1950s, many middle-class teenagers grew up with an abundance of material possessions. Most teenagers agreed with their parents when it came to politics, sharing their concern about communist expansion and the growing Soviet nuclear threat. Many, however, adopted an ethos of pleasure-seeking that often put them at odds with their parents who emphasized thrift and self-discipline. Unlike their parents’ generation teenagers were no longer expected to earn money to help support their families. Millions of young people experienced unprecedented leisure time and longer schooling, and were free to spend money earned from after-school jobs as they liked.

25.5 and 25.6
 Two candidates, one family portrait Throughout their political careers, Richard M. Nixon and John F. Kennedy used portraits of their family life to connect with voters. These images fit with the era’s idealized image of the perfect American family, which included a supportive wife, two children, and at least one dog.

 How did politicians use television and photographs to shape their public image?



 CHAPTER 25

IN A LAND OF PLENTY: CONTENTMENT AND DISCORD, 1945–1960

 Teenagers flocked to buy record players and radios to play music marketed specifically to them. In 1958, the Coasters scored a number-one record with their song, “Yakety Yak,” which depicts a teenager rebelling against household chores. In one refrain, the parent orders the teenager to “Take out the papers and the trash / Or you don’t get no spendin’ cash,” to which the teenager replies “yakety yak,” with the parent then retorting: “don’t talk back.”

 “Teenagers are my life and triumph. I’d be nowhere without them.” ELVIS PRESLEY, whose stardom demonstrated the strength of teen culture in the 1950s Teens’ freedom to create their own social world filled with slang and fads that adults did not understand disturbed critics. By the end of the decade, sociologist Edgar Friedenberg noted that “the ‘teenager’ seems to have replaced the Communist as the appropriate target for public controversy and foreboding.” In this cultural clash traditionalists lambasted horror comic books and teen films for encouraging teenagers to revolt against their parents and social norms. But rock-and-roll music and musicians provoked the most outrage. Rock-and-roll burst onto the national scene when Bill Haley and his Comets recorded “Rock Around the Clock” in 1955, the first rock-and-roll tune. The following year Chuck Berry thundered “Roll over, Beethoven, and tell Tchaikovsky the news!” proclaiming rock-and-roll the music of choice for this teenage generation. It took Elvis Presley, however, to make rock-and-roll (which got its name from a rhythm and blues slang term for sexual intercourse) a phenomenon. Exposed to the raw sexuality and powerful rhythms of African American rhythm and blues music as a boy in Mississippi, Presley also sang gospel and country music in church. Melding the sounds and explosive delivery of these musical traditions with catchy pop lyrics, he developed his own eroticized dancing style. “If I could find a white man who had the black sound and the black feel, I could make a billion dollars,” predicted record producer Sam Phillips, the owner of Sun Records, a small recording company in Memphis, Tennessee. Philips found his man when Presley walked into Sun Records to record a song as a gift for his mother.

 How did larger economic and technological changes make a mass teen culture possible?

 Americans embraced competing visions over whether the growing popularity of rock-and-roll meant the triumph of consumer tastes or the downfall of American civilization. Nicknamed “Elvis the Pelvis” for his suggestive hip thrusts while dancing, partially captured in this photograph (25.7), Presley became a lightening rod for critics who denounced rock-and-roll from the pulpit, in the press, and even in congressional hearings. When teenager Ron Kovic’s family watched Presley on TV’s Ed Sullivan Show, his sister went “crazy in the living room jumping up and down,” his mother sat “on the couch with her hands folded in her lap like she was praying” and his dad shouted from the other room that “watching Elvis Presley could lead to sin.” In introducing Presley the affable Sullivan assured parents that the 22-year-old Presley was “a real decent, fine boy.” To avoid controversy, however, Sullivan ordered camera crews to frame out Presley’s legendary pelvic thrusts and gyrations, showing only his head and chest. It took the draft to tame Elvis. “Presley wiggled off to military service,” one newspaper columnist wrote, “but comes marching home … shorn of his sideburns and behaving the way a sedate, seriousminded youngster should.” The new “clean-cut” Presley kept his original fan base but had limited appeal to the teenage generation coming of age in 1960. Ed Sullivan showcased a range of music, skits, and comedy acts to keep the whole family watching together during the hour-long show. Dick Clark, however, helped pioneer television programming exclusively for teenagers with his daily afternoon show American Bandstand, which featured Philadelphia high-school students dancing to the latest hits. The advent of pocketsize transistor radios meant that teenagers could listen to radio stations broadcasting the top 40 best-selling records or independent rhythm and blues stations in the privacy of their bedrooms, away from critical adult ears. Hollywood also catered to teenage tastes with films like The Wild One (1953), which featured Marlon Brando as part of a rebellious motorcycle gang, and Rebel Without a Cause (1955). In the latter film James Dean and Natalie Wood played teenagers from uppermiddle-class suburban homes; unsure how to handle their racing hormones, the two become defiant. Dean’s character tries to prove his masculinity by drag racing, while Wood’s character uses promiscuity to rebel against an overprotective father. This view of the suburbs as hotbeds of intergenerational conflict and alienated youth frightened adults but thrilled teenagers. Embracing the persona of an angry youth discontented with mainstream society, Dean (who died at age 24 in a car accident) became an icon of teenage rebellion in the 1950s.

Read the Document The Teenage Consumer (1959)


POPULAR CULTURE IN THE FIFTIES

 Parental norms often prevailed. Teenagers in the 1950s grew up quickly. Students who dated a lot in high school tended to marry soon after graduation. Once married, they quickly started families, conforming to the standards set by their parents.

The Beats
 Teens in the 1950s used their purchases—of music, clothes, fan magazines—to define their generational

 identity, while their parents announced their new middle-class status by buying cars and suburban houses. Beats or beatniks, members of the bohemian communities of poets, novelists, and artists that flourished in New York’s Greenwich Village and San Francisco’s North Beach, offered an alternative vision. The Beats rejected home ownership, career, and marriage in favor of individual freedom and immediate pleasure (including drugs and casual sex). The national spotlight briefly shined on City Lights Bookstore in San Francisco when it published the controversial poem Howl (1955) by thenstruggling Beat poet Allen Ginsberg. “I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness, starving hysterical naked, dragging themselves through the negro streets at dawn looking for an angry fix,” began the opening stanza. The poem sent readers on a journey into the underground lives of the drug addicts, musicians, artists, radicals, and homosexuals, who lived on the margins of mainstream society. In the 1950s, most states had so-called antisodomy laws that criminalized samesex intercourse. Ginsberg’s open celebration of gay sex in Howl offended anti-obscenity crusaders in San Francisco. The police arrested the owner of the City Lights Bookstore for selling the poem, but a judge dismissed the charge, arguing that it was a socially significant artistic work. In his novel On the Road (1955), the Beat writer Jack Kerouac celebrated the spiritual quest for a meaningful life away from the suffocating materialism and conformity of middle-class society. Guilty at times of over-romanticizing working-class life for its “authenticity” without appreciating the deadening effects of poverty, the Beats nonetheless laid the foundation for the youth protests of the sixties (see Chapter 27).



25.7 Elvis Presley
Nicknamed “Elvis
 the Pelvis,” Elvis Presley’s suggestive dancing enraged parents but earned the singer millions of adoring teenage female fans.

 What competing visions of youth rebellion did rock-and-roll and the Beat movement embody?



 CHAPTER 25

IN A LAND OF PLENTY: CONTENTMENT AND DISCORD, 1945–1960

25.8 Autumn Rhythm 1950.
 Hans Namuth photographed Jackson Pollock in action as he dripped and swirled paint to evoke the sensations of a fall day: light and dark, heavy and buoyant, graceful and chaotic. Pollock painted spontaneously, but also deliberately. “I can control the flow of paint: there is no accident,” he stated.

 Most Americans never read Howl or On the Road. They instead formed their impressions of the Beats from watching The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis, a TV series that showcased a beatnik best friend, who urged Dobie to reject his father’s single-minded drive to make money and instead enjoy life to the fullest. This televised depiction of Beat culture helped interject new expressions, such as “dig it,” “cool,” and “man” that the Beats took from African American culture, into the vocabulary of white teenagers. Beat poets and novelists were not the only artists rebelling against received traditions in the 1950s. American modern artists formulated a new mode of visual art called Abstract Expressionism that broke with the predominant painting styles of the previous generation. Before World War II leading artists included the Cubist painter Pablo Picasso, who reordered the physical world in his paintings, and American social realist painters, who captured the lives of ordinary people during the Depression. Politics informed much artistic work in the 1930s and 1940s. In the 1950s a restless generation of new artists chose instead to emphasize personal expression over How does Pollock’s painting compare to social realist paintings in the 1930s (see Chapter 22)?

 politics. “The big moment came when it was decided to paint…. Just TO PAINT. The gesture on the canvas was a gesture of liberation, from Value—political, aesthetic, moral,” wrote art critic Harold Rosenberg in 1952. Jackson Pollock dripped paint on the canvas to create paintings bursting with energy (25.8). German photographer Hans Namuth captured Pollock’s rhythmic dance as he obscured painted figures with splats of paint. Mark Rothko painted fields of color to reflect feelings rather than objects, and refused to title or explain his paintings, so that viewers could interpret his work freely. Each created signature styles that epitomized the rebellious nature of Abstract Expression. Young artists idolized these painters for refusing to represent reality or use their art to send a message. More tradition-bound artists denounced their work as trivial. Like James Dean in films and Elvis Presley in music, the painters Pollock and Rothko embodied the rebellious streak of fifties youth culture.

FREEDOM NOW: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT



Freedom Now:
The Civil Rights Movement
 The Civil Rights Movement entered a pivotal phase in the 1950s. Key Supreme Court rulings, new leadership, and innovative strategies emboldened thousands of black and white people to demand the end of racial segregation in the South. The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) successfully challenged the constitutionality of segregated public schools. Martin Luther King Jr. emerged as a major leader, alongside a generation of activist black and white college students who employed new nonviolent strategies to compel white Americans to confront the harsh realities of Jim Crow. Supreme Court decisions pressured the federal government to intervene on behalf of African Americans. Meanwhile television and news magazines transmitted shocking images of racial violence that made it impossible for the nation to ignore the demands of civil rights activists.

Separate and Unequal:
Challenging Segregated
Schools
 Black and white southern children, as this photo of a street scene in a small Southern town suggests (25.9), grew up in separate worlds. They lived in different parts of town, went to segregated schools, drank from separate water fountains, ate in different restaurants, waited for buses in different waiting rooms, sat in separate sections of movie theatres, and often shopped in different stores. For many black children segregation meant daily humiliation and unanswered questions. “I guess if you are from a small Georgia town, as I am,” one black college student recalled, “you can say that your first encounter with prejudice was the day you were born…. My parents never got to see their infant twins alive because the only incubator in the hospital was on the ‘white’ side.” After World War II ethnic and racial minorities successfully challenged the legality of segregated schools. In 1947, the Supreme Court ruled that educating children of Mexican ancestry in separate California schools was illegal, because state law only authorized segregated schools for children of Asian decent. After this ruling, California repealed this discriminatory law. Ending legalized racial segregation nationwide came next. In 1954, the Supreme Court overturned the 1896 Plessy v. Ferguson “separate but equal” ruling that had allowed the South to maintain

Read the Document Brown v. Board of Education
 of Topeka Kansas (1954)

 “Tastes the same to me, Mom.” LEO LILLARD, after secretly sampling water from “white” and “colored” fountains as a boy in Nashville segregated schools from elementary school to graduate school. In Plessy v. Ferguson the Court had concluded that separate facilities (schools, waiting rooms, railroad cars) for whites and blacks were constitutional as long as they offered each race similar amenities. (See Choices and Consequences, Chapter 14.) In practice legalized segregation usually resulted in

A
Southern Town
 On their visit to town, these white and black children carefully avoided mixing, demonstrating how early children in the South learned to respect their region’s racial customs.

 How did racial discrimination shape Southern children’s lives?



 CHAPTER 25

25.10 Emmett Till
 and his mother “If you have to get on your knees and bow when a white person goes past, do it willingly,” Emmett’s mother told her Northernraised son before he left to visit relatives in Mississippi, instructions that the teenager tragically disregarded.

IN A LAND OF PLENTY: CONTENTMENT AND DISCORD, 1945–1960

 inferior accommodations and schools for black citizens. The Supreme Court ruled in Brown v. Board of Education (1954) that segregated schools indeed violated the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The Brown case concerned sevenyear-old Linda Brown, whose parents wanted to send her to an all-white school closer to their home. In mounting the case NAACP lawyer Thurgood Marshall (who later became the first African American appointed to the Supreme Court), and his team based their argument on more than the law. To convince the public and the Court that segregation was wrong, they needed to dramatize its effects. “To show damage and a violation of equal protection under the Fourteenth Amendment, you had to show that being segregated actually damaged children,” psychologist Kenneth Clark asserted. To demonstrate the irreversible effects of segregation on African American children, the NAACP cited Clark’s controversial research. In a series of studies, Clark asked white and black children whether they liked a white or black doll best. Most children picked a white doll because it was “nice” and rejected the black doll as “bad.” Clark next asked the children to identify the doll that was the most like them. The black children now had to pick the doll that many of them had just rejected as “bad.” In the North black children often burst into tears rather than respond. In the South, however, reactions like the one from a young boy in Arkansas, who laughed, “pointed to the brown doll, and said, ‘That’s a nigger. I’m a nigger,’” convinced Clark that segregation taught African American children to accept their inferiority to whites. Not everyone agreed with Clark’s methodology, so the NAACP relied heavily on his findings in preliminary court challenges and then mentioned them only briefly in their Supreme Court filing. The wording of the Brown decision, however, revealed that the NAACP had guessed right in emphasizing the impact of segregation on the self-esteem of black children. In reaching its unanimous decision, the Court noted that “to separate [black children] from others of

 Why did the Supreme Court rule that segregated schools were unconstitutional?

 similar age and qualifications solely because of their race generates a feeling of inferiority as to their status in the community that may affect their hearts and minds in a way unlikely ever to be undone.”

Emmett Till
In 1955, Emmett
 Till was just another 14-year-old posing for the camera with his mother. Their portrait reveals a boy with a beaming smile and a mother’s pride in her growing son (25.10). That summer Mamie Till-Bradley sent Emmett from his home in Chicago to visit relatives in Mississippi. To prepare her Northern-raised son for the racial customs of Southern society, she warned him to think of his safety when encountering Southern whites. One morning at a country store in Money, Mississippi, Emmett forgot his mother’s warning. While playing with black teens on the porch of the store, Till bragged that he had a white girlfriend in Chicago. “Hey, there’s a [white] girl in that store there,” one of the boys retorted, “I bet you won’t go in there and talk to her.” Responding to the dare, Till walked into the store, bought candy, then grabbed the arm of Carol Byrant, who ran the store with her husband, and allegedly asked, “How about a date, baby?” Till’s aghast cousin ran in and pulled him out of the store. Three days later a car pulled up to his granduncle’s house in the middle of the night. Two white men burst into the house and dragged Till out of bed. The husband of the young woman in the store, Roy Bryant, and her brother, J. W. Milam, threw a terrified Till into their truck and drove away. This was the last time his relatives saw him alive. The white men drove to an abandoned shed on a nearby plantation where they beat Till, then drove to the Tallahatchie River and forced him to strip before they shot him in the head and tossed his body into the river. With his mother’s permission, Jet magazine and the Chicago Defender, stalwarts of the black press, published the grisly photos of the corpse. Images as History: Inspiring a New Generation to Act discusses how images of Emmett Till’s murder transformed the Civil Rights Movement.

 View the Image oKenneth Clark Testing Children’s Choices of Dolls (1924)

FREEDOM NOW: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT



Images as History
INSPIRING A NEW GENERATION TO ACT
The photo of Emmett Till’s broken body, printed in African American newspapers and magazines, became the wake-up call for young people destined to play major roles in the future Civil Rights Movement. The Emmett Till case gave the nation more than a clear image of the victim. It also provided a snapshot of the killers and the vigilante justice dealt out in many small towns across the Deep South. At first, Deciding that “the world is going to have to look at this,” Mamie TillBradley took her son’s body back to Chicago where she insisted on an open casket funeral that thousands attended. 
 some Southern officials and citizens denounced the murder. But when the Northern press castigated the entire South for the crime, Southerners fought back claiming that Till was alive and in hiding or that the NAACP had set up the murder to embarrass the South. Why are these images important for understanding the history of race relations and the Civil Rights Movement?

•
 After seeing these photos future civil rights activist Julian Bond “felt vulnerable for the first time in my life—Till was a year younger—and [I] recall believing that this could easily happen to me—for no reason at all.”

•


 The black Northern press provoked outrage over the killing by pairing this gruesome image of Till’s battered corpse with the photograph of him smiling with his mother (25.10).

•


 Emmett Till’s corpse The accused men’s nonchalance in the courtroom and the show of support from the white observers sent a warning to the African American witnesses who testified against the pair, illustrating how communities like Money, Mississippi, at that time preserved the racial status quo.

•


•


•


 For many of his neighbors, Roy Bryant’s defense of his wife protected her honor and his reputation, and fulfilled his duty to help the white community keep the color bar intact.

•


 Bringing their children into the courtroom demonstrated that the accused were upstanding family men and helped teach white youth about the importance of maintaining white supremacy. Men on trial for Emmett Till’s murder, sitting with their families.

View the Closer Look Images as History: Inspiring
 a New Generation to Act

 How do these photos compare to postcards of lynchings (see Chapter 21)?



 CHAPTER 25

IN A LAND OF PLENTY: CONTENTMENT AND DISCORD, 1945–1960

 What made Emmett Till’s murder different from previous racist killings of African Americans in the South was the courageous decision of his family to fight back. Ignoring the kidnappers’ warnings to keep quiet (so Till would become yet another black boy who went mysteriously “missing”), Till’s cousin called the sheriff and Till’s mother the next day. The sheriff found Till’s body and three days later arrested Roy Bryant and J. W. Milam. When Mamie Till-Bradley saw her son’s tortured body, a sight that would have caused many mothers to fall apart, she instead vowed that “here’s a job that I got to do now.” Till’s granduncle, Moses Wright, had begged the white men to just whip him, while his wife offered them money to leave the boy alone. Now Moses Wright decided to testify against the pair when they went on trial for murder. The 64-year-old Wright later recalled that as he entered the courtroom, he could “feel the blood boil in hundreds of white people as they sat glaring.” When the prosecutor asked him to identify Milam as one of the men who took Emmett, Wright stood up, pointed his finger, and said, “Thar he.” His testimony emboldened other black sharecroppers to step forward and testify about hearing Till crying for his mother as he was beaten. Fearing for their lives, all of these sharecroppers left town after appearing in court. At first it seemed they had risked everything for naught. The all-white male jury took less than an hour to find the men not guilty. They would have returned the verdict sooner, the jury foreman bragged, “If we hadn’t stopped to drink pop.” A second jury acquitted the men on the charge of kidnapping. Two months after their murder trial, Bryant and Milam sold their story to an Alabama journalist for $4,000 and admitted killing Till. Double jeopardy, a legal concept that prevents authorities from retrying someone for the same crime, protected the pair from prosecution after their confession. Nonetheless, the sight of ordinary black citizens standing up in court to accuse their white oppressors electrified a generation ready to strike back. Four months later, partly because of the Emmett Till case, the Montgomery Bus Boycott began.

Montgomery Bus
Boycott, 1955
 The Brown decision was a milestone in the fight for racial equality, but by the mid-1950s, civil rights activists were no longer content simply to fight for

 Which individual choices mattered in the Till case?

 justice through the courts. Many resolved to use economic boycotts, picketing, and mass demonstrations to force white America to take note of the injustice and violence experienced daily by African Americans. Courageous men and women, ordinary people who took extraordinary risks, set this new direction in civil rights protest. On December 1, 1955, Rosa Parks, a 43-yearold black seamstress, boarded a bus in downtown Montgomery, Alabama, and selected a seat. She was one of 40,000 blacks who paid a dime twice a day to the white driver, then stepped down and entered the bus through the rear door. When a white man demanded her seat, Parks had to decide whether to comply. Choices and Consequences: Rosa Parks Makes History explores her decision to stay seated. As soon as English professor Jo Anne Robinson heard of the arrest, she mimeographed 35,000 handbills urging black citizens to stage a one-day bus boycott on the day of Parks’ trial. Robinson was president of the Montgomery Women’s Political Council, which had been planning a one-day bus boycott for months. Parks’s arrest offered a perfect moment to act. Two of her students helped Robinson distribute the handbills to black schools, businesses, and churches. “Negroes have rights, too, for if Negroes did not ride the buses, they could not operate,” the handbill read. When the day-long boycott succeeded, community leaders decided to continue it indefinitely. The Montgomery Bus Boycott (1955–1956) was a year-long boycott that brought a new leader, Martin Luther King Jr., and a new strategy of nonviolent protest to the forefront of the Civil Rights Movement. The boycotters’ initial demands were moderate: courteous treatment from bus drivers, first-come-first-served seating so no one would have to give up a seat, and hiring black bus drivers. The city administrators and bus company executives refused. The Montgomery Improvement Association (MIA) now prepared for a lengthy boycott. Mass meetings twice a week kept boycotters’ spirits high and helped disseminate accurate information within a black community that had no radio station or newspaper. The MIA also set up an elaborate carpool system to transport black workers to their jobs and back home. Volunteers picked up passengers from one of 42 collection points throughout the city, which became the target of terrorist bombings. Images of black workers waiting peacefully for carpools contrasted with the burnt remains of bombed cars and provided good

Read the Document Jo Ann Gibson Robinson,
Bus Boycott


FREEDOM NOW: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT



Choices and Consequences
ROSA PARKS MAKES HISTORY
Unlike the signs above water fountains or posted in waiting rooms, there was no clear section marked “colored” on Montgomery city buses. Instead as more white passengers boarded a bus, black passengers had to vacate their seats for them. When three other black passengers heeded the white driver’s request to move on the afternoon of December 1, 1955, Rosa Parks faced a set of choices over how to respond. 
Choices




 Move to the back of the bus.



 Refuse to give up her seat.



 Vacate her seat but express her outrage by participating in a planned one-day bus boycott.

Decision
 Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat. When the driver threatened to call the police, Parks quietly replied, “You may do that.” She was arrested.

Consequences
 On the day of Parks’s trial (she was found guilty and fined), the Montgomery Women’s Political Council organized a one-day boycott that it had been planning for months and nearly all Montgomery’s black citizens stayed off the buses. That evening the city’s black male clergy met and formed the Montgomery Improvement Association (MIA), which voted to continue the boycott. The group chose 26-year old Martin Luther King Jr., the minister who headed the Baptist church that Rosa Parks attended, as their president. When the Supreme Court ruled that bus segregation was unconstitutional in 1956, the year-long boycott ended.

Continuing Controversies
 Who was the real Rosa Parks? The folklore is that Parks was simply a tired seamstress who impulsively decided to stay seated. This narrative leaves out key details. Parks was also secretary of the Montgomery chapter of the NAACP and had attended the left-leaning Highlander Folk School in Tennessee, where civil rights and labor leaders trained. She knew that the NAACP wanted to test the bus segregation law in the courts and had recently participated in a mass meeting

 protesting Emmett Till’s murder. Boycott leaders played down Parks’s activist past, worried that it would diminish her “everywoman” appeal and that moderates might view her as a radical agitator. Some activists later suggested that this simplified tale sent the wrong message about how to initiate social change. Rosa Parks’s bravery mattered, they agreed, but so did careful preparation, organization-building, and ideological dedication.

 What is the enduring legacy of Rosa Parks’s decision?



 CHAPTER 25

IN A LAND OF PLENTY: CONTENTMENT AND DISCORD, 1945–1960

 footage for the national television networks that covered the boycott extensively. Television interviews with King, a 26-year-old Baptist minister who headed the MIA, turned him into a celebrity overnight and allowed him to appeal directly to moderates throughout the nation. To raise money and garner publicity for the boycott, King also toured the country giving speeches.

“If Martin Luther King had
 never been born this movement would have taken place. I just happened to be there.” MARTIN LUTHER KING JR., commenting on his role in the Montgomery Bus Boycott.

 Instead of discouraging the protesters, white resistance convinced the MIA to broaden its demands to include the complete desegregation of the buses. The violence now threatened to spiral out of control. When King’s house was bombed, a crowd of supporters arrived carrying knives and guns. “If you have weapons, take them home,” King told them as news cameras rolled. Publicizing the new civil rights ethos of nonviolence, King declared, “‘He who lives by the sword will perish by the sword.’ … We must meet hate with love.” Over time white opposition fractured. Some whites had been openly sympathetic to the boycott from the beginning, even though their businesses and social life suffered as a result. Others had more pragmatic reasons for helping black workers reach their jobs. When the mayor chastised white women for chauffeuring their black maids to and from work, one defiant white woman wrote to the newspaper: “If the mayor wants to do my wash and wants to cook for me and clean up after my children let him come and do it.” After nearly a year the boycott was victorious. In November 1956, the Supreme Court ruled that segregated buses were unconstitutional. On December 21, 1956, Martin Luther King Jr. boarded the first integrated bus in Montgomery with the African American minister Ralph Abernathy and the white Reverend Glenn Smiley, both key leaders in the boycott. In their carefully choreographed ride, pictured here (25.11), all three followed the guidelines that the MIA had established for integrating

Why was the Montgomery Bus Boycott a
 turning point in the Civil Rights Movement?

 buses. An MIA pamphlet advised: “For the first few days try to get on the bus with a friend in whose non-violence you have confidence. You can uphold one another by a glance or a prayer.” The MIA cautioned black riders not to respond to curses or shoves. When King entered the bus, the presence of newspaper reporters and cameramen protected him from violence. “We are glad to have you here this morning,” the bus driver cordially greeted King as he climbed aboard. The ride was not so smooth for other Montgomery citizens. Over the next few weeks snipers fired into buses, and Abernathy’s house was bombed. Two months later King met with ministers from 11 other Southern states to form the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). Black churches, they decided, could help the Civil Rights Movement devise a new nonviolent strategy of direct action that challenged segregation and discrimination throughout the South. At first King saw nonviolence mainly as a way to gain sympathy and prevent authorities from using violence against demonstrators. He employed a bodyguard throughout the boycott and had applied for a permit to carry a gun (which the police refused). “King sees the inconsistency, but not enough. He believes and yet he does not believe … if he can really be won over to a faith in non-violence there is no end to what he can do,” Smiley noted privately. Over the next few years, King would develop that faith. His social justice fundamentalism evolved from his reading of Jesus’s biblical “Sermon on the Mount” that urged Christians to create “a beloved community” by winning over enemies with love and humility rather than seeking to punish or defeat them. King was also influenced by activists like Reverend James Lawson who had traveled to India to study the Hinduism version of nonviolence pioneered by the Indian activist Mahatma Gandhi in the 1930s to win independence from Britain. Lawson was in India during the Montgomery Bus Boycott but returned to instruct members of the SCLC and university students as they broadened their attack on Jim Crow in the early 1960s.

The Little Rock Nine, 1957
 The Brown v. Board of Education case launched a decades-long struggle to integrate public schools. Many white Southerners had grown up without ever questioning segregation. Brown forced them to either formulate a defense and rationale for segregation or consider changing generations-old

Watch the Video Video Lecture: African American Women
 and the Struggle for Civil Rights

FREEDOM NOW: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT

 habits. Throughout the South diehard segregationists dug in. “The Negro race, as a race, plainly is not equal to the white race, as a race,” asserted James Jackson Kilpatrick, the editor of a Richmond newspaper. Segregationists also advanced a states’ right argument, arguing that the federal government had no right to dictate racial policies to the South. Sympathetic to claims that it would be difficult to change ingrained habits overnight, the Supreme Court issued only a vague directive for school systems to desegregate “with all deliberate speed” in 1955. This ruling encouraged entrenched segregationists to try to delay integration indefinitely. In a few Southern cities, moderate whites accepted the piecemeal dismantlement of Jim Crow. Little Rock, Arkansas, for instance, had desegregated its parks, buses, and libraries with little controversy. After the Brown decision, the school board made plans to integrate slowly by inviting nine black

 teenagers to attend high school alongside 2,000 white students. Nicknamed the Little Rock Nine, the nine teenagers who integrated Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas, in 1957 became the focus of a national crisis that required the intervention of federal troops to resolve. Segregationists quickly organized statewide opposition to the planned integration of Central High School. Concern about states’ rights and segregationists’ claims that integration would lead to white and black students dancing together at school social functions won over some moderates. Two weeks before the school year started, the threats began. One night a rock shattered the living room window of Daisy Bates, secretary of the local NAACP chapter. The note tied around the rock read “Stone this time. Dynamite next.” Influenced by polls showing 85 percent of white Arkansans opposed school integration, Arkansas Governor Orval Faubus, who faced a difficult

Watch the Video Video Lecture: How did the Civil Rights
Movement Change American Schools?




25.11 First Ride
 on an Integrated Montgomery Bus, 1956 Martin Luther King Jr., seated on the left, rides with other activists on the first day that buses were integrated in Montgomery after a year-long bus boycott. Fearing vigilante attacks from angry whites, King urged all black bus riders to exude steely resolve and ride in pairs.

 What messages did this planned scene send to whites and blacks?



 CHAPTER 25

IN A LAND OF PLENTY: CONTENTMENT AND DISCORD, 1945–1960

 reelection campaign, declared he would not “force acceptance of change to which the people are so overwhelmingly opposed.” In September 1957, he decided to ring Central High with state troops on the first day of school to stop the black students from entering the high school. Using state troops to defy a federal mandate fit well with the desire of moderate whites and die-hard segregationists to protect the sanctity of states’ rights. To protect the black teenagers, Daisy Bates asked parents to drop the students off at her house so they could go to school together. Elizabeth Eckford, whose family did not have a telephone, never received the message. Instead she took a bus to the school by herself and confronted the angry mob alone. At first she felt reassured when she saw the troops, whom she assumed were there to protect her. She quickly realized her error. When she tried to squeeze past a guard, “He raised his bayonet, and then the other guards moved in.” As she stood there confused, the crowd started to chant “Lynch her! Lynch her!” Television cameras, tempering the crowd’s enthusiasm for a lynching, likely saved Elizabeth’s life. Also a godsend, Grace Lorch, a white woman, came out of the crowd to help Elizabeth flag down a city bus and escape. Over the next few days, as the crowds in front of the high school grew, attacks against news photographers and cameramen became more common. The television footage coming out of Little Rock, reporter David Halberstam noted, “made it hard for people watching at home not to take sides” as they saw “orderly black children behaving with great dignity” being assaulted by a “vicious mob of poor whites.” Outrage outside of the South over such images put pressure on President Eisenhower to act, as did the negative worldwide attention that the Little Rock incident garnered. “Our [Communist] enemies are gloating over this incident and using it everywhere to misrepresent our whole nation,” Eisenhower warned the country. Resistance to Supreme Court–mandated integration created more than a racial crisis. It also led to a showdown between the federal government and the state of Arkansas. Under pressure from the White House, Faubus withdrew state troops. It was the president’s responsibility to enforce federal law, Eisenhower told the American people, announcing his decision to send federal troops to Little Rock to ensure that Arkansas obeyed the Supreme Court’s ruling. With paratroopers from the 101st Airborne Division ringing the school, the Little Rock Nine walked up the front steps surrounded by armed guards.

 Why did Eisenhower send troops to integrate Central High School in Little Rock?

 This was the first time that the federal government had used troops to protect the civil rights of African Americans since Reconstruction. The troops, Melba Pattillo Beals recalled, meant a “declaration of war” in the hallways of Central High where white teenagers insulted, kicked, shoved, and ostracized the Little Rock Nine, who were each sent to different classrooms. Eight of the nine finished the year. (Minnijean Brown was expelled for dumping chili on a white student’s head after he insulted her in the cafeteria.) The following year Faubus defied the order to integrate by keeping the schools closed all year. In 1959, Central High reopened with one black student in attendance; in 1960, there were five; then eight in 1961. The small numbers of black students in Central High signified the long, slow road to complete the process of school integration.

The Sit-Ins
 A 1950 survey of segregation statutes across the nation (see Envisioning Evidence: A National Snapshot of Racial Discrimination) revealed a staggering array of state laws that prevented races from mixing in their daily lives. By the end of the 1950s, with the nonviolent Civil Rights Movement in full bloom, the movement’s attention shifted from schools to segregated lunch counters. In 1958, James Lawson began conducting SCLC workshops to prepare college students in Nashville for a sit-in campaign to desegregate the city’s lunch counters. At these meetings students studied Christian pacifist principles, Gandhi’s theories of nonviolence, and the nineteenth-century American philosopher Henry David Thoreau’s ideas on civil disobedience. During sit-ins protesters occupied seats at whites-only lunch counters and remained there even after they were refused service, sometimes for hours. The sit-ins employed the tactic of civil disobedience, breaking the law in a peaceful way to call attention to an unjust law, and replicated a tactic used successfully by the CIO in the 1930s when workers had occupied factories during strikes (see Chapter 22). Sit-ins, like sit-down strikes, disrupted business, making it impossible for white businessmen to ignore the protesters’ demands. Highly visible sit-ins in downtown Nashville department stores were also guaranteed to attract press attention. Lawson warned the students that their anger over Jim Crow was not enough to sustain them through the challenges ahead. Instead they needed to embrace nonviolence as the governing principle of their lives. They were fighting back, he assured them, but in a way that broke the cycle of violence.

View the Image Opposition to Integration


FREEDOM NOW: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT



Envisioning Evidence
A NATIONAL SNAPSHOT OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
Calling civil rights a “national problem,” the 1947 Presidential Commission on Civil Rights urged the federal government to act immediately to stop racial violence and eliminate discriminatory laws. This 1950 survey of state laws (which did not include local ordinances or regional customs) provided a broad overview of how segregation functioned in 33 states. Prohibition against mixed marriage was the most common law; more unusual ones included Oklahoma’s requirement for separate phone booths and North Carolina’s prohibition against white and black students sharing textbooks. Examples of other segregation laws are listed below. 
 White and black prisoners could not be shackled together on chain gangs in Alabama.

 Delaware mandated segregated schools for white, black, and Indian children.

 Florida mandated separate waiting rooms and railroad cars, except for sheriffs transporting prisoners or servants accompanying children or invalids.

 Mississippi segregated hospitals, and required black nurses for black patients.

AL AZ AR CA CO DE FL GA ID IN KS KY LA MD MS MO MT NE NV NM NC ND OK OR SC SD TN TX UT VA WV WY
Amusements Education Employment Hospitals Housing Mixed Marriages Penal Institutions Transportation 
 States authorizing or requiring segregation

 California prohibited marriages between Caucasians and people of African or Asian descent.

 Louisiana segregated all circuses and tent shows.

 North Carolina required separate toilet facilities at the workplace.

Source: Pauli Murray, States’ Laws on Race and Color (1951).


View the Closer Look Envisioning Evidence: A National
Snapshot of Racial Discrimination


 What do these statutes suggest about daily life for African Americans in the South?



 CHAPTER 25

IN A LAND OF PLENTY: CONTENTMENT AND DISCORD, 1945–1960

 “Do show yourself friendly on the counter at all times. Do sit straight and always face the counter. Don’t strike back, or curse if attacked. Don’t laugh out. Don’t hold conversations. Don’t block entrances.… Remember the teachings of Jesus, Gandhi, Thoreau, and Martin Luther King, Jr.” Instructions to sit-in demonstrators in Nashville, Tennessee, 1960

 Armed resistance was not only morally wrong, Lawson argued, it was also futile to believe that blacks could take on the police and army with guns. Students learned how to ignore the taunts and blows that whites would heap on them during a sit-in, to go limp when pulled from the seats, and to curl into a protective fetal position if attacked with blows. Lawson’s Nashville workshops identified and trained students who would become major leaders in the Civil Rights Movement, including John Lewis, Diane Nash, and Jim Bevel. Black civil rights protesters had intermittently organized sit-ins since 1942, but it was the spontaneous decision in 1960 of four freshmen from the all-black North Carolina Agricultural and Technical College to request service at a Woolworth’s lunch counter in Greensboro, North Carolina, that ignited the national sit-in movement. By acting on impulse these four teenagers ignored SCLC rules, which emphasized careful planning before any civil rights protest. The evening television news broadcast images of their defiance throughout the nation, demonstrating that ordinary people could make a difference. Over the following weeks churches and students worked together to unleash waves of sit-ins throughout the South. In Nashville Lawson’s group unfurled the longest and most sustained series of sit-ins. After a month of letting roving gangs of thugs punch and kick the students, the Nashville police tried to end the sit-ins by arresting the demonstrators for “disorderly conduct.” The students responded with a “jailno bail” strategy. “Only so many can fit into a cell; if you remain here, there can be no more arrests! Imprisonment is an expense to the state; it must feed and take care of you. Bails and fines are an expense to the movement, which it can ill afford,” SCLC organizer Bayard Rustin told the students. With the jails full and the sit-ins continuing, the SCLC increased the pressure with a successful boycott of the downtown stores.

 What principles lay at the heart of nonviolent direct action?

 The standoff came to a head when the home of a prominent black lawyer (who had represented the students in court) was bombed. Marching to city hall the students demonstrated the power of nonviolence to change minds. Diane Nash asked: “Mayor West, do you feel it is wrong to discriminate against a person solely on the basis of their race or color?” Answering as “a man had to answer, not a politician,” Mayor Ben West, a moderate on racial issues, agreed it was wrong. Three weeks later the lunch counters in Nashville were desegregated. Energized by their success the Nashville, group staged “stand-ins” in the city’s segregated movie theaters and “sleep-ins” in the lobbies of whites-only hotels. Throughout the upper South photographs of the sit-ins provoked a similar awakening among moderate whites. The contrast between “the colored students, in coats, white shirts, ties” quietly requesting service at a lunch counter and the ragtag gangs of “white boys come to heckle” was hard to ignore, noted the Richmond News Leader when sit-ins hit the capital of Virginia. Resistance to sit-ins in the Deep South proved more formidable and vicious. In 1963, Tougaloo College student Anne Moody sat at a Woolworth’s lunch counter with two white activists in Jackson, Mississippi. As this photo shows (25.12), a lunchtime crowd of high school students assaulted the three and poured condiments on their heads. The older man in the picture urged the mob to get the demonstrators off the stools and pour salt on their wounds. The crowd’s heated anger convinced Moody that “many more will die before it is over with.” By spring 1960, Jim Lawson and SCLC organizer Ella Baker saw that students had emerged as a powerful force within the Civil Rights Movement. The two leaders urged university students to form their own civil rights organization. Students, they realized, were willing to take more risks than were many adult activists. Employing the lyrics of a

FREEDOM NOW: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT

 movement song that urged protesters to “keep your eyes on the prize,” Baker told the students that their goal needed to be “bigger than a hamburger.” The students responded by forming their own civil rights organization, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, or SNCC (pronounced Snick) in 1960. SNCC founder Diane Nash noted that “the media and history seem to record it as Martin Luther King’s movement, but young people should realize that it was people just like them, their age, that formulated goals and strategies, and actually developed the movement.” In the struggles ahead SNCC and SCLC often forged a crucial partnership between black churches and university students. Idealistic and enthusiastic college students, white and black, eagerly put themselves in the frontlines during civil rights demonstrations. Black churches provided the experienced organizers, meeting spaces, and funds to organize successful protests.

 Read the Document SNCC Statement of Purpose (1960)

 The Civil Rights Movement brought together many critical features of the 1950s. While print media remained important, film footage shown on evening television news broadcasts of confrontations between racist whites and nonviolent protesters forced the rest of the nation to confront the realities of Jim Crow and racial violence in the South. Thanks to television what happened in the South no longer remained news only in the South. The rise of a distinctly teenage culture within the baby boom generation also helped to create a strong generational bond among those young adults who joined the movement. Finally the ideological overtones of the Cold War that pitted democratic capitalism against communism helped civil rights protesters focus attention on the inherent contradictions between America’s self-proclaimed goal of spreading democracy throughout the world and visible racial discrimination at home.



25.12 Mississippi
Sit-In, 1963
 Assaults on sit-in protesters grew more vicious as the demonstrations moved into the Deep South.

 What different strengths did students and churches bring to the Civil Rights Movement?



 CHAPTER 25

IN A LAND OF PLENTY: CONTENTMENT AND DISCORD, 1945–1960

1945–1946








 Five thousand labor strikes sweep the country

Taft-Hartley Act


 Pollock paints Autumn Rhythm.

 Nixon’s “Checkers” speech

 Puts restrictions on labor unions

 Creates public backlash against unions

 First Levittown built

Abstract Expressionism and Beat
 writing transform the arts

 First use of television to diffuse a political crisis

 Mass migration to suburbs begins

 Baby Boom begins

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Generation sets cultural trends from cradle to grave

Review Questions
 1. How successful were efforts to undo the New Deal and curtail the Fair Deal from 1945 to 1960?

 4. What key social conditions and events triggered the modern Civil Rights Movement?

 2. What debates arose over suburbanization and teen culture?

 5. What roles did ordinary citizens play in the fight against Jim Crow? How important were Civil Rights Movement leaders?

 3. How did the media in the 1950s affect intergenerational conflicts? What role did the media play during the Civil Rights Movement?

Key Terms
 Baby boom generation The 76.4 million Americans born between 1946 and 1964. Taft-Hartley Act (1947) Law that abolished the closed shop, banned so-called sympathy boycotts, and required that all union officers sign affidavits certifying that they were not members of the Communist Party. Fair Deal Truman’s proposals for national health care, public housing, education, and public works projects. Military-industrial complex Eisenhower’s term for the close ties between the defense industry and the Pentagon that might unduly influence government policy. Levittowns Planned suburban communities where developers standardized every part of the construction process. Brown v. Board of Education (1954) Supreme Court decision that segregated schools violated the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Montgomery Bus Boycott (1955–1956) A year-long bus boycott that brought a new leader, Martin Luther King Jr.,

 and a new strategy of nonviolent protest to the forefront of the Civil Rights Movement. Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) Civil rights organization founded by Martin Luther King Jr. that used black churches to devise a new nonviolent strategy of direct action. Little Rock Nine Nine black teenagers who integrated Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas, in 1957 and became the focus of a national crisis that required the intervention of federal troops to resolve. Sit-ins Nonviolent demonstrations where civil rights protesters employed the tactic of civil disobedience to occupy seats at whites-only lunch counters. Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) Student-run civil rights organization founded in 1960.

CHAPTER REVIEW









Brown v. Board of Education


 Emmett Till murdered

 Sit-ins across the South

 Supreme Court rules segregation of public schools unconstitutional

 Images of corpse spark civil rights protest

 Elvis Presley appears on The Ed Sullivan Show

Montgomery Bus Boycott
 Martin Luther King Jr. emerges as civil rights leader

 Culture clash over rock-and-roll

 Little Rock Nine integrate high school in Arkansas Showdown between federal and state governments over Brown ruling



 College students become a major force in the Civil Rights Movement

 Nixon-Kennedy debate Television shapes public opinion of presidential candidates

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of In a Land of Plenty.

Questions for Analysis
 1. What image does this song conjure of suburban life? Hear the Audio Little Boxes, p. 758

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • Dwight D. Eisenhower, Farewell Address (1961), p. 755 • The Teenage Consumer (1959), p. 762

 2. What do sit-coms reveal about 1950s popular culture?

• Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka Kansas (1954), p. 765
• Jo Ann Gibson Robinson, Bus Boycott, p. 768


View the Closer Look Choices and Consequences: Does
Father Know Best?, p. 760


 3. What key roles did women play in the Civil Rights Movement? Watch the Video Video Lecture: African American Women and the Struggle for Civil Rights, p. 770

View the Closer Look
• Competing Visions: Suburbs—American Dream or Nightmare?,
 p. 759 • Images as History: Inspiring a New Generation to Act, p. 767 • Envisioning Evidence: A National Snapshot of Racial Discrimination, p. 773

 View the Image Kenneth Clark Testing Children’s Choices of

 4. What challenges did the Little Rock Nine face as high school students?

Dolls (1924), p. 766


Watch the Video
View the Image Opposition to Integration, p. 772


 5. How did SNCC define nonviolence? Read the Document SNCC Statement of Purpose (1960), p. 775

• Kennedy-Nixon Debate, p. 761
• Video Lecture: How did the Civil Rights Movement Change
American Schools?, p. 771


How did the United States
 become involved in Vietnam?

Fighting in
Vietnam p. 789


 What key factors shaped combat in Vietnam?

Controversy on the
Home Front p. 796


 Why did the war become controversial at home?

The Long Road to
Peace p. 801


How did the Vietnam War
 finally end?

 CHAPTER

The Long Road
 to War p. 780



