 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 16

Wonder and Woe
The Rise of Industrial America,
1865–1900
 This scene of industrial discontent, The Strike (1886) by artist Robert Koehler, was inspired by the great railroad strike of 1877. Set in an unidentified industrial town, it captures a moment of confrontation as workers pour out of a factory to gather outside the office of their employer. Unlike most scenes of labor unrest painted or drawn in the late nineteenth century, Koehler presented these workers as sympathetic characters, painting each as an individual rather than as nondescript members of a mob. Many wear square hats popular among various skilled trades, suggesting that these are more established workers. They appear as hardworking and hard-pressed men voicing their anger to the employer, perhaps over a wage cut or layoffs, through the spokesman at the bottom of the stairs. Yet the painting is fraught with tension and an atmosphere of impending violence. Note, for example, the worker in the foreground stooping to pick up a rock. Maybe he is doing this merely as a dramatic show of anger, but perhaps he fully intends to throw it. Note also the scene to his left where a woman tries to calm down another angry worker. Again, it is not clear that she will succeed. And what about the employer? He appears to be listening patiently to the workers’ representative, but whether he will accede to their demands is unclear (his stiff, emotionless bearing suggests he will not). The uncertainty in the painting over both what is about to happen and which side—workers or employer—is in the right illuminates a central theme in American society as it experienced rapid industrialization in the late nineteenth century. By 1900, the Industrial Revolution had transformed the United States from a predominantly agricultural nation that ranked well behind Britain, Germany, and France to the world’s most formidable industrial power. While many Americans celebrated the Industrial Revolution for the unprecedented material wealth and progress it brought, others grew disturbed by some of the grim consequences of industrialization, especially the immense power accrued by big businesses and capitalists and the growing number of workers living in squalid slums. The result of these conflicting visions was an intense debate—much of it vividly captured in Koehler’s painting—over the proper role of government in regulating the economy, the rights of workers to form unions and strike for better wages and working conditions, and the impact of growing disparities of wealth on America’s republican traditions.

 “This association of poverty with progress is the great enigma of our times…. It is the riddle which the Sphinx of Fate puts to our civilization, and which not to answer is to be destroyed.” HENRY GEORGE, Progress and Poverty, 1879





 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

The Emergence of Big Business
16.1 The
Industrial
Revolution by
 the Numbers During the second half of the nineteenth century, every area of the economy produced enormous increases in output and value. Huge population increases helped to drive industrial and farm output.

 America’s huge supplies of key raw materials, its rapidly growing urban workforce, and its tradition of imposing few restraints on business enabled industrialization to boom after the Civil War. The railroads quickly emerged as the first big business, followed by steel and petroleum. All three industries pioneered in establishing modern business practices, but they also drew increasing criticism as Americans worried about their extraordinary power.

Sources of the Industrial
Revolution
 Compared to most of Western Europe, the United States was a relative latecomer to the Industrial Revolution, which made its rise





Population


31,450,000


76,212,000


Farms


2,044,000


5,737,000


 $6.64 billion

 $16.60 billion

140,500


510,000


Value Factory Production


 $1.9 billion

 $13 billion

Industrial Workers


 1.3 million

 5.1 million

4,589


95,573


 20 million tons

 270 million tons

Lumber


 10 billion board ft.

 40 billion board ft.

Cotton


 3.8 million bales

 10.1 million bales

Oil


 500,000 barrels

 45,824,000 barrels

 30,000 track miles

 193,000 track miles

 13,000 tons

 10,382,000 tons

 $7 billion

 $19 billion

Value of Farms


Factories


Patents Issued


Coal


Railroads


Steel
Gross National Product


 How did human migration foster American industrialization?

 to industrial supremacy by 1900 even more astonishing. Every statistical comparison between 1860 and 1900, from factory production to railroad mileage, told the same story of phenomenal growth that saw the Gross National Product rise 171 percent (16.1). Several factors combined to allow the United States to surpass all other industrialized countries by % Increase 1900. First, the nation possessed enormous quantities of 142.3 two essential ingredients for rapid industrialization: raw materials and cheap labor. 180.7 Vast deposits of coal in Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and 150.0 Kentucky, for example, provided a seemingly inexhaust263.0 ible supply of inexpensive fuel to fire steam locomo584.0 tives and factory machinery. Other plentiful resources 292.3 included iron, lead, copper, silver, gold, wood, cotton, and oil. Cheap labor came from 1982.7 two sources. Record levels of immigration (see Chapter 17) in the late nineteenth century pushed the number of foreign-born to one in five American workers (two in 165.8 five in manufacturing and mining) by 1910. Millions of 9064.8 American-born workers also moved from rural settings to manufacturing centers in 543.3 search of new opportunities. Many women and children, 79,761.5 both immigrant and nativeborn, also entered the paid 171.4 workforce.

THE EMERGENCE OF BIG BUSINESS

 The relentless development and adoption of new technology also furthered industrialization in the United States. Inventors flooded the U.S. Patent Office with applications, raising the number from an average of 1,000 per year in the 1850s to 20,000 per year in the 1890s. Some notable inventors, such as George Eastman (Kodak camera), William S. Burroughs (adding machine), Isaac Singer (sewing machine), Alexander Graham Bell (telephone), and Thomas Edison (incandescent light bulb, phonograph, motion picture camera, mimeograph machine, and more) became business giants. Less well known were the many women, immigrant, and African American inventors who filed thousands of patents in this period. For example, Jan Matzeliger, an immigrant of African and Dutch heritage from South America, invented a machine that simplified the most difficult and time-consuming step in making shoes ( 16.2). Although much of shoemaking had become mechanized by the 1880s, the difficult “lasting” process—attaching the upper portion of a shoe to the sole—could be done only by hand. Matzeliger’s lasting machine (patented in 1883) was a complex device, yet was easy for unskilled workers to operate, allowing manufacturers to boost production while slashing costs. Government policy also boosted American industrialization. The federal government and the states extended substantial support to railroad projects that totaled almost 180 million acres in land grants and $500 million in loans and tax breaks (see Chapters 13 and 15). Public officials, in an argument later used to justify government support for the interstate highway system and the Internet, defended this largess by arguing that railroads generated economic growth that benefited everyone from travelers to farmers to manufacturers. High federal tariffs that raised the price of imported goods, thereby helping domestic manufacturers, also promoted industrialization. Yet the government also facilitated industrialization by inaction. Public officials, business leaders, and conservatives subscribed to the philosophy of laissez-faire (French for “let do,” or “leave alone”), which argued that the government should impose no restraints on business, including workers’ demands for laws to regulate the hours of work, safety conditions, and wages. Government officials also ignored reformers’ demands for an income tax and laws curbing cutthroat business

Read the Document Thomas Edison, The Success of
 the Electric Light (October 1880)



16.2 The
Matzeliger
Lasting Machine
 Jan Matzeliger’s complex sewing machine wiped out jobs for skilled shoe “lasters,” who had hand-stitched shoe tops to soles, but allowed for a huge increase in mechanized shoe production.

 practices. As Thomas Nast’s political cartoon vividly shows (16.3), business and government leaders argued that government interference harmed the American economy, depicted here as a woman weighed down by government-imposed burdens such as income taxes, laws (regulations), and “ideal” money (money not backed by gold). The closed shop and idle ship in the background and the vultures circling overhead all suggested these policies would kill the economy. Widespread support for laissez-faire among lawmakers left capitalists to operate in a market free of the restraints of government regulation.

16.3 Defending Laissez-Faire
 This 1878 cartoon warns that government interference with the economy threatens the well-being of the nation.

 How did government officials defend the practice of making huge land grants to the railroads?



 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

The Railroads
 The most dramatic change in the late nineteenthcentury industrial economy was the emergence of large corporations, business organizations established by a group of individuals and owned by people who buy shares of stock in the company. Before the Civil War, most American manufacturers were small-scale operations with fewer than 25 employees. They were usually privately owned and sold their products within a few hundred miles of where they were made. All this changed after 1865, as entrepreneurs, seeking bigger markets and greater profits that they could now reach thanks to the railroad and telegraph, began to form massive corporations that boasted thousands of employees in a single factory complex, operations in several states, and millions of dollars of investment capital raised from the sales of stock. The original big businesses were railroads, and they played a key role in transforming the United States into an industrial power. In 1865, scores of small railroad companies operated throughout the Northeast and Midwest and, to a lesser extent, the South. Comprising 35,000 miles of track, they serviced small areas and established their own standards for things such as track gauge (the distance between the rails). Nearly all suffered from financial instability and poor management. But by 1900, this haphazard system had developed into a massive, consolidated, and integrated national railroad network of 193,000 miles dominated by just seven large corporations. Railroads grew at such a ferocious pace because they could be built almost anywhere, creating a transportation network no longer confined to meandering rivers and expensive, slow-to-construct canals that often froze in winter. The railroad also offered another great advantage: speed. People, mail, and goods traveling by stagecoach might, on a good day, cover 50 miles. A steam locomotive pulling many times more people, mail, and goods could cover the

 same distance in less than two hours. And after the completion of the first trans-continental line in 1869 (see map 15.8), the railroad offered service from coast to coast. The quicker and cheaper transportation offered by the railroad benefited the national economy. Railroads opened new areas of settlement, enticing farmers to settle on nearby land (often sold to them by the railroad), confident that they could get their produce to market. Shopkeepers, artisans, laborers, and railroad employees (one million by 1900) settled in towns that sprang up along the tracks. In turn they became consumers of finished goods brought by the railroad from Eastern manufacturers. The railroad industry also contributed to the national economy by consuming large quantities of iron, steel, coal, and wood. Fierce competition among railroads initially led to the rapid expansion of lines. By the 1870s, many railroads tried to diminish competition by buying out rivals, leading to the creation of giant corporations such as the Pennsylvania Railroad and the New York Central Railroad. Both owned thousands of miles of track in many states, employed tens of thousands of workers, and handled millions of dollars in investment capital and revenue.

Modern Business Practices
 The success of the large railroad corporations led to the modernization of business practices in two important ways. First, railroad corporations showed other types of businesses the advantages of incorporating and issuing stock. Stock sales allowed corporations to raise capital to expand the business (for example, to buy new and more efficient equipment, or a rival company). If the company earned a profit, stockholders benefited from an increase in the value of the stock (which they could sell for a profit) and sometimes by earning dividends. Stockholders played no direct role in running a company; a professional management team performed that

 “Railroad time, it appears, is to be the time of the future. And so, people will now have to marry and die by railroad time. Ministers will preach by railroad time, and banks will be required to open and close by the same time. The sun is no longer the boss of the job.” Indianapolis Sentinel, 1883

 How did railroad grants both reflect and promote national economic growth?

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Mastering Time and Space:
How the Railroad Changed America


THE EMERGENCE OF BIG BUSINESS

 function. But stockholders also enjoyed “limited liability”: If the company failed they were not liable for any of its debts or obligations; they stood to lose only their shares. By the 1870s, many companies involved in manufacturing, mining, communications, and finance had incorporated. Second, the sudden emergence of huge railroad corporations encouraged the development of modern, sophisticated management practices. Chief among these practices was standardization. For example, in 1883, the nation’s major railroads established the four time zones that are still in use today. This decision helped to combat the problem of irregular “local time” (for example, when local time in New York City was 12:00 p.m., it might be 11:55 a.m. in Philadelphia and 11:47 in Washington, D.C.) that often led to costly accidents between trains sharing a single track or crossing at a junction. Similarly, the development of standardized equipment like couplers, signals, and brakes allowed for easier operation and maintenance of a railroad’s growing fleet of rolling stock. In 1886, the railroads also established a standard gauge for track of 4 feet 8.5 inches, thereby eliminating costly delays caused by the need to transfer cargo from one train to another wherever tracks of two different gauges met. As this drawing (16.4) indicates, many Americans viewed standard gauge as bringing both economic and political benefits to the nation, since it promised to create both a more efficient railroad system and greater unity between the less developed South (see Chapter 14) with the rapidly industrializing North. The banner “The Last Spike of Our Commercial Union” likens the event to the 1869 completion of the transcontinental railroad. To oversee these vast commercial operations— the largest in the world—executives of the major railroads, such as Jay Gould, Tom Scott, and Collis B. Huntington, developed complex hierarchies of superintendents, managers, and clerks and new systems of accounting, advertising, information management, and pricing. Other big businesses, such as steel, oil, manufacturing, and retailing, soon copied these organizational practices, making them the norm in most large corporations.



 as “the modern emblem of motion and power— the pulse of the continent.” They delighted in the benefits of inexpensive and speedy travel and increased access to finished goods in new mail order catalogs. Yet many Americans worried about the larger implications of the railroad. This cartoon depicting

 Rising Concern over Corporate Power Americans greeted the astonishing spread of the railroad with mixed feelings. Many agreed with poet Walt Whitman, who celebrated the railroad

16.4 Celebrating the Standard Gauge, 1886
 In this imagined scene Northerners and Southerners celebrate the adoption of a standard rail gauge as a measure destined to bind the country together economically.

 What advantages did standardization bring to business?



 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

 tions further tarnished the railroads’ image and fueled concerted efforts to curb their power. Although few critics raised the issue at the time, later generations decried the railroad for its role in hastening the defeat of the Plains Indians and the near extermination of buffalo, on which they depended (see Chapter 15). Growing anxiety and anger over the abusive practices of many large railroads eventually compelled reformers to seek tighter regulation of the industry. Given the immense power and wealth of the railroad and politicians’ reluctance to regulate business, reform faced many setbacks. Farmers, bitterly opposing the high rates charged by railroads to transport and store agricultural commodities, led the first significant effort to curb laissez-faire business practices. Known as the Grange (see Chapter 15), it led a successful political movement in the 1870s to pass numerous laws regulating prices and outlawing unfair business practices.

Andrew Carnegie: Making
Steel and Transforming
 the Corporation

16.5 Demonizing
 the Monopoly Americans grew increasingly worried about the rising power of railroads, and the largest were often criticized as monopolies that strangled their competition.

 the Southern Pacific Railroad as a ravenous octopus (16.5) expressed their concern. The railroads and the fabulously wealthy men who ran them (shown in the eyes of the octopus) wielded immense power. The artist labeled the octopus a monopoly, a popular term to describe the control of an industry or market by one corporation. Was such unchecked power vested in the hands of so few people, worried the critics, compatible with the nation’s republican principles? Many feared it was not—especially when they learned that railroad executives routinely bribed state legislators, members of Congress, and cabinet officials. Revelations of stock manipulation, price gouging of farmers and manufacturers, exploitation of workers, shoddy construction, and unsafe opera-

 Why did many Americans come to see railroads as potential threats to democracy?

 Of all the new things produced by the explosion of industrial output after 1865, none was more important than steel. Much stronger than iron, steel became the essential ingredient in the transformation of America into an industrial society, allowing for the construction of the railroad and telegraph networks and tall buildings called “skyscrapers.” Steel also enabled the construction of huge factories, filled with powerful machinery— made from steel, of course. Sharp, durable, and deep-cutting steel plows and mechanical reapers accelerated the commercialization of American agriculture. More accurate and powerful, and thus more deadly, weapons made of steel also altered modern warfare. Steel, in short, was as influential and revolutionary a substance in the late nineteenth century as silicon (used to make computer chips) was to become in the late twentieth. Steel was important in still another way, for it brought to prominence the single most influential big businessman of the era, Andrew Carnegie. Carnegie’s success was all the more remarkable because of his humble origins. Born in Scotland in 1836, he immigrated to America with his family at age 12. Settling in Pittsburgh they struggled to earn a living. Young Carnegie dropped out of school and worked

View the Image Modern Colossus of (Rail) Roads (1879)


THE EMERGENCE OF BIG BUSINESS



 in a textile factory where he earned just $1.20 per Finally, Carnegie pursued cutthroat practices week. Bright and ambitious, he took night classes in to battle rival steel producers. Carnegie slashed his accounting, taught himself telegraphy, and worked prices to levels that bankrupted his competitors, for Western Union. In 1853, Pennsylvania Railroad allowing him to buy them out and gain a greater regional supervisor and future company president, share of the market. Like many other industrialists, Thomas A. Scott, hired the 17-year-old as his perhe also signed secret deals with railroads, secursonal telegrapher and eventually private secretary. ing lower transportation rates for his steel than his In this capacity, Carnegie learned every detail of competitors charged. Most of these tactics were the modern business practices that the railroad was legal at that time, but many critics considered developing. He also became rich by investing in rail- them abusive. roads, factories, and, increasingly, the iron and steel industries. VERTICAL INTEGRATION Seeking to bring under one company the many different products and processes that go into the making of paper, Company A has acquired forests, In 1870, while running a suclogging companies, railroads, and chemical companies, as well as paper manufacturing cessful company that built steel plants. The advantages in this system are lower prices for and greater control over supplies bridges, Carnegie decided to move of essential materials (such as wood pulp from trees). entirely to steel production. He Paper Company A Acquires built his own steel works and, drawing on his knowledge of railroad Forests management, followed obsessively (to supply pulp needed for paper) one fundamental business principle: reducing production costs to Logging Company the lowest possible level. (to harvest the trees) To achieve this goal, Carnegie hired the brightest executives, Railroad (to bring lumber and chemicals to the paper factory and to ship the accountants, managers, scientists, finished product to market) and engineers. He also invested heavily in the latest technology. He was Chemical Company the first U.S. steelmaker to invest in (to manufacture chemicals like bleach needed to make paper) the breakthrough Bessemer-Kelly process, a method of making excepPaper Factory tionally strong steel quickly and at (to manufacture the paper from pulp) low cost (in part due to reducing the need for skilled metalworkers). Carnegie’s focus on cost control HORIZONTAL INTEGRATION Seeking to gain the largest share of the market for paper led him to pioneer what is known products, Company B has acquired five more paper manufacturing companies. The as vertical integration, the orgaadvantage of this system is that Company B can generate more revenue from the nization of a business by which added production and sales of paper products. It can also lower costs by eliminating redundant operations like advertising, marketing, and accounting in the one company controls all the main acquired companies in favor of single operations covering these functions. Because of its phases of production, from acquirincreased size, the company can also lower costs by striking deals with suppliers (wood ing raw materials to retailing the pulp, chemicals, etc.) eager for its business. finished product. Other industrial Paper Company B Acquires magnates who came to dominate their industries opted for a horizontal integration, a model where they bought out many companies producing the same product to eliminate competition and achieve Paper Paper Paper Paper Paper greater efficiency (16.6). To provide Company Company Company Company Company a steady supply of cheap coal, iron, 16.6 Horizontal Integration versus Vertical Integration and other essential raw materials Industrialists pursued two strategies when seeking to expand their corporations. With vertical integration that steel production depended on, they sought to minimize costs and increase control of production by acquiring different kinds of companies Carnegie bought mines, smelting involved in the chain of production. Through horizontal integration they attempted to reduce competition by acquiring their competitors. operations, railroads, and ships.

Read the Document Interstate Commerce Act


 What policies contributed to Andrew Carnegie’s success in business?



 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

 The result of Carnegie’s business policies was astonishing, bringing annual profits to $40 million by 1900. By then Carnegie Steel was the largest corporation in the world, with more than 20,000 employees and operations in many countries. Carnegie’s success was part of the larger story of the “age of steel.” By 1900, the U.S. steel industry employed 272,000 workers who produced 10.4 million tons of steel—an output more than twice that of its nearest rivals, Germany and Great Britain.

Rockefeller and the
Rise of the Trust
 Carnegie was the most famous industrialist in the late nineteenth century, but countless others developed key parts of the American economy. They included entrepreneurs like Philip Armour and Gustavus Swift (meat-packing), James B. Duke (tobacco products), George Eastman (Kodak camera), and Cyrus McCormick (farm equipment). Like Carnegie these industry leaders and thousands more succeeded by combining vision and ruthlessness, leading the public to both laud them as “captains of industry” who offered an ever-growing number of new products and services and denounce them as “robber barons,” greedy capitalists who grew rich by devious business practices, exploitation of workers, and political manipulation. One industrialist frequently denounced as a robber baron was John D. Rockefeller. His rise to dominance in the oil industry resembled that of Andrew Carnegie. Through relentless cost-cutting, acquisition of new technology, hiring top-notch managers and scientists, and making secret deals with railroads to undermine his competition, Rockefeller’s Standard Oil company controlled 90 percent of the nation’s oil-refining capacity by 1879. Unlike Carnegie, Rockefeller initially expanded his interests via horizontal integration (16.6), focusing almost exclusively on buying or building oil refineries. Later he followed Carnegie’s vertical integration model, purchasing oil fields, railroad cars and warehouses, pipelines, and barrel factories. Rockefeller’s chief contribution to the rise of big business was the invention of two new forms of corporate management: the trust and the holding company. Like many industrial magnates, Rockefeller

 Why did big business find trusts so useful and attractive?

 paid lip service to the ideal of competition, but privately he believed competition between rival companies was wasteful and led to market instability. Because so-called pools—secret deals between ostensibly rival companies to set production limits to keep prices high and award each participant a certain share of the market—inevitably failed, Rockefeller devised the trust. Unlike pools, which lacked any legal basis and thus carried no penalty for cheating, trusts were legally binding arrangements that brought many companies in the same industry under the direction of a single board of “trustees.” To join a trust, a company turned over to a board a majority of its stock in exchange for trust certificates, which guaranteed it a share of the profits. Rockefeller’s Standard Oil Trust, for example, consisted of 40 companies under the direction of a nine-member board of trustees selected by Rockefeller himself. As profits soared, dozens of trusts in other industries, such as sugar, lead, cotton, and oil, were formed, although not all successfully.

 “Honest labor never rusts: up with labor down with trusts.” Banner in 1889 Boston Labor Day Parade The rapid emergence of giant trusts, as with the rise of large railroads, alarmed many Americans. Fueling this concern was the unwillingness of Congress and the Supreme Court to curb the power of big business. In 1886, the conservative Supreme Court declared that state railroad commissions did not have the authority to regulate railroads because only Congress had the right to regulate interstate commerce (Wabash, St. Louis & Pacific Railway Co. v. Illinois, 1886). In a separate case (Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad, 1886), the Court also declared that corporations were “de facto persons” and thus subject to all the protections under the Fourteenth Amendment. No state or local government, therefore, could impose limits on corporations “without due process of law”—in other words, approval by conservative federal courts. The next year in 1887, Congress attempted to curb the power of the railroads by establishing the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) and making pools and rebates (special discounts by railroads

View the Image John D. Rockefeller Cartoon (1901)


THE EMERGENCE OF BIG BUSINESS

 to favored customers) illegal. But the ICC proved weak and ineffective, especially in the face of a conservative Supreme Court. Of the 16 cases that resulted when railroads challenged a ruling by the ICC between 1887 and 1905, the Court sided with the railroads 15 times. Big business also benefited from enormous political influence in Congress. In this damning 1889 cartoon from the popular magazine Puck, The Bosses of the Senate (16.7), the bloated trusts, are clearly in charge. Congress was all too willing to do the bidding of corporate interests. Note that the doorway marked “People’s Entrance” is boarded shut while a much larger “Entrance for Monopolists” is wide open. Note too the bitter conclusion that big business has subverted American democracy: “This is a Senate of the monopolists, by the monopolists, and for the monopolists.” The fate of the Sherman Anti-Trust Act of 1890 seemed to verify this conclusion. It was originally proposed to empower the Justice Department to prosecute any illegal contract, combination, or conspiracy among corporations that was designed to eliminate

 competition or restrain free trade. In other words the act made trusts illegal. But months of lobbying by corporate interests influenced Congress to word the final version of the act so vaguely that it was essentially unenforceable. As a result, the Justice Department prosecuted only 18 antitrust cases between 1890 and 1904. Rockefeller’s other major corporate management innovation—the holding company—replaced the trust in the 1890s as the preferred big business model. The holding company was a huge corporation that bought and ran other corporations by purchasing their stock. Rockefeller’s idea caught on immediately because it offered protection from the Sherman Act and allowed for the creation of enormous corporations, many of which exercised near monopoly control of the market. Corporate mergers occurred at an astonishing pace. By 1900, one percent of corporations controlled 33 percent of the nation’s manufacturing output, a figure that rose to 44 percent by 1910. The same was true of the railroads. In 1900, seven colossal railroads controlled twothirds of the nation’s track mileage. Big business, despite the best effort of reformers, was here to stay.



16.7 The Political
Power of the
Trusts
 Reformers criticized trusts for their power to bribe and bully Congress to pass favorable legislation. Here, a meeklooking Congress sits under the domineering gaze of the bloated trusts.

 Why did efforts to curb the power of trusts fail?



 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

Creating a Mass Market
 Railroads, oil refineries, textile factories, and steel mills were the most vivid symbols of the industrial era, but production was only one part of the story. Equally important was consumption—getting the public to purchase the growing array of the national economy’s new products. Advertising would play a crucial role in creating a consumer culture, as would the department store and mail order catalogs.

The Art of Selling
 To promote consumption, businesses developed sophisticated advertising techniques and marketing strategies. Many hired psychologists and other experts to develop advertising campaigns that appealed to both consumers’ fears and their desires. Ads for toothpaste and deodorant, for example, stoked the public’s fears about bad breath and body odor, while those for pianos and fine clothing played to desires to appear sophisticated and wealthy. Advertisers also cultivated brand loyalty through catchy slogans and impressive claims. The makers of Ivory Soap, for example, touted their product’s healthful qualities with the impressive, but ridiculously exaggerated, claim that it was “99 44⁄100 % Pure.” Recognizing the value of celebrity, some manufacturers hired famous entertainers and athletes to endorse their products and allow the use of their pictures in ads. The underlying idea of advertising—spending a portion of a business’s profits to generate more profit—soon became a standard business principle. Spending on advertising jumped accordingly, from $50 million in 1867 to more than $500 million by 1900. As advertising caught on among manufacturers and retailers, competition led to increasingly complex and sophisticated advertisements. Gone were the days from before the Civil War when advertisers relied exclusively on a few bold headlines in a newspaper or magazine and some accompanying text touting a product’s quality and price. With so many advertisements jamming the pages of these media, and adorning roadside signs, sides of buildings, and grocery store windows, a product’s advertisement had to be eye-catching, convincing, and memorable. Advertisers experimented with new styles and sizes of type, developed catchy slogans, and enlisted celebrities and “experts” like doctors to vouch for their product. Once developments in

 Why did advertising become so important to business success?

 print technology made it possible and affordable, they focused increasingly on images to sell their products.

Shopping as an Experience:
The Department Store
 With the emergence of advertising came the department store. Irish immigrant Alexander Turney Stewart established the first department store in New York City in 1846. Stewart and the entrepreneurs who copied his idea built giant stores that offered a huge selection of goods for sale usually organized into different “departments.” Customers also found a small army of clerks ready to assist them and fixed prices that eliminated uncomfortable negotiations. Retailers also offered attractive policies such as the money back guarantee and free delivery. By the 1870s, customers, increasingly called “shoppers,” flocked to department stores not only for the selection, price, and convenience but also for the experience. Retailers had discovered that it was not enough to offer the finest products at good prices. Shopping had to be a pleasurable experience, so merchants built palatial, richly decorated “emporiums,” an impressive Latin term meaning a store

 “You can now buy your pins, your outing shirts, your wines, your prayer books, your Indian clubs, your pianolas, your false teeth, your automobiles, … [and] your spectacles … in the same place.” The Wall Street Journal, 1903

View the Closer Look Images as History: Advertising and the
Art of Cultivating Anxiety and Desire


CREATING A MASS MARKET

 that displayed a large variety of merchandise. One of the first merchants to do so was John Wanamaker, who transformed a Philadelphia railroad depot in 1876 into a massive and opulently decorated store called the Grand Depot. Rival stores soon sought to outdo each other in size and splendor, and customers came to look forward to store openings. On September 12, 1896, for example, 150,000 New Yorkers paraded through the new Siegel Cooper store on opening day. This new “shopping resort,” as the New York Times called it, employed 8,000 clerks and cashiers and 1,000 drivers and packers. It offered not only a huge selection of merchandise but also conveniences such as telegraph and long-distance telephone services, foreign currency exchange and stock trading, and a dentist office. As this photograph (16.8) of the central lobby shows, the store also wowed shoppers with its lavish interior. Note the marble columns, high, decorative ceilings, and the statue in the center of “The Republic,” a copy of the one carved by the renowned American sculptor Daniel Chester French for the 1893 World’s Fair in Chicago. The success of the department store led some retail entrepreneurs to expand their operations to large regions or even the whole country. The most noted



 figure in this field was Frank W. Woolworth, whose “five and dime” stores specialized in low prices rather than opulence. He opened his first store in Utica, New York, in 1879. By 1911, he owned more than 600. Like their big business counterparts in manufacturing, Woolworth and other national retailers found that with size came advantages. Because he bought huge quantities of goods, Woolworth received big discounts from wholesalers and manufacturers that allowed him to sell his merchandise at low prices.

Bringing the Market
 to the Frontier Some entrepreneurs realized that despite advertising and the growth of department stores, a massive retail market remained untapped: rural America. Living on farms or in small towns far from cities, these potential customers had money and desire to spend but lacked access to consumer goods. In 1872, Montgomery Ward set out to change that. If rural America could not get to a department store, he would bring it to them—in the form of a single broadsheet offering two dozen items for sale by “mail order.”

 View the Closer Look “Testing” Clark’s O.N.T. Spool Cotton

16.8 Shopping as
 an Experience Large retailers in cities built lavishly appointed shopping palaces to attract customers. The Siegel-Cooper store in New York City opened with great fanfare in 1896.

 Why did retailers spend so much money to build lavish stores?



 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

 Ward steadily expanded his list of offerings. By 1884, his broadsheet was now a catalog featuring some 10,000 items. By this time a rival mail order company run by Richard W. Sears and Alvah C. Roebuck had begun operation. Eager to reach this new market, established department stores like Macy’s in New York, Jordan Marsh in Boston, and Marshall Field’s in Chicago brought out their own mail order catalogs. The reach of corporate retailing beyond urban centers and into rural America (where most Americans lived until 1920) marked the emergence of a mass market. Whereas Americans had long shared a common language and republican political culture, they now developed a shared consumer culture. Exposed to the same advertising images and appeals, millions of Americans in different parts of the country began to adopt the same fashions, develop the same habits (cigarette smoking, for example), and purchase the same newfangled contraptions, including more than one million bicycles a year in the 1890s.

Selling to the World
 As the nation’s industrial production soared to unprecedented heights, manufacturers searched for new markets for their goods. The United States had long been an exporter of agricultural products like cotton and wheat, but the leading trend after the

 Civil War was the export of manufactured goods. The total value of exports rose between 1870 and 1900 from $450 million to $1.5 billion, with the percentage of manufactured goods rising from 15 to 32 percent. In addition to selling produce and goods overseas, American business interests also began to invest heavily in business ventures in foreign countries. By 1897, Americans had invested $635 million in overseas mines, plantations, oil wells, and increasingly, manufacturing plants ($94 million). By the 1890s, the Singer Sewing Machine Co. was an international corporation ( 16.9). With factories in Scotland and the United States, Singer sold its machines throughout the world. Note how the advertisement’s text, “The Singer Seam unites Two Continents,” and angelic female figures suggest that the company is pursuing humanitarian as well as capitalist goals. Farm equipment giant, International Harvester, likewise opened factories in Canada and Sweden. The globalization of the American economy brought many benefits to workers, consumers, and investors. But it also contributed to the growing sentiment in the 1890s that the United States needed to become an imperial power to protect overseas investments and ensure that markets in Asia, Africa, and Latin America remained open (see Chapter 19).

16.9 The
Globalization of
American Industry
 Like many large American firms, the Singer Sewing Machine Co. became an international corporation by the 1890s, selling its machines throughout the world.

 How did advertising promote the development of a national consumer culture?

THE WORLD OF WORK TRANSFORMED



The World of Work Transformed
 The huge industrial enterprises built by Carnegie, Rockefeller, and others ultimately depended not on their individual genius but on the collective labors of American workers. As the number and size of factories grew in the late nineteenth century, so did the industrial workforce expanding from 1.3 million workers in 1860 to 5.1 million in 1900. Many of them faced hardships: long hours, low pay, dangerous conditions, and frequent downturns in the economy. Workers responded by forming unions, staging strikes, and protesting the surging power of business as a threat to democracy.

The Impact of
New Technology


Hard Times for
Industrial Workers


 New industrial technology greatly increased manufacturing output, but it also changed the status of industrial workers. New machines produced more goods in less time and required mostly low-skilled labor to operate. Machinery transformed shoemaking, for example, from a skilled trade in the 1820s to a low-skill factory occupation by the 1860s. The same was true in the garment and textile industries. Because they could easily replace low-skilled labor, employers could pay low wages and demand long hours. They could also simply fire or replace workers who complained or failed to keep up the pace with other unskilled workers. This trend occurred unevenly across industrial America. For example, in building trades like carpentry and bricklaying, new technology did little to undermine the position of skilled craftsmen. In other settings new technology created new opportunities for some workers. Some found well-paid skilled work as mechanics, while others became foremen and floor managers who oversaw the work of unskilled operatives. These more fortunate workers often enjoyed far higher wages, shorter hours, and better treatment than the unskilled. Nonetheless for many workers new industrial technology eliminated their skilled jobs in favor of unskilled ones. Just as shoemaking changed from a skilled trade in the 1820s to a low-skill factory occupation by the 1860s, so did the garment and textile industries. In these settings, employers enjoyed increasing power over their employees for the simple reason that unskilled workers were easily replaced.

 New technology was but one of many difficulties confronting industrial workers in the age of industrialization. Most workers complained about long hours and low wages. Although averages for both varied by industry and region, workers often toiled 12 hours a day, six days a week, for wages that barely covered basic living expenses. By some estimates wage earners in the late nineteenth century made $400–500 per year, when living decently required a minimum of $600–800. Working-class families made up the difference by sending their children to work, taking in boarders, and bringing in “home finishing” work, performed by women and children, such as sewing buttons on new shirts. Compounding the precarious economic position of wage earners was the instability of the industrial economy. Severe depressions (1873–1877 and 1893–1897) and recessions interrupted periods of prosperity and economic growth and brought widespread business failure and high unemployment lasting years. The severe depression of the 1870s, for example, resulted in the loss of more than a million jobs and nearly 50,000 businesses. Those who did keep their jobs often found their wages slashed and hours increased by employers desperate to remain solvent or ruthless enough to take advantage of rising job competition between the employed and the unemployed. The monotony of industrial work also added to the difficulties wage earners faced. Many jobs required a laborer to perform the same task repeatedly, such as pulling a lever on a metal stamping machine. Workers felt, in the words of one machinist in 1883, that they were becoming “part of

Read the Document Technology and the Shoe Industry
 in Fincher’s Trade Review (1864)

 How did new technology weaken the independence of skilled workers?



 CHAPTER 16

16.10 The Price
 of Child Labor Because they could pay children less than one-half the wages of an adult, employers hired more children in the late nineteenth century, depriving them of education and often exposing them to industrial hazards.

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

 the machinery,” a state of affairs they found “very demoralizing.” The industrial workplace was also extremely dangerous. Every year between 1880 and 1900, 35,000 workers (on average) were killed on the job and another 500,000 injured. This carnage resulted in part from the monotony of factory work, which led mind-numbed workers to make mistakes or fall asleep. But most injuries stemmed from the factory owners’ negligence. With no laws compelling them to make their workplaces less lethal, few industrialists were willing to pay for safety devices or procedures. Not until the early twentieth century did most states begin enacting laws requiring compensation be paid to injured workers or the families of killed workers (see Chapter 18). Another disturbing trend was the sharp rise in child labor. Before the Industrial Revolution children of farmers and artisans performed all sorts of work that contributed to the family economy—but always under the supervision of a parent or relative. Children working in industry, however, left their homes to work in factories and mines under the supervision of a manager rather than a parent. Between 1870 and 1900, the number of children younger than 16 working for wages—usually a fraction of those paid adults—skyrocketed from 700,000 to 1.7 million. Children as young as seven toiled long hours in dangerous conditions in mines and factories, at jobs that exposed them to dangerous and unhealthful conditions. The boy in this photograph (16.10) lost his arm while operating a power saw in a box factory. Many states passed laws prohibiting child labor, but they rarely enforced them.

Exploitation,
Intimidation,
 and Conflict of

The
 end

 Central to the transformation in the lives workers ushered in by industrialization was the increasing power exercised by employers in the workplace. Since profit was their paramount goal, employers imposed strict discipline on their workers. clock dominated the workplace, as employers demanded workers begin and their day (with a few short scheduled breaks) at precise times. Workers who

 Why were industrial workplaces so dangerous?

 arrived late or took unauthorized breaks were fined or fired. Some factories forbade workers to talk to one another—or even to whistle.

 “I make about three dollars a week, and my sister—she is only six years old—she does not make as much, sometimes a dollar a week, sometimes more.” An eight-year-old child laborer, New York, 1871 Enforcing these new rules was an increasingly important figure in the industrial workplace: the manager or foreman. In sharp contrast to the early nineteenth-century preindustrial economy, few workers now ever saw, let alone spoke to, their employer. Instead, they dealt with managers or foremen hired to run a factory as efficiently and profitably as possible. This meant pushing workers to meet production goals and firing those who could not keep up or caused trouble. Many foremen came from working-class backgrounds and treated workers fairly, but others could be abusive, especially to workers of a different ethnic background. Female workers were particularly vulnerable to abuse. In this drawing from 1888, the foreman in a garment factory shakes his fist at a weary woman, urging her to work faster (16.11). In the larger inset, the overworked woman sprawls on a bed in a dingy tenement. That this image ran under the sensational title The Female Slaves of New York in a popular newspaper that often expressed hostility toward workers indicates the notoriety the foreman had achieved in the garment industry by the late nineteenth century. Workers also found it difficult to organize labor unions. The first major effort to build a national labor movement after the Civil War began in 1866 when William Sylvis, a charismatic iron molder, founded the National Labor Union (NLU). A federation of independent craft unions, the NLU sought to unite skilled workers nationwide to secure demands such as a federal law establishing the eight-hour day and a federal department of labor. Its membership topped 300,000 (nearly all native-born white men in skilled trades)

Read the Document Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics of Labor,
 from “The Working Girls of Boston” (1884)

THE WORLD OF WORK TRANSFORMED



16.11 Exploiting Female Workers
 Shop floor foremen and managers became increasingly important as workplaces grew bigger. As demands for productivity grew, female workers were especially vulnerable to abusive foremen. The threat of overwork to the health of women is emphasized in the two insets. One depicts workers carrying heavy bundles of work home while another shows an exhausted laborer collapsed on her bed.

 by 1869. But Sylvis’s sudden death that year weakened the NLU, and the depression of the 1870s wiped it out. Most employers saw unions as threats to their profits and freedom to run their businesses as they wanted. Many hired spies to expose labor organizers so they could fire them and put them on blacklists, lists of workers that employers in a town or industry refused to hire because they were considered trouble-makers. During strikes, employers routinely hired replacement workers, and enjoyed the support of local officials who ordered policemen to drive away or arrest pickets gathered outside a workplace. If a labor dispute went to court, an employer could normally count on a favorable ruling by a judge or jury. On top of all this, workers faced one over-riding problem—few unions had the resources to support striking workers for more

 than a few weeks. Strikers, one worker attested, “have had nothing to combat capital with except their empty stomachs, while the capitalists have had unlimited financial resources and have been able to starve the workingmen into submission.” Rising worker frustration and anger led to more strikes and violence. Between 1881 and 1905, six million American workers participated in nearly 37,000 strikes. One particularly bitter incident took place in Pennsylvania. In response to the abusive policies of coal mine bosses in the 1860s, miners had formed a union called the Workingmen’s Benevolent Association (WBA). Many of its members were Irish immigrants, some of whom, drawing on the tradition of secret societies that resisted oppressive landlords in Ireland, formed a clandestine labor organization known as the Molly Maguires that carried out acts of intimidation, vandalism, violence, and murder against foremen and managers. In 1874, mine owners set out to destroy the WBA by convincing the public that it was one and the same as the Molly Maguires. Within a year this campaign resulted in more than 50 arrests and numerous convictions—many on questionable testimony and with little or no evidence. Twenty alleged Molly Maguires were hanged for murder, including ten on a single day, June 21, 1877. Note how in this drawing (16.12) public officials created a powerful public spectacle to emphasize the men’s guilt and, aware that

16.12 The
Pageantry of
Execution
On June 21, 1877,
“Black Thursday,”
 Pennsylvania officials staged carefully planned executions of ten convicted miners known as Molly Maguires.

 Why were employers so hostile to labor unions?



 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

 most of the region’s miners were Catholic, their sinfulness. Three weeks later, on July 14, 1877, the largest nineteenth century strike in the world erupted. The “Great Uprising” of railroad workers began in Martinsburg, West Virginia, and quickly spread to Baltimore, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, St. Louis, Chicago, and other cities. The strike involved thousands of workers, and violence emanated from both sides. In Pittsburgh, for example, soldiers opened fire on striking workers and their families, killing 25 and wounding 29. Enraged strikers and their supporters attacked the troops and destroyed all of the Pennsylvania Railroad terminal’s buildings and other property. The mainstream press criticized the railroads for slashing workers’ wages, but most dismissed labor activism as illegal, ill-informed, and un-American. (See Competing Visions: The Legitimacy of Unions.) While workers faced hostility from employers, politicians, and journalists, they also had to contend with animosity within the ranks of labor that often hindered their ability to organize. Deep hostility often existed between skilled and unskilled workers, who frequently saw little in common with each other. Workers were also riven by disputes arising from different ideologies, including varieties of socialism, a theory that rejected capitalism and advocated common ownership of private property and greater social and economic equality. They also argued the persistent question of whether workers’ interests were best

 served by pressuring the major political parties or by forming an independent labor party. Perhaps the most significant divisions among workers centered on race and ethnicity. A rising tide of immigration in the late nineteenth century increased the ethnic, racial, and religious diversity of an already diverse workforce, making it more difficult to unite them in common cause. For example, when hard times hit during the depression of the 1870s, anti-Chinese sentiment among American workers soared, leading to the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882 barring Chinese immigration to the United States. As the cartoon (16.13) from The Wasp demonstrates, Chinese workers were blamed for taking jobs from Americans. The artist depicts a 12-armed Chinese worker, drawn in racist caricature, laboring maniacally at a dozen tasks while young American-born workers stand idly near a factory. One of the workers is being hauled away by a policeman, implying that unemployment has led him to a life of crime. African American workers also faced racist hostility from white workers, especially when they began moving to Northern cities in the 1890s. Much of this hostility stemmed from the widely held racist beliefs of the day including the concept that all whites were superior to blacks. But it also emanated from the fear that African Americans would take jobs from white workers—a fear exacerbated when employers occasionally used black workers as strikebreakers.

16.13 Hard Times
Fuel Anti-Chinese
Racism
During the
 depression of 1873–1878, workers blamed high unemployment on Chinese immigrants, whom they accused of working long shifts for low wages.

 Why were industrial workers so divided?

Read the Document Chinese Exclusion Act


THE WORLD OF WORK TRANSFORMED



Competing Visions
THE LEGITIMACY OF UNIONS
Although conflict between workers and their employers often centered on wages and hours, it also occurred over the legitimacy of labor unions. Many Americans denounced unions as illegal, foolish, and un-American. The editor of Scribner’s Monthly, writing after the 1877 Great Uprising of railroad workers, reflects this view as does the image from Puck. Workers and their advocates like John Swinton, editor of a pro-labor newspaper in New York, offered a different vision of labor unions as vital organizations that protected workers from the exploitation. Why did employers find unions so objectionable, even dangerous? What benefits did workers see in unions? 
 Scribner’s Monthly (October 1877)

 John Swinton’s Paper (January 27, 1884)

 And now that it is over, it is a good time to ask once more what good has come from this strike, and what good has come of any strike. The laws of nature which, after all, govern the laws of trade … can never be overcome or circumvented by a strike. Labor will always command its value—no more, no less.… Strikes are always mistakes; they are often crimes. The day of the inauguration of trades unions and labor organizations in this country was a day the blackest and fullest of menace to the popular prosperity and peace that ever dawned upon the nation. They have been an unmitigated curse to employers and employed alike. The nature and purpose of these organizations are simply outrageous. They have been despotic toward their own members, oppressive toward the class in whose interest they pretend to have been established, impertinent and intermeddling. They have assumed the right to control property and business in which they had no more right than if they lived in the moon. There should be in the good sense of the great mass of laborers a reaction against this wretched crime, and this stupendous foolishness.

 There are many who cannot understand why Trades Unions exist here. They have heard them described as alien to the American craftsman, causing strikes, and raising ill-feeling generally between … employer and employe[e]. In the present state of industry, Trade Unions are a necessity, recognized as such by the great majority of intelligent workmen, … and securing for their members a partial degree of protection without which they would sink into depths as yet unfathomed. There is a hue and cry against the Unions as agencies that provoke strikes. In nine cases out of ten, strikes are made necessary by circumstances over which the Unions have no control whatever; sometimes they are a protest against unendurable reductions in wages … sometimes by unjust conduct on the part of bosses or corporations. No Union to-day orders a strike that can be avoided by reasonable means; no Union orders a strike without full consideration of the subject and after a fair vote.… But we are told that no strike ever brings any advantage to the strikers … This is a mistake that cannot be made by any one who has observed the results of strikes either in the United States or in any other country.… But strikes often fail,—yes, it is true. Capital often triumphs in the conflict with labor,—true again. Yet capital would be even harsher and more exacting than it is, if it were not for the protest of the strike, and the warning that it gives. The wages which, in many industries, are but little above the living point, would be put down and kept down to the starvation point, if the men accepted with submissive spirit every reduction of wages, and all the severe terms that capital tries to enforce.

 This Puck magazine cartoon from the mid-1880s portrayed labor union officials as tyrants who hurt the interests of workers.

 Why did labor activists argue that unions were defensive in nature?



 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

Women Employed
 in Offices Women Employed as Saleswomen

19,000 / 503,000


7,462 / 142,265


16.14 Rising
Numbers of
Women in the Paid
Workforce
Economic
 necessity and a desire for greater independence brought millions of women into jobs outside the home.



New Roles and Opportunities
 for Women Economic necessity brought millions of women into the paid workforce. Whereas just 13 percent of women worked outside the home in 1870, 20 percent did so by 1900. Nearly all these women were single and younger than 25. Domestic service (cooking, cleaning, and childcare in the homes of middleand upper-class families) remained the leading occupation for wage-earning women in this period, but many also took on factory work, especially in the garment and textile industries. Like their male counterparts, women factory workers labored at repetitive tasks for long hours in unsafe conditions—but for only half (or less) the wages of men. Employers justified this disparity by claiming women worked merely for extra money, whereas men worked to support whole families and therefore deserved higher pay. In fact, many working-class families depended for their survival on the earnings of wives and daughters. Factory owners simply paid them less because women were powerless to prevent it. The emergence of modern corporations requiring armies of secretaries, clerks, and stenographers, combined with the invention of the telephone,

 adding machine, and typewriter, created new opportunities for educated, native-born, white women (16.14). Teaching, social work, and, as indicated in the graduation photograph of the Philadelphia School for Nurses (16.15), nursing emerged in the late nineteenth century as almost exclusively female professions. Although these fields represented new opportunities for women, they were deemed appropriate because they drew on what was widely believed to be women’s “natural” role as nurturers. The pageantry evident in this photograph, especially the bright white and highly professional looking uniforms, the elegant setting of the Philadelphia Academy of Music, and the presence of Red Cross founder Clara Barton (seated at center), indicates the high reputation the profession had achieved by 1900. Regardless of the level of work, social custom dictated that women leave the paid workforce soon after they married (only five percent of married women worked outside the home in 1900). Of necessity, working-class women continued to earn money to support their families. Only now they did so from within the home by taking in boarders, laundry, and “piece work,” which paid by the piece rather than by the hour. Many more African American women, more out of economic necessity than custom, remained in the paid workforce even after marriage. In urban areas in both the North and South, many worked as domestic servants in white homes, cooking, cleaning, doing the laundry, and caring for children. These jobs required long hours and paid low wages, but racist hiring policies in industry and other sectors of the economy left African American women with few options.

16.15 Women
Find Opportunities
 in Nursing These graduates of the Philadelphia School for Nurses, with Red Cross founder Clara Barton at center, were among the thousands of young women in the late nineteenth century who became nurses.

 Why did more women enter the paid workforce?

View the Map Atlas Map: Changing Lives of American
Women, 1880–1930


CONFLICTING VISIONS OF INDUSTRIAL CAPITALISM



Conflicting Visions of
Industrial Capitalism
 As the Industrial Revolution unfolded in the late nineteenth century, Americans of all classes, occupations, and regions felt its impact. For many it was an age of wonder, marked by a succession of new inventions, ideas, and possibilities. Yet one did not have to look far for signs of anxiety, fear, and discontent. Numerous critics offered a different vision of society, emphasizing the growing poverty, gaps between rich and poor, and inequality.

Capitalism Championed
 Many Americans in the late nineteenth century celebrated industrial capitalism. Proponents noted that every year American industry produced more consumer goods, from inexpensive clothing in a dizzying array of colors and styles to exciting new products like phonographs and bicycles. It also generated new forms of transportation that allowed people, including the poor, to travel to new and different places. In farming industrial technology led to stupendous annual harvests, falling food prices, and a more varied diet for the average American, whose life expectancy rose from a mere 38.3 years for white men in 1850 to 50 years by 1910. The telegraph, telephone, and steampowered printing press allowed for the unprecedented spread of information and literacy (aided by an expanded public school system). And despite unrest, depressions, and strikes, real wages for the average worker rose 50 percent between 1860 and 1900 (74 percent for skilled workers and 31 percent for unskilled). To these optimists industrial capitalism meant progress. Of the enthusiastic champions of the new industrial order, none was more fervent and influential than Andrew Carnegie. He offset his harddriving corporate style with a carefully constructed public image designed to set him apart from many of his fellow industrialists who angered the public with arrogant pronouncements. The shipping and railroad magnate Cornelius Vanderbilt, for example, once brushed aside the suggestion that his business practices violated the law by saying, “Law! What do I care about the law? Ain’t I got the power?”

Read the Document Andrew Carnegie, “Wealth”


 In countless speeches and articles in prominent magazines, Carnegie defended the status quo and emphasized its virtues. Rejecting the claims of critics that industrialists like him were greedy, abusive monopolists, he insisted they were visionaries who built key industries that brought immeasurable benefits to Americans, including jobs for workers and products that improved the quality of life. Granted, Carnegie explained in what he came to call the “Gospel of Wealth,” he and other entrepreneurs had grown fabulously rich, but this was a necessary and beneficial result of a free economy. Without the hope of future riches, business leaders would not have the incentive to seek new opportunities, take risks, and develop new products.

 “I can hire one half of the working class to kill the other half.” Financier and railroad magnate JAY GOULD Carnegie and other champions of big business also emphasized that industrial fortunes could be— and increasingly were—used to fund philanthropic projects such as schools and libraries. In the 1880s and 1890s he emerged as the nation’s most ostentatious philanthropist. In 1901 he sold his steel empire to financier J. P. Morgan for $400 million and then donated most of it to various causes, including thousands of public libraries. For a man who was both conservative and optimistic, libraries appeared the perfect form of charity because they

 How did business leaders like Carnegie defend industrial capitalism?



 CHAPTER 16

16.16 The
Carnegie Library
 and Floor Plan in Lincoln, Nebraska As a symbol of the virtue of industrial capitalism and the spirit of individual uplift, steel magnate Andrew Carnegie funded nearly 1,700 public libraries in America. The exterior designs reflected the popularity of classical styles circa 1900. The interiors emphasized the industrial values of order and efficiency.

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

 provided ambitious, hard-working, and intelligent people opportunities to better themselves, instead of handouts. This Carnegie library (16.16), built in Lincoln, Nebraska, in 1901, typified the more than 2,500 (1,689 in the United States) libraries funded by Carnegie between 1886 and 1929. Communities awarded a library were allowed to pick their own architectural style. Most, like Lincoln, opted for some variation on the popular neoclassical style. But Carnegie and the staff that oversaw the program insisted that library interiors stress efficiency and order—the values reflected in the design of his steel factories. Note how the floor plan allowed for a single centrally located librarian (seated at the curved desk in the center) to monitor all the neatly organized spaces devoted to reading, children, reference, and stacks. When Carnegie and other defenders of industrial capitalism were asked about the growing problem of poverty amid such progress, they pointed to what they claimed was the greatest virtue of a capitalist economy: the self-made man. As Carnegie’s own life story seemed to attest, anyone, regardless of birthplace, family, education, or poverty, could climb the ladder of success. Success was not guaranteed, noted Carnegie. But for those who possessed self-discipline, intelligence, frugality, and diligence and who avoided liquor and debt, the future was bright. Aiding Andrew Carnegie and other optimists in spreading this ideal of the self-made man was Horatio Alger. A former minister, Alger wrote more than 100 young adult books, beginning with Ragged Dick in 1868. All featured similar plots that told the story of a young boy, often a bootblack or a delivery boy, who lived a life of poverty and irresponsibility on the mean streets of a big city. Through the intervention

 Why was the self-made man idea so popular in the age of industry?

 of a “respectable” man, the boy discovers that he need only end his prodigal ways and pursue education and opportunity to enjoy the good life. Alger sold millions of books, and imitators churned out similar publications, including the popular Fame and Fortune magazine (16.17). As this cover shows, each issue offered dramatic “stories of boys who make money” by exhibiting honesty, diligence, and courage. Not all conservative defenders of industrial capitalism shared Alger’s rosy vision of a society where anyone willing to work hard, save money, and avoid liquor could find success. They subscribed to a theory known as social Darwinism, a corruption of Charles Darwin’s biological theory of natural selection (later termed “evolution”). British philosopher and sociologist Herbert Spencer took Darwin’s central idea that in evolution, plants and animals that are able to adapt to changing conditions survive, while those that cannot become extinct, and tailored it to fit his idea of modern industrial society as “survival of

16.17 The Promise of Success
 Taking their cue from the success of Horatio Alger’s success in writing scores of young adult novels, many imitators published similar books and magazines preaching that reward and respectability could be won if only one worked hard, told the truth, and helped the less fortunate.

Read the Document Herbert Spencer, Social Darwinism (1857)
Read the Document Horatio Alger, Ragged Dick


CONFLICTING VISIONS OF INDUSTRIAL CAPITALISM

 “What a blessing to let the unreformed drunkard and his children die, and not increase them above all others…. How wise to let those of weak digestion from gluttony die, and the temperate live. What benevolence to let the lawless perish, and the prudent survive.” The Christian Advocate (N.Y.), 1879

 the fittest.” The wealthy and powerful were the “fittest,” people endowed with innate intelligence, strength, and the adaptability that enabled them to succeed in the competitive world of business. And the poor? They were the “unfit,” men and women consigned by nature to failure, misery, and early death. To impose government regulation on business, social Darwinists argued, was both immoral and impractical, an affront to the laws of nature and God. They also attacked any initiatives public or private to alleviate the plight of the poor because they would promote the survival and growth of the unfit population with devastating consequences for society.



 parents fail to notice the shivering children as they pass. Many commentators in this period focused on the profound extremes of wealth and poverty found in two New York City neighborhoods: Fifth Avenue and Five Points. In the former neighborhood were the homes of the Stewarts, Vanderbilts, Astors, Morgans, and Carnegies. They patronized the opulent Metropolitan Opera House, entertained each other at lavish balls and dinners, and summered in their 50-room “cottages” in coastal retreats like Newport, Rhode Island. Just a few miles downtown was a notorious district called the Five Points. In this neighborhood and the surrounding Lower East Side district, nearly one million people lived in tiny, airless tenement apartments with no running water or toilets. Their neighborhoods had no parks, and the streets were filled with filth due to irregular street cleaning. Reformers, ministers, and social critics began to question whether American democracy, with its ideals of equal rights and individual freedom, could endure under such inequality and enslaving poverty. For example, a self-taught political economist named Henry George wrote Progress and

Capitalism Criticized
 Despite these confident assertions on the morality and virtue of laissez-faire industrial capitalism, critics decried the widening chasm between rich and poor. While some 4,000 Americans had become “millionaires” by the early 1890s, millions of others lived in poverty, or perilously close to it. A tour of any city provided ample evidence of what some called the “haves and the have nots,” a concern vividly captured in this 1876 image (16.18) from a popular magazine. Its caption, “The Hearth-Stone of the Poor,” and accompanying article pointed out that many of the poor, unlike the wealthy family on the left, had no warm fireplace around which to gather on cold nights. Instead, like these children, they gathered around outdoor steam vents to keep warm. Note how the wealthy

 16.18 The Growing Gap between the Haves and Have-Nots This image, The Hearth-Stone of the Poor from the popular magazine Harper’s Weekly (February 12, 1876) captured the growing concern among Americans over the growth of poverty amid rising levels of wealth.

 Why was the theory of social Darwinism so attractive to the wealthy and successful?



 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

 Poverty, an influential book that addressed one of the central questions of the age: Must industrial and technological progress be accompanied by increased poverty? If so, he warned, American democracy was doomed. George claimed that the monopolization of resources, especially of land, by powerful elites was to blame for the era’s growing social inequality and class conflict. Few people understood or supported George’s unorthodox solution (a “single tax” on land values), but his vivid diagnosis of the rising clash between labor and capital and his vision of a more equitable social order gained him an enormous following in the 1880s and turned Progress and Poverty into a bestseller. Edward Bellamy achieved similar fame as a critic of laissez-faire capitalism with his novel Looking Backward, 2000–1887. Published in 1887, it told the story of Julian West who, like Rip Van Winkle in another era, falls asleep in 1887 and awakens in 2000. To his astonishment he finds American society transformed into a socialist utopia. The class conflict, poverty, and economic inequality of the late nineteenth century are gone. The government controlled the economy, eliminating destructive competition and providing a comfortable living for all citizens. Bellamy’s book became a bestseller, and his largely middle-class followers established nearly 500 clubs to spread its message.

Power in Numbers:
Organized Labor
 Less famous, but more influential than critics like George and Bellamy, were the protests of those most buffeted by the Industrial Revolution: workers. Through the pages of labor newspapers and in speeches at worker rallies—and in actions such as strikes—American workers articulated a sharp critique of the new industrial order. A few were socialists, but most supported the broad ideals of a free market economy. Their protest stemmed from the growing conviction that greedy monopolists, in league with unscrupulous politicians, had seized control of the economy and bent it toward their own advantage. As a result, argued workers, they received a shrinking portion of the wealth they created, while working longer hours in increasingly inhumane conditions. Try as they might, these workers claimed, the upward mobility celebrated by

 What conditions led to rapid membership growth in the Knights of Labor?

 Andrew Carnegie and Horatio Alger was less and less attainable. Unsettled and angered by their declining power in the face of big business, American workers renewed their efforts to organize labor unions. In 1869, Philadelphia garment cutters formed The Noble and Holy Order of the Knights of Labor (KOL), an organization that called for many of the same reforms as the NLU, but added a long list of radical, even utopian, goals. For example, it advocated replacing the existing competitive industrial system with an economy based on cooperation. In addition, unlike the NLU’s emphasis on craft workers, the KOL was an industrial union open to all workers, including unskilled wage earners, immigrants, and eventually women and African Americans. Its leaders believed that fundamental social change was impossible unless this broad spectrum of workers joined forces. To overcome employer hostility, the organization adopted a policy of strict secrecy that necessitated holding meetings in clandestine locations. This requirement, however, combined with the depression of 1873–1877, hindered its growth. By 1879, it counted just 10,000 members, most in Pennsylvania. But two key developments that year propelled the KOL to become the world’s largest industrial union. First, the national economy recovered, providing wage earners with a measure of economic security that allowed them to form and join local unions in huge numbers. Second, a young machinist named Terence Powderly became the KOL’s leader, or Grandmaster Workman. Powderly was a superb organizer and gifted orator who in 1882 abolished the KOL’s secrecy rule, a decision that made it possible to recruit thousands of new members and fend off accusations from employers, politicians, and religious leaders that the KOL was a sinister and conspiratorial organization. Membership soared to 42,000 in 1882 (on its way to an eventual peak of more than 700,000 in late 1886). What drew many workers to the organization was the KOL’s sharp critique of laissez-faire capitalism and emphasis on economic justice and democracy. Its constitution decried, “the recent alarming development and aggression of aggregated wealth” by industrialists, bankers, and stock speculators, warning that it would soon lead “to the pauperization and hopeless degradation of the toiling masses.” (See Images as History: Why Fear Big Business?”)

Read the Document Henry George, “Progress and Poverty”


CONFLICTING VISIONS OF INDUSTRIAL CAPITALISM



Images as History
WHY FEAR BIG BUSINESS?
people—retain its legitimacy when big business exercised so much power and answered to no public officials and no voters? Other Americans focused on the plight of the worker under such a system. How could workers resist the power of large employers to slash wages, increase hours, and ignore safety issues? Could the United States endure as a republic if these citizens were reduced to desperate poverty while a few wealthy families reveled in luxury? These concerns are on full display in this vivid political cartoon from Puck Magazine. 
 As large corporations emerged in the Gilded Age (the late nineteenth century period of rapid economic growth), many Americans grew concerned about their power and influence. Some focused on the fact that large corporations and the immensely powerful men that ran them, people like John D. Rockefeller and William H. Vanderbilt, operated beyond the control of laws and democratic institutions. Did this not mean, they asked, that the republic was in danger? How could a democracy—a society governed by the will of the

 The artist represents the horse of “monopoly” as a huge golden locomotive. Railroads were the original big businesses and the largest corporations. They were also at the center of the era’s biggest corruption scandals and strikes. In contrast, the shoeless American worker sits on a scrawny horse labeled “poverty.”

 Big business and monopoly are depicted as a knight, a symbol of European aristocracy and the antithesis of republicanism. His plume carries the word, “arrogance.” Note how this figure stands in sharp contrast with the much smaller, humble worker.

 In a section labeled “Reserved for Capitalists,” sits a collection of the nation’s most powerful businessmen, including Cyrus Field, William H. Vanderbilt, and Jay Gould. Note the joy they seem to take in seeing the American worker destroyed.

 This huge, seemingly endless, crowd symbolizes the American people, who clearly outnumber the handful of capitalists on the left. Observe how small the people are compared to the industrialists. Note too how most of the crowd looks anxious or angry at what is happening (some shake their fists) and how some of the children appear malnourished.

•
•


•


 One of the most significant aspects of this image is its source. Subscribers to Puck were overwhelmingly middle- and upper-class. This shows that the rising fear of big business in the Gilded Age was not confined to low-wage factory workers. It was shared by a large cross-section of the American people.

•


•


•
•
•


 The vast disparity in power is captured in the weapons brought to the fight. The knight holds a shield labeled “corruption of the legislature,” suggesting corporate titans’ ability to bribe state and federal elected officials to ensure laws favorable to business. In his other hand he holds a lance labeled “subsidized press,” indicating the power of big business to buy favorable coverage in the newspapers. The lowly worker, in contrast, holds only one weapon: the strike.

 Why did so many Americans come to fear big business in the Gilded Age?



 CHAPTER 16

16.19 Establishing
Labor Day
 In 1882, workers in New York City held the first local Labor Day celebration. It soon became a national holiday.

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

 These sentiments and spirit of protest inspired workers in New York City, many of them KOL members, to establish the Labor Day holiday in September 1882. The organizers took care to present workers as orderly and dignified, marching in almost military fashion (16.19). Yet they also held aloft signs voicing their grievances (“Abolish Contract Labor” and “8 Hours to Constitute A Day’s Work”) and announcing their intent to reclaim their influence in the political system (“Vote for the Labor Ticket”). Others proclaimed the importance of workers (“Labor Creates All Wealth” and “Labor Pays All Taxes”), and in an age of growing economic inequality, reminded the spectators of key American principles (“All Men Are Created Equal”). The annual Labor Day holiday quickly gained popularity. By 1886, it was a national event, and in 1894, President Grover Cleveland signed a law establishing Labor Day as a holiday for all federal workers. Another significant aspect of the KOL’s vision, albeit one that was not embraced in every part of the country, especially the South, was its inclusion of African American workers as members. Many in the KOL’s leadership argued that the union

 Why did so many workers find the Knights of Labor appealing?

 must include all workers, including blacks, because employers would inevitably use them against organized labor to break strikes and lower wages. This same argument for inclusion led the KOL to allow women members. As a result, in an era when labor unions were almost exclusively the domain of white men, in 1886, ten percent of the KOL’s membership was women and another ten percent was African American. Many workers also joined the KOL because it emphasized practical goals. Its constitution called for the eight-hour workday, equal pay for men and women, the establishment of state bureaus of labor, and the prohibition of child and convict labor. The KOL also gained enormous support among workers because it led successful strikes. But the decision to strike was difficult and risky. (See Choices and Consequences: To Strike or Not to Strike?) Most strikes in this period were small and local, but on several occasions the KOL enjoyed success on a grand scale. In 1885, KOL-affiliated railroad workers won a strike against the Wabash Railroad, owned by financier Jay Gould, a man widely despised and

View the Map Interactive Map: Organizing American Labor in
 the Late Nineteenth Century

CONFLICTING VISIONS OF INDUSTRIAL CAPITALISM



Choices and Consequences
TO STRIKE OR NOT TO STRIKE?
Most strikes in the late nineteenth century failed, but the surge in labor activism and the emergence of the Knights of Labor in the 1880s boosted confidence among workers that strikes could succeed. In the summer of 1881, the hundreds of male shoemakers in the Knights Local Assembly 64 successfully opposed a wage reduction by the Mundell Company in Philadelphia. Management then imposed a rate cut on its female shoemakers. One of the workers, Mary Stirling, urged the workers, men and women, to strike until the company rescinded the wage cut. The workers at the Mundell Company considered essentially three major options: 
Choices




 Fearing for their jobs male and female workers refuse to strike.



 Seeking to protect their recent victory, the men remain on the job while the women walk out.



 Recognizing their mutual interests in opposing wage cuts for all workers, the male and female workers agree to strike together.

Decision
 Inspired by the KOL motto, “an injury to one is the concern of all,” the 700 men and women of the Mundell factory decided on option 3, walking out at Mary Stirling’s urging. The strike lasted weeks, during which time the female workers formed their own KOL local assembly—even though the union did not yet enroll female members. Strikers organized pickets, rallies, and fundraisers to help pay for food and rent.

Consequences
 The Mundell Company, facing lost profits and pressure to settle from other factory owners who feared worker unrest, rescinded the wage cut. The victory boosted the confidence of the workers and the reputation of the KOL locally. Within three years the shoe industry alone had 11 local assemblies that managed to win many struggles with employers over wages, firings, and work rules. Even more important, later in 1881, Mary Stirling attended the national convention of the KOL and convinced the organization to admit women. By 1887, ten percent of the KOL’s 700,000 members were women.

The Mundell Shoe
Company was one of the
 nation’s leading footwear manufacturers in the late nineteenth century

Continuing Controversies
 How should organized labor deal with the rising number of women in the workforce? The admission of women into the KOL did not end the opposition of many American workers to the rights of women to work and join unions. They continued to argue that keeping women out of the workforce

 would open up jobs for men and raise overall wages. When the KOL fell apart in the 1890s, the status of women in the labor movement fell with it. The American Federation of Labor, the organization that succeeded the KOL, admitted few female members until well into the twentieth century.

 What made strikes so risky for workers?



 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

 feared by workers. Elsewhere the KOL popularized the boycott, the organized effort to discourage customers from patronizing a business engaged in antilabor activity, as an effective labor tactic less costly and risky than a strike. As the KOL’s membership and influence grew in the mid-1880s, it alarmed employers, politicians, and conservatives, who feared its radical rhetoric of class conflict and demands for economic reform. They denounced Powderly and other KOL leaders as radical socialists bent on promoting violence and class warfare. Although both accusations were false, they made many Americans, including many wage earners, leery of the KOL and of organized labor.

The Great Upheaval of 1886
 Fear of the KOL in particular and the labor movement in general peaked in 1886. On May 1, 340,000 workers across the country staged a one-day work stoppage to bring attention to their demand for the eight-hour day. Three days later a far more serious

 incident occurred that would hurt the labor movement for decades. Outraged by the killing of striking workers outside the McCormick Reaper Works in Chicago, the city’s radical labor leaders called a mass meeting in Haymarket Square on May 4. When 300 policemen moved in to disperse the crowd, a bomb exploded amid their ranks. The enraged police attacked the crowd with guns and batons. In less than 20 minutes, seven policemen lay dead (most, an investigation would show, from shots fired by fellow officers) along with four workers. The press quickly dubbed the incident the Haymarket Riot, and especially when accompanied by images such as this one (16.20), the incident stoked vehement opposition to organized labor. Note the placement of the dead policemen in a sort of martyrs’ pantheon above a riot scene depicting “murderous rioters” being gunned down. The next day, as hysterical headlines across the nation proclaimed that revolution was at hand, Chicago police arrested eight men, all selfproclaimed anarchists, and charged them with

16.20 The Haymarket Incident, 1886
 The Haymarket incident sparked a nationwide backlash against organized labor. Newspapers ran images like this one, in which martyred policemen hover over a scene where, “murderous rioters” are gunned down.

 What role did the press play in promoting a negative impression of labor unions?

Read the Document George Engel, “Address by a Condemned
Haymarket Anarchist” (1886)


CONFLICTING VISIONS OF INDUSTRIAL CAPITALISM

 murder. After a hasty trial in which even the prosecution conceded that no one had seen the men throw a bomb, all were convicted. Seven were sentenced to death and one to life imprisonment. Four were hanged; one committed suicide in his cell. In 1893, Illinois elected a pro-labor governor who pardoned the remaining three, declaring they had not received a fair trial. Haymarket created a climate of fear and provided justification for officials across the nation to crack down on the labor movement. Throughout the spring and summer of 1886, hundreds of labor activists were arrested—100 in New York City alone. In response workers across the nation formed labor parties and ran candidates for offices from city councilor to governor. Most candidates lacked the money or experience to win, but there were notable surprises. For example, Chicago’s United Labor Party polled 25,000 votes (of 92,000 cast) and elected a state senator and seven state assemblymen. In Milwaukee, the People’s Party elected a mayor, a state senator, six state assemblymen, and a congressman. In one of the most widely watched contests, Henry George, the reformer and author of Progress and Poverty, finished a close second in the mayor’s race in New York City—out polling Republican Theodore Roosevelt, who finished a distant third. However, the unity and hope expressed by workers at the polls in November 1886 were soon undermined. First, the tumult of 1886 brought to the fore the dissatisfaction of many skilled workers within the KOL. Deeming the organization too strike prone and too influenced by socialists and radicals (who after Haymarket brought organized labor unwanted criticism), 25 unions of skilled workers convened in Columbus, Ohio, in December 1886 and founded the American Federation of Labor (AFL). The more radical activists within the



 KOL also grew dissatisfied with Powderly’s leadership, decrying his growing opposition to strikes and political action. Anti-labor hysteria in the press and legal repression following Haymarket further weakened the labor movement. Membership in the KOL dwindled rapidly, from 700,000 in 1886 to only 100,000 by 1890. National leadership of the labor movement after 1886 fell to the new AFL. Comprised exclusively of unions of skilled workers and led by cigar-maker Samuel Gompers, the AFL shunned the KOL’s idealistic goal of industrial cooperation. Instead, it accepted capitalism and the wage system and focused on what it termed “pure and simple” goals: higher wages, shorter hours, and job security. The AFL also refused to organize unskilled workers, arguing that they were too weak and unreliable. They similarly excluded (with a few exceptions) women, African Americans, and recent immigrants. The AFL grew to 1.6 million members by 1904. However, its narrowed vision and conservative approach to the labor question would leave the growing numbers of less-skilled industrial workers without a national voice until the 1930s. These divisions within the labor movement reflected the dramatic and often controversial changes industrialization brought to the United States after 1865. Many Americans prospered in this period, but others found themselves working in dangerous factories for long hours and meager wages. As a result, this period was marked by vigorous debates about economic justice, social equality, and the proper role of government in regulating the economy and protecting the rights and well-being of its most vulnerable citizens. These debates that would continue into the next century.

 What role did the press play in promoting a negative impression of labor unions?



 CHAPTER 16

WONDER AND WOE: THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA, 1865–1900

1866–1868


1873–1876




1878–1879


 William Sylvis founds the National Labor Union

The Panic of 1873


The “Great Uprising”
 railroad strike

 Terence Powderly elected Grandmaster Workman of the Knights of Labor

 First significant effort to organize workers nationally

 Horatio Alger publishes Ragged Dick

CHAPTER REVIEW

 First of one hundred “rags to respectability” novels popularizing the ideal of the self-made man

 Begins four years of severe economic depression

 Wanamaker opens Grand Depot in Philadelphia Sets standard for lavish department stores in an era of increasing consumerism

 Massive strike spreads to several cities. Clashes between workers and police and soldiers leave dozens killed and millions of dollars in damage

 Transforms KOL into a powerful industrial union with 700,000 members by 1886

 Henry George publishes Progress and Poverty The bestseller gives voice to the anxiety over growing social inequality

Review Questions
 1. What strengths did the United States possess in terms of resources, culture, technology, and public policy that facilitated industrialization after 1865?

 4. Why did American workers have such a difficult time uniting to oppose abusive and exploitative employers?

 2. Why were the Supreme Court and Congress so slow to curb the power of big business?

 5. How did industrialization create new opportunities for women? How and why were these opportunities limited?

 3. How was advertising transformed after 1865? How did it affect the Industrial Revolution?

 6. Why did the Knights of Labor expand in the 1880s? Why did it collapse almost as suddenly?

Key Terms
 Laissez-faire (French for “let do” or “leave alone”) A philosophy that argued that the government should impose no restraints on business. Monopoly The control of an industry or market by one corporation. Vertical integration Business organization where one company controls the main phases of production of a good, from acquiring raw materials to retailing the finished product.

Sherman Anti-Trust Act Authorized the Justice Department to
 prosecute any illegal contract, combination, or conspiracy among corporations that eliminated competition or restrained free trade. Blacklist A list of workers that employers in a particular town or industry refused to hire because they were considered troublemakers.

 Horizontal integration Business organization where one company buys many other companies producing the same product to eliminate competition and achieve greater efficiency.

 Social Darwinism The belief that the principles of evolution, which Darwin had observed in nature, also applied to society. Advocates argued that individuals or groups achieve advantages over others as the result of biological superiority, an idea expressed as “survival of the fittest.”

 Robber barons A pejorative name for big business leaders that suggested they grew rich by devious business practices, exploitation of workers, and political manipulation.

 Knights of Labor A labor organization founded in 1869 that in the 1880s accepted workers of all trades and backgrounds and became the world’s largest industrial union

 Trust A legally binding deal bringing many companies in the same industry under the direction of a board of “trustees.”

 Haymarket Riot A violent incident touched off when a bomb exploded amid a group of policemen as they broke up a peaceful labor rally in Chicago’s Haymarket Square on May 4, 1886.

CHAPTER REVIEW



1883–1884




 John D. Rockefeller creates the first trust

1889–1890


 Railroads establish standard time zones

 Becomes a key feature of modern business organization and target of social critics

 Police and workers clash in Haymarket

 Reflects power of railroads and the trend of standardization in business. In 1886, they establish a standard track gauge

 Leads to nationwide crackdown on labor union activism

 Andrew Carnegie publishes “The Gospel of Wealth”

 Knights of Labor wins strike against Wabash Railroad

 Workers in skilled trades separate from Knights of Labor

Workers in New York City
 establish Labor Day Reflects strengthening of labor movement and protest against growing inequality and exploitation

The American Federation of
 Labor founded

 Gains publicity and credibility for the KOL, leading to a surge in membership



 Popularizes the belief that opportunity and upward mobility are available to all in an industrial society

 Sherman Anti-Trust Act passed Reflects popular mood that big business must be restrained; weak, and ineffective

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Wonder and Woe.

Questions for Analysis
 1. Why did many Americans come to fear large corporations like railroads? View the Image Modern Colossus of (Rail) Roads (1879), p. 474

 2. How did the introduction of new technology impact American workers? Read the Document Technology and the Shoe Industry in Fincher’s Trade Review (1864), p. 481

 3. How did industrialists champion industrial capitalism? Read the Document Andrew Carnegie, “Wealth,” p. 487

 4. How did critics of industrial capitalism argue that it threatened the republic? Read the Document Henry George, “Progress and Poverty,” p. 490

 5. What challenges did workers face in trying to organize unions? View the Map Interactive Map: Organizing American Labor in the Late Nineteenth Century, p. 492

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • Thomas Edison, The Success of the Electric Light (October 1880), p. 471 • Interstate Commerce Act, p. 475 • Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics of Labor, from “The Working Girls of Boston” (1884), p. 482 • Chinese Exclusion Act, p. 484 • Herbert Spencer, Social Darwinism (1857), p. 488 • Horatio Alger, Ragged Dick, p. 488 • George Engel, “Address by a Condemned Haymarket Anarchist” (1886), p. 494

View the Closer Look
• Images as History: Advertising and the Art of Cultivating Anxiety and
Desire, p. 478
 • “Testing” Clark’s O.N.T. Spool Cotton, p. 479

View the Image John D. Rockefeller Cartoon (1901), p. 476
View the Map Atlas Map: Changing Lives of American Women,
1880–1930, p. 486


Watch the Video Video Lecture: Mastering Time and Space:
How the Railroad Changed America, p. 472


 What challenges emerged with the rise of large cities?

A
Search for Solutions p. 505


 How did reformers seek to improve urban life?

New Habits, Roles,
 and Lifestyles p. 511

 How did the roles and expectations of women change?

 The Challenge from Below p. 517

 How did American workers and farmers respond to the economic turmoil of the 1880s and 1890s?

 CHAPTER

The Rise of the
City p. 500




