 withdrawal would mark him as a weak leader, emboldening conservative challenges to the General EARLE WHEELER, civil rights laws and expanded supporting the troop buildup in Vietnam social welfare programs for the poor that he wanted to enact. “I was determined to keep the war On March 8, 1965, the first American Marines from shattering that dream,” Johnson later admitlanded at Da Nang along the northern coast of South ted, by which time the war had indeed consumed Vietnam, where young women put leis around their the financial resources and political goodwill that necks during an official ceremony. In the years that the president needed to fully realize this dream (see followed, troops received a distinctly less warm Chapter 27). welcome. As the American Air Force began a major Events off the coast of North Vietnam soon gave Johnson an excuse to act boldly. On August 2, bombing campaign against North Vietnam called Rolling Thunder, General William Westmoreland 1964, North Vietnamese torpedo boats attacked requested a dramatic escalation in American ground an American destroyer, the USS Maddox, in the forces. “You must take the fight to the enemy,” GenGulf of Tonkin. The Maddox easily repelled the eral Earle Wheeler, the Joint Chiefs of Staff chairconfirmed attack. Two days later its crew and a second destroyer, the USS Turner Joy, both reported man, agreed. Choices and Consequences: Making Vietnam coming under attack from North Vietnamese torAmerica’s War (page 788) explores how Johnson pedoes. After failing to locate any North Vietnamdecided to intensify America’s involvement in the ese boats, U.S. Navy pilot James Stockdale landed war. By choosing escalation Johnson on the Maddox where officers met him “all with sealed his legacy as the American sheepish grins on their faces.” Citing improperly president who made winning the working radar, overeager sonar operators, and no war a priority for the United visual sightings of the torpedo boats, the ships’ States. In 1966, the politijoint commander now doubted that a second attack had taken place. Accepting initial reports of a cal cartoonist David Levine reimagined the 1965 scene second attack as conclusive, Secretary of Defense of Johnson lifting his shirt Robert McNamara told Johnson that “we canto expose his gallbladder not sit still as a nation and let them attack us on incision. In Levine’s rendithe high seas and get away with it.” A television tion (26.5), the mark now reporter asked Secretary of State Dean Rusk why North Vietnam would attack an American ship. assumed the shape of “I can’t come up with a rational explanation for it,” Vietnam, the conRusk answered. Behind closed doors the president flict destined to admitted to knowing better, acknowledging in a scar Johnson’s private conversation that “there have been some presidency and covert operations in that area that we have been the nation. Johncarrying on—blowing up some bridges … roads son’s willingness to and so forth. So I imagine they wanted to put a expose the minute stop to it.” details of his health to Besides ordering reprisal bombing against the public contrasted North Vietnam, Johnson used the Gulf of Tonkin sharply with the ethos incident to win congressional approval for further of misinformation military action in Vietnam. In August of 1964, and secrecy (sugrallying behind the president, Congress approved gested by the the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution with only two Pinocchio-like dissenting votes in the Senate. The resolution nose of the gave Johnson permission “to take all necessary caricature) he measures to repel any armed attack against the embraced as forces of the United States and to prevent further commanderaggression” in Vietnam. in-chief.



 “No one ever won a battle sitting on his ass.”

 Read the Document Johnson’s Defense of the U.S. Presence in Vietnam (1965)

 26.5 Johnson’s Scar In 1966 the political cartoonist David Levine transformed President Lyndon Johnson’s scar from gallbladder surgery into the shape of Vietnam, portraying the conflict as an ugly mark on Johnson’s administration.

 Why was the 1964 Gulf of Tonkin incident a turning point in the Vietnam War?



 CHAPTER 26

A NATION DIVIDED: THE VIETNAM WAR, 1945–1975

Choices and Consequences
MAKING VIETNAM AMERICA’S WAR
In early 1965, Johnson initiated a regular bombing campaign against North Vietnam and sent 82,000 ground troops to South Vietnam. The theater commander General William Westmoreland soon requested 150,000 more. In deciding how to respond to Westmoreland’s request, the president’s advisors gave Johnson the following choices in the summer of 1965. 
Choices




 Avoid a protracted war with little chance for a military or political victory over the Communists and seek a negotiated settlement in Vietnam.



 Continue at the present level of military aid to South Vietnam and push for political reforms there to create a more democratic antiCommunist government.



 Send the requested troops, expand the bombing campaign, and work for political reforms in South Vietnam.

Decision
 Johnson considered a negotiated settlement as tantamount to losing Vietnam to communism, an outcome he viewed as a threat to both Southeast Asia and his presidency. Certain that South Vietnam would lose the war without additional U.S. aid, he publicly agreed to send fifty thousand troops immediately. He privately guaranteed Westmoreland an additional fifty

 thousand and promised to send more as needed. He also approved heavy bombing of Vietcong strongholds in South Vietnam and tried to institute political reforms in South Vietnam to erode support for the Vietcong.

Consequences
 The United States was no longer simply aiding South Vietnam in its struggle against communism, but now took the lead in fighting the Vietcong and the North Vietnamese. By 1967, there were nearly 500,000 American troops in Vietnam. During the war the United States dropped more bombs there than it had in World War II. Johnson’s Dilemma. He is shown here with Defense Secretary, Robert McNamara.

Continuing Controversies
 Should the United States have fought a major war in Vietnam? Detractors claim that Johnson committed the United States to an unwinnable war by trying to use the military to solve a political problem in South Vietnam. He underestimated the will of the Vietcong and exaggerated the importance of South Vietnam to containing communism in the rest of Southeast Asia. He failed to build strong domestic support for a long war, leading to unrest at home over the draft

 Why was Johnson’s decision to escalate U.S. troop levels in 1965 important?

 and rising casualties. Johnson’s supporters argue that he honored a commitment to South Vietnam made by his predecessors. This reassured American allies worldwide that they could count on the United States. Retreat would only have invited further Communist aggression in Southeast Asia and Europe. Losing Vietnam would have weakened Johnson politically, putting his controversial domestic reform and civil rights legislative agenda in jeopardy.

FIGHTING IN VIETNAM



Fighting in Vietnam
 David Halberstam, reporting for The New York Times in 1962, summed up the military dilemma in Vietnam perfectly: “It is often impossible to separate the cruel and dedicated foe you want to kill from the simple and illiterate peasant you want to woo.” America and North Vietnam embraced competing strategic visions in fighting the war. While the American military preferred fighting against uniformed soldiers on a clearly defined battlefield, the Communists embraced guerilla warfare, where troops blended into the civilian population or stayed hidden in underground tunnels. The American military tried to defeat Vietnamese guerillas by bombing enemy bases and destroying their village refuges. These tactics created another set of competing visions about the war: the soldiers’ view of an unending conflict versus the image of imminent victory that the government championed at home.

The Bombing Campaign
 The American military relied heavily on bombing to defeat the Vietcong and North Vietnamese. The American bombing campaign was the largest air war in world history, with American planes dropping nearly five million tons of bombs in eight years. The Americans hoped to pressure North Vietnam into ending the war. The North Vietnamese instead learned to live with bombs. The sighting of American planes over the North Vietnamese capital city of Hanoi sent inhabitants scurrying into bombproof underground shelters. The government built thirty thousand miles of tunnels, which moved the nation’s transportation and communication infrastructure underground. The sustained bombing campaign bred anti-American feelings among the civilian population that made it easier for the North Vietnamese government to mobilize the country to “foil the war of aggression of the U.S. imperialists.” Navy Captain James Stockdale led the first American air strike against North Vietnamese oil tanks in the wake of the Gulf of Tonkin incident. A year later during another air raid, he was shot down over a small coastal village in North Vietnam where angry villagers beat him and broke his knee. Stockdale spent the next seven and a half years in a prisoner of war (POW) camp. His jailers brutally tortured him when he taught fellow POWs a walltapping code so they could communicate with one another during their years in solitary confinement. American planes also targeted the Ho Chi Minh Trail, a 600-mile North Vietnamese supply route that ran along the western border of Vietnam through the mountainous rain forest of neighboring Laos and Cambodia. Nearly five thousand Communist soldiers and workers completed the

 arduous three-month journey each month, bringing troops, munitions, and food to the Vietcong. North Vietnamese propaganda glorified the difficult journey with images that emphasized the toughness and determination of its people. This photo (26.6) shows a North Vietnamese camera crew filming teenage volunteers from the north as they push bicycles, which the North Vietnamese called “steel horses,” through the woods to carry rice and guns to Communist troops in the south. Improvements turned the dirt paths into an open road by the 1970s. Surface-to-air missiles and antiaircraft guns helped protect trucks from bombing.

 26.6 Hardships along the Ho Chi Minh Trail North Vietnamese propaganda relentlessly publicized the arduous journey along the Ho Chi Minh Trail to highlight how Communist ingenuity had stymied the world’s greatest military power. Here, a Communist movie crew films teenage volunteers transporting bags of rice and guns strapped to their bicycle handlebars in 1970.

 What messages did North Vietnamese propaganda send?



 CHAPTER 26

A NATION DIVIDED: THE VIETNAM WAR, 1945–1975

 Americans also extensively bombed South Vietnamese “free fire zones,” villages that supposedly contained only enemy combatants. The American air campaign included spraying defoliants, usually Agent Orange, that stripped trees of their leaves to expose Vietcong hideouts and killed the crops that might feed enemy troops. “Only you can prevent forests,” American pilots quipped, a satirical

 “I wanted to be a hero.” Vietnam veteran RON KOVIC, explaining why he joined the Marines

26.7 American
Gunner Rescues
Downed Comrades
 Life photographer Larry Burrows captured the harrowing nature of combat in a photo that shows a U.S. soldier clearing the ground of enemy fire as his helicopter lands to aid a downed American helicopter crew.

 reworking of a popular environmental slogan “only you can prevent forest fires.” Defoliants ultimately destroyed half of Vietnam’s forests and caused lasting health problems for both American pilots and the Vietnamese that included cancers and birth defects. Responding to negative publicity, the military stopped using defoliants in 1971. American pilots also dropped napalm, a jellylike gasoline that ignited on impact, to destroy South Vietnamese villages hiding enemy troops. Napalm severely burns the body, contributing to the misery of civilians subject to bombing attacks. Reports of mounting civilian suffering energized the U.S. peace movement, a loose coalition of antiwar activists that included pacifists, students, professors, clergy, hippies (young people who rejected middle-class values and adopted a bohemian lifestyle), civil rights activists, and middleclass liberals. In making his decision to go to war, Johnson had focused on placating his hawkish critics without considering the political fallout of antagonizing the left. By 1967, however, belatedly realizing the price he was paying for waging the war, the president noted, “The major threat we have [politically] is from the doves.”

 War II, Phil Caputo viewed joining the Marines as a way to escape suburbia and serve his country. “I saw myself charging up some distant beachhead, like John Wayne in Sands of Iwo Jima,” noted Caputo, recalling a popular 1949 film that romanticized the battle responsible for the iconic World War II photo of six men raising the flag over Mount Suribachi (see Images as History, Chapter 23). Combat, however, quickly shattered the idealism of men like Caputo. In 1965, Life photojournalist Larry Burrows spent a month with helicopter crews, documenting their heroism and the harrowing combat. In this photo (26.7) gunner James Farley fires on enemy troops below as the pilot lands to rescue a downed American helicopter crew. Subsequent photos captured the anguish on Farley’s face when he realized that the rescued pilot had died. The drafted men sent to Vietnam in later years had fewer illusions than the initial volunteers. Conscripts were often working-class men who did not qualify for draft deferments, which only collegebound and married men enjoyed. Volunteers and conscripts served one-year tours in Vietnam, and as the time to return home neared, they often became more averse to taking risks in combat. Some soldiers even used their helmets as calendars, openly marking off the days left until their tour of duty ended. In World War II American soldiers had fought against a clearly distinguishable enemy in the Pacific island jungles. Vietcong forces, however, infiltrated

On the Ground
 The initial wave of American troops sent to Vietnam consisted mostly of army volunteers. Raised on tales of heroism during World

 What motivated American men to volunteer to fight in Vietnam?

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Popular
Music and the Vietnam War


FIGHTING IN VIETNAM



 the civilian population. They wore civilian clothes, stored arms in the Conference Entrance walls of huts, and sent spies to work chamber Kitchen on American military bases. Civilians gave the Vietcong crucial supFiring port, by choice or out of fear that the Well post Vietcong would torture or murder them. On search-and-destroy missions, American soldiers tried to draw the enemy out of hiding to kill Punji them and destroy their supply base stake trap with ground forces and air attacks. False tunnel To locate the enemy American solAir diers marched in darkness through shaft the steamy jungle and tried to stay alert while sweat poured down their faces and saw-edged grass cut into their skin. They walked gingerly, on Connector to the lookout for enemy ambushes, other tunnels Air-raid shelter land mines, and leaf-covered punji Sleeping stake traps (holes in the ground chamber lined with sharpened spears that would impale a soldier who fell into one) Search-and-destroy missions reduced villages that were suspected of aiding Vietcong to mounds of Storeroom Hospital rubble. American troops blew up or contaminated wells, burned straw huts, and salted the ground so no crops would grow. Even in the trap. The twisted tunnel design stymied American 26.8 Drawing of Vietcong Hideout middle of search-and-destroy missions, however, attempts to fill the tunnels with water, while poison Intricate tunnel American soldiers remained capable of compassion. gas escaped through the airshafts. Heavy bombing complexes conIt was “the paradoxical kindness-and-cruelty that demolished many tunnel complexes, but at the high cealed Vietcong guerilla forces made Vietnam such a peculiar war,” Phil Caputo cost of also destroying homes and forests. beneath villages. remembered. On one search-and-destroy mission, American soldiers fought a war of attrition, tryfor instance, men in his unit tried to treat and coming to kill as many Vietcong as possible while also fort a baby with skin ulcers. A few yards away, other destroying their resources and sapping their morale. soldiers threatened to kill an old woman for preparWhen the enemy could no longer replace its fighting metal stakes that the Vietcong placed in fields to ers in the field, the reasoning went, the Vietcong prevent helicopters from landing. would surrender. In previous wars, winning meant To combat American air superiority, the Viettaking territory away from the enemy. In Vietnam, cong moved many of their command posts, dormito- the United States measured victory by accumulating ries, and supply depots underground. This drawing a high body count of enemy dead. The Communists (26.8) illustrates an elaborate Vietcong tunnel had the same goal, hoping to inflict so many American casualties that the United States would abandon complex. Village huts camouflaged some entrances. the war. Punji stake traps are pictured on one side of the tunTallying enemy dead accurately proved imposnel entrance, and snipers hiding in a hole protect the other side. The Vietcong also laid traps for American sible, however. Soldiers encountered genuine difficulties determining how many Vietcong they had “tunnel rats” who entered the complex in search of killed. The aftermath of battle often littered the enemy troops. A wrong turn down the false tunjungle with body parts and trails of blood rather nel could mean overturning baskets of scorpions than intact countable bodies. The military also and poisonous snakes or falling into a punji stake

 What tactics did the military adopt to fight the Vietcong?



 CHAPTER 26

26.9 Doonesbury
Lampoons Body
Counts
Cartoonist Gary B.
 Trudeau underscored the meaninglessness of the official body count figure. Many Americans were becoming skeptical of the government’s claim that victory was imminent.

A NATION DIVIDED: THE VIETNAM WAR, 1945–1975

 unintentionally created incentives for soldiers to lie. “You guys want a day off, we got to be getting more kills,” one commander told his men. In compiling their body counts, troops made little effort to separate friend from foe. The credo, “If it’s dead and it’s Vietnamese, it’s Vietcong,” lumped enemy soldiers with innocent civilians. Eventually the inaccuracy of body counts became common knowledge. Gary Trudeau mocked the preoccupation with body counts in this Doonesbury comic strip (26.9). His rendition of an American captain using the day’s

 had killed more enemy soldiers than the Communists could replace in the field. To boost morale at home, Westmoreland publicly assured the nation that “we have reached an important point where the end begins to come into view.” Johnson was also upbeat. “The enemy is not beaten,” he told the nation before Christmas, “but he knows that he has met his master in the field.” A Vietnamese offensive in 1968 exposed the hollowness of these claims. On January 30, 1968, during the Vietnamese New Year holiday known as Tet,

 date as his official body count echoed an uncomfortable truth about the value of these officially circulated figures.

 North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces launched the Tet Offensive, a massive, coordinated assault against more than 100 cities and towns in South Vietnam. The map of Vietnam (26.10) depicts the wideranging attacks. “Uncle Ho was already quite old,” and the entire army and population were exerted to do “their best to liberate the South before his passing” a North Vietnamese officer recalled. By demonstrating their determination to fight forever, the North Vietnamese wanted to convince Johnson that the cost of an American victory was too high. The Communists also expected their attack on previously calm cities to spark a revolution within South Vietnam. Before the Tet Offensive the Communists had lured nearly fifty thousand American troops away from the cities by laying siege to a remote Marine garrison in Khe Sanh and attacking a few isolated towns. The weakened American presence left the urban centers vulnerable to enemy attack. A shocked American public watched on television as 19 Vietcong commandos entered the courtyard of the American Embassy complex in Saigon and battled guards there for six hours. It took heavy fighting and more than a month before American troops regained control of South

The Tet Offensive
 In 1967, Americans’ support for the war began to flounder. Nearly nineteen thousand American soldiers had died so far, and each month draft boards inducted another thirty thousand into the military. Johnson’s call for new taxes to meet rising war expenses further dismayed Americans. Some leading policymakers also changed their minds. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara underwent the greatest shift in views. He went from strenuously advocating war (some critics called it “McNamara’s war”) to conceding that “Ho Chi Minh is a tough old S.O.B. And he won’t quit no matter how much bombing we do.” Rather than making his breach with the president over Vietnam public, however, McNamara quietly left the administration. In the same year General Westmoreland assured Johnson that the war of attrition had reached a crossover point, meaning that American soldiers

 Why was using enemy body counts to measure victory problematic?

FIGHTING IN VIETNAM



Mekong


R.


 Vietnamese towns and cities. In the end the Communists paid a heavy price CHINA for forsaking the jungles and tunnels that provided such effective cover, sufferR ed ing forty thousand casualR. NORTH ties and military defeat. Major battles Vietcong Tet Offensive 1968 VIETNAM Nearly twelve thousand Major battles Vietcong Easter Offensive 1972 US air raids 1966-1968, 1972 Gulf of civilians died during the Ho Chi Minh Trail, North Vietnamese supply lines Haiphong To n k i n Dien Bien Phu Hanoi US withdrawal, Apr 30 1975 battle, along with 3,500 Harbor US and South Vietnamese troop movements American and South VietVietminh defeat French 1954 Boat people flee after 1975 Hainan namese soldiers. Island Yet rather than Gulf of Tonkin Incident: LAOS results in Gulf of Tonkin celebrating this victory Resolution 1964 over the Communists, Invasion 1971 by South Vietnamese troops with DMZ, 17th parallel: Demilitarized zone Americans’ support for American air support established 1954 the war plunged. The daily televised images of the Vientiane Battle that drew US troops out Khe Sanh of cities before Tet, 1968 month’s fierce fighting unDa Nang dercut the rosy predictions First US ground combat of imminent victory issued troops arrive 1965 by the White House. At a US troops massacre time when 60 percent of THAILAND 500 villagers 1968 My Lai Americans got their news Pleiku from television, Vietnam S O UT H became the first war in V I E T NA M which Americans viewed CAMBODIA the fighting in the comfort of their living rooms on Invasion 1970 by American South ground troops a nightly basis. Televised Gulf of China Sea news reports suggested Thailand Phnom Penh that no matter who won Communists enter US embassy courtyard, the battle the fighting Tet Offensive, 1968. Civilians evacuated by Saigon helicopter, April 1975 would go on. These newscasts stoked the shift in public sentiment already well under way before Tet. Images as History: The Power of the Press in Vietnam (page 794) considers how viewers’ political chiefs pressed the president for more troops, 26.10 Map of Vietnam leanings influenced their interpretation of photo“I couldn’t get hold of a plan to win the war” [from From the French graphs from the battlefront. The revered CBS-TV the military], Clifford later complained. “When I defeat at Dien Bien news anchor Walter Cronkite spoke for millions asked how many more men it would take, would Phu in 1954 to the final evacuation of when he declared the war a stalemate. “We have 206,000 more men do the job, no one could be cerU.S. personnel in been too often disappointed by the optimism of the tain.” Responding to these rising doubts, Johnson 1975, the United American leaders, both in Vietnam and Washington, made a surprise announcement in a televised adStates tried to defeat Communist forces in to have faith any longer in the silver linings they find dress to the nation on March 31, 1968. “I want to Vietnam. in the darkest clouds,” Cronkite told his listeners on speak to you of peace in Vietnam,” Johnson told February 27, 1968. He urged the government to seek a listeners. He would not seek reelection, he said. Innegotiated peace. stead of campaigning he would halt most bombing Cronkite’s assessment mirrored reports from the of North Vietnam and devote the rest of his time in new secretary of defense Clark Clifford. As the joint office to peace negotiations.

View the Map Interactive Map: The Vietnam War


 Why did the 1968 Tet Offensive have such tremendous political fallout?



 CHAPTER 26

A NATION DIVIDED: THE VIETNAM WAR, 1945–1975

Images as History
THE POWER OF THE PRESS IN VIETNAM
Photographers typically convey a point of view through their photos. However, the differing interpretations surrounding some of the most famous photographs from the Vietnam War suggest that each photo took on a life of its own as Americans disregarded the photographer’s original reason for taking the photo and imposed a different meaning on the image that reflected their own political views. Rather than creating new ideas or values, these images became iconic visual statements 
 about the war because they reinforced strongly held beliefs within the population. In examining the text and photos in this box, consider what kind of power the press had to mold public opinion about the war. In the midst of the 1968 Tet Offensive, Associated Press photographer Eddie Adams saw South Vietnamese police apprehend a Vietcong suspect in the streets of Saigon. Adams snapped his prize-winning photo just as South Vietnamese General Nguyen Ngoc Loan aimed his pistol at the man’s head and pulled the trigger.

 Instead of justifiable retribution many Americans saw an execution. Prisoners of war have the right to a trial under international law, critics argued.

 “He killed many of my men and many of your people,” Loan told Adams. The New York Times caption echoed Loan’s justification for his act. “GUERILLA DIES: Brig. Gen. Nguyen Ngoc Loan, national police chief, executes man identified as a Vietcong terrorist in Saigon. Man wore civilian dress and had a pistol.”

 This striking image of one man’s death became a symbol of the failed U.S. effort to establish the rule of law in South Vietnam, prompting fears that American soldiers were also killing prisoners of war.

•
•
 Adams regretted taking a photo that forever tarnished Loan’s reputation, whom he felt had simply acted impetuously in the heat of combat. “Pictures do not always tell the full story, and this is one case where that is true,” Adams contended.

•
•


•


 Supporters of Loan noted that the Vietcong ruthlessly executed thousands of South Vietnamese officials and police during the Tet Offensive.

 Why did this image become the defining one of the Tet Offensive?

View the Closer Look Images as History: The Power
 of the Press in Vietnam

FIGHTING IN VIETNAM

 In 1966, Life photographer Larry Burrows went into the field with a group of marines trying to stop North Vietnamese infiltration through the demilitarized zone along the seventeenth parallel, a supposedly combat-free strip of land that separated North and South Vietnam.



 He snapped this image of a wounded black soldier reaching out to a white buddy sprawled on the ground. Life published the photo twice, once right after Burrows took it and again in 1971 to eulogize Burrows after he died a helicopter crash in Laos.

 In their letters to Life, many readers said that Burrows’s portrait illustrated how the shared burden of combat inspired men to transcend the “great racial problems” of American society. Burrows’s photo gave some viewers hope that whether “purple, polka-dotted or streaked,” Americans could also learn to live together as brothers at home.

 In his captioning Burrows emphasized soldiers’ suffering in the midst of combat, simply noting, “At a first-aid center, during Operation Prairie, a wounded GI reaches out towards a stricken comrade.”

•


•


•


•


 The interracial compassion captured by Burrows’s photo told only one side of the story. Racial conflict permeated the armed forces in the rear and on ships, suggesting that fighting together did not magically heal the racial divide.

 The wounded soldier lies in a crucifix position, establishing a symbolic link between Christ who suffered on the cross to redeem humankind and a soldier sacrificing his life to save his nation.

 How does this image compare to combat photographs from World War II and the Korean War (see Chapters 23 and 24)?



 CHAPTER 26

A NATION DIVIDED: THE VIETNAM WAR, 1945–1975

Controversy on the Home Front
 Advocates for peace have opposed every American war, but their dissent rarely influenced the mainstream political debate. During the Vietnam War these rebellious voices offering an alternative vision of peace moved from the fringes to the center of American political life. Growing in strength as more Americans began to oppose the war, the peace movement made itself visible through mass demonstrations, propaganda posters, and press coverage of celebrities who joined it. The very existence of a vocal peace movement in the midst of a war, however, also invited controversy because Americans held differing views on the legitimacy of wartime dissent. Many peace activists believed they were preserving the American tradition of freedom of speech. Public opinion polls from 1965 to 1973, however, consistently showed that most Americans disliked both the war and the peace movement.

The Antiwar Movement
 In announcing his decision not to run for reelection in 1968, Johnson noted that “there is division in the American house right now.” In the 1960s the rise of a youth-based counterculture and a powerful civil rights movement roiled the country (see Chapter 27). The night of his announcement, however, Johnson was referring to the domestic debate over the war in Vietnam. Although many working- and middle-class people opposed the war, overcoming existing cultural and class divisions in American society to create a unified antiwar movement proved difficult. The organized antiwar movement tended to attract mostly white, middle-class, college-educated Americans or individuals already engaged in crusades of social justice. Many working-class women and African Americans with grade-school educations and lowpaying jobs, opposed the war, but had little interest in marching alongside middle-class college students in street demonstrations.

 “Hey, hey LBJ, how many kids did you kill today?” A popular chant during antiwar demonstrations Uniting around one universal vision also posed difficulties for the antiwar movement. All peace activists wanted to end the war in Vietnam, but they offered different arguments for doing so. Some made a primarily moral argument. They claimed that a war involving napalm, search-and-destroy What differing visions did peace activists offer on the war?

 missions, and forced relocation into strategic hamlets hurt the Vietnamese more than living under Communist rule did. Others focused on the futility of fighting an unwinnable civil war. Another group accepted that the nation needed to stop Communist China from expanding its influence. They argued that working with Ho Chi Minh could accomplish this goal more effectively than fighting a war in Vietnam. These critics noted that while Ho accepted Chinese aid to fight the United States, he was leery of Chinese ambitions to control Vietnam. America had worked successfully in Europe with the independently minded communist leader Josip Broz Tito in Yugoslavia to contain Soviet ambitions in the Balkans. Why could it not do the same in Vietnam? Other activists saw a chance to open the nation’s eyes to injustice at home, as well as overseas. Student leaders from the nation’s top universities founded the Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) at Port Huron, Michigan, in 1962. A leader in the New Left movement, SDS combined staunch opposition to the war with a scathing critique of the inequities of capitalism (see Chapter 27). Although their reasons for opposing the war differed, peace advocates agreed that the war was destroying American democracy. They noted violations of American democratic values: going to war without a formal declaration of war from Congress, presidential secrets and lies, FBI surveillance of peace protesters, and unjust draft deferments for middle- and upper-class men who could afford to go to college. When civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. spoke out against the war in 1967, he denounced both the destruction of Vietnamese culture and the war’s negative impact on African Americans. The war’s high cost diverted funds from antipoverty programs at home, King rightly View the Image “Vietnam—I want out”

CONTROVERSY ON THE HOME FRONT

 contended. The disproportionately high numbers of African American men fighting and dying in Vietnam further illustrated ongoing racial injustice within the United States, he continued. (King’s criticism was valid in 1967, but over the entire war, black soldiers did not incur higher casualty rates than the rest of the population.) One antiwar poster (26.11) captured this link between racial inequality and the war by picturing two African American soldiers as they advanced into the jungle under the headline, “The only time we’re in the front is when it’s time to die.” The rebuke against King for these statements was swift and severe, including criticism from civil rights activists who worried that his antiwar views would discredit their cause. King died a year later from an assassin’s bullet, cutting short his career as a civil rights leader and antiwar activist. The peace movement brought the debate over the war out of the halls of government and into the streets. In 1965, University of Michigan faculty and students organized the first teach-in, a series of public lectures and debates protesting the war. Over the next eight years, scholars and students on hundreds of other college campuses held teach-ins. Some teach-ins invited counterprotests. At the conclusion of a teach-in at the University of Wisconsin, for example, six thousand students signed a petition supporting President Johnson. Like other Americans, college students held differing views about the war. The draft made the war more than an abstract humanitarian or foreign policy question for millions of American men. Male college students would lose their draft deferments once they graduated, giving many personal, as well as political and moral, reasons to oppose the war. Peace activists organized ceremonies where men burned the notices from their draft boards ordering them to report for induction. When 1,500 peace activists gathered in New York City in 1965 to watch five men burn their draft cards, an onlooker bolted from the crowd with a fire extinguisher and doused the protesters before the cards caught fire. The activists nonetheless managed to ignite their soggy draft cards while hundreds of New Yorkers stood on the other side of police barricades and chanted “Burn yourselves, not your cards!” a macabre reminder, perhaps unintentional, of the Buddhist suicides in Vietnam in 1963. Johnson tried to discredit the peace movement by claiming it was communist-run and gave solace to the enemy. Other defenders of the war charged the peace movement with treason. However, some war supporters believed that the general unpopularity of the peace movement helped bolster the resolve

 of Americans in the political center to stay the course. The presumption that Senator Robert Kennedy, brother of the slain president, would seek the Democratic nomination as a peace candidate had encouraged Johnson to abandon a quest for a second term. On June 4, 1968, Sirhan Sirhan, a Jordanian immigrant upset with Kennedy’s pro-Israel stance, shot and killed the senator as he walked through the kitchen of a California hotel moments after finishing his victory speech for winning the state primary. At the Chicago nominating convention, the Democratic Party selected Vice President Hubert Humphrey as its presidential candidate, a man much like Johnson who supported liberal causes at home and the war in Vietnam. Instead of uniting liberal and conservative Democrats, Humphrey’s candidacy fractured the party. Outside the convention hall radical antiwar protesters denounced his nomination and clashed violently with police. “The war is destroying our

Read the Document Martin Luther King Jr., “Conscience
 and the Vietnam War” (1967)



26.11 Stop the
 War. It’s Killing Us This antiwar poster highlighted the disproportionate numbers of African Americans fighting and dying on the frontlines in the late 1960s, linking that imbalance to continued racial inequity in American society.

 How did the peace movement publicize its cause?



 CHAPTER 26

A NATION DIVIDED: THE VIETNAM WAR, 1945–1975

Dueling Bumper Stickers
 “Join the Army; travel to exotic distant lands; meet exciting, unusual people and kill them.”

“Peace Through
Victory in Vietnam”


 country as we are destroying Vietnam,” the writer I. F. Stone lamented. The outcome of the 1968 presidential election suggested that the peace movement had helped the conservative cause. Believing that the protesters, rather than the police, had gone too far in Chicago, many working- and middle-class Americans responded positively to Republican candidate Richard Nixon’s call for a return to “law and order.” During the campaign Nixon suggested that he had a “secret plan” to bring about a “peace with honor” that he could not reveal to the enemy. The election became a three-man race when Alabama Governor George Wallace ran as an independent candidate, attracting conservative Southern whites and white Northern blue-collar workers with his attacks on

 integration, elites in Washington, D.C., and antiwar protesters. “If any demonstrator ever lays down in front of my car,” Wallace proclaimed, “it’ll be the last car he’ll ever lay down in front of.” As Election Day neared Humphrey picked up liberal support by pledging to end bombing over North Vietnam immediately. Despite losing conservatives’ votes to Wallace, Nixon won the Electoral College vote handily but only received 44 percent of the popular vote (26.12). Opposition to the war never resulted in widespread support for the peace movement. Most Americans remained staunchly anti-communist, even as their dissatisfaction with the war in Vietnam grew. Gallup Polls in 1969 revealed that by a margin of 55 percent to 31 percent, Americans labeled themselves as doves not hawks and most described the war as indefen4 sible. Three-fifths, however, also believed that the peace movement 8 4 helped the enemy and made it more difficult for the president to end the 10 3 war. Americans, it seemed, wanted an end to the fighting overseas and at home.

















































My Lai






26.12 The
Presidential
Election of 1968
Republican Richard
 Nixon won easily in the Electoral College, but he received only about a half million more popular votes than his Democratic opponent, Hubert Humphrey.











 Electoral vote by state

Electoral Vote (%)


Popular Vote (%)


Richard M. Nixon
(Republican)


301 (56)


31,785,480 (44)


Hubert H. Humphrey
(Democratic)


191 (35)


31,275,166 (42)


46 (%)


9,906,473 (14)


George C. Wallace
(American Independent)
North Carolina
 (Electors split)

12 for Nixon
1 for Wallace


 Why did the peace movement have trouble winning support from mainstream America?

 Johnson had calmed the American public in March 1968 by announcing he would open negotiations with the North Vietnamese. Keeping his promise, he began fruitless negotiations with Hanoi. Johnson continued trying, however, to win the war before he left office. Believing that a final push against a weakened enemy could finish the job, American soldiers renewed their attacks on the Vietcong. The largest search-and-destroy missions of the war occurred in March

Watch the Video Protests Against the Vietnam War


CONTROVERSY ON THE HOME FRONT

 and April, involving more than 100,000 troops. During one of these in the village of My Lai, American soldiers massacred hundreds of civilians, an atrocity that fueled the strident domestic debate over the American mission in Vietnam. On March 16, 1968, 75 American soldiers in two platoons under the command of Lieutenant William Calley entered My Lai. Before the mission, these troops had spent long days wading through the rice paddies and even longer nights battling snipers and insects, looking for Vietcong who had killed a popular sergeant the week before. By the time the men approached My Lai, they were in an ugly mood. By attacking during the morning hours, the company’s officers anticipated that their troops would confront 250 enemy troops and few civilians, whom the Americans expected would follow the usual daily ritual of leaving the village to visit a local market. None of these predictions came to pass. In the village the men found only unarmed women, children, and the elderly. The Vietcong had retreated into the western mountains before the Americans arrived. Rather than leaving, however, the Americans engaged in an orgy of rape, torture, and slaughter that took four hours to complete and left more than 500 villagers dead. Army photographer Ron Haeberle snapped this image (26.13) of terrified women and children huddled together moments before American soldiers killed them. “Guys were about to shoot these people, I yelled, ‘Hold it’ and I shot my pictures. As I walked away, I heard M-16s open up, and from the corner of my eye I saw bodies falling but I did not turn to look,” Haeberle recalled. Seeing the carnage from the air, pilot Hugh Thompson landed his helicopter between the soldiers and 11 survivors, whom he flew to safety. Thompson reported the atrocity to his superiors to no avail. Only the perseverance of Ron Ridenhour, a sergeant who was not even at My Lai, finally brought the massacre to light. After hearing stories from men who took part, an outraged Ridenhour wrote to President Nixon, the Pentagon, and members of Congress. When the story broke in 1969, Haeberle sold his photos to Life. A military investigation headed by Lieutenant General William Peers resulted in Calley’s court martial for premeditated murder. Calley’s conviction in 1971 exposed Americans’ conflicting views over the meaning of My Lai. Was the atrocity a unique episode or representative of American conduct in Vietnam? Competing Visions: Who Was Responsible for the My Lai Massacre? (page 800) explores this question in more detail.

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Atrocity and
Cover Up: My Lai Massacre


 Responding to the public outcry over Calley’s conviction, Secretary of the Army Howard “Bo” Callaway reduced Calley’s life sentence to ten years, and President Nixon pardoned Calley after he had served only five months in prison. By this time Calley had been transformed from villain to hero in the American imagination. People on both the left and the right of the political spectrum defended Calley. The left saw him as a scapegoat for failed American policies, while the right argued that civilians were fair targets in a guerilla war.



26.13 My Lai
Villagers Moments
 before their Execution, 1968 Americans expressed more outrage over the publication of photographs from My Lai than over the actual killings.

 Why did photos of the My Lai massacre provoke conflicting responses from Americans?



 CHAPTER 26

A NATION DIVIDED: THE VIETNAM WAR, 1945–1975

Competing Visions
WHO WAS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE MY LAI MASSACRE?
Americans disagreed over who bore responsibility for the massacre at My Lai. Some commentators focused on those directly involved in the killings, others on the orders given by higher-ranking officials to destroy the village. As you read the following excerpts, try to reconstruct the domestic dispute over My Lai. Is one argument stronger than the other? Who was to blame: Calley, the two platoons, the commanding officers, or the American people? Fellow soldier Dennis Conti told Army investigators that he saw Calley and Private Paul Meadlo kill civilians in My Lai. 
 The National Review rejected suggestions that the nation bore the blame and should abandon the war in Vietnam.

 They were bringing people out [of their huts], and then we pushed them out into the rice paddy, onto the dike there … Lieutenant Calley came back, and said: “Take care of them.” So we said: “Okay.” And we sat there and watched them like we usually do. And he came back again, and he said: “I thought I told you to take care of them.” I said: “We’re taking care of them,” and he said: “I mean kill them.” So I looked at Meadlo and he looked at me, and I didn’t want to do it, and he didn’t want to do it … then [Calley] said: “Come on, we’ll line them up here, we’ll kill them.” So I told him: “I’ll watch the tree line” … Then they opened up, and started firing. Meadlo fired a while. I don’t know how much he fired, a clip, I think. It might have been more. He started to cry, and he gave me his weapon.

 “That America and Americans must stand in the larger dock of guilt and human conscience for what happened at My Lai seems inescapable.” So observed Time [magazine], adding: “Men in American uniforms slaughtered the civilians of My Lai, and in so doing humiliated the U.S. and called in question the U.S. mission in Vietnam in a way that all the antiwar protesters could never have done.” One’s mind staggers: Are “America and Americans” generally guilty, the same America and Americans now preparing to bring the accused to trial? And even if it turns out that atrocities were committed, how does this call in question the U.S. mission in Vietnam? Do the innumerable atrocities committed by both sides in World War II add up to the proposition that resistance to the Nazis ought to have been abandoned? … Irrational and irresponsible comment on [My Lai] has become collective madness.

 This New York Times editorial suggested that higherranking officials than Calley bore some responsibility for ordering and observing the My Lai massacre. Who gave the orders? Who knew what was going on? Was any attempt made to stop it? Who is responsible? … [Paul Meadlo] was one of 18 witnesses to describe a briefing the night before the assault at which Captain [Ernest L.] Medina told the men they were going into battle with a hardened Vietcong battalion; that their mission was “search and destroy” and they were to destroy everything in the hamlet—houses, crops and people … Helicopter pilots, radio men and artillery observers said the higher officers had flown over the scene for several hours and had seen bodies on the ground, had conference with the other officers and, as one pilot said, “knew what was going on” all through the day … the Geneva conventions, the Nuremburg doctrines and the Army’s own rules of land warfare make plain that obedience to orders is not a blanket defense, that orders that to a “prudent” or “reasonable” man seem patently illegal need not be obeyed. The question here, then, is whether the order, if that is what it was, to kill everything was one that a prudent man should obey when he found that everything included women, children, and infants.

 What was the ultimate historic significance of the My Lai massacre?

Lieutenant William Calley


View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Who Was Responsible
 for the My Lai Massacre?

THE LONG ROAD TO PEACE



The Long Road to Peace
 When Richard Nixon entered the White House in 1969, he told his advisors, “I’m going to stop that war. Fast.” Nixon was also intent, however, on preserving America’s international reputation. He had a different vision from his predecessor, he assured the public, pledging to seek “peace with honor.” Nixon’s promises proved empty, however. The war did not end quickly, but continued for four more years. At home Nixon benefited politically by portraying the peace movement as out of step with the values of law-abiding citizens. When he extended the war into Laos and Cambodia and became embroiled in political scandal, his actions fueled the political debate over whether Americans could trust their government.

 Seeking Peace with Honor For Nixon a peace with honor meant winning the war. He and his national security advisor, Henry Kissinger, pursued four different tactics to achieve this goal. First Nixon implemented Vietnamization, which turned the bulk of the ground fighting over to the South Vietnamese Army. By 1971, the American presence in Vietnam had diminished dramatically. In many respects this was a return to the pre-1965 approach, when America propped up an independent South Vietnam with financial and military aid. Announcing Vietnamization in November 1969, Nixon asked for support from “the great silent majority of Americans,” referring to the many Americans who supported the war quietly in the privacy of their homes. He also rebuked the peace movement. “Let us be united for peace. Let us also be united against defeat. Because let us understand: North Vietnam cannot defeat or humiliate the United States. Only Americans can do that.” Polls indicated that the “silent majority” overwhelmingly supported his plan. Vietnamization promised to give America exactly what it wanted: victory with minimal loss of American lives. The United States quickly transformed the South Vietnamese Army into one of the largest and best-equipped military forces in the world. At the ongoing peace talks, a North Vietnamese negotiator wondered aloud how the United States, when it could not win with its own troops, thought it could “succeed when you let your puppet troops do the fighting.” That dilemma, Kissinger admitted, “also torments me.” In implementing Vietnamization Nixon hoped to disarm the peace movement by replacing images of civilian suffering on the evening news with pictures of troops withdrawing and returning home.

 In March 1970, he announced the incremental withdrawal of another 150,000 soldiers to “drop a bombshell on the gathering spring storm of antiwar protest.” He simultaneously reformed the draft, replacing the controversial deferment system with a lottery that randomly drafted men by date of birth. Nixon hoped these changes would buy his administration enough time to win the war. The controversial actions of peace activists inadvertently helped Nixon solidify the support of Middle America. In 1972, the actress Jane Fonda accepted an invitation from the North Vietnamese government to visit Hanoi. While in the enemy capital, she made radio broadcasts urging American pilots to mutiny. A photo of Fonda joking with North Vietnamese soldiers as she sat on an antiaircraft gun used to shoot down American planes created a backlash against the peace movement that Nixon exploited. Vietnamization was more than a reaction to declining popular support for fighting in Vietnam. It was also part of Nixon’s attempt to reshape the role that the United States played in global geopolitics. Nixon and Kissinger viewed the longstanding vision of a bipolar world that pitted the United States against the Soviet Union as obsolete. They embraced a competing strategic vision of multipolarity that focused on negotiating with Europe, China, Japan, and the Soviet Union to construct a new balance of power system to keep the peace. In this foreign policy reformulation, the United States would refrain from direct involvement in regional conflicts, such as Vietnam. The Nixon Doctrine, formulated in 1969 and 1970, announced that the United States expected its friends to take the lead in defending themselves. Nixon’s second tactic linked Vietnamization to the resumption of massive bombing in North

Read the Document Richard Nixon, Vietnamization (1969)


 Why did Nixon implement Vietnamization?



 CHAPTER 26

A NATION DIVIDED: THE VIETNAM WAR, 1945–1975

 Vietnam, which Johnson had halted when he initiated peace talks in 1968. As American troops left Vietnam between 1969 and 1972, the number of bombs dropped increased spectacularly (see this shift in Envisioning Evidence: Vietnam: The War by the Numbers). America had not used enough military force to achieve victory, the president and Kissinger concluded. They intended to correct this problem. For a while the news of troop withdrawals diverted attention from the intensified bombing of North Vietnam. Alongside Vietnamization and renewed bombing of North Vietnam, Nixon and Kissinger’s third tactic used diplomacy to decrease Soviet and Chinese support for North Vietnam. Exploiting the discord between China and the Soviet Union, Nixon pursued independent negotiations with each nation to strengthen their ties to the United States and deepen their distrust of each other. He reshaped the Cold War by pursuing his vision of multi-polarity through détente, using diplomatic, economic, and cultural contacts to improve U.S. relations with China and the Soviet Union. Fearing that the United States might form an alliance with the other, the Soviet Union and China each eagerly accepted these overtures. In return for a more congenial relationship with the United States, Nixon expected China and the Soviet Union to end their support of North Vietnam. Although both countries continued to send aid to North Vietnam, once they decided to normalize trade relations and enter into arms limitations agreements with the United States, the Soviet Union and China began pressuring Hanoi to seek a negotiated peace.

Cambodia: Invasion
 and Outrage The fourth tactical component of Nixon’s Vietnam policy involved the neutral country of Cambodia, which bordered Vietnam to the west. In 1969, Nixon initiated a secret bombing campaign of Cambodia. He hoped to cut off supplies filtering through the Ho Chi Minh Trail and thus pressure North Vietnam into accepting the American terms for peace that included an independent South Vietnam. In April 1970, Nixon shattered the public consensus he had carefully created for Vietnamization by ordering an American ground force invasion of Cambodia. Before the invasion Nixon sought inspiration from repeated showings of the movie

 How did Nixon try to win the war?

 Patton in the White House, a film that portrayed the hard-nosed and belligerent World War II tank commander General George S. Patton leading American forces to victory. Nixon announced in a televised speech that American troops needed to destroy Communist bases in Cambodia to help the South Vietnamese army defeat the Vietcong. But the two-month-long incursion only pushed the North Vietnamese further into the interior of Cambodia, where they began supporting the Khmer Rouge, Communist rebels who seized power in Cambodia in 1975 and unleashed a wave of mass murder so brutal that the country became known as “the killing fields.” Nixon’s claim that he was expanding the war to end it sooner persuaded few. Protest erupted on college campuses nationwide and in Congress where the Senate symbolically terminated the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution. Many university demonstrations turned violent as protesters clashed with police and set fire to college buildings. A defiant Nixon stood his ground, assuming that the “silent majority” agreed with his assessment that the protesters were just “bums blowing up the campuses.” In Kent, Ohio, student-organized demonstrations protesting the invasion of Cambodia took a nasty turn, recalled Phil Caputo, who had left the Marines after two tours in Vietnam and was now a reporter for the Chicago Tribune. In a May weekend rampage, “store windows had been smashed in town, [and] radicals had burned down the ROTC building,” according to Caputo. Calling the protesters “the worst sort of people we harbor in America,” Governor James Allen Rhodes promised to “use every weapon possible to eradicate the problem,” as he sent National Guardsmen to restore order. On Monday morning a few hundred students gathered on the campus of Kent State University for a rally, defying a ban on protests. National Guardsmen fired tear gas to disperse the demonstrators, who responded by throwing rocks and shouting obscenities at the troops. Suddenly, as bystanders and students on their way to class watched the mini-battle unfurl, the troops sprayed bullets into the crowd, killing four and wounding nine. The National Guardsmen claimed that they had fired in self-defense when protesters began throwing concrete slabs. Two of the victims were passers-by, however, and all four were too far away from the troops to have hit them with anything more than pebbles.

View the Image Kent State Demonstrations


THE LONG ROAD TO PEACE



Envisioning Evidence
VIETNAM: THE WAR BY THE NUMBERS
Americans’ opinions about the Vietnam War varied over the course of the war, eventually influencing the strategy pursued there. Even as the war became more unpopular, however, at least 40 percent of the nation continued to believe that the nation had done the right thing by sending troops to fight in Vietnam. The United States also tried to use its air superiority to win the war, dropping more bombs in the Vietnam War than in World War II. 
 In 1968 the U.S. troop commitment reached its highest level and bombing of North Vietnam remained intense, but after the Tet Offensive for the first time the majority of Americans (54%) felt that it had been a mistake to send troops to Vietnam.



,00






,00






 With only 24,000 troops on the ground in 1972, President Nixon made a last futile attempt to win the war by undertaking a massive bombing campaign on North Vietnam.

,00




 In the wake of the 1964 Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, most Americans supported the troop build-up and American involvement in Vietnam.

,30










,56




,60
































24,














 Percentage who said sending troops to fight in Vietnam was a mistake Number of American serviceman in Vietnam Tons of bombs dropped on Vietnam













View the Closer Look Envisioning Evidence: Vietnam:
The War by the Numbers


 What do these data reveal about the stages of America’s involvement in Vietnam?



 CHAPTER 26

A NATION DIVIDED: THE VIETNAM WAR, 1945–1975

 Responding to Nixon’s earlier characterization of the protesters, the father of one of the dead told reporters, “My child was not a bum.” The cover of Life (26.14) showed terrified students trying to save the life of one victim, underscoring that the war’s killing had come home to America. This photo, along with the others inside the magazine, inspired musician Neil Young to write the song “Ohio” to protest the shootings, the war, and the Nixon administration.

 “Tin soldiers and Nixon coming, We’re finally on our own. This summer I hear the drumming, Four dead in Ohio.” Lyrics from Neil Young’s song “Ohio,” written in response to the Kent State shootings

 “A nation driven to use the weapons of war upon its youth is a nation on the edge of chaos,” concluded the presidential commission that investigated the Kent State incident. The Kent State shootings unmasked the growing “town and gown” divide over the war and latent anger at the peace movement. “They should have shot more of them,” suggested one Kent resident, still angry over the weekend riot. Radio stations refused to play Young’s “anti-Nixon” song. While protests over the shooting engulfed more than half the nation’s college campuses, workingclass unions staged counter-protests to support the war. In New York City hundreds of longshoremen wearing hard hats attacked students who were protesting the Cambodian invasion. During a subsequent meeting at the White House, sympathetic labor leaders presented the president with a “commander-in-chief” hard hat. The wave of protests after the Kent State shootings nonetheless bothered Nixon. At the end of a sleepless night on May 9, 1970, he made an impulsive decision to have his valet drive him, without his Secret Service detail, to the Lincoln Memorial at five o’clock in the morning so he could talk to the antiwar demonstrators camped out there. According to the protesters Nixon talked disjointedly about college sports and surfing and assured them that he shared their wish for peace in Vietnam. Despite his clumsy attempt to talk directly with peace activists, Nixon remained determined to see the war through to victory. Clinging to the belief that success would vindicate his methods, Nixon expanded the theater of war again in February 1971 by ordering an invasion of Laos. This time South Vietnamese troops fought on the ground with American air support. Once again, however, the hopes of permanently disrupting the Ho Chi Minh Trail bore meager results. Administration officials claimed that the Laos invasion illustrated the success of Vietnamization. Skeptics pointed to the sight of South Vietnamese soldiers clinging in panic to the skids of departing helicopters during their chaotic retreat back into South Vietnam. In 1971, antiwar demonstrators staged 62 demonstrations in Washington, D.C., bringing

26.14 Kent State University, 1970
 The images of students wounded and killed at Kent State University by National Guardsmen prompted fears that a war undertaken to protect American democracy was instead destroying it.

 What competing visions emerged in response to the Kent State killings?

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Protest, Counterculture, and the
 Antiwar Movement during the Vietnam Era

THE LONG ROAD TO PEACE

 over 100,000 demonstrators to the nation’s capital (26.15). That summer The New York Times published the Pentagon Papers, a secret Department of Defense study that criticized the way Kennedy and Johnson had handled the war, stoking the flames of antiwar sentiment in the wake of the Calley conviction, the failed Cambodian and Laos invasions, and the Kent State killings. The Pentagon Papers, leaked by Pentagon official Daniel Ellsberg, confirmed that presidents Kennedy and Johnson had intentionally lied to the public about the extent of previous American involvement in the war. Many Americans assumed that Nixon was also misleading the country. By now only 34 percent of Americans approved of his handling of the war. Controversy over the war also seeped into the military. Morale plummeted as soldiers became unwilling to risk their lives for a cause that the nation seemed poised to abandon. In 1970, the military reported nearly 200 incidents of “fragging,” which were deadly fraternal attacks by enlisted men on officers, named for the hand grenade fragments that did most of the damage. Escalating use of marijuana, opium, and heroin, all readily available in Vietnam, among servicemen was another sign of disintegrating discipline.

“How do you ask a man to be
 the last man to die for a mistake?” Vietnam veteran and antiwar activist JOHN KERRY

Withdrawal
 Nixon envisioned détente creating a new world order in which the United States used trade agreements and arms limitation treaties to curtail the expansionist ambitions of its enemies. His administration made significant headway with this approach in 1972, beginning with a highly publicized trip to China in February and culminating with a May summit meeting in Moscow. The carefully orchestrated pictures of the staunch anti-communist Nixon toasting China’s communist leader Mao during an official banquet and lauding the achievements of Chinese civilization during a trek to the Great Wall signaled an important turning point in



 Number of total number of annual demonstrations





































 Total annual numbers of demonstrators 100,000 or more 10,000 to 99,999 1,000 – 9,999

 Sino-American relations. Improved relations with China also demolished one of the main arguments used to justify the war in Vietnam. American leaders had always linked the war to the larger American goal of containing communism in Southeast Asia. They considered the region, rather than Vietnam itself, vital to American strategic interests overseas. Nixon now demonstrated that diplomacy could perhaps contain communism in Southeast Asia more effectively than war. Why then, many Americans wondered, was the nation still fighting in Vietnam? The improving relations between its communist benefactors and the United States alarmed North Vietnam. When the North Vietnamese grumbled about Mao shaking hands with Nixon, Mao advised them to sign a peace treaty, regroup while the Americans withdrew, and then resume the war. North Vietnam eventually followed Mao’s advice. They first tried, however, to replicate the political success of the Tet Offensive by launching a major invasion of the South. The North Vietnamese timed the so-called Easter Offensive of March 1972 to coincide with the start of the American presidential campaign. In response Nixon ordered a massive retaliation against North Vietnam that included bombing, a blockade, and mining a key harbor. Unlike Tet the Easter Offensive did not greatly alter the political equation in the United States or worldwide. At home Nixon’s approval ratings rose for defending South Vietnam from attack. Moving from his successful meeting in China to Moscow, the U.S.-Soviet summit proceeded as planned. When Nixon returned with the first disarmament agreement ever signed by the Soviet Union, he bolstered his image as a tough negotiator who got results. The Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT I) limited the number of intercontinental ballistic missiles

26.15 Antiwar
Demonstrations in
Washington, D.C.,
1965–1975.
 The overall number of demonstrations and marchers protesting the war peaked in 1969 and 1971.

 How did Nixon reshape the Cold War?



 CHAPTER 26

26.16 The Final
Evacuation
Fleeing Vietnamese
 scramble for a spot aboard an American helicopter as the North Vietnamese Army approaches Saigon in 1975, a final portrait of the failed American mission in Vietnam.

A NATION DIVIDED: THE VIETNAM WAR, 1945–1975

 and submarine-launched missiles each side could stockpile and the number of antimissile launching pads. Once again, however, Nixon’s diplomatic success undercut his argument that the United States needed an anti-Communist South Vietnam to win the Cold War. By summer 1972, both the United States and North Vietnam concluded that the costs of continued fighting had become too great. Recognizing that Democratic presidential candidate Senator George McGovern of South Dakota, a peace advocate who promised to withdraw U.S. troops from Vietnam, was trailing in the polls, the North Vietnamese decided to seek the best terms possible from Nixon. Although Nixon had discredited McGovern by suggesting that he would abandon American POWs in Vietnam, the president was also eager to negotiate. With his reelection assured Nixon wanted to fulfill his campaign promise to end the war, so he could pursue his larger goal of refashioning Cold War relations among the world’s superpowers. Despite this renewed willingness on both sides to negotiate, it still took months to seal the deal. The final 1973 peace treaty called for American withdrawal, allowed North Vietnamese troops to remain in South Vietnam, and left the existing South Vietnamese government in place.

 How did the Vietnam War finally end for the United States and the Vietnamese?

 All left the Paris negotiating table knowing that the cease-fire existed only on paper. The war would go on, only now without American advisors, soldiers, or pilots. Despite the spiral downward in Vietnam, Nixon retained a durable base of domestic support due to the success of détente with China and the Soviet Union and his effective portrayal of the antiwar movement as out of step with mainstream America. This political base, however, eroded quickly when he became embroiled in a major political scandal. The Watergate scandal (1972), a botched Republican-engineered break-in of the Democratic National Committee headquarters in Washington, D.C., forced Nixon to resign in 1974. On June 17, 1972, members of Nixon’s campaign staff had broken into the Watergate building office to fix broken wiretaps (listening devices on telephones) that they had installed during a previous burglary in May. Congressional challenges to his Vietnam policies and investigations into potential criminal activity by Nixon and members of his administration (see Chapter 28), weakened Nixon politically as he began his second term.

THE LONG ROAD TO PEACE

 In the midst of the Watergate crisis, Congress passed the War Powers Resolution to curtail presidential war-making powers. The 1973 law required congressional approval for any deployment of American troops overseas that lasted for more than 60 days. Critics pressed for even greater restrictions, arguing that the constitutional authority to declare war lay solely with Congress whether a war lasted 60 days or 60 years. Nixon countered that the law interfered with the president’s constitutional role as commander in chief of the armed forces. Ignoring Congress’s desire to end American involvement in Vietnam, he tried to continue funneling money and arms to South Vietnam. In response Congress sharply reduced funding for South Vietnam in 1974. When Nixon resigned the presidency on August 9, 1974 to avoid impeachment, VicePresident Gerald Ford assumed office. (Nixon had appointed Ford as his vice president in 1973 when Spiro Agnew resigned following an unrelated corruption scandal.) The political controversy at home and Americans’ widespread distrust of executive power in the wake of the failed war in Vietnam and the Watergate scandal weakened President Ford’s ability to respond to the imminent collapse of South Vietnam. In March 1975, North Vietnam renewed its offensive. With no American help in the offing, South Vietnam collapsed. Within eight weeks North Vietnamese troops neared Saigon. They walked along highways littered with boots and uniforms discarded by deserting South Vietnamese soldiers who hoped

Total Serving in the
 American Military (worldwide) Total Serving in Vietnam Total Killed in Vietnam Total Wounded Total Draft Evaders Vietnamese Casualties (North and South) Total Cost of War



 8.7 million men 250,00 women 3.4 million men 6,421 women 47,415 battle deaths 10,785 other causes 153,303 600,000 (tens of thousands fled to Canada) 2 million $173 billion

 to blend into the civilian population and avoid execution. Ho Chi Minh did not live to see the end of the war (he died in 1969), but the Communists renamed Saigon “Ho Chi Minh City” in his honor. Victory in the 30-year conflict did not end civilian suffering in Vietnam, however. Famine and prison camps caused thousands to flee in overcrowded boats to refugee camps in Thailand and Malaysia, where they faced an uncertain future waiting for permanent asylum in the United States or Europe. For America the war concluded with the image of South Vietnamese citizens climbing a ladder on the roof of the American Embassy in Saigon to board one of the American helicopters that flew American citizens and 150,000 South Vietnamese to safety in the final days of the war (26.16). The frantic evacuation was a disheartening end to America’s longest war to date, one that claimed the lives of 47,415 combatants and cost the nation $173 billion (26.17). How to remember such a divisive and controversial war continued to provoke debate within the United States. The 1982 Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C., listed all the names of American war dead on two black marble slabs that descended into the ground. “Hidden in a hole, as if in shame,” complained one veteran. “It is exactly the right memorial for that war,” countered another. Festering rumors that Vietnam was still holding American soldiers hostage deepened public bitterness against the nation’s former foe. The United States finally normalized diplomatic relations with Vietnam in 1995, 20 years after the fall of Saigon. It was time, one veteran wrote, “to recognize the truth. The war is over.”

26.17 The Human
 and Financial Cost of the Vietnam War, 1964–1973. The numbers of draft evaders fleeing to Canada illustrated the growing unpopularity of the war.

 Why does the Vietnam War continue to provoke controversy among Americans?



 CHAPTER 26

A NATION DIVIDED: THE VIETNAM WAR, 1945–1975
olution 1964 US air raids 1966-1968, 1972 
Dien Bien Phu


 DMZ, 17th parallel: Demilitarized zone established 1954

Khe Sanh


Hanoi


 efeat French 1954

 LAOS

Battle
 of citie

Invasion 1971 by South
 Vietnamese troops with American air support

Da Nang
First U
 troops

 ntiane

Haiphong
Harbor


Gulf of
To n k i n


 DMZ, 17th parallel: Demilitariz established 1954

Khe Sanh










 Truman offers aid to French in Vietnam

Geneva Accords


 Buddhist monk sets himself on fire to protest corrupt Diem Regime

Gulf of Tonkin Resolution


 United States begins financing 80 percent of France’s war effort

 Peace settlement between France and Vietminh divides Vietnam at seventeenth parallel

 Eisenhower uses domino theory to explain U.S. involvement in Vietnam

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Links defeating communism in Vietnam to protecting U.S. interests in Southeast Asia

 Kennedy supports overthrow of Diem

President Kennedy
 assassinated

Hainan
Island


Gulf of Tonkin Incident:
 results in Gulf of Tonkin Resolution 1964

 After alleged North Vietnamese attack on U.S. destroyers, Congress gives Johnson permission for military action in Vietnam

 Johnson resolves to stay the course in Vietnam

Review Questions
 1. How important were early decisions (1945–1954) in setting the course of U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War? 2. How did the Cold War influence presidential decision making about Vietnam from 1945 to 1975?

 4. How did competing images of the war create turmoil at home? 5. What do the debates surrounding the My Lai massacre and Kent State shootings reveal about Americans’ competing visions of the war?

 3. What military challenges did American troops face while fighting in Vietnam?

Key Terms
 Domino theory The fear that a communist Vietnam would open the door to a complete communist takeover of Southeast Asia. Geneva Accords (1954) Called for a temporary partition of Vietnam along the seventeenth parallel, with the Vietminh in the north and the French in the south, and a general election in two years to reunify the country under one government. Southeast Asian Treaty Organization (SEATO) 1954 alliance among the United States, Britain, France, Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, the Philippines, and Pakistan who pledged to “meet common danger” in Southeast Asia together. Gulf of Tonkin Resolution (1964) Gave Johnson permission “to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression” in Vietnam. Ho Chi Minh Trail A 600-mile North Vietnamese supply route that ran along the western border of Vietnam through neighboring Laos and Cambodia.

 Tet Offensive (1968) A massive, coordinated Communist assault against more than 100 cities and towns in South Vietnam. My Lai A Vietnamese village where American soldiers massacred 500 civilians in 1968. Vietnamization A Nixon administration policy that turned the bulk of the ground fighting over to the South Vietnamese Army. Détente Relaxing Cold War tensions by using diplomatic, economic, and cultural contacts to improve U.S. relations with China and the Soviet Union. Watergate scandal (1972) A botched Republican-engineered break-in of the Democratic National Committee headquarters in Washington, D.C. that forced Nixon to resign in 1974.

CHAPTER REVIEW







1973–1975


 American ground forces arrive in Vietnam

Tet Offensive


 U.S. forces invade Cambodia

Paris Peace Accords


 Major North Vietnamese attack convinces majority of Americans that war is futile

 National Guardsmen fire on protesters at Kent State University, killing four

 Ends direct American involvement in war

 Vietnam becomes America’s war

My Lai Massacre
 Controversy erupts over who was responsible for U.S. troops killing five hundred unarmed villagers



 North Vietnamese troops enter Saigon North Vietnam wins the war

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of A Nation Divided.

Questions for Analysis
 1. What increasing role did Eisenhower envision for the United States in Vietnam?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • Declaration of Independence for Vietnam (1945), p. 780

Read the Document Dwight D. Eisenhower, Dien Bien


 • George Ball’s Dissenting Opinion on Vietnam (1965), p. 786

Phu (1954), p. 782


• Martin Luther King Jr., “Conscience and the Vietnam War”
(1967), p. 797


 2. How did Johnson justify fighting in Vietnam?

• Richard Nixon, Vietnamization (1969), p. 801


 Read the Document oJohnson’s Defense of the

View the Closer Look


U.S.
Presence in Vietnam (1965), p. 787 

• Images as History: The Power of the Press in Vietnam, p. 794


 3. What differing views do these two songs offer on the war in Vietnam? View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Popular Music and the Vietnam War, p. 790

• Competing Visions: Who Was Responsible for the My Lai
Massacre?, p. 800
• Envisioning Evidence: Vietnam: The War by the Numbers, p. 803


View the Image
 • “Vietnam —I want out,” p. 796 • Kent State Demonstrations, p. 802

 4. What message does this film send to middle America about the peace movement? Watch the Video Protests Against the Vietnam War, p. 798

 5. What is the significance of My Lai? Watch the Video Video Lecture: Atrocity and Cover Up: My Lai Massacre, p. 799

View the Map Interactive Map: The Vietnam War, p. 793
Watch the Video Video Lecture: Protest, Counterculture, and
 the Antiwar Movement during the Vietnam Era, p. 804

How did the Great Society
 transform American society?

Nonviolence
Triumphant:
The Civil Rights
Movement,
1960–1965 p. 819


 Why were nonviolent civil rights protests successful in the 1960s?

The Fractured
Left p. 828


 Why did disagreements arise among liberals and radicals?

The End of an
Era p. 836


 Why did conservative ideals gain strength as the decade progressed?

 CHAPTER

The Liberal
Moment p. 812




 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 27

A
Decade of Discord  The Challenge of the 1960s In April 1968, civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. traveled to Memphis, Tennessee, to support a black garbage men’s strike. Around 6:00 p.m. on April 4, 1968, as King leaned over a balcony railing outside his second-story room at the Lorraine Motel to chat with two friends in the courtyard below, shots rang out. A wounded King collapsed on the floor of the balcony, and colleagues frantically tried to stem the bleeding with towels while waiting for the ambulance to arrive. Within an hour hospital doctors pronounced the 38-year-old minister dead. As news of King’s assassination spread, rioting erupted in black communities throughout the nation, and images of violence saturated the television airwaves. In this photo King’s 13-year-old daughter Yolanda sits inside a car peering at mourners, reflected in the car window, while her mother Coretta Scott King sits solemnly behind her as they leave King’s funeral in Atlanta, Georgia. This somber photograph, as much as the images of rioters, captured the crushing disappointment of dashed dreams. It was a sentiment shared by many Americans in the 1960s, white and black, who failed to fully realize their goals of either reforming America or ending the cultural turmoil. America was rife with discord during the 1960s. Much debate centered on liberalism and its willingness to use the government to protect civil rights and expand economic opportunity. Throughout the decade social reformers working within the liberal tradition advanced competing visions of social justice and shared prosperity. Some visions were bold; some, truly radical. King dreamed of using nonviolence to achieve racial equality; more militant activists advocated armed self-defense. Building on the reform legacies of the Progressive Era and the New Deal, Democratic Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson launched their own wars against poverty. Their legislative agendas were too timid for young radical activists, who wanted to revolutionize American capitalism. Feminists, Chicano activists, and Native American protesters also mobilized to demand equal rights. These visions of reform, especially the more radical revolutionary ones, appeared like nightmares to conservative segments of the population that abhorred liberalism. Southern segregationists organized to prevent government-mandated dismantling of Jim Crow, and white Northerners increasingly resented taxpayer-supported programs for unruly minorities. The rise of a hippie counterculture that emphasized love and pleasure convinced many working- and middle-class whites that liberalism meant the end of law and order and traditional values. If there was one point of agreement throughout the 1960s, it was that the political and cultural battles that defined the decade, for good or ill, transformed the nation. By 1970, frustration over unfulfilled dreams left Americans divided over whether the nation had changed too much or not enough.

 “We know through painful experience that freedom is never voluntarily given by the oppressor; it must be demanded by the oppressed.” MARTIN LUTHER KING JR., 1963





 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

The Liberal Moment
 The 1960s was the heyday of American liberalism, thanks in part to presidential reform agendas and to pivotal Supreme Court rulings. Presidents Kennedy and Johnson viewed themselves as heirs to the New Deal legacy, and they intended to follow in Harry Truman’s footsteps, who as president had desegregated the American military and secured federal funds for urban public housing, education, and public works projects. Kennedy and Johnson each believed in the power of the federal government to reform American society, but each faced intense resistance from conservatives who were certain that the less the government interfered in the economy or society, the better.

Kennedy and the
New Frontier
 Nearly 20 percent of Americans, 70 percent of them white, lived in dire poverty during the most prosperous moment in American history. Many middle- and upper-class Americans learned this startling statistic by reading Michael Harrington’s The Other America: Poverty in the United States (1962). Harrington documented the deteriorating schools, substandard hospitals, and dead-end jobs that created a cycle of poverty that continued unabated for generations. Just like Jacob Riis’s nineteenthcentury exposé, How the Other Half Lives (see Chapter 17), Harrington made the lives of the nation’s poor “visible” to the rest of the nation. Harrington claimed that a “culture of poverty” filled with extramarital sex, illegitimate children, and broken families created “a different kind of people” who did not share the values or outlook of middle-class America. Like Riis 70 years earlier, Harrington succeeded in awakening the social consciousness of affluent liberals, including John F. Kennedy. While campaigning in West Virginia during his 1960 presidential bid, Kennedy came face to face with appalling poverty as he sat and talked with coal miners, pictured here (27.1), about their lives. This moment of intimate conversation, one of his speechwriters noted, was “Kennedy at his best” as he gathered details about children who never drank 27.1 Presidential Candidate John F. Kennedy Speaking with Coal Miners, 1960 Kennedy’s personal touch and charisma helped him connect with voters, who educated him about the entrenched poverty endemic to many rural and industrial communities.

 What social problems associated with poverty became visible in the early 1960s?

View the Image New Frontier Legislation


THE LIBERAL MOMENT

 milk and their fathers’ dangerous work underground. “I was better off in the war than they are in the coal mines,” Kennedy, a World War II veteran, told his campaign staff after this photo was taken. “It’s not right.” “Let us begin anew,” John F. Kennedy told the nation in his 1961 inaugural address, setting a tone

 “Ask not what your country can do for you—ask what you can do for your country.” Kennedy’s Inaugural Address, 1961 of hope that inspired young people and liberals throughout the nation. After eight years with the moderate Republican Dwight Eisenhower in the White House, Kennedy wanted to reinvigorate the liberal agenda through a legislative program called the New Frontier. Kennedy’s proposed reforms included raising the minimum wage, reducing overcrowding in schools, and providing health care for the elderly. Kennedy advocated cutting taxes and increasing government spending to stimulate the economy, reasoning that as incomes rose more tax revenue would flow into federal coffers to pay for these programs. Kennedy also needed large sums for the ongoing space race with the Soviet Union, begun when the Soviets launched Sputnik in 1957 (see Chapter 24). The Soviets sent the first astronauts into space in 1961, prompting Kennedy to announce that the United States intended to recover its reputation as the world’s technological leader by putting a man on the moon. The youngest elected president in American history, Kennedy’s charisma and idealism inspired many baby boomers, who were just reaching adolescence or entering college. Thousands rushed to join the Peace Corps, an agency established by Kennedy that sent recent college graduates to work on humanitarian projects in developing nations. “I really believed that I was going to change the world,” recalled one teenager. By 1970, over 10,000 Peace Corps volunteers had traveled abroad to teach, build hospitals, set up water treatment plants, and establish irrigation systems. Kennedy raised unemployment and Social Security benefits and the minimum wage, but he had trouble implementing other parts of his

Read the Document John F. Kennedy, Inaugural
Address (1961)




 liberal legislative program. Unskilled in lobbying legislators, just over one-third of his proposals became law. Conservative congressmen balked at using deficit spending to fund the tax cuts and programs Kennedy proposed. Southerners objected to Northerners’ insistence that federal education funds go only to racially integrated schools, while Protestants resisted offering public monies to private Catholic parochial schools. It was one of the “great ironies of American politics,” a New York Times reporter noted, that “JFK, the immensely popular president, could not reach his legislative goals.”

A
Liberal Court  Under the leadership of Chief Justice Earl Warren from 1953–1969, the Supreme Court became an aggressive champion of individual rights, fostering the liberal agenda more successfully than Kennedy and Democrats in Congress. Warren believed that the Constitution gave the government the power, and the responsibility, to protect the relatively powerless against oppression by the majority. By rendering opinions on a wide range of social justice issues, the Warren Court brought about a legal revolution in the United States that permanently altered American schools, politics, the criminal justice system, and cultural norms. Northern liberals cheered these decisions, but conservatives in both parties viewed the Warren Court as an activist court, rewriting rather than upholding the Constitution. In 1954, the Brown v. Board of Education decision (see Chapter 25) paved the way for school desegregation. Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, the court dismantled Jim Crow piece by piece, striking down segregated interstate and city buses, upholding the rights of civil rights protesters to hold sit-ins, and embracing mid-1960s federal laws that desegregated public places and guaranteed the right to vote as constitutional. Another innovative judicial premise, the right to privacy, accompanied the Supreme Court’s new support for civil rights. The court struck down state laws that outlawed possession of obscene publications, prohibited the use of contraception, and prevented interracial marriages. Individual Americans, the court ruled, had the right to decide what to read, to use birth control, and to marry whom they wanted. Other decisions redefined how the police arrested and interrogated suspected criminals. The police now had to inform individuals of their constitutional rights to have a state-funded

 Why did many young people find Kennedy inspiring?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

The 1964 Election














27.2 Major
Decisions of the
Warren Court
The Supreme
 Court presided over a major “rights revolution” in the 1960s.

 When Lyndon B. Johnson (LBJ) assumed office after Kennedy’s assassination on November 22, 1963 (see Chapter 26), he took up the slain presiBaker v. Carr gave federal courts right to intervene if states dent’s liberal agenda. “Let us continue,” created voting districts of unequal size. Johnson proclaimed, echoing Kennedy’s earlier entreaty, “let us begin.” Unlike Engel v. Vitale outlawed official school prayer in Kennedy, Johnson excelled at forging public schools. the deals needed to move legislation through Congress, and under his stewGideon v. Wainwright gave accused felons the right to free legal counsel. ardship liberalism gained tremendous momentum. Over the next few months, Griswold v. Connecticut established “right to privacy,” Johnson used the nation’s grief to pooverturning state laws banning use of contraception. litical advantage by cajoling Congress into enacting key pieces of Kennedy’s Miranda v. Arizona required that police inform suspect legislative initiatives, including civil of right to remain silent and have a lawyer present during rights legislation, a tax cut, and federally police questioning. funded public housing. Johnson also announced his own War on Poverty, Loving v. Virginia prohibited state laws banning creating an Office of Economic Opinterracial marriages. portunity that formed the Jobs Corps to teach inner-city youth vocational skills and created Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA), a domestic Peace Corps that sent privileged young adults to work on attorney present during questioning and to not community projects in impoverished urban and answer questions that might incriminate them in rural areas. a crime. Despite these successes, Johnson knew that “for The court also championed freedom of speech, millions of Americans I was still illegitimate . . . ruling against Red Scare–era laws that required a pretender to the throne,” because he had not been Communist Party members to register with the elected president. Johnson saw the 1964 election government and striking down official school as an opportunity to validate his presidency. His prayer. For years children across America had campaign, however, got off to a rocky start. LBJ begun their school days by reciting the “Pledge of expected to lose Southern votes for having openly Allegiance,” to which Congress added the words supported federal civil rights legislation. Segrega“under God” in 1954 to contrast American religitionist Alabama Governor George Wallace’s strong osity with the godless communism embraced by showing in a few Northern Democratic primaries the Soviet Union. Most schoolchildren then sang was unwelcome evidence that the president’s civil a patriotic song like “America,” and some conrights record might cost him votes in Northern cluded this opening ritual with a short reading white working-class ethnic neighborhoods and some from the Bible. The court’s ruling against official middle-class suburbs. school prayer in Engel v. Vitale (1962) is explored Racial controversy also rocked the Democratic in Choices and Consequences: Is School Prayer Party’s presidential nominating convention in Constitutional? The decision ignited a firestorm of Atlantic City when two separate delegations from controversy among conservative Protestants and Mississippi appeared. Disenfranchised blacks Catholics. President Kennedy, however, endorsed the decision. Having encountered anti-Catholic big- could not vote in Mississippi’s official Democratic otry during his 1960 presidential campaign, he wel- primary, so the Mississippi Freedom Democratic comed the chance to make religion a strictly private Party (MFDP) had held a shadow primary to elect their own delegates. This delegation challenged the matter as he geared up for his reelection campaign. all-white Democratic Party’s claim to represent The chart, Major Decisions of the Warren Court the state. (27.2), summarizes key court decisions. Brown v. Board of Education outlawed racial segregation in public schools.

 How did the Warren Court advance the liberal reform agenda?

Read the Document Fannie Lou Hammer, Voting
Rights in Mississippi (1964)


THE LIBERAL MOMENT



Choices and Consequences
IS SCHOOL PRAYER CONSTITUTIONAL?
In 1962, parents in New York State challenged the constitutionality of the short nondenominational prayer that the state Board of Regents had adopted in 1951 for use in the public schools. The question was whether government-directed prayer violated the First Amendment clause that “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.” The Fourteenth Amendment made this clause applicable to state law. 
Choices




 The prayer was constitutional because students were not required to recite it.





 An official prayer, regardless of its content, violated the First Amendment.

 School prayer simply recognized the importance of religion in American society without establishing an official religion.

Decision
 In Engel v. Vitale (1962) the Supreme Court ruled 6 to 1 that state-directed school prayer was unconstitutional. Justice Hugo Black wrote the majority opinion, stating that the First Amendment prohibited “official prayers for any group of American people to recite as part of a religious program carried on by government.”

Consequences
 The Warren Court received more mail opposing this case than any other. In 1963, the court also banned reciting the Lord’s Prayer and Bible-reading in public school, ruling that to remain neutral the government could not support “the tenets of one or all religions.” Outrage over school prayer rulings helped forge a new political coalition between Southern fundamentalist Protestants and Northern Catholics, whose grassroots activism against liberalism contributed to the conservative right’s resurgence in the late 1960s. Subsequent court decisions in the 1980s and 1990s prohibited moments of silence for private prayer, minister-led prayers at high school graduations, and student-led prayers at high school football games.

 First-graders praying

Continuing Controversies
 Does school prayer violate the First Amendment? Those who answer “yes” believe that the Founding Fathers included the establishment clause in the Constitution because the union of government and religion often leads to persecution of those not adhering to mainstream religious views. Freedom of

 religion requires a completely secular government that neither advances nor inhibits religious beliefs. Many conservatives argue that the court’s decisions violated their First Amendment right to exercise free speech and destroyed the spiritual heritage of the nation that stretched back to the Pilgrims.

 Why did so many Americans object to the Supreme Court’s ruling against school prayer?



 CHAPTER 27

27.3 Sequence
 of Stills from the Daisy Girl Campaign Ad, This Democratic campaign ad implied that Republican candidate Barry Goldwater would start a nuclear war if elected. The ad script included these directions: “Ominous male voice counts down launch sequence, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. Close up of girl’s face as camera progressively zooms in on her eye. Overlay an atomic explosion into the pupil of her eye.”

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

 In deciding which delegation to seat, the convention’s Credentials Committee heard gripping testimony from MFDP delegate Fannie Lou Hamer. Thanks to the live television feed covering the proceedings, Americans throughout the nation heard her describe being beaten, losing her job, and receiving a $9,000 water bill even though her house had no running water—all retribution for trying to register to vote. “Is this America, the land of the free and the home of the brave, where we are threatened daily because we want to live as decent human beings?” she asked before the cameras. Suddenly the networks broke away for an impromptu presidential news conference that Johnson had called to interrupt coverage of Hamer’s moving personal story. Johnson did not want the convention and his subsequent campaign to center on civil rights. To end the matter, he tried to broker a deal off-camera. When the MFDP rejected the offer of two delegate seats, the all-white Mississippi delegation took the floor. In the election of 1964, the Democrat and Republican parties fielded candidates who offered starkly different visions of the role that government should play in American society. Johnson spoke of creating a Great Society with social welfare reforms that would make the amenities of modern life—a decent standard of living, education, health care, clean water—available to all Americans. Like turn-of-the-century Populists and Progressives, and 1930s New Dealers, he wanted to use the power of the federal government to rein in the wealthy and help economically disadvantaged Americans. Having begun his congressional career as an avid New Dealer in the 1930s, Johnson shared Franklin D. Roosevelt’s desire to provide the deserving poor with a decent standard of living. Johnson, however, believed even more strongly than previous generations of liberal reformers in the ability of the government to improve the quality of life in America. Under Johnson the federal government began com-

 What competing views of government emerged during the 1964 presidential election?

 bating pollution, supporting the arts, and planting trees and flowers along the nation’s highways—a beautification project strongly endorsed by his wife, Lady Bird Johnson. Johnson aspired to do more than put food in people’s bellies; he also wanted to nurture their spirits. Barry Goldwater, a conservative Republican senator from Arizona, offered a radically different view of what responsibilities the government should assume. Instead of more government Goldwater proposed dismantling most of the New Deal, including Social Security, and opposed federal civil rights laws, because he saw them as the first step toward creating “a police state.” “My aim is not to pass laws but to repeal them,” he declared. Goldwater spoke for the radical right, staunch conservatives who felt that the government’s interference in the economy and society did more harm than good. His extreme conservative views, however, alarmed prominent moderate Republicans who openly supported Johnson. In the campaign the Democrats astutely used Goldwater’s most extreme pronouncements against him, making the liberal Johnson look almost moderate in comparison. Amplifying a remark by Goldwater that NATO commanders should have the authority to use nuclear weapons, a Democratic television campaign ad pictured a little girl counting as she picked the petals off a daisy (27.3). When she reached nine the camera froze on the image of her uplifted face before dissolving into a countdown to a nuclear bomb explosion. As the mushroom cloud dissipated, the screen turned dark and these words appeared: “Vote for President Johnson on November 3. The stakes are too high for you to stay home.” The ad provoked its own firestorm of controversy and only aired once. It succeeded, however, in planting the image of Goldwater as a dangerous extremist who might lead the nation into nuclear war.

Watch the Video Lyndon Johnson Presidential Campaign
Ad: Little Girl vs. Mushroom Cloud


THE LIBERAL MOMENT



 “In Your Heart You Know He’s Right.” Republican billboards

 “In Your Guts You Know He’s Nuts.” Democratic bumper stickers Dueling campaign slogans in the 1964 presidential election centered on Republican candidate Barry Goldwater

 Johnson won the election with over 61 percent of the popular vote, the largest percentage in American history. The Democrats also widened their control of Congress, strengthening Johnson’s hand. Johnson knew that he had to strike immediately to enact his legislative agenda. “Hurry, boys, hurry,” he told his staff. “Get that legislation up to the hill and out. Eighteen months from now Landslide Lyndon will be Lame-Duck Lyndon.”

The Great Society
 Admiring the trees and landscaping along a national highway, reading a food label listing nutritional content in the supermarket, buying unleaded gas at a service station, and watching a documentary on the Public Broadcasting System (PBS): these are all experiences of modern life made possible by Johnson’s Great Society. Reflecting liberal faith in the power of the government to do good, the adherents of the Great Society hoped to remove the causes of debilitating poverty by improving the nation’s educational system, providing health care to the aged, disabled, and indigent, and creating a new cabinet-level position in housing and urban affairs

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: The Federal
Government, Friend or Foe?


 to oversee housing and economic relief to struggling cities. Johnson’s Great Society also included a new Department of Transportation to manage the federal funds pouring into highway construction and landscaping. Johnson worked hard to create consensus for his liberal ideals. He offered conservative industrialists tax breaks in return for supporting his social welfare programs, arguing that his programs would create highly skilled workers who consumed more. “Doing something about poverty is economical in the long run,” he told them. From his long years in Congress, Johnson knew how to lobby legislators. To secure a needed vote, Johnson brought legislators to the White House and subjected them to “The Treatment,” a mixture of cajoling, horse-trading, and intimidation. One congressman recalled the 6’3” Johnson grabbing him by the lapels of his coat, pulling him close and holding his face inches away while he “talked and talked. I figured it was either getting drowned or joining.” Johnson pushed through over 65 percent of his proposals, a level of success only surpassed by Franklin D. Roosevelt’s 80 percent legislative passage rate. Unable to stop the Great Society juggernaut, Republicans complained bitterly of

 Why was Johnson such an effective politician?



 CHAPTER 27



A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

 Economic Opportunity Act—created VISTA, a domestic version of the Peace Corps, and community-based antipoverty programs that residents designed and administered. Wilderness Act—protected public lands from development to preserve their unspoiled state.



 Social Security Act—created Medicare, government health insurance for Americans over 65, and Medicaid, government health insurance for the poor. Department of Housing and Urban Development—established a new Cabinet—level position to administer Great Society legislation intended to clear slums and build new public housing. Elementary and Secondary Education Act—allocated $1 billion to improve education for impoverished children. Higher Education Act—created federal scholarships and loans for students in need. Immigration Act—eliminated national quotas, set new guidelines favoring family unification and desirable occupational skills. Highway Beautification Act—provided funds for landscaping along nation’s highways. Motor Vehicle Air Pollution Control Act—set first federal standards for motor vehicle emissions.



 The Department of Transportation—established a new Cabinetlevel position to administer federal funds to improve highways and urban mass transit. Fair Packaging and Labeling Act—required manufacturers to label number of servings and nutritional information on food packages.



 Public Broadcasting Act—created public television and radio stations dedicated to educational programming.

27.4 Key Great Society Legislative Achievements
 The Great Society built on liberal legislation initiated during the Progressive Era and New Deal to expand the federal government’s role in society.

 “the three-B Congress—bullied, badgered, and brainwashed.” After pushing first for federal aid to schools, Johnson turned to providing health care to senior citizens and the poor. Facing opposition from health insurance companies and medical professionals to government-provided health care, Johnson compromised. Medicare, government-funded health

 What social problems did Great Society laws and programs address?

 insurance for the elderly, reimbursed doctors and hospitals whatever they charged senior citizens instead of establishing government rates. Johnson also agreed to let the states, not the federal government, run Medicaid, which provided health services to the poor. In creating the Great Society, Johnson wanted to restore America’s identity as the land of opportunity for immigrants. The Immigration Act of 1965 eliminated the quota system established in the 1920s that set stringent caps on immigration from Southern and Eastern Europe and barred all Asian immigration (see Chapter 21). In the first great wave of immigration since the 1910s, unprecedented numbers of Koreans, Chinese, Filipinos, and Vietnamese migrated to the United States over the next 30 years. Whether immigration benefited or hurt the nation again became a topic on which Americans offered competing visions (see Chapter 29). By detailing the destructive impact of pesticides, Rachel Carson’s best-selling book Silent Spring (1962) helped create a politically favorable climate for the environmental regulation that Johnson proposed. Silent Spring vividly detailed the destructive impact of pesticides on native birds, provoking alarm over the possibility of a future silent spring when no bird songs would be heard. Johnson noted that Americans had always been proud of “America the beautiful,” but polluted air, disappearing forests, and filthy rivers had tarnished this image. The air in some cities was so bad that motorists had to use their headlights after noon. The pronouncement that Lake Erie was “dead” and the sight of oil slicks on the Cuyahoga River in Cleveland burning for eight days after a man tossed a lit cigar into the water underscored the environmental deterioration. These ecological catastrophes helped spawn an exploding grassroots environmental movement that included Greenpeace, a radical direct-action group, and a resurgent Sierra Club, a long-standing conservation society. Responding to environmental activism and growing middle-class concerns, Congress enacted bipartisan environmental measures that required pollution controls on cars and established national standards for acceptable air and water pollution. Johnson also created federally protected wilderness areas to safeguard endangered domestic species at risk of extinction, such as the whooping crane. The Great Society chart (27.4) contains a list of Johnson’s most significant legislation.

Read the Document Rachael Carson, Silent Spring (1962)


NONVIOLENCE TRIUMPHANT: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT, 1960–1965



Nonviolence Triumphant: The Civil
Rights Movement, 1960–1965
 Kennedy’s and Johnson’s strong civil rights agendas came in response to carefully planned grassroots protests against segregation and disenfranchisement in Alabama and Mississippi. These highly visible demonstrations imperiled many civil rights workers, and their leaders hoped to win support from white liberals and moderates nationally by showing them the face of Southern segregationists’ resistance. Putting increased pressure on the federal government to act, the Civil Rights Movement ended legalized segregation and disenfranchisement by 1965. March on Washington 1963; Civil Rights Act 1964; Voting Rights Act 1965

IOWA NEBRASKA

Washington, D.C.


OHIO ILLINOIS

 INDIANA

 MARYLAND

WEST VIRGINIA VIRGINIA

 KANSAS

 DELAWARE

27.5 Civil Rights
Milestones, 1961–1965
The Civil Rights Movement
 spread across the Deep South in the early 1960s, pushing to end legalized segregation and disenfranchisement.

KENTUCKY MISSOURI NORTH CAROLINA ARKANSAS OKLAHOMA

 Police use fire hoses and dogs against protesters 1963

 TENNESSEE

Freedom Riders
 attacked 1961

Anniston


SOUTH CAROLINA

Rights Milestones,
1961–1965” (27.5)
ATLANTIC
Philadelphia Selma 3 civil rights workers murdered depicts where pivduring Freedom Summer 1964 Montgomery OCEAN Jackson ALABAMA otal demonstrations LOUISIANA TEXAS MISSISSIPPI occurred. Freedom Summer 1964; voter registration projects Selma to Montgomery The immediate and Freedom Schools March 1965 FLORIDA issue centered on the enforcement of recent Gulf of Mexico Supreme Court rulings 1961 Freedom Rides that desegregated bus terCORE (Congress of Racial Equality) route from Washington DC to Birmingham AL minals serving interstate SNCC (Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee) travelers. Faced with Kennedy’s from Birmingham AL to Jackson MS reluctance to act, the interracial Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) organized the Freedom Rides, interstate bus journeys by black and white activists who entered segregated bus waiting rooms together throughout the South. “We felt we could count on the racists of the South to create a crisis, so that the federal government would be compelled to enforce the law,” the African Inspired by Kennedy’s pronouncement during his inaugural address that “the torch has been passed to American CORE leader James Farmer recalled. The Freedom Rides began when 13 whites and a new generation of Americans,” civil rights leadblacks (including Farmer and John Lewis, a veteran ers expected the new president to aggressively seek of the 1960 Nashville sit-ins) boarded an interstate an end to Jim Crow. Kennedy, however, adopted a bus on May 4, 1961, in Washington, D.C., headed cautious stance, and like his predecessors, remained for the Deep South. Expecting the worst, several silent on civil rights. The movement would have to riders left sealed letters for their families to open compel the new president to act. The map of “Civil Birmingham 
 GEORGIA

Kennedy and the
Freedom Riders


 What was the purpose of the Freedom Rides?



 CHAPTER 27

27.6 Freedom
Riders Attacked in
Anniston, Alabama,
 Traumatized civil rights activists sit on the ground after a mob firebombed the bus the Freedom Riders were riding to protest the segregation of interstate bus facilities.

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

 if they were killed. After a smooth ride through the upper South, in Atlanta the Freedom Riders decided to take two separate buses into the heart of the rigidly segregated Deep South. As the first bus carrying Freedom Riders entered the depot in Anniston, Alabama, a mob pelted the bus with stones and slashed its tires. The driver drove away without stopping, pursued by 50 cars carrying vigilantes. When a flat tire obliged him to stop along a deserted country road, a firebomb forced the Freedom Riders off the bus and into the waiting gauntlet of sticks and crowbars. State troopers arrived in time to save the lives of the traumatized Freedom Riders, two of whom sit stunned on the ground in this photo (27.6) of the bus burning. Meanwhile the second bus arrived in Birmingham, where Ku Klux Klansmen beat white Freedom Rider James Peck, a 47-year-old labor and peace activist, when he entered a white-only waiting room with a black colleague. “When you go somewhere looking for trouble, you usually find it,” the governor of Alabama remarked unsympathetically. A photo of Klan members beating Peck accompanied the front-page story in the New York Times that informed President Kennedy about the organized attacks on the Freedom Riders. Still dealing with the fallout from the Bay of Pigs invasion that had ended in disaster four weeks earlier and preparing for a summit with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev (see Chapter 25), Kennedy urged the Freedom Riders to call off the rest of their scheduled journey. Instead members of the Student

 Who made key choices that affected the course and outcome of the Freedom Rides?

 Non-Violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), the student-run civil rights group founded in 1960 during the sit-ins (see Chapter 25), rushed to Birmingham to ride alongside John Lewis, a founding member of SNCC, taking the place of riders unable or unwilling to continue.

 “We can’t let them stop us with violence. If we do, the movement is dead,” SNCC leader DIANE NASH upon resuming the Freedom Rides, 1961 Avoiding a violent confrontation became the administration’s priority. Attorney General Robert Kennedy (the president’s brother) secured a promise from the governor of Alabama that state troops would protect the riders. When the state reneged on this promise and another savage attack occurred at the Montgomery, Alabama bus depot, Robert Kennedy sent 600 federal marshals to protect the riders as they traveled to the Mississippi border. Rather than allowing vigilantes to attack the riders, Mississippi authorities took a different tack. As the riders filed off the bus in Jackson, police escorted them into waiting patrol cars. Most of the riders spent four months in jail for violating segregation laws. The Freedom Rides continued through the summer of 1961, and eventually 300 white and black protesters took part. In the fall the Interstate Commerce Commission required the integration of all interstate travel facilities. The Freedom Rides, however, did not achieve the organizers’ broader goals of securing President Kennedy’s enthusiastic support for the Civil Rights Movement. Despite his own integrationist views, President Kennedy remained preoccupied with protecting his white Democratic Southern base and feared that open discussion of America’s racial problems provided fodder for Soviet propaganda. It would take a shocking visual demonstration of racial violence in Birmingham, Alabama, to make him a champion of civil rights.

NONVIOLENCE TRIUMPHANT: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT, 1960–1965

Birmingham, 1963
In 1963, the Southern Christian Leadership
 Conference (SCLC), Martin Luther King Jr.’s church-based civil rights organization, unfurled a carefully coordinated campaign to desegregate Birmingham, Alabama, perhaps the most segregated city in the nation. “We were trying to launch a systematic, wholehearted battle against segregation that would set the pace for the nation,” explained the Birmingham SCLC leader Fred Shuttlesworth. Volatile Police Chief Bull Connor made the city an especially dangerous place to launch such a protest. SCLC accurately predicted that they would gain the attention of the president once the world saw Connor’s police attacking nonviolent demonstrators with highpower water hoses and dogs. Television was vital to this campaign: The images of violence pouring into living rooms would make it impossible for moderate white Americans to ignore the nation’s racial problems. In April 1963, King and the SCLC initiated their Birmingham campaign with economic boycotts and sit-ins. Press coverage increased when King and Shuttlesworth led a march in defiance of a state injunction that prohibited public demonstrations. Police immediately arrested and jailed the pair. King timed his arrest to occur on Good Friday, the day that Jesus died on the cross, using religious symbolism to underscore the immorality of racial persecution. As King sat in solitary confinement, the Birmingham News published an open letter to him from white liberal Southern clergymen who criticized the demonstrations as “unwise and untimely” for trying to provoke hardcore segregationists. The opinion of liberal and moderate Southern whites mattered to King. The nonviolent strategy depended on swaying those who may have traditionally supported segregation but were not die-hard racists. Visitors to King smuggled out his response, written on the margins of newspapers and scraps of toilet paper during his eight-day jail stay. King’s “Letter from a Birmingham Jail” did not influence events in Birmingham (by the time it was published, the protests had ended), but the text was one of his most eloquent statements on the dehumanizing aspects of racial discrimination. “For years now I have heard the word ‘Wait!’ It rings in the ear of every Negro

 with piercing familiarity. This ‘Wait’ has almost always meant ‘Never,’ ” King wrote. How would whites feel about sleeping in their cars when traveling because “no motel will accept you,” telling their children that they could not go to the segregated amusement parks advertised on television, and “living constantly on tiptoe stance, never quite knowing what to expect next”? These were the reasons, King explained, “why we find it difficult to wait.” Hoping to stop downtown demonstrations that were keeping shoppers away and worried that the federal government might intervene, moderate white business owners initiated secret talks with SCLC leaders without Chief Connor’s knowledge. To increase pressure on the businessmen, SCLC went ahead with marches despite lukewarm support from Birmingham churches and adults. To fill the ranks Jim Bevel, another veteran of the Nashville sit-ins, proposed turning Birmingham into a “children’s crusade” by recruiting from the city’s high schools and, if necessary, middle and elementary schools. “A boy from high school has the same effect in terms of being in jail, in terms of putting pressure on the city, as his father, and yet there’s no economic threat to the family, because the father is still on the job,” Bevel argued. On May 3, 1963, the second day of the protests, Carolyn McKinstry, like many others, left her high school without telling her parents that she was joining the demonstrations. When the teenagers arrived downtown, Connor was waiting with water hoses and police dogs. A shocked nation viewed television and newspaper images of firefighters directing torrents of water at McKinstry and her friends and police dogs biting protesters. (See Images as History: Birmingham, 1963, page 822.) As the SCLC had hoped, Northerners reacted with outrage to this blatant display of police brutality, while Southern moderates worried that Connor’s heavy-handed tactics would invite more federal scrutiny of Southern politics and racial customs. The Civil Rights Movement scored a major victory in Birmingham. Besides winning a commitment to desegregate lunch counters and schools and the promise of jobs, the protests renewed President Kennedy’s interest in civil rights. Concerned about losing momentum in the Cold War, he asked the nation: “Are we to say to the world—and much more importantly to each other—that this is the land of the free, except for the Negroes … ?”

 Read the Document Martin Luther King Jr., “Letter from Birmingham City Jail” (1963)



 Why did the Birmingham campaign succeed?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

Images as History
 BIRMINGHAM, 1963 In Birmingham civil rights activists developed a strategy that included using television and news photos to their advantage. The Civil Rights Movement got exactly the images the activists wanted in 1963 when the Birmingham Police Chief Bull Connor unleashed extreme violence against protesters in the downtown area. How important

 “The water hoses hurt a lot,” recalled Carolyn McKinstry, the high school sophomore girl pictured here.

 was the press to the success of the Birmingham campaign? Why did the public react so strongly to these photos? As a white child in rural Alabama, Life photojournalist Charles Moore had accepted segregation “as the way things were.” Birmingham was a turning point in his own evolving social consciousness:

 Three teenage protesters clung to a doorway as water whipped their bodies, an ordeal that Moore immortalized in this iconic photograph of the Birmingham protests.

•
•
•


•
Fire Hoses, Birmingham, 1963


 McKinstry remained “proud of what I had done,” but afterwards questioned “the tactics that they [SCLC] were using because I think I felt that you could actually be hurt.”

 Does knowing more about McKinstry and Moore alter this photograph’s meaning?

 Moore avoided taking photos that might send a mixed message to the public. He took no pictures of students, only partly schooled in nonviolent techniques, who threw pieces of concrete at the police—even after a slab hit and injured him.

Watch the Video Video Lecture: Photographing the Civil
Rights Movement, Birmingham, 1963


NONVIOLENCE TRIUMPHANT: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT, 1960–1965

 “My emotional involvement in the story grew as I saw what was happening.” On the afternoon of May 3, 1963, Moore arrived in downtown Birmingham just as firefighters turned their high-pressure hoses and police dogs on teenage demonstrators. When Moore’s photos appeared in Life, a magazine read by half of American adults in the 1960s, his images, Movement leaders wanted liberal and moderate Americans to blame the police for escalating the violence in Birmingham, and Moore’s pictures left little room for an alternative explanation.



 along with television coverage of the mayhem, helped transform Birmingham from a local crisis into an event that prompted national soulsearching about democracy in America. Inspired by these images, civil rights activists initiated 1,000 demonstrations in nearly 100 cities throughout the South. The police arrested Moore when he refused to stop taking pictures. “It was scary to be a victim” of abusive police, Moore recalled, an experience that strengthened his solidarity with the protesters.

•
•


•
•


 “The sight of snarling dogs, and the possibility of dogs ripping flesh, was revolting to me,” Moore recollected.

 Moore sided with the protesters, but the story that accompanied his photos blamed extremists on both sides for the melee. “[The pictures] are frightening because of the brutal methods being used by white policemen in Birmingham, Ala. against Negro demonstrators. They are frightening because the Negro strategy of ‘nonviolent direct action’ invites that very brutality—and welcomes it as a way to promote the Negroes’ cause, which, under the law, is right,” Life told readers.

View the Closer Look Images as History: Birmingham, 1963


Police Dogs, Birmingham, 1963


 How did Life magazine and Moore differ over the meaning of this photo?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

 In his televised address to the nation Kennedy proposed a civil rights act that would outlaw racially segregated public facilities nationwide. The white supremacist response came immediately. The next day a Klansman shot and killed Medgar Evers, the head of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in Mississippi, as Evers stood in the driveway of his Jackson home. Evers’s killing was the first, but not the last, assassination of a major political figure of the 1960s.

March on Washington


27.7 March on
Washington, 1963
Martin Luther
 King Jr. speaks to a reporter while standing inside the Lincoln Memorial to underscore that 100 years after Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation blacks were still secondclass citizens in the segregated South.

 Birmingham had given the civil rights cause national and international visibility, and Evers’s shocking assassination reinforced Kennedy’s determination to enact a sweeping civil rights bill. Southern Democratic senators were equally prepared to filibuster to prevent its passage. Intent on winning this legislative battle, King and other civil rights leaders decided to organize the March on Washington, a massive demonstration in the nation’s capital that would demand passage of a federal civil rights act. Adopting the slogan, “Jobs and Freedom,” organizers underscored the link between greater economic opportunity and civic equality. The organizing committee included African American labor leader A. Philip Randolph, founder of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters. Randolph had cancelled his own March on Washington in 1941 when President Franklin D. Roosevelt agreed to guarantee fair protection at the workplace during World War II (see Chapter 23). On August 28, 1963, in the nation’s largest political protest to date, more

 What symbolism and rhetoric connected the 1963 March on Washington to the past and future?

 than 200,000 marchers walked from the Washington Monument to the Lincoln Memorial to listen to three hours of music and speeches. This photo (27.7) of Martin Luther King Jr. talking to a reporter reveals why organizers put their speakers’ platform before the Lincoln Memorial. On the hundredth anniversary of the Emancipation Proclamation, the larger-than-life statue of President Abraham Lincoln in the background offered a potent reminder of how long African Americans had waited for equal rights. “I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character,” declared King in the day’s most memorable speech. The march received the national media’s full attention. It was also among the first events that television viewers throughout the world could watch live, thanks to a new communications satellite. From Cairo to Amsterdam people participated in sympathy marches before American embassies and sent petitions to Kennedy. By August nearly 78 percent of white Americans believed that images of racial discrimination in the United States made it harder for the nation to achieve its Cold War foreign policy goals. Two weeks after the March on Washington, a bomb tossed into Birmingham’s Sixteenth Street Baptist Church killed four girls attending Sunday school. Carolyn McKinstry, the young woman that Charles Moore had photographed during the Birmingham protests, was in the church at the time, a friend to the girls. The attack convinced her that she too would one day die at the hands of white supremacists. “I guess this bombing is Birmingham’s answer to the march,” exclaimed an enraged Anne Moody, who was working on a voter registration campaign in Mississippi. President

 Watch the Video Martin Luther King Jr.’s Speech at the March on Washington, August, 1963

NONVIOLENCE TRIUMPHANT: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT, 1960–1965



 Kennedy’s assassination two months later only underscored her growing conviction that “nonviolence is through.”

Freedom Summer
 With SCLC’s Birmingham campaign to desegregate public facilities successfully concluded, the spotlight turned to Mississippi. Freedom Summer, a multipronged attack on white supremacy in Mississippi during the summer of 1964, was a turning point in the Civil Rights Movement. It forced the federal government to deepen its commitment to equal rights, laid bare the rising tensions within the Civil Rights Movement, and trained a generation of student activists who would soon spearhead new leftist and feminist movements. In the summer of 1964, the Council of Federated Organizations (COFO) coordinated the efforts of civil rights groups to launch Freedom Summer, including SNCC and CORE. With ambivalence SNCC recruited many Northern whites to work on the voter registration projects. SNCC had reluctantly concluded that the national media, which had started to ignore blacks-only protests, would pay attention to Freedom Summer only if white students

 “At night, people should not sit in their rooms without drawn shades.” Rule from CORE security handbook meant to protect Freedom Summer workers from sniper attacks

 were involved. SNCC, CORE, and COFO hoped that the media spotlight would protect Freedom Summer workers from racial violence, protection that the federal government was unwilling to give. This calculation proved incorrect. On the first day of Freedom Summer, three CORE workers went missing in Mississippi. Twenty-four-year-old Michael Schwerner was a white Jewish social worker from Manhattan who, one coworker recalled, “had been deeply affected by the photographs of Negroes sprawling under the dogs and fire hoses” in Birmingham. On June 21, 1964, Schwerner went with James Chaney, a 21-year-old Mississippi black activist,

 and 20-year-old Andrew Goodman, another white Jewish volunteer from New York, to inspect a church that the Ku Klux Klan had burned to stop CORE from opening a school there. On the return home they passed near Philadelphia, Mississippi, where local sheriff (and Klansman) Cecile Price recognized Schwerner’s car and license plate from a circular the governor’s office had issued concerning “outside agitators.” Price arrested them for speeding and then alerted fellow Klansmen to join him for an ambush after he released the three men from jail in the middle of the night. The trio’s disappearance created national headlines, forcing the FBI to launch a manhunt across five states to find them. The FBI posted this circular (27.8) seeking information about the men’s whereabouts, haunting images that conveyed more than the dangers of vigilante violence.

 Read the Document Letters from Mississippi Freedom Summer

FBI
Poster  of Three Slain Freedom Summer Civil Rights Workers, 1964 The murder of these three CORE workers hardened the resolve of many Freedom Summer volunteers to continue registering blacks to vote, but some blacks resented that the nation seemed to care only if white activists disappeared.

 What interracial tensions within the Civil Rights Movement did Freedom Summer expose?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

 Putting her own grief aside, Schwerner’s wife Rita, herself a CORE field worker, publicly voiced her suspicion that “if Mr. Chaney, who is a native Mississippian, had been alone at the time of the disappearance, . . . this case, like so many others that have come before it, . . . would have gone completely unnoticed.” As if to prove her point, sailors sent to comb through Mississippi swamps for the bodies of the three men (now assumed to be dead) discovered the corpses of three lynched black men whose disappearances authorities had ignored. As the FBI investigation unfolded, Freedom Summer continued. Nearly 1,000 black and white activists fanned out throughout Mississippi to register blacks in rural areas. Hoping to recruit and train a new generation of student leaders, SNCC and COFO founded summer Freedom Schools. In these schools Freedom Summer volunteers taught high school students African American history to build pride in the long legacy of black accomplishment and gave remedial instruction in basic subjects to remedy their deficient public education. In a state with no mandatory school laws, black children often spent more time in the cotton fields than in the classroom. In the midst of Freedom Summer, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which banned segregation in businesses and places open to the public (such as restaurants and public schools) and prohibited discrimination in employment on the basis of race, religion, ethnicity, or sex. This landmark legislation, the most sweeping civil rights law since Reconstruction, came about because thousands of individuals risked arrest, murder, or unemployment to participate in boycotts, sit-ins, and street demonstrations in towns and cities throughout the South. Their activism went unnoticed in the national press, which focused mostly on a few dramatic moments such as the disappearance of Schwerner, Chaney, and Goodman. A month after the Civil Rights Act’s passage, after six weeks of searching, the FBI paid $30,000 to an informant who helped officers locate the three men’s bodies buried in an earthen dam. All three had been shot in the head, and Chaney’s shattered bones attested to the savage beating he had received. No one was ever convicted of the murders, although Price and nine others were found guilty on federal conspiracy charges in 1967 and served a few years in jail. Like Kennedy, Johnson knew that the world was watching events unfold in Mississippi. Passage of the

 What pivotal role did college-age students play in Freedom Summer?

 Civil Rights Act was front-page news overseas, and world leaders rushed to congratulate Johnson. Winning the 1964 Nobel Peace Prize, King was now an international figure who inspired social justice activists worldwide. Passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act was a great victory for the Civil Rights Movement, but the combat-like conditions during Freedom Summer took their toll. Fearful SNCC volunteers began to arm themselves for self-defense. Many blacks resented the media attention given to white activists. Meanwhile female civil rights workers, black and white, objected to males’ expectations that they would clean and cook for them. The stage was set for a fracturing within the activist community.

Selma and the Voting
Rights Act of 1965
 The nonviolent Civil Rights Movement registered one more significant victory before that fracturing occurred, using a stand-off in Selma, Alabama, to secure President Johnson’s open support for federal legislation guaranteeing blacks the right to vote. On Sunday March 7, 1965, a day soon known as “Bloody Sunday,” about 600 marchers left the small town of Selma, Alabama, and began walking across the Edmund Pettis Bridge that spanned the Alabama River. They intended to march 50 miles to Montgomery, the state capitol, to demand voting rights. At the other end of the bridge, county troopers armed with clubs and tear gas waited for them. When the marchers knelt in prayer at the end of the bridge, Sheriff Jim Clark ordered the troopers to attack as white spectators cheered. Photographers and television crews witnessed the violent attack. That evening ABC interrupted the film Judgment at Nuremburg, a dramatized account of trials that convicted Nazi leaders of crimes against humanity, to show news footage of the Bloody Sunday assault. The juxtaposition between the film’s portrayal of the Holocaust and events in Selma haunted viewers. Late that evening the door opened to the chapel in Selma that served as the marchers’ headquarters. “We have seen on the television screen the violence that took place today, and we’re here to share it with you,” announced a group of blacks and whites from New Jersey who had chartered a plane to arrive that night.

Read the Document Voting Literacy Test (1965)


NONVIOLENCE TRIUMPHANT: THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT, 1960–1965

 On Monday, March 15, 1965, President Johnson, who had spoken privately with King before Selma about how to win public support for voting rights legislation, announced in a televised address that he was sending a federal voting rights act to Congress. “It’s not just Negroes, but really it’s all of us, who must overcome the crippling legacy of bigotry and injustice,” Johnson told the nation. “And we shall overcome,” he concluded, quoting the anthem of the Civil Rights Movement. A triumphant march from Selma began the following Sunday, March 21, 1965. Along the way a group of men, women, whites, blacks, and veterans stopped to pray in front of a billboard claiming that King was a communist (27.9). Erected by the John Birch Society, the sign showed a photo of King attending a workshop at the Highlander Folk School for social activists, labeling it a “Communist Training School.” Like the



 “I asked my mother and father for my birthday present to become registered voters.” Eight-year-old SHEYANN WEBB, youngest member of the first Selma to Montgomery march.

 Republican’s 1964 presidential candidate Barry Goldwater, the arch-conservative Birch society opposed federal civil rights legislation as a violation of state and individual rights. The marchers took advantage of every opportunity to enlist the sympathies of mainstream journalists like Haynes Johnson, the white reporter standing and taking notes who won a Pulitzer Prize for his coverage of the Selma march. When the marchers arrived in Montgomery five days later, King addressed the crowd on the steps of the state capitol, looking down at the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church where he had helped initiate the Montgomery Bus Boycott ten years earlier (see Chapter 25): “I know you are asking today, ‘How long will it take?’ ... How long? Not long, because no lie can live forever.” Five months later Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which prohibited literacy tests and poll taxes and authorized the use of federal registrars to register voters if states failed to respect the Fifteenth Amendment. Within a year over 9,000 blacks had registered in Dallas County, Alabama, enough to block Jim Clark’s reelection as sheriff. 27.9 Prayer Vigil During the March from Selma to Montgomery, March 21, 1965 This image of peaceful protesters praying was meant to counter charges from ultraconservative groups that the civil rights movement was intentionally provoking violence to pave the way for a communist revolution.

View the Map Interactive Map: Impact of the Voting Rights Act of 1965


 How did the media, public, and government respond to events in Selma?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

The Fractured Left
 Conservative Republicans and Democrats never liked the antipoverty initiatives of Kennedy and Johnson, while die-hard segregationists adamantly opposed the integrationist goals of nonviolent civil rights leaders like King. The most potent attacks on these progressive visions, however, came from the left where competing visions proliferated. By the mid-1960s, disaffected student activists increasingly dismissed the Great Society as too cautious and protested against “Johnson’s War” in Vietnam, while others renounced all ties to mainstream culture. Within the Civil Rights Movement, militancy replaced nonviolence as the dominant ethos. Meanwhile many white women left the Civil Rights Movement to pursue women’s liberation.

The New Left and the
Counterculture
 The baby boom generation came of age in the 1960s. By 1968, over half of the American population was under the age of 25. By then a core of white middleclass college students had created the New Left, a small, but highly visible, coalition of student-based organizations that attacked racial discrimination, poverty, and the war in Vietnam. Al Haber formed Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) in 1960 at the University of Michigan, believing “that if any really radical liberal force is going to develop in America, it is going to come from the colleges and the young.” In 1962, Tom Hayden, a white activist in the Civil Rights Movement, penned the group’s manifesto, “The Port Huron Statement.” Hayden urged his peers to act, noting “we are people of this generation, bred in at least modest comfort, housed now in universities, looking uncomfortably to the world we inherit.” Although most college-age Americans did not attend university, their ranks were increasing. By 1965 nearly 6.5 million students attended colleges or universities, compared with 2.2 million in 1950. Strict rules governed student behavior. Students lived in single-sex dormitories, had to obey curfews each evening, and abide by dress codes that prohibited female students from wearing pants. The University of California, Berkeley, even forbade political debate or discussion on campus, a rule in place since the 1930s to prevent communist student groups from recruiting. For years students had used a small strip just outside the Berkeley campus main gate to hand out political pamphlets or give speeches. In the fall of 1964, the university administration shut this down as well, provoking the Free Speech Movement, a mass student protest that accused the University of California

 How did the New Left affect university life?

 of denying students the right to freedom of speech. Protest leader Mario Savio, who had just returned from Freedom Summer, pointed out that “the two battlefields [in Mississippi and Berkeley] may seem quite different to some observers, but this is not the case. The same rights are at stake in both places—the right to participate as citizens in a democratic society.” Aided by sympathetic television coverage, the Free Speech Movement succeeded after four months of demonstrations and inspired left-leaning students on other university campuses. Most college students never joined any organized protests, but in response to those who did, universities eliminated codes of conduct, introduced more elective courses into curriculums, and established black and women’s studies. After 1964, SDS chapters organized antiwar demonstrations on university campuses that included teach-ins and draft-card burnings (see Chapter 26). SDS at first embraced the liberal vision of using representative government to implement incremental reforms, but in the course of its antiwar protests the group became more radical. By 1968, New Left leaders expressed open admiration for Marxist-inspired communist revolutionaries like the Vietnamese leader Ho Chi Minh and Ernesto “Che” Guevara, a colleague of Cuban dictator Fidel Castro trying to foster revolution in Bolivia and the Congo. When student-led protests roiled Europe and South America in 1968, the American New Left assumed they were part of a global youth rebellion that would reshape the world. Once the novelty of student demonstrations wore off, getting television reporters to cover their protests required more outlandish theatrics, images that increasingly radicalized student leaders eagerly provided. Press scrutiny sometimes backfired, however. Nightly news reports of demonstrators hurling bricks and expletives frightened

 Read the Document The Report of the President’s Commission on Campus Unrest

THE FRACTURED LEFT

 moderates, who viewed the New Left as unpatriotic and dangerous. The challenge to the liberal vision went beyond the New Left. An emerging counterculture, the heir to the Beat cultural ethos of the 1950s (see Chapter 25), emphasized rejecting middle-class lifestyles more than agitating for political change. Hippies, youthful social rebels who renounced material acquisition and used drugs to explore their inner spiritual selves, refused to dedicate their lives to acquiring the same suburban home, car, and corporate job as their parents. The hippie utopian vision embraced peace, pleasure, sexual liberation, and sharing of material resources, an ethos captured in this 1968 photograph (27.10) of a hippie gathering by Robert Altman (who became a renowned filmmaker). Drugs, especially marijuana and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), formed an essential part of the counterculture’s challenge to the values of middleclass society. Rock music exposed many young people to these counterculture ideals. Bob Dylan, a folk troubadour whose songs had inspired civil rights protesters, transformed himself into a rock musician with poetic lyrics steeped in drug references. The Beatles underwent a similar transformation after taking America by storm. Nearly 60 percent of the nation watched the four mop-headed British musicians sing their masterful pop concoctions during the band’s first televised performance on the Ed Sullivan Show in 1964. In just three years the group

 underwent a complete makeover with the release of an album, Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band, that broadcasted the counterculture message, “I’d love to turn you on”—a reference to taking drugs and having sex. The heyday of the marriage between rock music and the counterculture was Woodstock, a free three-day drug-infused music festival held on a farm in upstate New York, in August 1969. New Left and young civil rights activists adopted a hippie-style of dress and experimented with drugs, but unlike hippies they remained dedicated to political activism. Most black civil rights activists, rather than rejecting white middle-class materialism, were fighting for their fair share of the nation’s wealth and prosperity. New Left radicals shared the hippie belief that acquisitive capitalism bred inequality and injustice, but they were committed to social action, not “tuning out.” Out of the spotlight conservative college students were also active, laying the foundation for the coming conservative resurgence within a Republican Party dominated by moderates. College students formed the Young Americans for Freedom (YAF) in 1960 under the guidance of National Review founder William F. Buckley. Throughout the 1960s the Radical Right YAF attracted more members than the New Left SDS. Goldwater supporters in 1964, these conservative students championed limited economic regulation, states’ rights, respect for law and order, and staunch anticommunism. For the time being, however, the New Left had center stage.



27.10 Holding
Together
 In their quest to define an alternative lifestyle, hippies emphasized love and harmony in their gatherings–– sometimes wearing clothes, sometimes not.

 How did the New Left, Civil Rights Movement, and counterculture diverge?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

Malcolm X: An Alternative
 to Nonviolence

27.11 Malcolm
X
Snaps a Photo  of Muhammad Ali, 1964. This meeting between two mid1960s icons of black manhood came just after Ali won the heavyweight boxing title. Both Black Muslims, Malcolm X and Muhammad Ali enjoyed keeping whites on edge with militant rhetoric that emphasized black pride and physical prowess.

 The New Left and counterculture did not speak with one voice, and by the mid-1960s fractures within the Civil Rights Movement were also apparent. The Nation of Islam, an African American religious sect founded in the 1930s, rejected integration as the path to salvation for the black community and instead wanted to establish a separate black nation within the United States. Followers of Nation of Islam leader Elijah Muhammad prayed to Mecca five times a day, dressed modestly, and avoided pork and alcohol. The Nation of Islam departed from mainstream Islamic practices, however, by viewing whites as “blue-eyed devils” whom Allah would condemn to eternal damnation on a forthcoming Day of Judgment. The celebrated African American writer James Baldwin understood the appeal of Elijah Muhammad’s prophecies, even though he rejected them. “The white God has not delivered them, perhaps the black God will,” wrote Baldwin in The Fire Next Time (1963) to explain the Nation of Islam’s growing popularity within Northern urban neighborhoods. Malcolm X moved armed self-defense and black separatism from the fringes to the center of the civil rights debate. A magnetic speaker, he had converted to Islam while serving a six-year stint in prison. After his release he changed his name from Malcolm Little to Malcolm X, the X signifying the lost name of his African ancestors.

 Why did Northern blacks find Malcolm X’s vision appealing?

 “I don’t see any American dream; I see an American nightmare.” MALCOLM X, ridiculing King’s “I Have a Dream Speech” during the 1963 March on Washington Even during the heyday of nonviolence in the 1950s and early 1960s, more militant voices within the black community championed a competing vision of self-defense and racial pride that extended back to Marcus Garvey (see Chapter 21). Malcolm X ridiculed the nonviolent strategy of the Christianled SCLC. “If someone puts his hand on you, send him to the cemetery,” he proclaimed in 1963. He received an increasingly sympathetic hearing among Northern blacks who could already vote and sit alongside whites at lunch counters but encountered racial prejudice that relegated them to segregated ghettos, limited their employment opportunities, and subjected them to police harassment. Malcolm X linked the domestic black struggle for civil rights to the anti-colonial movements underway in Africa and Asia, underscoring that the American Civil Rights Movement was one of many liberation movements being waged worldwide, including a campaign to end apartheid (rigid racial segregation) in South Africa. Malcolm X’s rhetorical links with Africa resonated among northern blacks, who adopted African clothing, hairstyles, and music. Many jettisoned the old label “Negro” in favor of “black” to reflect their growing color consciousness and racial pride. This photo (27.11) of Malcolm X smiling as he photographs boxer Muhammad Ali in a Miami restaurant after Ali won the heavyweight championship in 1964 conveys the charisma that each man radiated, and the Watch the Video Malcolm X

THE FRACTURED LEFT

 strong bonds they maintained to the black urban community. Ali, who called himself “the greatest,” gained fame not just for his athletic feats but, like Malcolm X, also for his defiance of authority. The day after this photo was taken, he announced his conversion to the Nation of Islam, changing his name from Cassius Clay to Muhammad Ali. His mentor Malcolm X applauded Ali’s announcement, knowing that the magnetic boxer would help attract other converts. By the time Malcolm X’s ideas began to gain widespread currency among disaffected blacks, however, his own philosophies were starting to shift. Viewing the increasingly powerful Malcolm X as a potential rival, Elijah Muhammad had silenced Malcolm X a few months before this photo was taken. Malcolm X’s transgression was calling the assassination of President Kennedy “a case of ‘the chickens coming home to roost’” because whites were finally experiencing the vigilante violence that had terrorized blacks for decades. Malcolm X left the Nation of Islam soon afterward, and Ali severed all ties with him. In 1964 Malcolm X made a pilgrimage to Mecca, Islam’s holiest city, in Saudi Arabia, where he saw pilgrims “of all colors” coming together to worship. This trip gave him new faith in the possibility of interracial cooperation. His more moderate stance did little to mollify his Nation of Islam critics. On February 21, 1965, as he stood to address a gathering in Harlem, three Nation of Islam members shot him dead.

Watts and Chicago
 Malcolm X did not live to help heal the fractures that divided the Civil Rights Movement. In the mid-1960s, tensions among activists led to an overt split between those who continued to advocate non-violence and integration and those who assumed a more militant, nationalistic approach. Stalwart civil rights veterans like John Lewis and Martin Luther King Jr. never stopped advocating their vision of nonviolent collective action. But after 1965, the vision of armed self-defense won many adherents. When riots and demonstrations in Northern cities moved the civil rights struggle to their own backyards, the limits of Northern whites’ support for the goal of racial equality became evident. August 6, 1965, the day that President Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act of 1965, represented the high-water mark of the nonviolent Civil Rights Movement. Five days later, with activists

 still basking in the afterglow of this achievement, riots erupted in Watts, a Los Angeles black ghetto rife with high unemployment, poor schools, and drug use. The routine arrest of a black man for drunk driving, which residents viewed as yet another example of the police harassment that plagued them daily, sparked the uprising. Watts burned for six days before 16,000 national guardsmen managed to stop the violence. The Watts riot left 34 dead and destroyed $35 million in property, including many businesses and homes owned by blacks. Watts changed the image of African American protest in the white imagination from a portrait of nonviolent demonstrators kneeling in prayer before their attackers to one of lawless mobs shouting “Burn, baby, burn.” The same cameras that helped awaken the liberal and moderate white consciousness now stoked white fears about unchecked black violence. The press ignored residents’ complaints about police harassment and instead portrayed Los Angeles police and firemen (27.12) as heroes who struggled to prevent black rioters from destroying their own community. Watts was the prelude to four long, hot summers of racial rioting that rocked cities throughout the nation from 1965–1968.



27.12 Watts
Riots, 1965.
 Images of heroic policemen arresting looters and firemen putting out fires set by rebellious blacks reassured anxious whites that authorities were restoring law and order. Only two years earlier, photographs of police and firemen attacking peaceful black demonstrators in Birmingham had encouraged whites to support integration and voting rights.

 “It’s much easier to integrate lunch counters than it is to eradicate slums.” MARTIN LUTHER KING JR, 1968

 Why did many Northern whites lose sympathy for the Civil Rights Movement?



 CHAPTER 27

27.13 Black
Panther Leader
Huey Newton, 1967
 This staged photo showed Newton dressed in guerrillastyle clothing surrounded by symbols of African warrior culture to convey the Black Panthers’ militant, nationalistic ideology.

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

 King rushed to Watts intent on teaching residents to employ nonviolent means to express their grievances. Instead, it was King who came away with a valuable lesson. When he toured the smoldering ruins, a crowd of black youths shouted “We won!” “How can you say you won when 34 Negroes are dead, your community is destroyed and whites are using the riot as an excuse for inaction?” King asked. Their reply taught him the extent of despair among Northern blacks: “We won because we made them pay attention to us.” The Watts riots convinced King to move aggressively to end economic inequality nationwide now that battles against legalized segregation and disenfranchisement were won. But the SCLC’s 1966 Chicago campaign dramatically demonstrated the limits of moderate Northern whites’ support for racial equality. When protesters marched through all-white neighborhoods to protest racial discrimination in renting and selling houses, white crowds pelted them with bottles and rocks, which some marchers threw back. “I have never seen—even in Mississippi and Alabama—mobs as hostile and hate-filled as I’ve seen in Chicago,” King noted with dismay. After King’s death in 1968, President Johnson successfully lobbied Congress to pass the Fair Housing Act that prohibited discrimination in selling, renting, or financing housing as a memorial to the slain leader.

Black Power
 and the Black Panthers The “black power” slogan emerged during James Meredith’s 1966 “March against Fear” in Mississippi. Meredith had faced down hostile crowds in 1962 when he became the first black student to graduate from the University of Mississippi. Four years later he decided to march 220 miles by himself from Memphis, Tennessee, to Jackson, Mississippi, hoping that his courage would inspire blacks to register to vote. On the second day of his march, a

 Did the tactics used by the Black Panthers to publicize their militant vision help or hurt them?

 sniper waiting in the bushes wounded Meredith. When activists flocked to continue his march, SNCC leader Stokely Carmichael told participants “we been saying freedom for six years, and we ain’t got nothing. What we gonna start saying now is black power.” Black Power, however, soon became a slippery term that people employed in different ways. Competing Visions: Defining “Black Power” explores how black leaders with different ideologies embraced competing definitions of Black Power. In 1966, Black Power militants came to the forefront of traditionally nonviolent civil rights organizations like SNCC, which expelled whites to foster black community leadership. That same year Bobby Seale and Huey Newton founded the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense in Oakland, California. The Black Panthers were a militant civil rights group dedicated to armed self-defense, racial pride, and inner-city renewal. To project an image of strength that would appeal to inner-city youth, the Black Panthers wore commando-style attire including black leather jackets, black pants, black berets, and dark sunglasses, items already fashionable among young black men. The 1967 photo (27.13) that became the emblem of the Black Panther Movement depicted Newton sitting in a throne-like wicker chair surrounded by a zebra rug and warrior shields, symbols of a racial identity rooted in African culture. Wearing Western military-style clothing and holding a rifle in his right hand and a spear in his left, Newton stared into the camera with the steely resolve of a revolutionary. The paramilitary group initiated community projects including free breakfasts for school children and health clinics, but the

THE FRACTURED LEFT



Competing Visions
DEFINING “BLACK POWER”
The image of a raised, clenched black fist became the most enduring symbol of “Black Power,” but it only represented one view of the slogan’s meaning. In the following excerpts civil rights leaders debate the meaning and implications of Black Power. Malcolm X never used the term directly, but his separatist message laid the groundwork for Black Power nationalism later in the decade. In contrast Martin Luther King Jr. advocated using nonviolent methods to empower the black community. Political scientist Charles Hamilton notes the various interpretations given to the “Black Power” slogan and embraces one that emphasizes pride in being black. Is there any agreement among these competing definitions? How does this debate compare to the one between Marcus Garvey and W. E. B. DuBois in the 1920s (see Competing Visions, Chapter 21)? The revolutionary, nationalist rhetoric in Malcolm X’s fiery 1963 “Message to the Grassroots” greatly influenced later advocates of Black Power. There’s no such thing as a nonviolent revolution. The only kind of revolution that is nonviolent is the Negro revolution. The only revolution in which the goal is loving your enemy is the Negro revolution. It’s the only revolution in which the goal is a desegregated lunch counter, a desegregated theater, a desegregated park, and a desegregated public toilet; you can sit down next to white folks—on the toilet. That’s no revolution. Revolution is based on land. Land is the basis of all independence. Land is the basis of freedom, justice, and equality … Whoever heard of a revolution where they lock arms … singing “We Shall Overcome”? You don’t do that in a revolution. You don’t do any singing, you’re too busy swinging. 
 In a “Conversation with Martin Luther King,” March 25, 1968, King offered a definition of Black Power that supported his strategy of nonviolence. We have always stood up against injustices. We have done it militantly. Now, so often the word ‘militant’ is misunderstood because most people think of militancy in military terms. But, to be militant merely means to be demanding and to be persistent, and in this sense I think the non-violent movement has demonstrated great militancy. It is possible to be militantly nonviolent. … I haven’t advocated violence, because I do not see it as the answer to the problem. I do not see it as the answer from a moral point of view and I do not see it as the answer from a practical point of view.… Let me briefly outline the positives [of Black Power]. First, Black Power in the positive sense is a psychological call to manhood. This is desperately needed in the black community, because for all too many years black people

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Defining
Black Power


 have been ashamed of themselves.… Secondly, Black Power is pooling black political resources in order to achieve our legitimate goals.… Thirdly, Black Power in its positive sense is a pooling of black economic resources in order to achieve legitimate power.… Withdrawing economic support from those who will not be just and fair in their dealings is a very potent weapon.

 Writing to white America in The New York Times Magazine in 1968, Charles Hamilton outlined competing views of Black Power and stressed the importance of maintaining black racial identity. Black Power has many definitions and connotations in the rhetoric of race relations today. To some people, it is synonymous with premeditated acts of violence to destroy the political and economic institutions of this country. Others equate Black Power with plans to rid the civil rights movements of whites who have been in it for years. The concept is understood by many to mean hatred of and separation from whites; it is associated with calling whites ‘honkies’ and with shouts of ‘Burn, baby, burn!’ Some understand it to be the use of pressure-group tactics in the accepted tradition of the American political process. And still others say that Black Power must be seen first of all as an attempt to instill a sense of identity and pride in black people.… Black Power rejects the lessons of slavery and segregation that caused black people to look upon themselves with hatred and disdain. To be ‘integrated’ it was necessary to deny one’s heritage, one’s own culture, to be ashamed of one’s black skin, thick lips and kinky hair. … The black man must change his demeaning conception of himself; he must develop a sense of pride and self-respect. Then, if integration comes, it will deal with people who are psychologically and mentally healthy, with people who have a sense of their history and of themselves as whole human beings …

 Why do all three writers emphasize racial pride and manhood?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

 press only saw their rifles. The Black Panthers organized paramilitary patrols that openly carried weapons (then legal under California law) and, Newton explained, “stopped whenever we saw the police questioning a brother or a sister” to ensure that no beatings or abuse occurred. In May, 1967, 30 armed Black Panthers filed onto the floor of the California State Assembly in Sacramento to protest the imminent passage of a law banning the open display of weapons, a bill meant to shut down the Black Panther street patrols. As security forces disarmed them, Bobby Seale called on “black communities of America to rise up as one man.” By October, 1967, Newton was under arrest, wounded by police during a shoot-out and accused of killing a white policeman who died in the melee. FBI chief J. Edgar Hoover viewed the Panthers as “the greatest threat to the internal security of the country” and used spies to plan raids on Panther offices and create rifts within the group to weaken the Panthers internally. When the courts overturned Newton’s conviction in 1970, he emerged from jail to find the Black Panthers in shambles.

 The Women’s Liberation Movement Another fracture within the Civil Rights Movement, this one between men and women, energized the modern women’s movement. When young white female activists began leaving the Civil Rights Movement to join the women’s movement, they joined a crusade already well underway. Feminists did not speak with one voice, but instead offered competing visions of how to empower women. Helen Gurley Brown and Betty Friedan each wrote bestsellers that helped re-ignite the women’s movement, which had faltered since the 1920s. Marriage was overrated, Brown asserted in Sex and the Single Girl, a 1962 advice book counseling young, single women to explore their sexuality while they

 “I’m a server of food and a putter-on of pants and a bedmaker…But who am I?” A middle-class housewife quoted in The Feminine Mystique, 1963

 What competing visions did Brown and Friedan offer on empowering women?

 had the chance. By using their sex appeal intelligently, young women could thrive despite earning less than men and having fewer career opportunities. Brown’s prescription was: find a job you liked, flirt to get special treatment, have your dates pay for everything, and wait to get married until your looks start to deteriorate. Friedan also challenged the accepted notion that women should focus solely on homemaking and child-rearing. Men were free to make careers, enjoy hobbies, and engage in politics, Friedan noted in her 1963 treatise The Feminine Mystique. By contrast, women “never had a chance to be anything else” than a “housewife-mother.” As they shopped for groceries, made beds, and drove their children to afterschool activities, many wondered, “Is this all?” Unlike Brown, Friedan did not believe that sex could fill the void, nor did she urge women to avoid marriage or having children. Instead she believed that women should be able to engage in the full range of meaningful activities available to men. Her analysis resonated strongly among white middleclass women who felt imprisoned within their suburban lives. Brown continued to promote her philosophy of “empowerment through sexuality” in Cosmopolitan, a provocative women’s magazine that she launched in 1965. Friedan took a different path, joining the political activists frustrated with the government’s failure to fully enforce the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which barred discrimination in employment on the basis of race, religion, ethnicity, or sex. The new Equal Employment Opportunity Commission took complaints of racial discrimination seriously, but ignored charges of sexual discrimination. “Men are entitled to female secretaries,” the Commission chairman glibly remarked. In 1966, Friedan helped found the National Organization for Women (NOW) to secure equal rights for women in employment, education, and politics—traditionally, male domains. NOW also wanted to give women control over their own bodies through unfettered access to contraception and legal abortions. A relatively small organization with only 5,000 members in the late 1960s, NOW nonetheless convinced President Johnson to issue an executive order that required government agencies and federal contractors to create affirmative action programs to hire and promote women and minority men. NOW also persuaded airlines to stop employing only attractive single women under age 32 as flight attendants.

Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Birth Control Pill: The Solution
 to the World’s Problems or Sexual Chaos?

THE FRACTURED LEFT

 The women’s movement grew as younger female activists, unhappy with gender discrimination within the Civil Rights Movement and New Left, took up the cause of female liberation. Collegeage women had participated enthusiastically in Freedom Summer by teaching in the Freedom Schools and registering blacks to vote. Women, however, also performed virtually all the clerical chores and housework for SNCC, and this gendered allocation of work provoked complaints. At the height of Freedom Summer, black female SNCC workers staged a sit-in at a SNCC office in Atlanta to protest gender discrimination within the Civil Rights Movement. The “assumptions of male superiority are as … crippling to the woman as the assumptions of white supremacy are to the Negro,” asserted white activists Mary King and Casey Hayden. Few males took these complaints seriously. “What is the position of women in SNCC?” joked Stokely Carmichael while relaxing with staffers one evening. “The position of women in SNCC is prone!” The punch line won Carmichael appreciative laughter from his male colleagues, but this oft-repeated story hastened the departure of white female activists. Women in the New Left experiencing similar problems with gender discrimination within SDS also redirected their energies to the women’s movement. Black women were more reluctant to abandon the Civil Rights Movement. In their view racial oppression affected them more severely than sexual discrimination. The feminists who founded NOW lobbied for legislative solutions to women’s problems. In contrast, more radicalized feminists, steeped in New Left ideology and nonviolent tactics, adopted a grassroots approach that used consciousness-raising—heightening awareness of social and political issues—to help women “understand the universality of our oppression.” They emphasized changing attitudes rather than lobbying for legislative changes. To combat the ways that sexism pervaded normal social

 interactions, feminists introduced the word “Ms.” into the American lexicon to replace “Miss” or “Mrs.,” titles that linked a woman’s identity to her marital status. When Robin Morgan brought busloads of women to Atlantic City to protest the annual Miss America pageant in 1968, she sought maximum media coverage. Demonstrators carried the photograph (27.14) of an attractive, naked young woman with lines dividing her body like cuts of beef to protest how beauty pageants dehumanized women. “Welcome to the Miss America Cattle Auction,” they chanted while filling a trash can with bras, high heeled shoes, fashion magazines, and copies of Playboy, items they believed reinforced “the Mindless Sex Object Image” of women. In deference to a local ordinance, the protesters never set the trash can on fire, but from this point onward detractors dismissed feminists as “bra-burners.” Despite their different styles and messages, both moderate and radical feminists had trouble expanding their support beyond the white middle class. “If your husband is a factory worker or a tugboat operator, you don’t want his job,” noted Democratic Congresswoman Barbara Mikulski to explain why NOW’s emphasis on equality in employment failed to resonate among working-class women.



27.14 Feminists
Picket the Miss
America Pageant,
 This satirical portrait of a woman marked up like a side of beef criticizes beauty pageants for reducing a woman’s value to the quality of her body parts.

 How did activists’ competing visions and media coverage shape the women’s liberation movement?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

The End of an Era
 As the Civil Rights Movement unraveled, the Great Society also floundered. Republicans widened their appeal by promising to end the cultural strife that was tearing the nation apart. Although most liberal and radical causes lost energy after 1968, Chicano and Native American activists helped keep the protest tradition alive as the decade ended.

The Faltering Civil
Rights Movement
 Embittered by years of violent attacks in the South, young activists either left the movement altogether or migrated to more militant organizations. By 1967, King’s weakening leadership reflected a movement adrift. When King attacked the Vietnam War, he strained his relationship with President Johnson, losing a valuable ally in the White House. King’s call for a complete restructuring of American capitalism to eliminate poverty also cost him the support of moderate blacks and whites. In fall 1967, after a summer of deadly race riots in Detroit and Newark, King proposed setting up a poor people’s encampment in front of the White House. When the Poor People’s Campaign stalled, King made a quick trip to Memphis to support a garbage men’s strike.

 On April 4, 1968, a sniper’s bullet tore through the knot in King’s necktie and fatally wounded him as he leaned over the balcony of his Memphis motel. Within hours Life photographer Steve Schapiro entered King’s motel room and snapped a haunting photograph of King’s open suitcase containing a copy of his book Strength to Love, a wrinkled shirt, and the remnants of a meal (27.15). “The half-drunk cup of coffee gave me a moment of pause,” Schapiro noted. “He had left his room planning to return.” King’s portrait appeared on the motel television during a newscast reporting his death to complete this eerie scene. The three-week urban rampage in 100 cities across the nation that followed King’s murder further alienated the white community, which increasingly supported using troops to restore “law and order.” Two months later a white man, James Earl Ray, admitted to killing King, a confession he later retracted.

The Great Society Unravels
 Diminishing sympathy for the Civil Rights Movement also meant less support for Great Society programs directed at the urban poor. Congress had written much of the legislation quickly, but the public had no patience to wait for the Great Society to work through its growing pains. Critics from the left and right continued their attacks. The New Left advocated redistributing corporate profits more equitably throughout society. The Radical Right denounced the Great Society as a “hodgepodge” of programs that humiliated the poor and encouraged dependency on government welfare. Ethnic working-class 27.15 King’s Room in the Lorraine Motel, April 4, 1968 King stepped out of this motel room to chat briefly with friends over the balcony and never returned. The television above King’s suitcase announces his death to an empty room. The former motel is now a civil rights museum, where this room is preserved in its original state.

 Why was King’s death a serious blow to the Civil Rights Movement?

THE END OF AN ERA

 whites and left-leaning suburbanites, groups that had traditionally supported the Democratic liberal agenda, began to resent federal programs that they felt helped primarily blacks and other minorities. The shift among the white working class had political significance. In 1964, nearly 60 percent had voted for the Democratic ticket; four years later only 35 percent did. The Great Society’s troubles reflected more than persistent racism, however. Johnson’s unwillingness to raise taxes to pay for an exploding array of domestic programs and the war in Vietnam also contributed to its undoing. As the economy overheated interest rates doubled, the national debt exploded, and inflation caused prices to rise faster than wages. This sudden decline in the standard of living after decades of prosperity dismayed Americans. This 1967 Herblock political cartoon ( 27.16) illustrated Johnson’s dilemma in trying to fund both the Vietnam War and the Great Society. In the drawing Johnson prepares for an evening out with his mistress, a robust and expensively attired woman wearing a mink stole emblazoned with the words “Vietnam War.” As they leave he tries to assure the other woman in his life, a thin homemaker wearing a tattered apron labeled “U.S. Urban Needs,” that “There’s Money Enough to Support Both of You—Now, Doesn’t That Make You Feel Better?” As this cartoon suggested, the administration was neglecting its domestic programs and giving the war the bulk of its attention and funds. In 1968, Johnson agreed to raise taxes to finance the expanded war in Vietnam, but Southern conservative congressmen refused to vote for the measure until the president cut funding for his domestic programs. The Democratic Convention in 1968 pulled together these strands of disenchantment with liberal politics. With Vice President Hubert Humphrey on track to secure the nomination, ten thousand antiwar activists led by New Left leader Tom Hayden protested outside the Chicago Convention Center to support the antiwar candidate Eugene McCarthy. Yippies, a New Left splinter group that stood for blending “pot and politics,” joined the protest. As Democratic delegates debated the administration’s Vietnam policy inside the convention hall, the police attacked the demonstrators outside. Televised images of longhaired, pot-smoking protesters who waved North Vietnamese flags and threw excrement swayed



 27.16 Torn between Two Mistresses, 1967 This Herblock cartoon illustrated how Johnson’s escalation of the war in Vietnam deprived his Great Society programs of funds.

 public opinion more than news reports of police brutality. Over 70 percent of adults supported the police crackdown. Critics of liberalism found the public suddenly much more receptive to their competing political vision. Richard Nixon won the presidency in 1968 promising to restore “law and order,” a Republican catch-phrase that fueled the political shift underway in many traditionally Democratic blue-collar and suburban neighborhoods. With grassroots conservatism on the rise, the liberal vision appealed to fewer Americans by 1970. A rare moment of national celebration occurred on July 20, 1969 when astronaut Neil Armstrong became the first man to walk on the moon. Watching the event on their television sets, Americans heard Armstrong declare “that’s one small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind” as he began to stride across the moon’s surface. Announcing the U.S. space race victory over the Soviet Union to the world, astronaut Buzz Aldrin

 How did presidential choices and public attitudes undermine Johnson’s Great Society agenda?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S

 derarm deodorant. Worried that the counterculture had made addictive drugs such as heroin popular among the young, states passed stringent anti-drug laws. At the federal level, in 1972, President Nixon announced a “war on drugs” to disrupt the illicit drug trade. The quick commercialization of the counterculture also hastened its demise as a potent alternative social vision. Modes of hippie dress, slang, and values (albeit in diluted form) swept into the mainstream. Granola appeared on supermarket shelves, and middle-aged men grew their hair long. Affluent and educated adults increasingly smoked marijuana and listened to rock music. More sexually explicit movies and highly profitable rock record sales fueled rather than undermined acquisitive capitalism.

27.17 The First
Moon Landing,
 National pride surged at the sight of an American flag planted on the moon. For many Americans, beating the Soviets to the moon challenged the radical left’s view that American society was faltering.

 planted an American flag (27.17) near manmade footprints that would permanently mark the moon’s surface. This iconic photo of the United States conquering the moon bolstered many citizens’ faith in the superiority of the American way of life, giving them another reason to reject the New Left and counterculture critique of American culture.

The Demise of the
Counterculture
 As with the Civil Rights Movement and the Great Society, the hippie counterculture also unraveled. Media coverage drew large crowds to the 1967 “Summer of Love” in San Francisco’s HaightAshbury neighborhood, a hippie gathering dedicated to free food, drugs, sex, and music. In the fall hippie stalwarts organized a mock “Death of Hippie: Son of Media” funeral procession, blaming the over-hyped media image of the free-loving hippie for the drug-related violence and epidemic of rapes that now beset Haight-Ashbury. They then departed en masse, moving the foci of hippie culture to rural communes away from the media glare, where some kept the hippie utopian ideal alive. Ronald Reagan, the Republican Governor of California, echoed the views of mainstream America in 1969 when he characterized a hippie as someone who “dresses like Tarzan, has hair like Jane, and smells like Cheetah,” a reference to the counterculture’s embrace of public nudity, long hair, and disdain for un-

 How did media exposure affect the counterculture?

Keeping Protest Alive:
Mexican Americans and
Native Americans
 The declining fortunes of the Civil Rights Movement and the counterculture did not mean the end of all campaigns for social justice in the late 1960s. Mexican American and Native American activists drew inspiration from the African American struggle and launched their own highly visible, if short-lived, crusades to end ethnic discrimination. Ultimately, however, factionalism and police harassment also hurt these crusades. In the 1960s, the life expectancy for Mexican American migrant workers hovered around age 50, while their infant mortality rate was double the national average. The short-handed hoe represented the nearly complete exploitation of California migrant workers. “The short one” forced workers to bend all day (27.18) as they worked in the fields, often causing crippling back pain that sidelined workers who could not afford health care. California regulators finally banned the tool in 1975. Rallying Mexican Americans around the slogan Si Se Puede (“Yes, it can be done”), César Chávez, head of the United Farm Workers union, used strikes and marches to secure better working and living conditions. Chávez also appealed directly to consumers, convincing 17 million Americans to stop buying nonunionpicked grapes. These tactics provoked a backlash in some quarters. One Safeway grocery store manager reported antiunion customers loading up “their car with grapes and nothing else.” By

THE END OF AN ERA

 1970, however, the economic toll of the boycott forced growers to recognize the United Farm Workers and raise wages. Latino urban radicals in Texas, California, and Colorado embraced a competing vision called La Raza (The Race) that emphasized racial identity over union organizing. The Brown Berets modeled themselves after the Black Panthers and proudly called themselves “Chicanos,” embracing their Mexican American heritage while demanding an end to Anglo-American discrimination. In March 1968, 10,000 high school students in East Los Angeles staged a “blow-out” by walking out of their classrooms to protest the poor education they received in their mostly Hispanic schools. By this point most white Americans had little tolerance for radical political protest and overwhelmingly supported the police for shutting the demonstrations down. Internal divisions within the Mexican American community over the wisdom of mass demonstrations and steady harassment from the police hastened the demise of the Chicano student movement. Native American activists also drew inspiration from the integrationist vision that championed equality and the competing militant one that emphasized racial identity. After encouraging Indians to move off their reservations in the 1950s, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) began terminating the rights of some Indian tribes to federal protection. Ending their dependence on the BIA to run schools, manage their lands, and provide health care, the agency argued, would encourage Indians to assimilate into mainstream culture more quickly. Indian activists wanted the federal government to continue its financial assistance, while also allowing more self-government on reservations. On November 20, 1969, a group calling themselves “Indians of All Tribes” took over the abandoned federal prison on Alcatraz Island in San Francisco Bay. The Indian activists issued the sardonic Alcatraz Proclamation

 that offered to purchase the island for $24 in glass beads and red cloth, the same amount that the Dutch had paid indigenous people for Manhattan Island in 1626. The proclamation described Alcatraz as the perfect site for an Indian reservation because it lacked running water, sanitation, schools, mineral resources, and productive soil, plus “the population has always been held as prisoner and kept dependent upon others.” Eventually the cold and isolation took its toll, and the protest ended in June 1971. Native Americans staged nearly 70 other occupations throughout the nation, including the American Indian Movement’s armed takeover of the village of Wounded Knee, South Dakota, in 1973, the site of the army’s massacre of 300 Sioux in 1890. These highly visible protests prompted Nixon to increase funds for social services on Indian reservations and establish the Office of Indian Water Rights. In the early 1970s, the federal government ended the policy of termination, and Congress increased Indian selfrule on the reservations. Indian tribes also began successfully suing the government for past treaty violations. But government harassment, part of a general crackdown on revolutionary political movements in the early seventies, eviscerated radical Indian groups.

Read the Document Cesar Chavez, “He Showed Us the Way” (1978)




27.18 Hispanic
Farm Workers
Using Short Hoes
 Workers nicknamed short hoes “the devil’s arm” because using them caused intense back pain. Every time union activist César Chávez saw a head of lettuce in the supermarket, he remembered the suffering field workers had endured and felt renewed determination to organize strikes and boycotts to improve their working conditions.

 What problems did Chicanos and Native Americans face in the 1960s?



 CHAPTER 27

A DECADE OF DISCORD: THE CHALLENGE OF THE 1960S









 Peace Corps established

 Supreme Court rules school prayer unconstitutional

Birmingham


Freedom Summer


 Furor lays the foundation for religiously based conservative resurgence

 Outrage over fire hose and dog attacks on civil rights protesters prompts Kennedy to support a federal civil rights law

 Murder of three Civil Rights workers in Mississippi prompts Congress to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964

Port Huron Statement


March on Washington


 Motivates student activists to join SDS

 International press coverage turns the peaceful march into a triumphant movement for the nonviolent Civil Rights Movement

 Largest legislative liberal reform effort since the New Deal

 Program sends U.S. aid volunteers worldwide

Freedom Rides


CHAPTER REVIEW

 Kennedy administration begins enforcing Supreme Court ruling against segregated interstate travel

 Great Society begins

Review Questions
 1. Why were the Freedom Rides, the Birmingham campaign, and the March on Selma effective nonviolent civil rights protests? 2. How did the Great Society compare to the New Deal? What continuities or differences existed between them?

 3. Why did black nationalist sentiment increase among African Americans after 1965? 4. How did media coverage affect protest movements in the 1960s? 5. How did the 1960s transform American society?

Key Terms
 Great Society President Johnson’s wide-ranging social welfare reforms intended to make the amenities of modern life—a decent standard of living, education, health care, and clean water—available to all Americans. Freedom Rides Interstate bus journeys by black and white activists who entered segregated bus facilities together throughout the South. Birmingham campaign Civil rights effort to desegregate Birmingham, Alabama, where shocking images of police brutality prompted Kennedy to push for a federal civil rights act. March on Washington, 1963 Massive demonstration in the nation’s capital that demanded passage of a federal civil rights act and more economic opportunities. Freedom Summer, 1964 Multipronged attack on white supremacy in Mississippi that included a voter registration drive and the creation of Freedom Schools.

 Civil Rights Act of 1964 Legislation that banned segregation in businesses and places open to the public (such as restaurants and public schools) and prohibited discrimination in employment on the basis of race, religion, ethnicity, or sex. Voting Rights Act of 1965 Legislation that prohibited literacy tests and poll taxes and authorized the use of federal registrars to register voters if states failed to respect the Fifteenth Amendment. New Left A small, but highly visible, coalition of left-leaning student-based organizations that attacked racial discrimination, poverty, and the war in Vietnam. Black Power A call for blacks to unite politically and economically in black-only organizations to protect their racial identity as they fought for equality. National Organization for Women (NOW) An organization dedicated to securing equal rights for women in employment, education, and politics.

CHAPTER REVIEW











 March from Selma to Montgomery

 Black Panthers founded

“Summer of Love”


 King assassinated

 Black militants embrace Black Power

 Congress responds to vigilante attacks on marchers by passing the Voting Rights Act of 1965

 NOW founded

 Hippie gathering in Haight-Ashbury publicizes counterculture

 Nationwide rioting signals the end of the nonviolent Civil Rights Movement

Watts Riot


 Feminists picket Miss America Pageant

 Government creates affirmative action programs for women and minorities

 Feminists use media coverage to challenge sexist stereotypes

 Violent rampage in Los Angeles ghetto generates white backlash against Civil Rights Movement

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of A Decade of Discord.

Questions for Analysis
 1. What different views did Johnson and Goldwater offer on the role of the federal government in American society?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • John F. Kennedy, Inaugural Address (1961), p. 813

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: The Federal


• Fannie Lou Hammer, Voting Rights in Mississippi (1964), p. 814


Government, Friend or Foe?, p. 817


• Rachael Carson, Silent Spring (1962), p. 818


 2. How did this test prevent African Americans from voting? Read the Document Voting Literacy Test (1965), p. 826

 • Martin Luther King Jr., “Letter from Birmingham City Jail” (1963), p. 821 • Letters from Mississippi Freedom Summer, p. 825 • Cesar Chavez, “He Showed Us the Way” (1978), p. 839

 3. What impact did a politically active youth culture have?

View the Closer Look


 Read the Document The Report of the President’s

• Images as History: Birmingham, 1963, p, 823


Commission on Campus Unrest, p. 828


• Competing Visions: Defining Black Power, p. 833


 4. Why did Malcolm X propose internationalizing the civil rights movement? Watch the Video Malcolm X, p. 830

 5. How did competing views about the pill mirror earlier debates over female sexuality? Watch the Video Video Lecture: The Birth Control Pill: The Solution to the World’s Problems or Sexual Chaos?, p. 834

View the Image New Frontier Legislation, p. 812
View the Map Interactive Map: Impact of the Voting Rights Act
 of 1965, p. 827

Watch the Video
• Lyndon Johnson Presidential Campaign Ad: Little Girl vs.
Mushroom Cloud, p. 816
• Video Lecture: Photographing the Civil Rights Movement,
Birmingham, 1963, p. 822
 • Martin Luther King Jr.’s Speech at the March on Washington, August, 1963, p. 824

 Why did the nation face economic problems in the 1970s?

A
Crisis of Presidential
Leadership p. 851


 CHAPTER

Downturn and
Scandal p. 844




