 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 19

CAPE VERDE ISLANDS GAMBIA

BARBADOS WINDWARD ISLANDS

 PORTUGUESE

 What factors propelled the United States beyond its borders?

 The SpanishAmerican War

 CHAPTER

Becoming a World
Power p. 562


 p. 565

Why did the United States
 fight the Spanish-American War?

Creating an American
Empire p. 573


 What conflicting visions divided imperialists and anti-imperialists?

America and East
Asia p. 579


How did the United States
 protect its economic and strategic interests in East Asia?

 In America’s Backyard p. 584

 Why was it so difficult to build the Panama Canal?

Source: Destruction of
 the battleship Maine in Havana harbor in the Spanish-American war; Havana (Cuba) 1898 Feb. 15; Creator-Kurz & Allison

Imperial America
The United States in the World,
1890–1914
 On February 15, 1898, a naval officer awoke President William McKinley in the middle of the night with the stunning news that the American battleship the Maine had exploded in Havana, Cuba, killing 266 of the 354 crew members. The explosion turned the battleship into a hunk of molten steel. This illustration depicted the blast propelling bodies and debris sky-high in Havana Harbor. Americans also read moving, first-hand accounts in the press, including one from survivor James R. Young. “I was feeling a bit glum,” Young recalled, “and in fact was so quiet that Lieutenant J. Hood came up and asked laughingly if I was asleep. I said, ‘No, I am on watch.’ Scarcely had I spoken when there came a dull, sullen roar. Would to God that I could blot out the sounds and the scenes that followed.” The United States and Spain had long been at odds over the question of independence for Cuba, then a Spanish colony. McKinley had sent the Maine to Havana to stop Spanish-instigated attacks on American-held property in Cuba. Many Americans suspected that Spanish saboteurs had blown up the ship to protest the U.S. incursion into Spanish territorial waters. The shocking images and accounts of the Maine explosion fueled public anger against Spain for its supposed attack on the U.S. Navy, creating a crisis between the two nations. An official investigation confirmed these widely held views, blaming the Maine explosion on a Spanish mine in the harbor. The exact cause of the blast, however, remained a mystery. Some experts now cite a spontaneous combustion from the coal stored alongside ammunition as the most likely culprit, a misfortune thirteen American naval vessels shared between 1895 and 1898. Others suggest that Cuban revolutionaries may have planted the explosives, expecting the United States to blame Spain and declare war. The Maine explosion ignited a four-month war between the United States and Spain in 1898. This “splendid little war,” as one official called it, ended with an overwhelming American victory. The overseas possessions that the United States gained from Spain, including Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines, gave the nation a new formal colonial empire. The United States simultaneously constructed an informal economic empire throughout the Caribbean and East Asia. As the United States established itself as a budding world power, Americans offered conflicting visions of how the United States should behave outside its borders.

“Remember the Maine and to
 hell with Spain!” Newspaper slogan urging war with Spain in the wake of the Maine explosion





 CHAPTER 19

IMPERIAL AMERICA: THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD, 1890–1914

Becoming a World Power
 Throughout the nineteenth century the Atlantic and Pacific oceans provided Americans with a sense of security and detachment from world affairs. By the 1880s, however, advancements in transportation and communication suddenly made the world seem smaller and more dangerous to Americans. Fear alone, though, did not explain Americans’ growing interest in venturing overseas. Americans looked outside their borders to find markets for U.S. goods and the raw materials needed to fuel a growing industrial economy. International recognition as a world power and spreading American values also appealed to the country’s growing sense of national greatness. C A

N A


D A


 NEWFOUNDLA

St. Pierre and
Miquelon


U N I T E D S TAT E S
OF AMERICA

Bermuda


Ri o


 nde Gra

A T L A N T I C
O C E A N


Bahamas


 MEXICO

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

 CUBA

 HAITI

Jamaica


LEEWARD ISLANDS

BRITISH HONDURAS HONDURAS

GUATEMALA SALVADOR

 NICARAGUA

Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands
St. Martin


We st I n d i e s


 Curaçao

Guadeloupe
Martinique


C


 BARBADOS

WINDWARD ISLANDS

European Imperialism


Gre e n
Alaska


C A N


A D A
 NEWFOUNDLAND

St. Pierre and
Miquelon


U N I T E D S TAT E S


Azores


OF AMERICA
Bermuda Rio 
A T L A N T I C


 nde Gra

O C E A N


Bahamas


M EXI CO


Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands
St. Martin


 HAITI

Jamaica


LEEWARD ISLANDS

BRITISH HONDURAS GUATEMALA SALVADOR

Guadeloupe
Martinique


West Indies


 HONDURAS

 Curaçao

 NICARAGUA

WINDWARD ISLANDS COSTA RICA

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

 VENEZUELA

BRITISH GUIANA DUTCH GUIANA FRENCH GUIANA

COLOMBIA
Galapagos Islands to Ecuador 
ECUADO R

B R A Z I L
E


 ACRE

R
U


Ottoman Empire
PA RA GU

 Britain and possessions

 AY

 URUGUAY

A


 German Empire and possessions

 NTIN

 Netherlands and possessions

E


 Portugal and possessions

 CHIL

 Spain and possessions

 ARGE

 France and possessions

Pa
 ran á

B O L I V IA


 Denmark and possessions

CAPE VERDE ISLANDS

 BARBADOS

 Russian Empire and possessions Japan and possessions Italy and possessions US and territories

FALKLAND ISLANDS

 How did European imperialism affect the U.S. effort to create a formal empire?

Canary I


DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

 CUBA

P


 In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Britain, France, and Spain had based their world prominence on far-flung colonial empires, places that they populated with settlers and soldiers to exploit economic resources and protect ocean trade routes. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, these settler communities launched a slew of successful revolutions that liberated colonies in North and South America from European rule. With the “old” colonial empires now defunct, European nations and Japan sought new ones. As Britain, France, Belgium, Germany, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Russia, the Netherlands, and Japan discovered vulnerable areas around the globe to colonize, they developed a new style of empire building. Imperialism, the late nineteenth-century term for colonizing foreign nations and lands, relied primarily on business, political, and military structures rather than settlers to rule colonized peoples and exploit their resources. Europe’s drive to create colonial empires in Africa and Asia in the late nineteenth century provided a model to either emulate or reject as the United States embarked on its campaign to become a world power. Besides exploiting colonies for economic gain, Europeans also drew satisfaction from fulfilling a self-imposed “civilizing” mission to spread Western culture and values to nonwhite and nonChristian populations throughout Africa and Asia. The drawbacks to empires, however, included the need to defend widely dispersed territories and suppress popular uprisings against colonial rule. Americans, therefore, developed conflicting visions from the lessons that they drew from the European experience. Some saw it as an inspiration; others, a cautionary tale.

View the Map World Colonial Empires (1900)


 PORT

BECOMING A WORLD POWER

 As the map (19.1) indicates, the world situation in 1898 affected where the United States could hope to expand its influence. By the time the United States began exploring opportunities for expansion beyond the North American continent, Britain, France, Germany, and the Netherlands had already established colonial empires throughout Africa, East Asia, and South Asia. Great Britain exerted the greatest reach, making it the world’s preeminent imperial power. This left the Western Hemisphere and China as possibilities for U.S. colonial expansion.

The Impulse for Expansion
 Throughout American history territorial expansion played an important role in defining national identity and providing economic opportunity to Americans. In the early nineteenth century, Manifest Destiny, or the belief that Americans had a divine right to expand across North America, fueled expansion. Imbued with a sense of cultural and racial superiority over the indigenous peoples who inhabited these lands, Americans felt justified in taking away land from Indians. In their

19.1 Map of the
World, 1898
 The creation of far-flung European empires at the end of the nineteenth century limited opportunities for the United States to establish its own colonies or new overseas markets.

 n la nd Y

W


A


 DE

N
 FINLAND

N


 SWE

O


R


 ICELAND

R U


S


S


I


A


N


E M P I


R


E


DENMARK BRITAIN

 GERMAN

 NETH.

 POLAND

 EMPIRE

 BELGIUM

AUSTRO-HUNGARIAN EMPIRE

FRANCE ROMANIA

 SWITZ.

 KHIVA

Black Sea


KOREA BU

 KH

 MONTENEGRO

 GREECE

 RI

O


Islands


T


T


O


M


A NCYPRUS

 British occupied

Re
 d

Arabian


Se


 a

Peninsula


ANGLOEGYPTIAN SUDAN

 ERITREA

FRENCH SOMALILAND

Madras
Pondicherry
Karikal


 nominally independent under Belgian control

 ANGOLA

MALDIVE ISLANDS

GERMAN EAST AFRICA

SOUTHERN RHODESIA

Caroline
Islands


 MALAYA

PA C I F I C O C E A N

Bor neo


DUTCH EAST INDIES

PORTUGUESE EAST AFRICA

ORANGE FREE STATE NATAL

KAISER WILHELM’S LAND BISMARCK ARCHIPELAGO

Gilbert
Islands


New
Guinea


Chagos Islands


Java
Cocos Islands


Comoro Islands


SOUTH AFRICAN REPUBLIC

CAPE COLONY

BRITISH NORTH BORNEO BRUNEI

Amirante Islands


 BECHUANALAND

Marshall
Islands


Seychelles


Zanzibar


BRITISH CENTRAL AFRICA

BAROTSELANDNORTHWESTERN RHODESIA

PHILIPPINE ISLANDS

 SARAWAK

NORTHEASTERN RHODESIA

GERMAN SOUTHWEST AFRICA

FRENCH INDOCHINA

 CEYLON

CONGO FREE STATE

Ascension


WALVIS BAY
to Cape Colony 
Guam


Mahé


ITALIAN SOMALILAND

BRITISH EAST AFRICA

 SIAM

Goa


Socotra


 tra

FRENCH CONGO

ST. HELENA

Mariana
Islands


 ma

RIO MUNI

Burma


A BYS S I N I A


 LADO

Hong Kong
Macao
Guangzhouwan


Su


SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE

Taiwan


Diu
 Damão

 HADHRAMAUT

MA DA GA SC AR

Fernando
Po


 g

I N D I A


BRITISH SOMALILAND

KA ME RU N

 TOGO

 BHUTAN

Yanaon


 al eg

 LIBERIA

 NEPAL

 l a y a s

 JAPAN

Weihaiwei
Jiaozhou


 es

A


 to Oman TRUCIAL OMAN

N I GER I A


SIERRA LEONE

 a

Gwadar


Ottoman
 dominions under British control

 GAMBIA

Nig
 er

 m

Ga
 n

 EGYPT

 French in terms of 1899 Franco-British agreement.

GOLD COAST

 i

G


KUWAIT BAHRAIN

FRENCH WEST AFRICA

TUGUESE GUINEA

 PERSIA

 AF

RIO DE ORO

Se
 n

A


H


 IFNI

 TUNIS

 ALGE

 MOROCCO

Malta
Melilla


 IRE

 NIS

Ceuta
Madeira


P
 EM

C H I N A
TA N

I TA LY


 GIBRALTAR

 AR

N


S PA I N


OM A

 PORTUGAL

SERBIA BULGARIA

 HA

 BOSNIAHERZEGOVINA



Christmas
Island


Solomon
Islands


PAPUA PORTUGUESE TIMOR

Ellice
Islands
Santa Cruz
Islands


INDIAN OCEAN
Mauritius Réunion 
Fiji
New
Caledonia


AUSTRALIAN COLONIES

 BASUTOLAND

Lord Howe
Island


NEW ZEALAND

 Which characteristics defined a nation as a world power in the late nineteenth century?



 CHAPTER 19

IMPERIAL AMERICA: THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD, 1890–1914

 view, Native Americans had failed to make the land productive. The government relocated many Indian tribes onto reservations, where officials and missionaries embraced the goal of “civilizing” Indians by teaching them Western capitalist and Christian values (see Chapter 15). The same belief in Manifest Destiny, quest for economic opportunity, and ideas of racial superiority spurred interest in expanding American influence and trade overseas. Prominent businessmen, commercial farmers, and politicians urged the country to seek territory and markets outside the United States. In the 1890s, American companies and farmers sold 90 percent of their goods to other Americans. The time had come, these critics argued, to develop global markets and even colonies to ensure continued prosperity and economic opportunity at home. When the country suffered a devastating economic depression from 1893 to 1897, these calls crystallized into a resolve in some quarters to build a commercial and colonial empire overseas. Technological innovations also encouraged Americans to look beyond their borders. The laying of transatlantic telegraph cables increased both the speed and the volume of information sent throughout the world. The telegraph in many respects served as the Internet of the nineteenth century. Telegrams accelerated the exchange of diplomatic notes between governments, while dispatches from journalists overseas connected Americans on a daily basis to events around the world. If the telegraph hastened the flow of information, the advent of steam-powered ships dramatically reduced the time needed to move people and goods throughout the world. In his seminal 1890 work, The Influence of Sea Power Upon History, 1660–1783, U.S. Navy Captain Alfred T. Mahan traced a direct correlation between a strong navy and world power. In the new age of steampowered battleships, the navy’s outdated wooden sailing ships, described by one congressman as “floating washtubs,” were ill-suited for advancing U.S. interests in the world. From 1890 onward, the United States built battleships to match its growing economic power and its expansionist ambitions, and it soon boasted the third most powerful navy in the world after Great Britain and Germany. In 1907, President Theodore “Teddy” Roosevelt sent the nation’s 16 battleships and four destroyers on a global tour to show off America’s

 How did technology and ideology fuel the nation’s expansionist impulses?

 world-class steam-powered navy, a trip that took two years to complete. Americans’ growing pride in their nation’s economic might and technological prowess encouraged the United States to seek international recognition as a world power. So did the ideological vision encapsulated by social Darwinism, an ideology that applied nineteenth-century naturalist Charles Darwin’s theory of biological evolution to human society through the notion of “survival of the fittest.” At home Americans often used social Darwinism to justify the dominance of the wealthy and powerful, considered “the fit,” over the poor and weak, or “the unfit.” These ideas also shaped how Americans viewed the world. In the social Darwinist view, the “racial superiority” of Northern Europeans explained why Britain, France, and Germany were world powers that easily colonized nonwhite peoples. To take its rightful place alongside, or even above, these world powers, the United States needed to demonstrate its fitness by entering the global competition for colonies. In making a case for expansion, the Congregational minister Josiah Strong linked older ideas of Manifest Destiny with this newer emphasis on survival of the fittest. “It seems to me that God, with infinite wisdom and skill, is training the AngloSaxon race to prevail” in the competition to control lands throughout the world, Strong wrote in his influential book, Our Country: Its Possible Future and Its Present Crisis (1885). In Strong’s view the United States risked losing its chance for global eminence if it failed to join the scramble for colonies underway worldwide. Driven to perfect democracy at home, many Progressives found the call to spread American values abroad appealing. Their reform impulse extended beyond U.S. borders to imagine a world freed from tyranny and injustice. In many respects the strong, activist government that Progressives helped construct at the turn of the century made it possible for the United States to extend its imperial reach during the Progressive Era. Progressives never spoke with one voice on domestic matters, and they also offered competing visions on expanding U.S. influence in the world. Progressives who opposed the nation’s overseas forays feared strengthening big business at the expense of exploited foreign peoples and American workers. They also believed that imperial ventures drew attention away from Progressive reform projects at home.

 Read the Document Josiah Strong, from Our Country (1885)

THE SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR



The Spanish-American War
 The first significant opportunity to expand U.S. influence overseas came when Cuba rose in revolt against Spanish rule. Extensive press coverage of Spanish atrocities and U.S. economic interests in Cuba prompted the nation to take note of this colonial struggle for independence. After a mysterious explosion sank the Maine and killed hundreds of American sailors, many Americans accused Spain of deliberately attacking the ship. Fearing that Congress might declare war on its own, a reluctant President William McKinley finally agreed to an armed intervention. The war with Spain was short, but the outcome was dramatic. The peace treaty with Spain granted the U.S. island possessions in the Caribbean and Pacific that became the territorial foundation for the new U.S. colonial empire.

The Growing Conflict
 with Spain In the early nineteenth century, when Spain’s other Western Hemisphere colonies successfully fought for independence, Cuba (and Puerto Rico) remained loyal to Spain. By 1868, however, oppressive Spanish rule provoked a rebellion in Cuba that ended ten years later with Spain’s pledge to grant the island increased autonomy. Failure to fulfill this promise, economic hardships inflicted by the 1890s depression, and continued agitation by exiled Cuban rebels living in the United States fanned the flames of rebellion again in 1895. By the time the second revolt began, the United States and Cuba had established strong commercial ties. Cuba sent over 90 percent of its exports to the United States, and American investment totaled nearly $50 million in Cuban sugar, cattle, mining, and tobacco industries. Spain paid a heavy price to maintain this symbol of its imperial past. Of the 278,000 Spanish troops sent to Cuba to suppress the revolt, nearly 50,000 had died of yellow fever or malaria by 1898, and an equal number lay too sick to fight. A much smaller force of 20,000–30,000 Cuban rebels drew on their knowledge of the terrain and support from civilians to fight a guerrilla war that ravaged tobacco and sugar plantations to deprive the Spanish government of revenue. Rebels purposefully steered clear of American-owned plantations to avoid antagonizing the United States. Cuban exiles in the United States drew appealing analogies between their struggle for independence and the American Revolution, highlighting the similar desire of Cuban and American colonists

 to free themselves from an exploitive ruler and establish democratic self-rule. If any uncertainty existed among the American public over which side they supported, Spanish General Valeriano Weyler’s infamous reconcentration policy ended those doubts. Through reconcentration Spanish soldiers tried to crush the Cuban rebellion by herding peasants off their farms into heavily fortified camps and then systematically destroying the crops that fed the rebel armies. This policy created a humanitarian crisis in Cuba, as famine and disease ravaged the civilian population, killing nearly 100,000 civilians. Outraged Americans denounced reconcentration as uncivilized and illegal warfare. The yellow press, tabloid journalists and newspapers that reported sensationalist stories with a strong emotional component, fueled public anger against the Spanish. This unique name for nineteenthcentury tabloid journalism derived from competing “Yellow Kid” comic strips in leading New York newspapers that portrayed the antics of a precocious boy living in the city’s tenements. Yellow journalism emerged in the 1880s when Joseph Pulitzer began using melodramatic, partly fictionalized stories to bolster sales of his newspaper, the New York World. After William Randolph Hearst took over the New York Journal in 1895, the two newspapers waged daily battles over who could print the most lurid tales. In the Cuban crisis both papers saw a chance to report the kinds of scandal-driven stories guaranteed to sell newspapers. Exiled Cuban rebels living in the United States provided a steady supply of atrocity stories (some fabricated, some true) to the yellow press, and the vivid illustrations accompanying these accounts helped the public visualize Spanish brutality.

 Why did Americans take an interest in the Cuban rebellion against Spain?



 CHAPTER 19

IMPERIAL AMERICA: THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD, 1890–1914

 The importance of illustrations to the yellow press became clear in a fabled exchange between Hearst and the artist Frederic Remington. Remington, already famous for his portraits of the American West, went to Cuba to draw illustrations for the New York Journal. Tiring of the rebellion’s slow pace, Remington told Hearst he was leaving Cuba. Hearst supposedly replied, “Please remain. You furnish the pictures, and I’ll furnish the war.” This exchange passed quickly into American folklore as proof of Hearst’s determination to use shocking images, real or staged, to provoke a war with Spain. No evidence exists, however, that Hearst ever wrote or sent this reply. Images as History: Atrocity Stories and Public Opinion examines how yellow press illustrations shaped American public opinion.

 Next the Maine exploded in Havana Harbor. After a month of press speculation about the cause of the explosion, an official naval investigation erroneously blamed a Spanish harbor mine for the disaster, rather than the real culprit: faulty ship design that caused an internal explosion, or perhaps sabotage by Cuban rebels who wanted the United States to declare war on Spain. In the weeks immediately following the sinking of the Maine, McKinley tried unsuccessfully to convince Spain to grant Cuba independence and to calm calls for war from Congress. “I have been through one war,” McKinley told a friend, referring to his service in the Civil War. “I have seen the dead piled up, and I do not want to see another.” For many other Americans, however, memories of brutal Civil War battles had faded. They enthusiastically viewed war as a manly adventure that would instill discipline and vigor in American men. The assistant secretary of the navy, Theodore Roosevelt, championed this competing view, writing to a friend in 1897, “I should welcome almost any war, for I think this country needs one.” With the yellow press clamoring for military action, With the Democrats championing war, RepubPresident McKinley turned to diplomacy to end the licans feared that McKinley’s resistance to fighting impasse over Cuba peacefully and repeatedly asked might hurt the party at the polls. Some senators Spain to grant Cuba more autonomy. In 1897, the even suggested that Congress declare war whether Spanish government ended reconcentration by McKinley agreed or not. The pressure for war recalling Weyler and allowing displaced Cuban increased when Senator peasants to return to their Redfield Proctor, several homes. Spain also andays before the navy renounced a plan for limited leased its findings on the Cuban self- government, Maine attack, gave the inviting protests from all Senate a grim accounting sides. Cuban rebels urged Yellow press headline regarding Spanish of the appalling effects of Americans to help them ambassador’s disparaging comments Spain’s reconcentration attain complete indepenabout McKinley policy on the Cuban peodence. Meanwhile Cubans ple. “I went to Cuba with still loyal to Spain reacted a strong conviction that the situation had been overangrily to the limited autonomy plan and rioted drawn,” Proctor noted, then went on to detail the in Havana. An alarmed McKinley decided to send starvation, squalor, and sickness he had seen. This the Maine battleship to Havana to deter loyalists sober address from a conservative Republican and from attacking Americans or their property. Acting stalwart friend of McKinley’s convinced many wawithin the boundaries of acceptable international vering congressmen and Americans that the country practice, McKinley expected the battleship’s preshad a humanitarian duty to save Cuba. ence (with the implied threat of bombardments) to To head off a war, Spain made one last offer to restore calm to Havana. Events in February, 1898, grant Cuba increased autonomy, rejecting McKinley’s however, conspired against McKinley’s effort to call for total independence. “Mr. President, I can no resolve the crisis peacefully. First Hearst’s Journal longer hold back the Senate,” Vice President Garpublished a private letter written by the Spanish rett Hobart told McKinley. “They will act without ambassador, which described McKinley as “weak you if you do not act at once.” Accepting that he and a bidder for the admiration of the crowd.” had failed to settle the crisis, McKinley asked ConAlthough tame compared with the vicious stategress to authorize an armed intervention to end the ments American newspapers routinely made about civil war in Cuba without declaring war on Spain. the president, the letter outraged the public.

The Decision to Intervene
 in Cuba

“Worst Insult to the United
States in Its History.”


 Why was McKinley unable to avoid war with Spain?

Watch the Video Burial of the Maine Victims


THE SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR



Images as History
ATROCITY STORIES AND PUBLIC OPINION
Ever since the yellow press helped raise American ire against Spain in the years leading up to the Spanish-American War, Americans have pondered the power of the press in the United States. How much power do atrocity stories and pictures have to shape public opinion? Can the press convince the public to fight a war? On February 12, 1897, the New York Journal published a story by Richard Harding Davis about a young Cuban woman whom Spanish authorities had expelled for carrying secret messages between Cuban rebels. Davis reported that “Spanish officers” followed Clemencia Arango and her companions onto an American ship. The Spanish officers “demanded that a cabin should be furnished to them to which the girls might be taken, and they were then undressed and searched” for messages to exiled Cuban rebels living in the United States. Frederic Remington’s illustration “Spaniards Search Women on American Steamers” accompanied Davis’s story. The paper next took up the cause of Evangelina Cisneros. Sentenced to 20 years in prison for trying to lure a Spanish officer into a rebel death trap, Cisneros was awaiting deportation to an African penal colony. According to the New York Journal, her only crime was calling for help from nearby Cuban rebels to stop a Spanish officer, “a beast in uniform,” from raping her. On October 10, 1897, the paper triumphantly announced that a New York Journal reporter had helped Cisneros break out of jail and sail to the United States. The yellow press presented Clemencia and Evangelina as symbols for the virtuous and victimized Cuban people, fueling public sympathy for the Cuban rebellion. 
View the Closer Look Images as History: Atrocity
Stories and Public Opinion


 Frederic Remington (who was in the United States when this incident occurred) drew a beautiful naked white woman standing defiantly before the three overly curious and swarthylooking Spanish officers who had undressed her. In fact, female prison matrons performed the search.

•


 “There are things more dreadful than even war and one of them is dishonor,” the New York Journal editorialized about the Clemencia Arango incident.

•


•


 This 1897 illustration of dark-skinned men viewing and touching the body of a white woman resonated powerfully with many white Americans because it aroused their racial prejudices.

“Spaniards Search Women on American
Steamers.” New York Journal, February 12, 1897.


 Press coverage of Cisneros’s escapades generated so much interest that huge crowds gathered to hear of her adventures when she appeared in New York and Washington, D.C., where President McKinley received her in the White House.

•
•


 The headline criticized diplomatic inaction and suggested that only military-style action could save Cuban rebels.

•
 New York Journal accounts exaggerated Cisneros’s lightskinned beauty, noble birth, and prison sufferings.

 Nearly 15,000 women, including President McKinley’s wife, signed the newspaper’s petition to Spain’s Queen María Cristina demanding Cisneros’s release.

•


“Evangelina Cisneros Rescued by the Journal.”
New York Journal, October 10, 1897.


 Why did popular media accounts depict the Cubans as light-skinned and the Spanish as dark-skinned?



 CHAPTER 19

IMPERIAL AMERICA: THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD, 1890–1914

 Congress complied. On April 24, 1898, however, Spain declared war on the United States. The next day Congress responded with its own declaration of war, dating it retroactively to April 21, 1898. To underscore the nation’s altruistic motives, Colorado Senator Henry M. Teller added an amendment to the war resolutions that disavowed any intention of annexing Cuba. The Teller Amendment (1898) promised “to leave the government and control of the [Cuban] Island to its people” at the end of the Spanish-American War. Congress made no such promise to other colonized peoples under Spanish control in the Caribbean and Pacific.

Fighting the War
 against Spain

 “I could not have told where those darned islands were within two thousand miles.” President McKINLEY on the location of the Philippines before the Spanish-American War

 rebellion against Spain. At first the Filipino rebels, who controlled much of the interior, welcomed the Americans as liberators. “I have studied the Constitution of the United States, and I find in it no authority for colonies and I have no fear,” rebel leader Emilio Aguinaldo told one American general. Time would prove him wrong. Besides securing a foothold in the Philippines, the McKinley administration also used the war against Spain as a pretext for settling the festering question of annexing Hawaii that had divided Americans for the past six years. Americans had a long history of involvement in Hawaiian affairs.

FORMOSA (TAIWAN)
(Japanese) 
PA C I F I C OCEAN

Hong Kong
(British)


PHILIPPINE ISLANDS

De
 we

 America’s victory in the Spanish-American War, which lasted from April to August 1898, paved the way for U.S. territorial expansion in the Caribbean and Pacific. One week after the war began, Commodore George Dewey sailed into Manila Harbor, in the Spanish colony of the Philippines, (19.2) and destroyed the Spanish Pacific fleet. Why, Americans wondered, did the navy fight the first battle to liberate Cuba halfway around the world in the Philippines, an archipelago of 7,000 islands in the Pacific Ocean? By C H I N A eliminating the Spanish Pacific fleet, Dewey prevented it from sailing to Cuba. The Gulf of defeat also put added Tonkin pressure on Spain to HAINAN sue for peace. Dewey’s stunning victory catapulted the Philippines into the spotlight, and Americans learned that S I A M the Filipinos were in the midst of their own FRENCH

 y

Manila


Manila Bay


South
China
Sea
Sulu
Sea


 INDOCHINA

19.2 The
Spanish-American
War, 1898
 The U.S. Navy first attacked the Spanish in the Philippines, and then blockaded Cuba as U.S. forces invaded.

Pacific Theater
 Spanish Territory ceded to United States

BRITISH NORTH BORNEO

 Major battle, May 1, 1898 US forces

 Why did the United States first attack Spain in the Philippines?

Read the Document The Teller Amendment (1898)


THE SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR

 By the 1880s, American-owned sugar plantations dominated the Hawaiian economy, American missionaries had waged a successful campaign to eradicate native religions, and the U.S. Navy had established a permanent base at Pearl Harbor on the island of Oahu. Responding to popular discontent over the erosion of native Hawaiians’ economic standing and cultural traditions, Queen Liliuokalani promised to curtail U.S. dominance, when she assumed the throne in 1891. In 1893, however, American businessmen and missionaries working on the islands (representing 5 percent of the islands’ population) overthrew Queen Liliuokalani. U.S. Marines sent ashore from a nearby warship, ostensibly to protect American property, ensured the revolution’s success. Thousands of Hawaiians took to the streets to protest the coup, to no avail. The new Hawaiian republic’s immediate request for annexation by the United States proved controversial, however. Disavowing the role that U.S. officials had played in the coup, President Grover Cleveland apologized to the Queen and demanded her restoration to the throne. The new Hawaiian government ignored Cleveland’s request, choosing



 instead to renew its appeal when the pro-annexation McKinley became president five years later. McKinley believed that acquiring Hawaii would foster U.S. commercial interests in the Pacific. This time the Hawaiian Patriotic League blocked a formal U.S. takeover by presenting the Senate with a 556-page anti-annexation petition signed by over half of native-born Hawaiians. Faced with Hawaiians’ overwhelming opposition to annexation, the Senate voted the measure down in 1897. A year later, however, with the Spanish-American War underway, Congress reversed course. Supporters of annexation argued that U.S. ships headed to the Philippines needed guaranteed access to the naval base in Pearl Harbor. Putting its own strategic and economic needs ahead of Hawaiians’ desire to remain independent, the United States assumed sovereignty over Hawaii on July 7, 1898. Without enough votes in the Senate to approve a formal annexation treaty, McKinley settled for a congressional joint resolution that authorizied annexation with a majority vote. The president appointed a territorial governor to head the Hawaiian government, and in 1900, Congress granted Hawaiians the right to elect a territorial legislature.

Gulf of
Mexico
Tampa


San Juan Heights,
July 1,1898


 FLORIDA

Santiago


 Spanish fleet destroyed, July 3, 1898

Miami


Santiago
Bay


BAH AMA ISL AN D S

Key West


Daiquiri


C a rib b e a n
Se a
Havana
 US

C U B A


Na


ISLE OF PINES

 vy

 co

 as

AT L A N T I C O C E A N
ta 
 lb

 loc

 ka

 de



Santiago
June
Sa
 mpson Ju



See Inset


 ne

Caribbean
Sea
Caribbean Theater


H AI T I D OMI N I C AN
R EPU BL I C


 Port-au-Prince

Santo
Domingo


 Spanish territory ceded to United States Major battle US forces

JA MA I C A

Miles


San Juan
´


PUERTO RICO

 Spanish forces

 Why did Hawaii lose its independence in a war to liberate Cuba?



 CHAPTER 19

19.3 Charge
 up the San Juan Heights, 1898 This painting depicted a horseback charge up the San Juan Heights that was glorious and heroic, with flags flying and no casualties. In reality, the soldiers advanced slowly on foot to reach the crest.

IMPERIAL AMERICA: THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD, 1890–1914

 Meanwhile military planners focused on defeating the Spanish in Cuba. The accompanying map, “Spanish-American War, 1898” (19.2) illustrates how the navy immediately blockaded Cuba, trapping the Spanish Atlantic Fleet in Santiago. America’s small peacetime army, however, was woefully unprepared to train and equip the thousands of volunteers enlisting throughout the country. Theodore Roosevelt resigned as assistant secretary of the navy and formed the First U.S. Volunteer Calvary by recruiting Americans from wildly diverse backgrounds. Many of the recruits had personal connections to Colonel Roosevelt, a result of his eclectic lifestyle that included attending Harvard, hunting expeditions in the West, and a stint as police commissioner in New York City. Dubbed the Rough Riders, this collection of cowboys, Ivy League athletes, policemen, and Pawnee scouts was one of the few volunteer units that actually fought in the war. Although American forces swelled from 28,000 to 275,000, most never left the United States. On June 22, 17,000 U.S. troops landed in Cuba to join Cuban rebels on a slow march through heavy jungle to the port of Santiago, which sheltered the

 How accurate were the legends that surrounded the charge up the San Juan Heights?

 bulk of the Spanish navy and army. Hidden Spanish sharpshooters harassed U.S. soldiers as they made their way to the San Juan Heights, the hills that encircled Santiago. On July 1, the Americans, under the command of General William Shafter, attacked 750 Spanish soldiers along the San Juan Heights. “I have seen many illustrations and pictures of this charge on the San Juan hills, but none of them seem to show it just as I remember it,” recalled journalist Richard Harding Davis, who watched the battle from the sidelines as the Americans walked up the hill. Like most illustrations of the battle seen in newspapers at the time, this painting (19.3) erroneously shows waves of eager American soldiers advancing on horseback with the flag flying, suggesting “an invincible overpowering weight of numbers,” Davis noted. Yet, he continued, “I think the thing which impressed one the most, when our men started [walking] from cover, was that they were so few. It almost seemed as if someone had made an awful and terrible mistake. One’s instinct was to call to them to come back.” Roosevelt led the Rough Riders to the top of the San Juan Heights, a feat that garnered him and the unit acclaim. They stood alongside African American

 Watch the Video Roosevelt’s Rough Riders

THE SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR

 troops from the Ninth and Tenth Calvary who had actually reached the top first, which Roosevelt and the mainstream media failed to mention when celebrating the victory. The battle provided another opportunity for the yellow press to whip up war fervor on the home front. Responding to (false) rumors that Spanish soldiers had mutilated the corpses of American servicemen killed during the clash, a Judge magazine cover (19.4) pictured a Spaniard drenched in the blood of American soldiers who lay at his feet. In one hand the ape-like figure holds the bloody knife responsible for the atrocity. His other hand rests on the gravestone of U.S. sailors whom he allegedly killed by exploding the Maine. This image of a brute that trampled on the American flag reinforced yellow press portrayals of Spain as a beast that the United States needed to subdue. The caricature also fed into racist notions of white supremacy—just like African Americans at home, and soon the Filipinos abroad, the dark-skinned Spanish posed a threat to the civilized world. In future conflicts American propaganda used strikingly similar images to arouse passionate hatred of the nation’s German and Japanese enemies. Legendary accounts attributed the American success in charging up the San Juan Heights to heroic frontal charges; in fact, the Americans’ three Gatling machine guns made the decisive difference. Believing his exhausted troops could go no farther after reaching the top, General Shafter decided to lay siege to Santiago instead of attacking the city directly. While American troops encircled the city atop the surrounding hills, U.S. ships blocked the port, thus trapping the bulk of the Spanish navy and army in Santiago. When the Spanish fleet made a dash to leave on July 3, American ships sank or beached every Spanish vessel. In both Manila and Santiago, the newly modernized U.S. navy outclassed the decrepit Spanish fleet, scoring easy, one-sided victories. On July 17, the Spanish surrendered the city and Cuba to the Americans. After defeating the Spanish in Cuba, U.S. forces landed in Puerto Rico, also a Caribbean Spanish colony, where they encountered only token opposition. American troops fought one more battle to take Manila on August 13, having not yet received word that the war between the United States and Spain had ended the day before. The war concluded on a sour note, however. With limited understanding of how malaria, yellow fever, and typhoid spread, Army physicians could not stop these diseases from ravaging

View the Image Our Victorious Fleet in Cuban Waters


 the troops that occupied Cuba during the summer of 1898. Victory celebrations among U.S. troops soon gave way to panic, when hundreds of soldiers fell ill and healthy young men became hollow-eyed, walking skeletons. It was “a heartbreaking sight” to see her husband, a yellow fever victim whose weight had dropped from 165 pounds to 89 pounds, Grace Paulding recalled. He needed a year’s nursing before he could work again. Despairing over the lack of qualified hospital attendants, the surgeon general turned in desperation to the female nurses offering their services to the military. Eventually, 1,500 professional and Red Cross female nurses worked side by side with army doctors at home and overseas. Overall the Americans counted 385 officers and soldiers killed in combat (excluding those killed on the Maine), and nearly 2,000 deaths from disease. The peace treaty, signed on December 10, 1898, set the terms of the U.S. victory. In the Treaty of Paris, Spain relinquished its claim to Cuba, and the United States received Puerto Rico



19.4 The Spanish
Brute, 1898
 This wartime caricature portrayed the Spanish as bloodthirsty beasts who murdered and mutilated American servicemen.

 Were Americans right to characterize the SpanishAmerican War as “the splendid little war”?



 CHAPTER 19

IMPERIAL AMERICA: THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD, 1890–1914

 in the Caribbean and Guam, the largest of the Mariana Islands, in the Pacific. In return for $20 million, Spain also ceded the Philippines to the United States. How this land transfer would affect the political future of the Philippines remained in doubt. Did the United States intend to grant the Philippines independence or keep it as a colony? Americans soon offered competing visions on how to resolve this question. Despite the idealistic guarantees given in the Teller Amendment, Cuba became an independent nation in name only. The United States linked the withdrawal of American occupation troops to concessions from Cuba. The Platt Amendment (1901) required Cuba to give the United States the right to maintain a naval base at Guantánamo Bay and to intervene militarily to protect “life, property, and individual liberty.” Besides granting the United States a privileged trading relationship, the Cuban government also needed permission from the United States before entering into treaties with other nations. The former Spanish colony essentially became a U.S. protectorate, a relationship in which a superior power assumes authority over a weaker country or territory to protect it from invasion and dominate its affairs. The United States took advantage

 of these rights and occupied Cuba numerous times until Congress repealed the Platt Amendment in 1934. The United States continues to maintain a naval base at Guantánamo Bay, using it to jail and interrogate prisoners captured during the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq that began in 2001 and 2003, respectively. In his successful 1900 reelection bid against Democrat William Jennings Bryan, McKinley made a strong connection between events at home and abroad. One campaign poster (19.5) featured portraits of the president and his war hero running mate, Theodore Roosevelt. The individual images reminded Americans of Cuban suffering under Spanish rule and blamed the devastating depression of the 1890s on the Democrats. The poster then noted that domestic prosperity returned and social justice prevailed overseas, once the United States led by the Republicans stepped out into the world. The claim that American intervention improved life for both U.S. and world citizens became a powerful argument in favor of constructing an American empire. Bryan focused his campaign on the evils of imperialism, but McKinley carried the election with a “full dinner pail” slogan that emphasized restored prosperity.

 19.5 McKinley Campaign Poster, This poster helped voters visualize how expanding the nation’s global influence created trading opportunities that made the whole country more prosperous. Emphasizing the American humanitarian mission abroad resonated with Progressive reformers and religious groups dedicated to spreading American values and institutions.

 What steps did the United States take to construct a formal and informal empire after its victory over Spain?

Read the Document The Platt Amendment (1901)


CREATING AN AMERICAN EMPIRE



Creating an American Empire
 The Senate’s razor-thin ratification of the Treaty of Paris, with just two votes to spare, ignited a strident internal debate over whether the United States should annex or free the Philippines. In the wake of ratification, both imperialists and anti-imperialists offered competing economic, political, and racial arguments about the wisdom of colonizing the Philippines. Unwilling to leave their fate in the hands of American politicians, Filipinos revolted against U.S. forces. The rebellion soon evolved into a vicious all-out war with high casualties on both sides.

 The Debate over Colonies

 countries, the league asked? Instead of economic gains anti-imperialists foresaw decades of expenses to maintain colonial outposts. Debate also centered on the ability of the Filipinos to govern themselves. On the imperialist side, McKinley adopted a strong paternalistic stance, arguing that “We could not leave them to themselves—they were unfit for self-government, and they would soon have anarchy and misrule worse then Spain’s was.” Caricatures helped imperialists

 In a risky strategic move that divided Democrats, party leader William Jennings Bryan had urged anti-imperialist Democratic senators to support ratification of the Treaty of Paris, so that the United States could grant the Philippines independence, once Spain relinquished control. But after the Senate had ratified the treaty, the majority of Republicans fought to keep the Philippines as a colony. Maps in the popular press helped Americans visualize the strategic and commercial importance of the nation’s new island possessions. The “Map of the China Seas … Under the National Flags, 1898” (19.6), published in Harper’s Weekly, portrayed key parts of the imperialist argument for building an American empire in East Asia. By showing the proximity of the Philippines to European colonial possessions in East Asia, the map reinforced McKinley’s claim that another European power would colonize the islands if the United States withdrew. The map also illustrated the imperialist slogan, “trade follows the flag.” The closeness of the Philippines to China, for example, underscored the usefulness of the colony for developing a strong trading relationship between the United States and China. A competing economic argument came from the Anti-Imperialist League, an organization that attracted a broad cross-section of politicians, Progressive reformers, writers, industrialists, and labor activists who opposed overseas colonial expansion. How would markets for 19.6 “Map of the China Seas … Under the National Flags, 1898” American industrialized goods suddenly This Harper’s Weekly map depicted the United States taking its rightful place alongside other world powers with colonial empires in East Asia. materialize in undeveloped Asian

 What competing economic arguments did imperialists and anti-imperialists offer about colonies?



 CHAPTER 19

IMPERIAL AMERICA: THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD, 1890–1914

19.7 Give the Child Over to the Nurse, Uncle, and It Will Stop Crying
 Uncle Sam protects a Filipino child from ignorance and crime, portrayed as a savage black nurse, by feeding him education and civilization. This 1899 pro-expansionist political cartoon accused anti-imperialists like Senator Hoar of Massachusetts of failing to realize that the racially inferior Filipinos were too immature to rule themselves, no matter how much the Filipinos protested.

 publicize their case, incorporating popularly accepted notions of Americans’ racial and moral superiority to so-called uncivilized peoples. This political cartoon (19.7) contained strong racial undertones, depicting Uncle Sam as a nurturing white father who protects the wailing savage Filipino child from Independence (pictured as a depraved mammylike figure) and from anti-imperialists like Senator George Hoar, a Republican from Massachusetts. Most Filipinos had converted to Catholicism under three centuries of Spanish rule, a religion that many Americans distrusted. Besides spreading AngloSaxon cultural and political values, McKinley called upon Americans to take control of Filipinos’ spiritual lives by turning them into Protestants.

 How did white Americans’ racial views influence the debate over colonizing the Philippines?

 Anti-imperialists viewed the question of governing the Filipinos differently. They claimed that subjugating the Philippines to imperial rule violated the principles of representative government outlined in the Constitution. Their slogan, “the Constitution follows the flag,” conveyed their belief that Congress could not withhold constitutional rights, including the right to self-government, from colonial subjects. In the 1900–1904 Insular Cases, the Supreme Court affirmed Congress’s authority to govern the Philippines, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico as colonies. The Court upheld the acquisition of colonies as constitutional and ruled that colonial populations did not become American citizens until the United States incorporated the colonies as territories. The justices offered a more mixed response on the question of extending constitutional rights to colonial subjects. In these cases the Court denied colonial subjects some constitutional protections, such as procedural rights that guaranteed a fair trial, but held that Congress could not abridge the “natural rights” of free speech and religion. Recognition of these limited rights did not appease anti-imperialists, however. “Yes, as near as I can make out the Constitution follows the flag—but doesn’t quite catch up with it,” quipped Secretary of War Elihu Root. In 1900, Congress granted inhabitants of Hawaii and Alaska American citizenship, making them eligible for full protection under the Bill of Rights. Puerto Ricans had to wait until 1917 and residents of Guam until 1952. Filipinos never held American citizenship. This 1899 editorial cartoon (19.8) by Louis Dalrymple, School Begins. Uncle Sam (to his new class in Civilization) encapsulated the debate between imperialists and anti-imperialists over whether the United States needed the consent of colonized peoples to govern them. Appearing in Puck, a magazine that specialized in political satire, the cartoon portrays Uncle Sam as an annoyed teacher pointing sternly at frightened black pupils representing the Philippines, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and Cuba. Getting ready to teach from a book entitled U.S.— First Lessons in Self Government, the teacher tells the students that they have to “learn these lessons

Read the Document Platform for the American
Anti-Imperialist League (1899)


CREATING AN AMERICAN EMPIRE



19.8 School
Begins. Uncle Sam
 (to his new class in Civilization) Before the SpanishAmerican War, images in the popular press depicted Cuba as a virginal white woman (see Images as History: Atrocity Stories and Public Opinion, p. 567) to arouse Americans’ sympathies. Afterward, editorial cartoons consistently portrayed Cuba as a black child in need of instruction to justify ruling Cuba as a protectorate.

 whether you want to or not!” He then urges them to “take a look at the class ahead of you, and remember that, in a little while, you will feel as glad to be here as they are!” Does he mean the studious white students studying from books bearing the names of recently added states like California and Nevada? Or is he referring to the African American boy washing windows, the Indian sitting in the corner reading a book upside down, or the Chinese child refused entry into the classroom—all previous subjects of missionary zeal? The satirical signs on the wall trumpet the imperialist emphasis on precedents—in this case the willingness of Britain and the Union to govern colonies and the former Confederacy, respectively, without their consent. The debate between imperialists and anti-imperialists is explored further in Competing Visions: Annexing the Philippines (page 576). In 1899, the British poet Rudyard Kipling entered the American debate over colonizing the Philippines when the popular magazine McClure’s published his poem, “The White Man’s Burden—The United

 States and the Philippine Islands.” Kipling pictured Americans embracing “the white man’s burden,” the Anglo-Saxon quest to better the lives of so-called racially inferior peoples by spreading Western economic, cultural, and spiritual values and institutions. Black newspapers offered a competing vision, publishing an array of poems and editorials that detailed “the black man’s burden” of living in a country that accepted Jim Crow practices in the South.

 The PhilippineAmerican War On June 12, 1898, the Filipino leader Emilio Aguinaldo declared the Philippines independent of Spain. In January, 1899, he formed a provisional government that concentrated power in the hands of elites from the main island of Luzon to rule the ethnically and religiously diverse societies that inhabited the archipelago. Fighting began

 “[T]here was nothing left for us to do but to take them all, and to educate the Filipinos, and uplift and civilize and Christianize them.” President McKINLEY explaining the imperialist vision for annexing the Philippines as a colony

View the Closer Look Competing Visions:
 The White Man’s Burden

 How did imperialists define the nation’s civilizing mission?



 CHAPTER 19

IMPERIAL AMERICA: THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD, 1890–1914

Competing Visions
ANNEXING THE PHILIPPINES
Debate over annexing the Philippines did not follow party lines, as revealed in the differing views of two leading Republicans, Carl Schurz, a former secretary of the interior and senator from Missouri and Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts. Schurz and Lodge both evoked the nation’s previous expansionist drives to strengthen their arguments, offering historical analogies between the nation’s prior success acquiring and absorbing new territories and the present dilemma over the Philippines. Did annexing the Philippines represent a continuation or break with past expansionist methods and policies? In this 1899 anti-annexation speech, Carl Schurz argued that the past offered no guide to the present crisis. 
 In 1900, Senator Henry Cabot Lodge saw strong continuities between the past and present in urging for annexation of the Philippines.

 Has not the career of the Republic almost from its very beginning been one of territorial expansion? Has it not acquired Louisiana, Florida, Texas, the vast countries that came to us through the Mexican war and Alaska, and has it not digested them well?... If the Republic could digest the old, why not the new? What is the difference?...

 It has been stated over and over again that we have done great wrong in taking these islands without the consent of the governed, from which, according to American principles, all just government derives its powers. The consent of the governed! It is a fair phrase and runs trippingly upon the tongue, but I have observed a great lack of definite meaning in those who use it most … What do we mean by the “consent of the governed?” We quote it from the Declaration of Independence. What did Jefferson mean by the phrase? … The Declaration of Independence was the announcement of the existence of a new revolutionary government upon American soil. Upon whose consent did it rest? Was it upon that of all the people of the colonies duly expressed. Most assuredly not. In the first place we must throw out all negroes and persons of African descent, who formed about one quarter of the population, and who were not consulted at all as to the proposed change of government …. Were women included in the word “governed?” They certainly were not permitted by voice or vote to express an opinion on this momentous question. They must, therefore, be excluded…. Did the revolutionary government rest on the consent of all the white males in the colonies? Most assuredly not. There was the usual age limitation … Everywhere the suffrage was limited, generally by property qualifications, sometimes by other restrictions… … Under the guidance of Thomas Jefferson … we took Louisiana without the consent of the governed, and ruled it without their consent so long as we saw fit. Who is there to-day who will stand up and say that Thomas Jefferson did not do well and rightly when he bought Louisiana? … Then came the Mexican war, and by the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo we received a great cession of territory from Mexico, including all the California coast … There were many Mexicans living within the ceded territory. We never asked their consent….

 1. All the former acquisitions were on this continent and, excepting Alaska, contiguous to our borders. 2. They were situated, not in tropical, but in the temperate zone, where democratic institutions thrive and where our people could migrate in mass. 3. They were but very thinly peopled in fact, without any population that would have been in the way of new settlements. 4. They could be organized as territories in the usual manner, with the expectation that they would presently come into the Union as self-governing States with populations substantially homogeneous to our own. 5. They did not require a material increase of our Army and Navy, either for their subjection to our rule or for their defense against any probable foreign attack provoked by their being in our possession.

 Did Schurz and Lodge interpret history correctly in their arguments?

View the Closer Look Competing Visions:
Annexing the Philippines


CREATING AN AMERICAN EMPIRE



 on February 4, 1899, when U.S. and Filipino patrols as a motto, and fill the blacks [Filipinos] full of clashed in the darkness, igniting a full-scale battle lead before finding out whether or not they are on the outskirts of Manila. The U.S. government friends or enemies,” a soldier from Utah wrote called the conflict the Philippine Insurrection, home. American soldiers burned villages and using insurrection, a term used to describe an illecrops to deprive rebels of shelter and food, tactics gitimate revolt against an established government, that created a starving civilian refugee populato underscore that the Philippines was now a U.S. tion and encouraged resentful peasants to join colony, not an independent nation with the right to Aguinaldo’s force. Critics were quick to point out wage war. The conflict nonetheless soon became a that these tactics resembled those used by Spain full-fledged war. In the Philippine-American War, in Cuba. Exposés in the American press and Senfought from 1899 to 1902, the United States evenate investigations revealed the inventive tortures tually defeated Filipino rebel forces. The cost of the the army used to extract information from captwo-and-a-half-year war in human lives differentitured Filipino rebels, fueling the ongoing debate ated it immediately from the quick American vicover whether the United States was civilizing or tory in Cuba. Between 1899 and 1902, 70,000 U.S. conquering the Philippines. In the “water cure,” soldiers (nearly 70 percent of the army) fought a for example, interrogators shoved a bamboo grueling war against the insurrectionists, and 4,196 shoot down a victim’s throat to keep his mouth U.S. troops lost their lives. Estimates place the open while they poured water into his throat and number of Filipino soldiers and civilians killed as nose until his stomach swelled and he could not high as 220,000. breathe, and then pushed The rebels used convenon the stomach to expel tional warfare tactics at the water. The victim had a first, but eventually turned few minutes to release the to ambushes, sniping, and desired information before sabotage to drive out U.S. his interrogators repeated An American soldier confronting occupying forces. American the entire process. Filipino rebel guerilla tactics soldiers called the Filipino Justifying annexation way of war “amigo warfare” of the Philippines as part (amigo being the Spanish word for friend) because of the “white man’s burden” posed a particularly the guerilla fighters posed as friendly peasants dur- thorny dilemma for the 6,000 African American ing the day, then fought for the rebel army at night. soldiers fighting in their own segregated regiments The difficulties of supplying troops with food and to subdue the Filipino rebels. White soldiers conmedical care as they marched through the jungle stantly referred to Filipinos as “niggers,” the same in search of insurgents contributed to American derogatory term they used when speaking about soldiers’ miseries. To uproot the guerillas, the U.S. their African American comrades. Knowing that Army adopted a mix of persuasive and coercive many African American civilians opposed the war tactics. In many villages the army built roads, imas “an unholy war of conquest,” a term coined by proved sanitation, vaccinated civilians, and created Methodist minister Henry McNeal Turner, black schools. Tens of thousands of Filipinos aided the soldiers nevertheless hoped that their honorable U.S. Army during the rebellion by providing infor- military record would advance civil rights and mation and supplies, a sign of their gratitude for economic opportunities for African Americans. American-engineered improvements in their daily Filipino rebels posted signs on trees that chastised life and of their own religious, class, or ethnic disAfrican Americans for fighting “against people agreements with the Aguinaldo-led independence who are struggling for recognition and freedom, movement. Rebel soldiers dealt harshly with civil[while] your people in America are being lynched ians who refused to supply them with food or told and disfranchised by the same who are trying to the Americans where to find insurgent hideouts. compel us to believe that their government will Benevolent policies won over only half of deal justly and fairly by us.” Yet these Filipino apthe archipelago, however. In provinces where peals to lay down their arms had little effect on these reforms failed to curtail guerilla attacks, most African American troops, who focused inU.S. troops lashed out with increasing brutality. stead on avenging the lives of comrades killed by “With an enemy like this to fight, it is not surpris- Filipino rebels. One exception was Corporal David ing that the boys should soon adopt ‘no quarter’ Fagan, a black soldier who had fought in Cuba and

 “Every tree seemed to shoot at us!”

View the Image African American Troops in the Spanish American War


 What tactics did the U.S. Army adopt to fight the Filipino rebels?



 CHAPTER 19

19.9 American
Rule in the
Philippines
The 1904 St. Louis
 World’s Fair included exhibits on American efforts to school native tribes in the Philippines, turning these exotically dressed people into tourist attractions.

IMPERIAL AMERICA: THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD, 1890–1914

 defected to the Filipino army shortly after arriving in the Philippines. He was one of five black soldiers who deserted to the other side. Fagan’s reputation grew to mythic proportions as he eluded capture and organized guerilla raids on his former comrades-in-arms. Emilio Aguinaldo was not so fortunate. In March 1901, a prisoner revealed the location of Aguinaldo’s hideaway 50 miles into the jungle. To capture Aguinaldo, General Frederick Funston assembled a group of Macabebe scouts, a Philippine ethnic group that had traditionally served Spain and now aided the United States. Posing as reinforcements, the Macabebe soldiers entered Aguinaldo’s camp accompanied by five American soldiers pretending to be prisoners. The group arrived as a birthday celebration for Aguinaldo was underway, and when the infiltrators reached for their weapons, Aguinaldo’s guards assumed they were preparing to fire an honor salute. Instead the Macabebe scouts began shooting, the signal for the rest of Funston’s men, who were waiting on the perimeter, to invade the camp. Aguinaldo’s guards fled in panic, leaving him in the hands of the Americans. A chastened Aguinaldo called on his followers to lay down their arms and accept U.S. rule. One by one his generals surrendered, and the war ground to a halt. Theodore Roosevelt, who became president after McKinley’s 1901 assassination (see Chapter 18), declared the war over on July 4, 1902. American troops nonetheless remained in the

 Philippines for another 11 years to subdue separate revolts by Muslim Moro tribal leaders in remote islands. In 1900, William Howard Taft became the first civilian governor general of the Philippines. When the war ended, he expanded efforts to build roads and schools and improve sanitation. Taft also convinced Congress to purchase church-held land from the Vatican, which the colonial administration then helped peasants buy with low-cost mortgages. To put the debate over annexing the Philippines to rest, the government sponsored exhibits at the 1904 St. Louis World’s Fair that championed the imperialist vision of colonization. In the Philippine Reservation display, visitors walked through six reconstructed Filipino villages and watched partially clothed members of remote Filipino tribes demonstrate native practices that included feasts of dog and headhunting. By inviting tribes with the most exotic customs to participate, organizers intended to juxtapose the primitiveness of Filipino culture with the civilizing influence of U.S. rule. Photographs captured the U.S.-sponsored effort to provide illiterate, nearly naked Filipinos with a Western education. In this image (19.9) an educated Filipina instructor wearing a traditional butterfly dress (representing the positive aspects of modernization) teaches her “uncivilized” pupils before a gallery of onlookers who appear unconcerned about putting these people on display as a tourist attraction. Instead Americans who talked with villagers at the exhibit quickly “disabused themselves of any impression that the natives could take care of themselves,” one newspaper reported. Other displays at the World’s Fair championed America’s scientific, economic, and cultural achievements. Collectively these exhibits suggested that as a leading nation in the civilized world, the United States had the duty and right to become a colonial power.

 How does this image of a Philippine classroom compare to the schoolroom setting satirized in School Begins. Uncle Sam (to his new class in Civilization) (Figure 19.8 on page 575)?

AMERICA AND EAST ASIA



America and East Asia
 The United States fought a war of conquest in the Philippines to secure an independent trade route to East Asia only to discover that the coveted China market was in danger of disappearing. To prevent the world’s leading powers from carving China up into formal colonies, the United States turned to diplomacy, convincing these nations to keep Chinese trade open to all. Americans also viewed their nation’s role in negotiating an end to the Russo-Japanese War in 1905 as a sign of America’s growing world stature. Not all international conflicts in this period originated outside the United States, however. In 1907, President Roosevelt used diplomacy to smooth over the crisis that arose in Japanese-American relations when California initiated a campaign to segregate and ban Japanese immigrants. American access to these potential customers, however, appeared in danger of evaporating at the Throughout the nineteenth century China granted turn of the century. The world’s leading nations most-favored trading status (commercial privileges) descended on China to each claim a sphere of to every world power that asked. This strategy preinfluence, the term used to describe the exclusive vented any one foreign nation from gaining too political and trading rights that a foreign nation much influence over the Chinese economy and enjoyed within another nation’s territory. American helped China remain independent in an age when missionaries continued their religious activities in Europe and Japan colonized most other Asian lands. these new spheres of influence, areas that American Any nation contemplating a campaign to colonize businessmen also coveted as future markets for U.S. China risked provoking the wrath of angry competi- goods. At this point the involved nations only detors eager to protect their own access to Chinese manded a monopoly over trade in a specific region, trade. but the U.S. government feared that an outright In the 1880s and 1890s, American Protestant division of China into formal colonies would soon missionaries began venturing into the interior follow. “All Europe is seizing on China and if we do of China, away from not establish ourselves the ports where foreign in the East that vast businessmen concentrade, from which we trated their commermust draw our future cial activity. In their prosperity” would letters to American close to the United churches, missionaries States forever, Senator Expansionist JOSIAH STRONG, exaggerated Chinese Henry Cabot Lodge linking the civilizing mission to interest in Western warned. capitalist consumption, 1886. agricultural crops such Already stretched as wheat and cotton. to the limit in the By whetting public curiosity about a vast Chinese Caribbean and Philippines, and facing strong antimarket, some missionaries hoped to bolster imperialist sentiments at home, McKinley never domestic support for their religious work in considered sending troops to China to seize a port China. In his book Chinese Characteristics (1900), or territory. Instead Secretary of State John Hay missionary Arthur Smith offered a competing circulated a carefully worded set of notes that laid vision. Chinese clothing, he pointed out, had no the foundation for the Open Door Policy, a U.S.pockets. The Chinese placed little emphasis on sponsored nonbinding international agreement that acquiring personal possessions like “a cork-screw, kept the Chinese market open to all foreign nations. a boot-buttoner, a pair of tweezers, a minute The first set of Open Door Notes asked Britain, compass, a folding pair of scissors … a fountain France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and Russia to allow pen” that most Americans deemed essential to other nations to trade freely within their respective their daily lives. spheres of influence, refrain from imposing arbitrary

The Open Door in China


 “What is the process of civilizing but the creating of more and higher wants?”

 Why did Americans develop a strong interest in China at the turn of the century?



 CHAPTER 19

19.10 Foreign
Activity in China,
American
 missionaries and businessmen established a presence in China that the U.S. government tried to protect by negotiating with nations that had spheres of influence there.

IMPERIAL AMERICA: THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD, 1890–1914

 the militants’ martial arts training. When thousands of Boxers began roaming the countryside, attacking foreigners, an international force of ground troops and battleships assembled to crush the insurgency. Tensions escalated dramatically when the Boxers besieged foreign diplomats and businessmen in Beijing (called Peking by Westerners). Throughout the crisis Secretary Hay worked frantically to prevent the involved nations from using the Boxer Rebellion as an excuse to colonize China. In a second round of Open Door Notes, Hay asked the same nations that had accepted the first Open Door Notes to respect the “territorial and administrative integrity” of China. To avoid negative responses, Hay did not ask for a formal reply to his request. To further protect American missionary and economic interests in China (pictured in 19.10), McKinley sent 2,500 U.S. soldiers to join a

 duties on foreign goods, and let Chinese officials collect customs fees (thereby recognizing China’s continued political control). By January 1900, Hay reported that all nations with a sphere of influence in China had agreed to abide by these terms. For the time being the allure of trading opportunities in the spheres of others outweighed the desire for fullfledged colonies in China. Hay neglected to consult China in his diplomatic negotiations. Angry over the humiliating foreign domination, Chinese militants vowed to restore Chinese sovereignty over its land and economy. In 1900, a secret society called the Righteous and Harmonious Fists initiated a terrorist campaign to drive the “foreign devils” out of China, a crusade that members of the Chinese imperial government secretly funded. Westerners called this group the Boxers because of the clenched fist they adopted as their emblem and

RUSSIAN EMPIRE MANCHURIA

 r R .

S ea of
Japan J A PA N


A


Gobi D


 r ese

 mu

 t Pyongyang

 KOREA (Japan 1895)

 an g H e ow R.)

Seoul


H


 u

(Y


 el

Beijing
(Boxer Rebellion 1900)


 l

PACIFIC E
ast C hi na S ea 
M


TI BET
(autonomous A after 1912) L A Y A S 
Jiang
 ng zi R.)

Lhasa


OCEAN RYUKYU IS.

(Y Cha
 an g

I


Kyoto


Yel l ow
S ea


C H I N A
H


Edo
(Tokyo)


(Japan, 1872)
Colonial
 possessions

 TAIWAN

Delhi


Spheres of
 influence

Russia
Britain


BRITISH INDIA

Macao
(Port., 1555)


Calcutta


Japan


Hong Kong
(Br., 1842)


France
Germany
 US colonies

BURM A
Manilla 
SIA M
Ba y o f Bengal 
Bangkok


FRENCH INDOCHINA
(1884) 
 S outh C hi na S ea

US
Protestant missionary activity 
 PHILIPPINES

Saigon


 What does this map reveal about relations between China and the world’s leading powers, including the United States?

Read the Document Katherine Mullikin Lowry on the
Boxer Rebellion (1900)


AMERICA AND EAST ASIA

 multinational force in rescuing the foreigners and ending the Boxer Rebellion. As punishment for the imperial government’s support of the Boxers, the international coalition demanded $333 million in indemnities from China. The United States used its share to provide scholarships for Chinese students studying at American universities.

 Relations with Japan Despite the Open Door Policy, the competition for rights to control railroads, mines, and ports in China continued, and within a few years, Japan and Russia fought to control China’s resource-rich Manchurian province and the Korean peninsula. The RussoJapanese War of 1904–1905 threatened to topple the balance of power that the United States was trying to maintain in China. Concerned that an overwhelming Japanese victory “may possibly mean a struggle between them and us in the future,” President Roosevelt offered to negotiate a peace settlement. In August 1905, a financially exhausted Japan and a militarily defeated Russia came to the peace table in Portsmouth, New Hampshire. Many Americans delighted at the sight of their president mediating a conflict between two world powers. In 1906, Roosevelt received the Nobel Peace Prize for his role in ending the Russo-Japanese War. But Roosevelt soon faced the possibility of losing the Japanese friendship he had worked so hard to protect. In 1905, California legislators, newspapers, and labor leaders mounted a strident campaign to halt Japanese immigration. Japanese and Korean exclusion leagues urged Congress to follow the precedent of the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act and prohibit Asians from entering the nation. These groups denounced Asians as a degenerative element that threatened American culture and unfairly competed for jobs that rightfully belonged to native-born white workers. California legislators lumped all Asians together when they spoke about defending the nation from the “Yellow Peril,” but Roosevelt understood the vast difference between a weak, humiliated China and a powerful, proud Japan. “If we show that we regard the Japanese as an inferior and alien race, and try to treat them as we have treated the Chinese; and if at the same time we fail to keep our navy at the highest point of efficiency and size—then we shall invite disaster,” Roosevelt wrote privately. In 1906, the San Francisco Board of Education decided to send Japanese, Chinese, and Korean children to one set of segregated schools. With Japan bristling at



 the insult of Americans lumping Japanese together with Asian peoples whom they viewed as inferior to themselves, Roosevelt intervened to control the damage to U.S.-Japanese relations. California agreed to revoke the segregation order in return for an end to Japanese immigration, but Hawaiian sugar planters protested that they needed Japanese workers. As a compromise Roosevelt issued an executive order that allowed Japanese workers into Hawaii. The president then negotiated a reduction in Japanese immigration to the mainland. In the Gentlemen’s Agreement (1907–1908), Japan agreed to deny passports to Japanese workers intending to immigrate to the United States. This informal agreement helped Japan escape the indignity of joining China as the only other nation legally banned from sending immigrant workers to the United States.

Angel Island
 In the Gentlemen’s Agreement Japan reserved the right to issue passports to professionals and the relatives of Japanese migrants or citizens already living in the United States. Until the United States closed this loophole in 1921, Japan gave passports to Japanese wives so they could join their husbands in the United States. Americans called these women “picture brides” because couples often exchanged photos of each other through a matchmaker who arranged long-distance marriages for Japanese men residing in the United States. The 300–500 Japanese “picture brides” who immigrated annually to the United States met their new husbands for the first time when they arrived. Chinese immigration also surged during this period. The 1906 earthquake in San Francisco destroyed the city’s birth records and without any way to prove otherwise, hundreds of Chinese men successfully claimed that they were American-born. As citizens they asserted their right to bring their families to the United States. Many brought in “paper sons,” boys whose families paid a fee to Chinese men already in the United States to fraudulently claim to be their fathers. In 1910, U.S. authorities opened up an immigration processing station on Angel Island in San Francisco Bay to verify the identities of Japanese and Chinese immigrants claiming the right to enter the United States. Chinese “paper sons” endured long periods of detention on Angel Island while authorities investigated their background. Before leaving China “paper sons” memorized details about their “fathers,” including descriptions of relatives, houses, and key events in a family’s history. Once these men arrived

 How did domestic racial prejudices affect diplomatic relations with Japan?



 CHAPTER 19

19.11 Japanese
Picture Brides,
 To rally public support for cutting off the flow of Japanese women coming to the United States, a delegation of congressmen posed for the cameras as they confronted these shy, pretty Japanese picture brides, whose ethnicity made them unwelcome.

IMPERIAL AMERICA: THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD, 1890–1914

 at Angel Island, inspectors quizzed sons and fathers separately and refused entry to those whose answers failed to match. Chinese men detained on Angel Island sometimes passed the time by etching poetry onto the barrack walls, including one anonymous poet who expressed his angst by writing, “who was to know two streams of tears would flow upon arriving here?” In 1919, California politicians reignited their campaign against the Japanese, making it illegal for Japanese immigrants to own property. Naturalization laws allowed only people of white or African ancestry to become citizens, preventing Japanese immigrants from seeking U.S. citizenship to circumvent these restrictions. In Takao Ozawa v. United States (1922), the Supreme Court held that Japanese immigrants were indeed ineligible for citizenship because they were not white. Choices and Consequences: The Legal Construction of “Whiteness” explores this decision. The fact that Japanese picture

 What insights does this photo offer into issues of ethnicity and gender in the early twentieth century?

 brides bore children who were U.S. citizens, and therefore eligible to own property, did not escape the notice of those campaigning for a ban on Japanese property ownership. Senator James D. Phelan, a California Democrat, led the campaign to stop admitting picture brides to the United States, ominously predicting that a booming birthrate among Japanese immigrants would lead to Japanese dominance of California agriculture. To garner publicity for their anti-Japanese crusade, a congressional delegation traveled to Angel Island in 1920. The legislators invited news photographers to take photos (19.11) as they sternly lectured a group of bewildered, frightened young women, dressed in their best clothes to meet their new husbands. Fearful that rising anti-Japanese prejudice might lead to a Japanese exclusion law, Japan agreed to stop issuing passports to picture brides in 1921. Congress banned all immigration from Asia in 1924 (see Chapter 21).

AMERICA AND EAST ASIA



Choices and Consequences
THE LEGAL CONSTRUCTION OF “WHITENESS”
Takao Ozawa was a Japanese immigrant who lived in California and Hawaii for 28 years before he applied to become a citizen of the United States. Aware that naturalization laws allowed only Caucasians and people of African ancestry to become citizens, Ozawa argued that he was white. He emphasized his complete assimilation into American society and the lightness of his skin. When the Supreme Court heard his case in 1922, the justices faced four options about how to define “whiteness.” 
Choices




 Differing physical features divided the human species into white, black, and yellow races.



 Skin color established racial identity.



Whiteness was a
 socially constructed notion with no scientific basis.



 Assimilating into American culture made one “white.”

Decision
 The Court rejected Ozawa’s contention that skin pigmentation signified whiteness and his claim of complete assimilation. In a unanimous decision the justices ruled that “the words ‘white person’ are synonymous with the words ‘a person of Caucasian race.’” This decision accepted contemporary anthropologists’ assertions that measurements of facial features provided scientific evidence to classify the Japanese as members of the “Mongolian race.”

Consequences


Measurement of the Head and Face, 1883


 Within three months the court unanimously reversed its reasoning, deciding instead that whiteness was a socially, not scientifically, constructed category. When Indian immigrant Bhagat Singh Thind applied for citizenship, he argued that anthropologists categorized Asian Indians as Caucasians. In rejecting Thind’s claim of whiteness, the Supreme Court now ruled that “the words ‘free white persons’ are words of common speech, to be interpreted in accordance with the understanding of the common man.” Deciding who was legally white now depended on the whims of the larger culture, not the claims of scientists.

Continuing Controversies
 What determines racial identity? Well into the twentieth century, many Americans continued to believe that biologically based racial differences existed, even within the Caucasian race. In the 1920s, the United States severely curtailed immigration from eastern and southern Europe, viewing northern Europeans as racially superior (see Chapter 21). The fear that light-skinned blacks were “passing” as whites caused many Southern states to bar individuals with any African ancestry, the so-called “one-drop” of blood rule, from using “whites-only” facilities. The view of racial identity as a social construct also drew adherents. Radical black civil rights leaders tried to cultivate a racial identity based on African Americans’ cultural distinctiveness, while others sought a color-blind society that did away with racial identities completely.

 What different methods have Americans used to define racial identity?



 CHAPTER 19

IMPERIAL AMERICA: THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD, 1890–1914

 In America’s Backyard Establishing a U.S. presence and maintaining favorable relations in East Asia became key aims of American foreign policy at the turn of the century. Americans also, however, explored opportunities to expand closer to home. The government focused on constructing a canal through Central America to facilitate U.S. trade with China and better protect the nation’s coastlines. Earlier transportation breakthroughs such as the Erie Canal, National Road, and transcontinental railroad quickened the movement of people and goods and helped the United States expand across the continent. The Panama Canal secured U.S. dominance of the Caribbean, and the government resolved to keep foreign powers out of the region.

The Panama Canal
 At the end of the nineteenth century, American canal advocates emphasized increased trade and better defense as reasons for building the Panama Canal, a manmade waterway through Panama completed in 1914 to link the Pacific and Atlantic oceans. The canal project received a boost when one of its strongest supporters, Theodore Roosevelt, became president in 1901. Roosevelt took up the canal project immediately. “No single great material work which remains to be undertaken on this continent is of such consequence to the American people,” he told Congress the first time he addressed the legislators. Roosevelt intended to take up where Ferdinand de Lesseps, the French mastermind who built the 1869 Suez Canal in Egypt that linked the Mediterranean and Red Seas, had left off. In the 1880s, de Lesseps had begun building a canal through Panama (then part of Colombia). Battling mudslides, earthquakes, and disease, de Lesseps eventually abandoned the project and sold his concession from the Colombian government to the New Panama Canal Company, a French company headed by Philippe Bunau-Varilla, a longtime engineer on the project. In 1902, the United States offered the New Panama Canal Company $40 million for its concession and assets, a sum that Bunau-Varilla eagerly accepted. Colombia, however, rejected Roosevelt’s offer of $10 million to secure the rights to maintain a U.S.-controlled canal in Panama indefinitely. The New Panama Canal Company’s concession expired in 1904, and by stalling, Colombia expected to pocket the $40 million earmarked for the company. “Those contemptible little creatures in Bogotá [the capital of Colombia] ought to understand how much they are jeopardizing things and imperiling their

 How did U.S. intervention in Panama compare with its colonization of the Philippines?

 own future,” Roosevelt wrote in frustration to Secretary of State John Hay. In 1903, Panama revolted against Colombia. The timing was not coincidental. Fearing it would lose everything, the New Panama Canal Company encouraged and financed the rebellion by Panamanian business and political elites who did not want to share revenue from the projected canal with the rest of Colombia. Bunau-Varilla not only set the date for the revolution but also provided its leader, Manuel Guerrero Amador, with money, defense plans, a declaration of independence, and even a flag. Roosevelt never gave Bunau-Varilla a direct promise of U.S. support but, the president later recalled, it was Bunau-Varilla’s “business to find out what he thought our Government would do . . . in fact, he would have been a very dull man had he been unable to make such a guess.” Once the Panamanian revolt began, Roosevelt ensured that events favored the United States. The mountainous terrain separating the rest of Colombia from Panama forced Colombian troops to move by sea. When they arrived, U.S. naval ships patrolling both coasts prevented them from landing in Panama. Roosevelt claimed that an 1846 agreement with Colombia gave the United States the authority to control transit across Panama. The nineteenth-century pact, however, envisioned using U.S. forces to protect, not destroy, Colombian sovereignty in Panama. In the 1920s, Congress apologetically sent Colombia $25 million for Roosevelt’s transgression. With America’s help the revolution in Panama succeeded. The United States immediately received its reward from Bunau-Varilla, the new minister to the United States for the Republic of Panama. The Hay– Bunau-Varilla Treaty (1903) gave the United States perpetual control over a strip of land ten miles wide that included the Panama Canal for $10 million and

IN AMERICA’S BACKYARD



19.12 Building the
Panama Canal
The Americans
 used a system of locks and dams to construct the waterway through a mountainous terrain subject to flooding and mudslides.

 an annual rent of $250,000. These terms remained in effect until December 31, 1999, when the United States turned control of the canal over to Panama. When American engineers took over building the Panama Canal in 1904, they confronted a host of geological challenges. The Chagres River crisscrossed the route selected for the canal. Tropical rains regularly poured down the mountains into the Chagres, which, if not diverted, would dump floodwaters and silt into the planned canal. By damming the Chagres, U.S. engineers created the artificial Gatun Lake that ships reached through a stairway of locks on either side. This approach used water rather than shovels to create much of the waterway. The accompanying map (19.12) shows the 164 square miles of rain forest that construction crews flooded to create Gatun Lake. The 5,000 American engineers, skilled workers, and foremen at the construction site relied on thousands of foreign workers, mostly blacks from the British West Indies, to dig the rest of the canal.

 President Roosevelt shared the public’s fascination with the feat of building the canal, and visited the site in 1906. His two-week trip made Roosevelt the first American president to leave the country while in office. Not content merely to watch the huge steam shovels through the window of the train bringing him to the Culebra Cut, the project’s largest excavation site, Roosevelt tramped through the mud to reach a steam shovel and climbed into the driver’s seat. As photographers snapped away, Roosevelt learned that the Bucyrus steam shovel picked up eight tons of dirt in a single scoop, required a crew of ten, and dug five times more than older machines.

 “It is an epic feat, and one of immense significance.” President ROOSEVELT, after visiting the Panama Canal construction site

 How did U.S. engineers overcome the geological obstacles to building the Panama Canal?



 CHAPTER 19

IMPERIAL AMERICA: THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD, 1890–1914

 “You had to pray everyday for God to carry you safe, and bring you back.” A black worker on felling giant trees and surviving mudslides while building the Panama Canal This photo of Roosevelt sitting at the controls of a Bucyrus steam shovel (19.13) captured the adventurous spirit of an era dedicated to overseas economic expansion, technological innovation, and world prominence. “The real builder of the Panama Canal was Theodore Roosevelt,” wrote Major George W. Goethals, chief engineer on the project. Americans usually

19.13 Theodore
Roosevelt Visits
 the Canal Zone Instead of observing construction of the Panama Canal from a safe distance, Roosevelt climbed into the seat of a steam shovel to work its controls.

 What does this photograph convey about Roosevelt and the feat of building the Panama Canal?

 saw photos of their formally dressed presidents standing on podiums, sitting at desks, or posing with dignitaries. In this photograph Roosevelt appears as the larger-than-life personality he was, literally building the canal he played such a large part in securing for the United States. Americans solved more than the engineering riddle of constructing the canal. They also conquered the disease-carrying mosquito. Guided by the recent discovery that mosquitoes transmitted malaria and yellow fever, Dr. William C. Gorgas undertook a relentless fumigation campaign that saved thousands

IN AMERICA’S BACKYARD



 of lives. Nonetheless, poor sanitation in the black workers’ camps (which Roosevelt criticized during his visit) and the dangers posed by mudslides and working with dynamite exacted a toll. Nearly 4,500 foreign black workers and 500 white Americans died during the American phase of construction.

The Roosevelt
Corollary
The Panama Canal
 was a symbol of U.S. technological achievement, naval power, and economic strength. The canal also increased the importance of the Caribbean to U.S. national security. “America’s interests in this hemisphere are greater than those of any European power,” Roosevelt stated. Therefore the United States intended to “police and protect” the canal alone. Roosevelt had reason to worry about European naval incursions into the region. Anxious about overdue debts, Britain, Italy, and Germany blockaded Venezuela in 1902, and two years later European nations threatened to intervene in the Dominican Republic for the same reason. To head off a European invasion, the Dominicans asked Roosevelt to accept the nation as a protectorate. Roosevelt privately remarked he had “about the same desire to annex it as a gorged boa constrictor might have to swallow a porcupine wrong-end-to.” He nonetheless agreed to help, but only after deciding to use the incident to establish a new principle in U.S. foreign policy. To prevent European military incursions into the Western Hemisphere, Roosevelt announced a corollary to the 1823 Monroe Doctrine (see Chapter 7), which had declared the Western Hemisphere off-limits to further European colonization. The Roosevelt Corollary of 1904 stated that when confronted with “flagrant cases” of wrongdoing by Latin American nations, such as not paying their debts to Western nations, the United States intended to act as an “international police power” in the region. View the Image His Foresight (1901)

 19.14 Theodore Roosevelt’s Big Stick In this cartoon illustrating the impact of the Roosevelt Corollary, the president pulls a line of naval vessels around the Caribbean to keep nearby nations in line and prevent the creation of European colonies too close to U.S. shores.

 In this political cartoon (19.14), a gigantic Roosevelt, dressed as a Rough Rider, holds a big stick as he pulls U.S. ships labeled “sheriff ” and “debt collector” around the Caribbean. Americans dubbed the Roosevelt Corollary the “big stick” policy in reference to a West African proverb that Roosevelt favored: “Speak softly and carry a big stick, and you will go far.” The corollary exempted Argentina, Brazil, and Chile because Roosevelt considered them civilized nations capable of meeting their international commitments and running their own domestic affairs. Satisfied that the United States would help Europe recoup its loans to Central and South American nations, European governments reacted positively to the Roosevelt Corollary. How did the Roosevelt Corollary bolster U.S. stature as a world power?



 CHAPTER 19

IMPERIAL AMERICA: THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD, 1890–1914

 Roosevelt’s successor in the White House, William Howard Taft, expanded U.S. influence over Latin America. Not content with ensuring that Caribbean nations paid their debts, Taft initiated a policy of Dollar Diplomacy that encouraged U.S. investment in Latin America to maintain U.S. economic dominance over the region. Hoping to substitute “dollars for bullets,” Taft shared Roosevelt’s desire to turn the Caribbean into an American lake. In Taft’s formulation enlarging America’s commercial presence required the establishment of American banks, English-language news bureaus, and trained foreign service personnel in Latin American countries. These would provide U.S. businesses with the credit, information, and active government support that they needed to penetrate the region.

 When Democrat Woodrow Wilson became president in 1912, he followed in Roosevelt and Taft’s footsteps by aggressively protecting U.S. business interests and curtailing European access to the Western Hemisphere. The map, “American Involvement in Latin America, 1898–1939,” (19.15) lists the many U.S. military incursions that occurred in areas where American businessmen had invested heavily in fruit and sugar industries. Like his predecessors Wilson denied any intention of seeking “one additional foot of territory by conquest.” He acknowledged that U.S. intervention protected America’s national security and commercial interests, but also asserted that the nation’s main goal was to spread democracy and law and order. Even Wilson’s secretary of war William Jennings

19.15 American Involvement in Latin America, 1898–1939
 The United States intervened continually in the domestic affairs of its southern neighbors to protect the area as a U.S. sphere of influence.

UNITED STATES ATLANTIC OCEAN
New Orleans 
Houston


BAHAMA ISLANDS
(Br.) 
 CUBA

Gu l f o f
Me x i c o


Protectorate: 1898–1934,
Occupied: 1898–1902, 1906–1909,
1912, 1917–1933


VIRGIN ISLANDS

Miami
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

 (purchased from Denmark, 1917)

Protectorate: 1905–1941,
Occupied: 1903–1904, 1914,
1916–1924


Bahia Honda
(1903–1912)


 Guantánamo Bay (1903–Present)

PUERTO RICO
(ceded by Spain, 1898) 
Mexico City


BRITISH HONDURAS

HAITI HONDURAS
Intervention: 1903,1907,1911, 1912, 1919, 1924–1925 
 MEXICO

Protectorate: 1915–1936,
Occupied: 1915–1934


 JAMAICA (Br.)

Intervention: 1905,1914,
1916–1917


Caribbean Sea


 NICARAGUA

Gulf of Fonseca
(1914–1933)


 GUATEMALA

Intervention: 1906,1909–1910
Occupied: 1898, 1899, 1910,
1912–1925, 1926–1933


Intervention: 1906


EL SALVADOR US
and possessions 
Canal Zone
(1903–1999)


 VENEZUELA

COSTA RICA

 US commercial interests: Fruit US commercial interests: Sugar US Naval bases

COLOMBIA PANAMA
Protectorate: 1903–1939 
 What steps did Taft and Wilson take to protect the Caribbean as a U.S. sphere of influence?

View the Map Activities of the United States
 in the Caribbean 1898–1930s

IN AMERICA’S BACKYARD

19.16. Exports to
 the Americas, Europe, and Asia, 1880–1950. Despite intense interest in cultivating the China market, the majority of U.S. exports went to neighboring nations in the Americas and with Europe, especially Great Britain.

10,000


9,000


8,000


7,000
Millions of Dollars




6,000


5,000


4,000


3,000


2,000


1,000


















Year
Europe


 Bryan, who had vehemently opposed annexation of the Philippines, supported an active U.S. presence in Latin America. During this period U.S. troops invaded Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Haiti, the Dominican Republic, and Cuba for strategic, commercial, and humanitarian reasons. American armies often stayed for years, and in 1915 Haiti joined Cuba, the Dominican Republic, and Panama as a U.S. protectorate. By creating protectorates, rather than colonies, the government avoided re-igniting the divisive arguments between imperialists and anti-imperialists that had surrounded the decision to annex the Philippines. Military intervention also allowed the United States to control all direct approaches to the Panama Canal and to protect access to raw materials and markets for U.S. exports (19.16). Exerting influence over its Caribbean neighbors, through military invasions and protectorates, became a mainstay of twentieth-century U.S. foreign policy.

The Americas


Asia


 On August 15, 1914, the Panama Canal officially opened. Newspapers buried this news about America’s crowning achievement of the imperial age in their back pages, instead devoting their headlines to the 11-day-old war in Europe. The beginning of World War I ushered in a new era in world history, one of global warfare made possible by the powerful empires constructed in the late nineteenth century. Now actively engaged in the world, the United States would find it difficult to stay out of this spreading conflict, especially as its trade with Great Britain and France in war-related goods exploded.

 “Those Latin republics are our political children, so to speak.” Secretary of State WILLIAM JENNINGS BRYAN justifying U.S. intervention in Nicaragua.

 Why were protectorates less controversial than colonies?



 CHAPTER 19

IMPERIAL AMERICA: THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD, 1890–1914

Key West


 KOREA

C H I N A


Weihaiwei
Jiaozhou


 JAPA

Havana
 NEPAL

 a y a s

 BHUTAN

C U B A


 ng

 es

Taiwan


I A
Burma


Hong Kong
Macao
Guangzhouwan


ISLE OF PINES







1900–1901


 Four-year depression begins

 The Maine explodes in Havana Harbor

Philippine-American war
 begins

Open Door Notes


 Major cause of Spanish-American War

 Ignites debate within United States over keeping Philippines as a colony

 Intensifies interest in finding foreign markets for American goods

 Treaty of Paris signed

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Ends war with Spain; United States gains Caribbean and Pacific islands

 Protects American access to China market

Platt Amendment
 Cuba becomes a protectorate of the United States

Review Questions
 1. What concerns and fears encouraged the United States to look outside its borders in the 1890s? 2. How did Americans picture Spanish rule in Cuba and the American war against Spain? 3. How did imperialists and anti-imperialists reconcile their ideas with traditional American values?

 4. How did American views about race and racial identity shape the nation’s development as a world power? 5. What different tactics did the United States use to protect its economic and strategic interests in East Asia versus those used in the Caribbean at the turn of the century?

Key Terms
 Imperialism The late nineteenth-century term for colonizing foreign nations and lands, relying primarily on business, political, and military structures rather than settlers to rule colonized peoples and exploit their resources. Teller Amendment (1898) Congressional promise “to leave the government and control of the [Cuban] Island to its people” at the end of the Spanish-American War. Treaty of Paris Agreement that ended the Spanish-American War, with Spain relinquishing its claim to Cuba and the United States receiving Puerto Rico and Guam. In return for $20 million, Spain turned the Philippines over to the United States. Platt Amendment Granted the United States the right to maintain a naval base at Guantánamo Bay, to intervene militarily in Cuban domestic affairs, and a privileged trading relationship with Cuba. The Cuban government also needed permission from the United States before entering into treaties with other nations.

 “The white man’s burden” The Anglo-Saxon quest to better the lives of so-called racially inferior peoples by spreading Western economic, cultural, and spiritual values and institutions. Sphere of influence The term used to describe the exclusive political and trading rights that a foreign nation enjoyed within another nation’s territory. Open Door Policy A U.S.-sponsored nonbinding international agreement that kept the Chinese market open to all foreign nations. Gentlemen’s Agreement (1907–1908) Japanese agreement to deny passports to Japanese workers intending to immigrate to the United States. 581 Panama Canal A manmade waterway through Panama completed in 1914 to link the Pacific and Atlantic oceans. Roosevelt Corollary (1904) Corollary to the 1823 Monroe Doctrine that announced the U.S. intention to act as an “international police power” in Latin America.

CHAPTER REVIEW





1907–1908




Roosevelt Corollary


 Roosevelt wins Nobel Peace Prize and visits canal zone

 Gentlemen’s Agreement

 Panama Canal opens

 Limits Japanese immigration

 Symbol of U.S. technological, military, and economic might

Establishes United States as
 international police presence in the Caribbean

 Signals new U.S. international presence

 St. Louis World’s Fair

San Francisco Earthquake


 Exhibits highlight industrial progress and “civilizing” mission in Colonies

 Destruction of public records results in Chinese “paper son” phenomenon



 World War I begins Global war engulfs Europe and its empires

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Imperial America.

Questions for Analysis
 1. Who were the world’s leading imperial powers in 1900? View the Map World Colonial Empires (1900), p. 562

 2. How did social Darwinism fuel expansionism? Read the Document Josiah Strong, from Our Country (1885), p. 564

 3. How does this image announce the emergence of the United States as a world power? View the Image Our Victorious Fleet in Cuban Waters, p. 571

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • The Teller Amendment (1898), p. 568 • The Platt Amendment (1901), p. 572 • Platform for the American Anti-Imperialist League (1899), p. 574 • Katherine Mullikin Lowry on the Boxer Rebellion (1900), p. 580

View the Closer Look
• Images as History: Atrocity Stories and Public Opinion, p. 567
• Competing Visions: Annexing the Philippines, p. 576


View the Image African American Troops in the Spanish
American War, p. 577


View the Map Activities of the United States in the Caribbean
 1898–1930s, p. 588

Watch the Video


 4. What views do these poems offer on the benefits and drawbacks of colonization? View the Closer Look Competing Visions: The White Man’s Burden, p. 575

 5. What does this cartoon reveal about American dominance in the Western Hemisphere? View the Image His Foresight (1901), p. 587

• Burial of the Maine Victims, p. 566
 • Roosevelt’s Rough Riders, p. 570

 Why was neutrality difficult for the United States to define and maintain?

The War at Home
 p. 602

 How did the government mobilize resources and support to fight a total war?

Fighting the War
 p. 609

 What was it like to serve as a soldier in World War I?

Peace


 p. 616

 Why did Americans disagree over ratifying the Versailles Treaty?

 CHAPTER

The Decision for
War p. 594




