 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 17

Becoming a
Modern Society
America in the Gilded Age,
1877–1900
 Hundreds of thousands of people, including President Chester A. Arthur and countless dignitaries, participated in the joyful ceremonies marking the opening of the Brooklyn Bridge on May 23, 1883. As this painting of the event demonstrates, Americans in the late nineteenth century celebrated the onset of the urban age. An astonishing sight and the very embodiment of the modern age, it was the world’s largest suspension bridge, a style made possible by the one product that in many ways defined the industrial revolution—steel. The bridge’s designer, German immigrant John Roebling, emphasized this transition to the modern age by using a stark contrast: he constructed the bridge’s twin towers out of the ancient building material (stone) and formed them into gothic archways, a style reminiscent of the great medieval cathedrals of Europe. The Brooklyn Bridge embodied the new urban and industrial era beyond its cutting-edge technology and symbolic design. Workers who were either immigrants or the children of immigrants constructed the bridge. By connecting the nation’s largest city (New York) and third largest city (Brooklyn), a prelude to their consolidation into one city in 1898, the new bridge also symbolized rapid urban growth. Finally the bridge hinted at the emergence of a new, more independent American woman. When Washington Roebling (who had succeeded his father as chief engineer) fell gravely ill in 1872, his wife, Emily Warren Roebling, spent the next 11 years as the project’s onsite manager. The enthusiasm that marked the bridge’s opening masked the grave problems that rampant urban growth entailed. Indeed, the era’s name, the Gilded Age, reflected this notion that the amazing achievements of the period were like a thin gold layer that covered many unresolved social problems. The sections of New York and Brooklyn connected by the bridge, for example, were vast working-class immigrant districts beset by high rates of poverty, crime, and disease. Equally unseen in the glow of the fireworks was the rising discontent among American workers over exploitation by employers and alienation from an unresponsive political system. Indeed, dozens of men had died during the bridge’s construction, and more than once the workers went on strike. These sentiments and those of hard-pressed American farmers in the heartland would explode in the 1890s, leading to the emergence of the People’s Party. The party eventually faded away, but not before establishing a reform agenda that would shape the Progressive Era (1900–1920).

 “The day seems brought distinctly nearer when the nation, equipped with the latest implements furnished by science, shall master and use as never before its rich domain.” REV. RICHARD STORRS, speech at the opening of the Brooklyn Bridge





 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

The Rise of the City
 The United States experienced explosive urban growth in the second half of the nineteenth century. Industrialization and mass immigration transformed older cities, such as New York and Philadelphia, and newer ones, such as Denver and Chicago, into major metropolises. Their growth was often chaotic and attended by significant increases in crime, poverty, and epidemics. City political machines grew powerful, providing relief to the vulnerable and promoting urban growth, but earning a reputation for corruption.

To the Cities
 The urban population of the United States grew at an astonishing rate between 1860 and 1900. In 1860, one in five Americans lived in urban areas—by 1900, two in five. In that same period the number of cities with populations greater than 100,000 soared from 9 to 38. Among these were New York (3.4 million), Chicago (2.7 million), and Philadelphia (1.3 million). Seventy-eight other cities had 50,000 or more inhabitants by 1900. Much of this new urban population came from rural areas within the United States. As agriculture became more mechanized (see Chapter 15), thereby lowering demand for farm labor, men migrated to urban areas. Similarly, the rise of American manufacturing eliminated the need for rural women to make clothes and other household goods, leading many to seek economic opportunity in cities. These men and women found an array of job opportunities in the city, from low-paid work as factory operatives, laborers, and servants to more desirable positions as skilled artisans and clerks. They also were faced with the challenge of adjusting to an utterly new lifestyle.

1880–1889
17.1 Immigration
 to the United States, 1880–1920 Before 1880, most immigrants to the United States came from Northern and Western Europe, but after 1880, most were from Southern and Eastern Europe. [Source: U.S. Bureau of

Austria-Hungary
German Empire
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Russia
Scandinavia
United Kingdom


314,787
1,445,181
1,807
764,061
276,660
182,698
761,783
810,900


Totals


5,248,568


 Another rural-to-urban internal migration involved African Americans seeking to escape the poverty, racism, and violence of the Jim Crow South (see Chapter 14). Drawn by word of better jobs and greater freedoms, some 300,000 migrated to northern cities between 1890 and 1910. Chicago’s African American population jumped from 15,000 in 1890 to 110,000 in 1920. This marked the beginning of what became known as the Great Migration, the relocation of some 7 million African Americans from the South to the North between 1890 and 1970. However, the greatest source of urban population growth was mass immigration from Europe, with significant numbers also from Latin America, the Caribbean, and Asia. Before 1880, most immigrants to the United States came from Britain, Ireland, Germany, and Scandinavia. Thereafter, the sources of immigration shifted to nations in Southern and Eastern Europe such as Russia, Italy, Greece, and AustriaHungary (17.1). All told, the United States accepted 28 million newcomers between 1860 and 1920. As with all immigrants before and since, some of these newcomers chose immigration to escape poverty, warfare, political and religious

%


1890–1899


%


1900–1909


%


1910–1919


%


6.0
27.5
.1
12.8
5.1
3.5
12.7
15.5


534,059
579,072
12,732
405,710
603,761
450,101
390,729
328,579


14.5
15.7
.3
11.0
16.3
12.7
10.5
8.9


2,001,376
328,722
145,402
344,940
1,930,475
1,501,301
488,208
469,578


24.4
4.0
1.8
4.2
23.5
18.3
5.9
5.7


1,154,727
174,227
198,108
166,445
1,229,916
1,106,998
238,275
371,878


18.2
2.7
3.1
2.6
19.4
17.4
3.8
5.8


3,694,295


8,202,388


6,347,380


 the Census.]

 Why did so many people flock to American cities?

Read the Document Adna Weber, “The Growth of Cities”


THE RISE OF THE CITY

 persecution, and natural disasters. But most were drawn by the promise of economic opportunity and upward mobility in America. Some migrated to rural areas and became farmers, but most headed for America’s cities with their ever-expanding number of jobs in industry, construction, service, and entrepreneurship. Cities already characterized by ethnic, racial, and religious diversity brought by earlier immigrants and African Americans saw their diversity reach unprecedented levels. By 1910, immigrants and their American-born children comprised an astonishing 78.6 percent of New York’s 4.8 million residents. Chicago (77.5 percent), Milwaukee (78.6 percent), San Francisco (68.3 percent), and most medium-tolarge cities boasted similarly astoundingly numbers. Overall, the foreign-born comprised 14.8 percent of the national population in 1910.

Emergence of
Ethnic Enclaves
 These new immigrants, like the Irish and Germans before them, soon formed concentrated ethnic enclaves. Often they moved into neighborhoods previously dominated by immigrants who had arrived before the Civil War. As a result in New York, for example, the Lower East Side enclaves of Little Ireland, Little Germany, and Little Africa became by the 1890s Little Italy, Chinatown, and the Jewish East Side. This process of ethnic succession is captured in a World War I memorial plaque affixed to the façade of the Church of the Transfiguration on New York’s Lower East Side (17.2). A community of native-born Americans built the church in 1801 as the English Lutheran First Church of Zion, but they sold it in the 1840s to Irish Catholics who renamed it Church of the Transfiguration. In the 1890s, a massive influx of Italians and outflow of Irish to other parts of the city turned the neighborhood into Little Italy and Transfiguration into a mostly Italian Catholic church. (Mother Elizabeth Cabrini, later canonized a saint, worked in the church caring for Italian immigrants.) The plaque provides a snapshot of the transformation from Little Ireland to Little Italy. Of the twenty names of parishioners who died in World War I,



 seventeen are Italian and only three—Donahue, Durkin, and Kane—are Irish. Today the neighborhood is part of Chinatown and most of the parishioners are Chinese. Immigrant groups formed ethnic enclaves in part because they faced hostility and discrimination from Americans and other immigrant groups. But the primary cause was their recognition that grouping together enhanced their chances of success in America. Italian immigrants in Chicago’s Little Italy, for example, enjoyed the comfort and practical benefits of residing among people who spoke their language. There they could find help getting a job from an immigrant aid association, fellowship in an Italian fraternal society, or solace in an Italian Catholic church. They also found things that reminded them of home: Italian food, books, newspapers, churches, theaters, and opera houses. A closer look at these enclaves revealed that they usually comprised smaller units composed of people from a particular region or village of their home country. New York’s Jewish East Side, for example, included large concentrations of Jews from Hungary, Romania, Galicia, Russia, and the eastern Mediterranean. Italians in Boston’s North End clustered on certain streets depending on whether they came from Sicily, Campania, the

17.2 Evidence of Ethnic Succession
 This 1919 plaque lists 17 Italian and three Irish names, indicating that the neighborhood once known as Little Ireland had become Little Italy.

View the Closer Look Immigration to the U.S. 1870–1915


 Why did immigrants form ethnic enclaves in cities?



 CHAPTER 17

17.3 Mapping the
Diversity of Ethnic
Chicago
This 1895 map of
 the 12-block area surrounding Hull House demonstrates the diversity of the immigrant neighborhood. [Source: ICHi51283; Hull House— map of Nationalities in Chicago; Chicago (Ill.); n.d.; Creator- Hull House. Nationalities Map No. 1—Polk Street to Twelfth, Halsted Street to Jefferson, Chicago.]

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 Abruzzi, or Liguria. Yet as this 1895 map (17.3) of the neighborhood surrounding Chicago’s famous Hull House, which provided that city’s immigrants with social and educational services, demonstrates, even immigrants in ethnic enclaves shared their neighborhoods with people of diverse origins. This twelve-block section of the city included immigrants from Ireland, Germany, Italy, Russia, Poland, Switzerland, France, Canada, Bohemia, Scandinavia, China, and the Netherlands, not to mention African Americans.

The Troubled City
 Many Americans in the late nineteenth century saw cities as exciting places filled with opportunity, cultural diversity, entertainment, and new technology such as electric lighting and skyscrapers. Yet many more viewed cities as places of crowding,

 Why was life in tenement districts so difficult?

 turmoil, filth, and despair. Both images were accurate, but the latter generated the most commentary and concern. One of the most striking features of modern urban life was the emergence of densely packed “slums.” In one ward on New York’s Lower East Side in 1890, population density reached 334,000 people per square mile, numbers never seen before in history. Most people living in these densely packed districts were immigrants who worked for low wages as day laborers and factory operatives. Few men earned enough money to support their families. So they relied on their wives and children to produce additional income (see Chapter 16). Squalid housing exacerbated the poverty of urban workers. Tenements, or multiple family dwellings of four to six stories housing dozens of families, became the most common form of housing for poor city dwellers by the 1860s. Most tenement

THE RISE OF THE CITY

 apartments consisted of just two or three dimly lit and poorly ventilated rooms. Tenement districts in every city suffered from high rates of disease and death, much of it caused when drinking water became contaminated by bacteria due to primitive sewage systems. Another source of disease was horses. In 1900, New York’s 120,000 horses dropped six million pounds of manure on the streets every day. In most cities, as shown in this photograph (17.4), street cleaning was inadequate in working-class neighborhoods. Note that in this filthy working-class street in New York, vendors sell all manner of goods on the sidewalks, including food. These conditions contributed to frequent epidemics. In Chicago in 1891, for example, 2,000 people died from typhoid fever and 4,300 from bronchitis and pneumonia. Every year in Chicago in the early 1890s, 10,000 to 12,000 children under the age of five died. Despite the dreadful condition of many tenements, the surging population of American cities kept the demand for housing high, causing rents to rise continually. In New York an 1883 survey of bricklayers, among the city’s best-paid workers, determined that they paid 28 percent of their annual income to their landlords. Another survey a few years later revealed that cloak makers, another skilled group, devoted 38 percent of their income to



 rent. As a result evictions for falling behind in rent were common. New York averaged more than 16,000 evictions per year in the early 1880s and more than 23,000 by 1892.

 “Thousands of small houses and cottages arranged for one family are now packed with a family in each room.” Chicago Board of Health report Late-nineteenth-century cities also suffered from high rates of crime, especially in the tenement districts. Some crime was driven by poverty or despair. Women, for example, usually turned to prostitution as a last resort to survive. Immigration also increased crime, because it resulted in a disproportionately high population of young single men (typically an age cohort with higher than average crime rates). The overall growth, diversity, and mobility of urban populations also contributed to increased crime because these populations fostered anonymity and undermined the ability of communities to prevent potential criminal activity.

Read the Document George Waring, “Sanitary Conditions in New York” (1897)


17.4 Mired
 in Muck Late-nineteenthcentury American cities, especially in working-class neighborhoods, had public health problems because of inadequate street cleaning.

 Why were crime rates so high in cities?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

The Political Machine—
“Boss Rule”
 Another unsettling feature of urban life, in addition to poverty, crime, and disorder, was the emergence of political machines. Most often associated with the Democratic Party, these organizations became powerful in nearly every large American city by mobilizing large blocs of working-class and immigrant voters while developing favorable relationships with real estate and business interests. Some machines controlled small sections of big cities. Martin Lomasney, for example, was the “boss” of Boston’s Eighth Ward. Others, such as New York’s Tammany Hall, ruled the entire metropolis by the 1860s. By the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, several machines extended their power to the state level.

 “Tammany Hall bears the same relation to the penitentiary as the Sunday school to the church.” A reformer, 1876

17.5 Winning By
Any Means
 Political machines often resorted to voter intimidation and election fraud. As the motto “In Counting There Is Strength” suggests, vote counts were manipulated to ensure victory.

 Several trends coincided to account for the rise of political machines in American cities. The spread of universal white male suffrage in the 1820s (see Chapter 8) meant that political success depended less on a candidate’s family name or wealth than on his ability to whip up enthusiasm and get out the vote on Election Day. Rapid urban growth also produced unprecedented opportunities for politicians and their machines to reward supporters with construction contracts and jobs such as police officers and building inspectors. Machines also garnered support from immigrants by denouncing nativism and stymieing anti-immigrant legislation such as proposals to deny public jobs to the foreign born. Finally, the growing numbers of the poor provided a needy constituency, for which the machines supplied not only jobs but also a range of services and favors, including cash handouts, payments for funerals, legal assistance, and seasonal giveaways of turkeys at Thanksgiving and bags of coal in winter. Recipients of machine

 How did political machines gain the support of working-class and immigrant voters?

 largesse and charity were expected to vote for its candidates. The emergence of political machines horrified many wealthy and native-born Americans. They found rule by the foreign-born threatening and the rough and corrupt style of bosses offensive. One aspect of machine politics, however, aroused especially bitter criticism: the policy of no-questions-asked charity. Political machines acquired and retained power not only by providing services to their constituents but also, as suggested by this political cartoon of boss William Tweed, the notoriously corrupt head of Tammany Hall, by intimidating voters and engaging in election fraud (17.5). This image shows that the ballot “box” in many cities was actually a transparent glass ball that allowed the political machines’ “shoulder hitters” to intimidate voters by letting them know they were watching to see how they voted. The motto “In Counting There Is Strength” refers to the machines’ tactic of using the police and boards of elections to manipulate the vote count to ensure victory for their party. Equally important was the money machines garnered by selling patronage jobs, demanding kickbacks from city contractors, and collecting protection fees from a vast economy of vice the machine-controlled police allowed to flourish. Reformers railed against the machine, but consistently failed to defeat it.

Read the Document Lincoln Steffens, The Shame of the Cities
View the Closer Look Competing Visions: How Best to Help the Poor?


A SEARCH FOR SOLUTIONS



A
Search for Solutions  The dark side of urbanization in the late nineteenth century prompted a wide range of competing views and responses. Some Americans concluded that the real problem of urban poverty and the troubling crime, disease, disorder, and corruption that accompanied it was the urban poor, in particular, the foreign-born. Their solution was heightened nativism and a demand to restrict immigration. Other Americans, however, worked to develop government agencies to address the emerging challenges of urban life. Still others established private institutions like settlement houses that reflected a new attitude toward the immigrant poor.

The Nativist Impulse
 The rise of the modern American city was accompanied by a revival of nativism, or antiimmigrant views and sentiments. Suspicion of and hatred for the foreign-born had flared up during the Know-Nothing movement (see Chapter 12) in the 1850s, which targeted Irish and German immigrants, especially those who were Catholics. In the Gilded Age nativism targeted the so-called new immigrants, or those coming from Southern and Eastern Europe. As this 1899 image (17.6) illustrates, nativists decried newcomers as bearers of a wide range of unwanted habits and ideas. The immigrant, shown here in a racist caricature of Eastern Europeans, carries according to his labels poverty, anarchy, superstition, intemperance, and Sabbath desecration (working or recreating on a Sunday). Note Uncle Sam’s disdainful reaction and the sarcastic inscriptions on the gateway— “admittance free,” “walk in!” and “welcome”—meant to convey nativists’ anger over what they considered lax immigration laws. As slums grew larger and strikes (often involving many foreign-born workers) became more violent, nativists called all the more loudly for the sharp restriction of immigration. One of the most prominent was Josiah Strong, a Midwestern minister whose 1885 book, Our Country:

Read the Document Josiah Strong, “Anglo-Saxon
Culture Under Siege” (1885)


 Its Possible Future and Present Crisis, warned the nation against the immigrant menace. In 1882, Congress responded to pressure by American workers and passed the Chinese

17.6 Fear of
Foreigners
 on the Rise Decrying the so-called “new immigrants” from southern and Eastern Europe as bearers of unwanted habits and ideas, nativism surged in the Gilded Age.

 Why did nativists oppose immigration?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 Exclusion Act (see Chapter 16), which barred Chinese immigration to the United States. In 1887, nativists who were especially fixated on the dangers posed by Catholic immigration formed the American Protective Association (APA) to lobby for immigration restriction. The organization grew to 500,000 members by the end of 1893. Its main base of strength was middle-class Protestants in the Midwest, but chapters also sprang up in most cities in the East.

 The city has become a serious menace to our civilization…. It has a peculiar attraction for the immigrant….Here is heaped the social dynamite; here roughs, gamblers, thieves, robbers, lawless and desperate men of all sorts, congregate; men who are ready on any pretext to raise riots for the purpose of destruction and plunder. JOSIAH STRONG, Our Country: Its Possible Future and Its Present Crisis (1885) In 1890, Congress made oversight of immigration a federal responsibility and established immigration depots in most major ports to weed out and reject immigrants with incurable diseases, radical beliefs, criminal backgrounds, or so little money and skills they seemed likely to swell the ranks of the urban poor. The largest and most famous of these facilities, Ellis Island in New York harbor, opened in 1892. Many nativists considered this new system too lenient and called for additional restrictions on immigration. In 1894, several Harvard graduates founded the Immigration Restriction League to lobby for a literacy test for all would-be immigrants (requiring they demonstrate the ability to read and write in any language). Presidents Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson vetoed immigrant literacy test bills, but Congress overrode Wilson’s veto, and it became law in 1917. How did urban reformers try to improve the safety and livability of cities?

A
Different View: Urban Reforms
 While some Americans believed urban poverty, crime, disease, and overcrowding could be eliminated simply by restricting immigration, others developed a range of innovative policies and institutions to solve, or at least minimize, these problems. To meet the problem of rising crime, most cities followed the lead of New York, when in 1845 it replaced the traditional night watch of a few untrained and unarmed men with a paid professional police department. Large cities also disbanded their volunteer fire companies and invested in new fire-fighting technology, such as steam pumpers, and adopted tougher building codes. More dangerous to a city than fire—at least to its inhabitants—were the frequent outbreaks of cholera, diphtheria, typhoid fever, and other maladies. Drawing on increasing knowledge about germ theory, cities established boards of health and took steps to improve water quality, waste removal, and street cleaning. The latter half of the nineteenth century also witnessed a movement to build urban parks to provide the beauty and serenity of nature and offer wholesome and healthy recreation space (as opposed to alleys and saloons) for all. New York’s Central Park, built in the 1850s and 1860s, proved so successful that nearly every large city commenced its own park projects. Because most of the grand parks were located far from the slums, however, reformers in the 1890s pushed urban governments to condemn blocks of tenements and build parks within working-class neighborhoods. Urban reformers also expanded public education. Compulsory education laws (usually requiring schooling until age 14) and a massive building campaign saw public school enrollments surge from 6.9 million to 17.8 million between 1870 and 1910. Millions more students attended parochial schools established by the Catholic Church. This effort reflected the traditional belief that education made for a productive and informed citizenry. But as the photograph (17.7) of children reciting the Pledge of Allegiance illustrates, advocates also saw expanded urban public schooling as a means of Americanizing the immigrant masses, teaching them English and respect for democracy and the law. The pledge was first published in a youth magazine in 1892 to promote patriotism and civic pride among school children on the eve of the 400th anniversary of Read the Document Proposal to Buffalo, New York, Park Commission (1888)

A SEARCH FOR SOLUTIONS

 Christopher Columbus’s arrival in the New World. Educators quickly made its recitation a daily ritual in schools across the country. This earlier style, which required people to end the pledge by extending their arms out straight, was abolished in the 1930s because of its similarity to salutes used in fascist Germany and Italy.

Capturing a New
View of Poverty
 Reformers in the Gilded Age also developed a new way of thinking about poverty and its causes. Most Americans held to the traditional view that poverty was caused by personal or moral failures such as laziness or drunkenness. The poor, as Read the Document Jacob Riis, How the Other Half Lives

 Horatio Alger and others argued so persuasively in popular literature (see Chapter 16), needed only to abandon their dissolute ways and seize the opportunities for success that abounded in American life. But reformers began to challenge this view of poverty by arguing that factors beyond their control made people poor. A key figure in this new outlook was photojournalist Jacob A. Riis, who emigrated from Denmark to New York in 1870. After spending his first years in America in poverty, he gained a foothold in journalism. By the mid-1880s, he had earned a reputation as a reporter covering the city’s crime beat. But Riis was troubled by the poverty and suffering he saw and decided to publicize it to gain public support for reforms. In 1887, he started taking photographs of



17.7 Promoting
Loyalty and
Patriotism
Advocates saw
 public education as a means of Americanizing the urban immigrant masses. Soon after its introduction in 1892, educators made the Pledge of Allegiance a daily ritual in schools.

 Why was the Pledge of Allegiance adopted in the 1890s?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 slum life to spark public awareness, and by 1888–1889, he began showing his photographs while giving lectures before reform societies and church groups. Spurred by the positive reaction to these talks, especially to the photographs (see Images as History: Seeing the Poor, page 509), he wrote the book How the Other Half Lives: Studies among the Tenements of New York, which he published in 1890. Books providing shocking accounts of prostitution, drunkenness, and violence in America’s slums had appeared as early as the 1840s, but Riis’s book was different and it caused a sensation.

 Living among the Poor: Settlement Houses Riis was not alone in promoting a more progressive and sympathetic view of poverty and remedies to it. In the early 1880s, middle-class and collegeeducated women began establishing in immigrant neighborhoods settlement houses, or institutions dedicated to helping the urban poor by providing a wide range of social and educational services. Jane Addams and Ellen Gates Starr founded the most famous and influential settlement house, Hull House, in Chicago in 1889. Born to wealthy Illinois families, they had met in college and toured Europe together in 1888, where they were inspired by a visit to Toynbee Hall, a settlement house in London’s poor East End. There they saw educated, wealthy young men enter the East End to assist the poor. They vowed to establish a similar institution in Chicago. With financial backing from wealthy reformers, Addams and Starr rented an old mansion on Chicago’s Near West Side. The neighborhood was overwhelmingly foreign born (see 17.3) and its residents lived in dreary, run-down tenements. It also suffered from poor sanitation and high rates of crime. Unlike socially conscious elite women of earlier generations who simply raised money for the poor or lobbied the state legislature for laws against child labor, Addams, Starr, and the many women workers they attracted to Hull House chose to live among the poor to get to know them and understand their needs— even learn from them. The staff at Hull House first offered educational classes in literature and art. When these proved popular, they began to teach more practical subjects, such as cooking, sewing, hygiene, civics, the English

 What services did settlement houses provide the urban poor?

 language, and vocational training. They also opened their doors to fledgling labor unions, recognizing the vital role unions could play in raising the earnings of workers, especially the foreign born. Within a decade Hull House was a flourishing institution offering an array of services to the poor of Chicago. Addams and other Hull House workers like Florence Kelley also became activists to prod city authorities to improve tenement laws, increase street cleaning and garbage removal, and expand public education. They also lobbied state officials for laws against child labor and for improved factory safety. Hull House was not the first settlement in America, but it soon became its most famous, inspiring hundreds of successful imitators (400 by 1910), including Denison House in Boston (1889) and Henry Street Settlement in New York (1893).

The White City
 The optimistic vision of modern urban life articulated by reformers like Jane Addams and Jacob Riis found vivid expression in the City Beautiful Movement. Taking form in the late 1880s, it brought together architects, landscape architects, and urban planners who believed the many problems afflicting American cities could be ameliorated, even eliminated, through the comprehensive planning and grand redesign of urban spaces. City Beautiful proponents like Daniel Burnham and Frederick Law Olmsted argued for the creation of large parks and public squares linked by grand boulevards. They also emphasized classical architectural styles for both public and private buildings. Burnham, Olmsted, and others first demonstrated these ideas at the 1893 Chicago World’s Exposition, a grand celebration of the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus’s arrival in the New World in 1492 and of Chicago’s recovery from its devastating fire in 1871. Like the many world’s fairs that preceded it, the Chicago Exposition celebrated technology, culture, and commerce. It contained thousands of exhibits on science, machinery, art, history, ethnic heritage, music, and theater. But its greatest significance was its impact on architecture, design, and urban planning. Given nearly 700 acres of waterfront property along Lake Michigan on which to erect buildings, Burnham and the extraordinary team he assembled, including landscape architect

Read the Document Jane Addams,
“Twenty Years at Hull House”


A SEARCH FOR SOLUTIONS



Images as History
SEEING THE POOR
In 1890, Jacob Riis published a shocking exposé, How the Other Half Lives, of the dreadful conditions in which the poor lived. But unlike most Americans writing about urban poverty in that era, who attributed these problems to the moral failures of the poor, Riis argued that the poor were victims of unhealthy and unregulated tenements for which they were forced to pay most of their earnings. Adding to the book’s impact were his photographs and drawings made from photographs. His carefully composed photograph, “An Italian Rag-Picker in Jersey Street,” shows the woman’s desperate situation. 
 Riis convinced many of his readers that the growing numbers of impoverished slum dwellers were trapped in circumstances beyond their control largely due to unhealthy and expensive tenement housing. He called for improved tenements that would free the poor from their debilitating circumstances and allow them the chance to succeed. As a result of How the Other Half Lives and other books, not to mention magazine articles and speeches, many cities passed tougher laws regulating room size, windows, running water, and toilets.

Sandro Botticelli, Madonna and Child (c. 1470)


 The ladder suggests her “apartment” is little more than a dingy, windowless basement room with only one piece of furniture (the chair on which she sits). Riis presents her not as filthy or drunk; despite the dreadful circumstances, she and her baby wear clean clothes. Riis often included babies and innocentlooking children in his photographs to prompt the viewer to wonder— and worry—about their fate if the plight of the poor was not alleviated.

 The man’s hat on the wall prompts the viewer to wonder if this desperate woman has a husband or has been abandoned.

•
•
•


•


•
•


Jacob A. Riis, “Italian Mother and Her Baby in Jersey Street” (1889) [Source: Jacob
A.
Riis “Italian Mother and Her Baby in Jersey Street”, in the home of an Italian rag-picker, Jersey Street, circa 1890. Museum of the City of New York, The Jacob A. Riis Collection (#157)] 
 Although poor this woman is a hard worker. A rag picker collected discarded rags and other fabric (note the sacks), laundered them on a stovetop tub, and then sold them to paper manufacturers for pennies per pound. The mother’s heavenward gaze was intended to spur sympathy among middle- and upper-class viewers by conjuring up the familiar religious imagery of the Madonna and Child.

 How did Jacob Riis’s portrayal of the poor differ from traditional notions of poverty?



 CHAPTER 17

17.8 The
White City
 Designed by some of the nation’s leading architects, Chicago’s White City consisted of 14 main buildings designed in the BeauxArts style, set in landscaped grounds featuring waterways and reflecting pools.

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 Frederick Law Olmsted and architect Louis Sullivan, developed a master plan that called for landscaped grounds featuring waterways and reflecting pools. Around the waterways, (17.8), Burnham placed 14 main buildings designed in the Beaux-Arts style, which emphasized logic, harmony, and uniformity. The Court of Honor buildings, shown in the image, lined the Grand Basin that formed the centerpiece of the exposition grounds. Covered in shimmering bright white stucco, the buildings of the White City astonished the estimated 27 million visitors who entered through the main gates.

 Yet as this image indicates, Burnham and his team sought not simply to wow the public with grand architecture. They wanted to showcase the potential glory of the modern city. All cities could be—should be—as impressive as the White City. All that was needed were civic leadership and enlightened urban planning. This grand vision never fully caught on, but many of the City Beautiful ideals and concepts exhibited in the White City influenced a generation of urban planners and architects committed to making American cities more beautiful, healthy, and efficient.

 How did the White City reflect an optimistic vision of urban life in the future?

NEW HABITS, ROLES, AND LIFESTYLES



New Habits, Roles, and Lifestyles
 The development of vast working-class districts was but one aspect of a broad trend that reshaped urban life in the late nineteenth century. Urban and suburban growth also led to the development of middle-class and elite residential neighborhoods and urban central business districts dedicated almost exclusively to commerce. Middle-class neighborhoods increasingly reflected the new values of the urban middle class, including a growing interest in leisure activities. The growth of leisure time allowed women to take on significant roles in public life through memberships in socially and politically active clubs.

The New Urban Landscape
 The evolution of mass transit systems like horse cars, steam railroads, and trolleys, led to explosive urban growth and specialized districts dedicated to specific functions. Most cities, for example, developed central business districts where almost no one lived. Instead the high-value real estate in downtowns from Baltimore to Chicago to San Francisco was dedicated to commerce: banks, department stores (see Chapter 16), and the offices of corporations, accountants, lawyers, and other professionals. Each day mass transit systems carried thousands of shoppers and workers to central business districts from sections of cities now dedicated almost exclusively to residential use, or from residential neighborhoods just beyond the city limits. Soaring real estate values and new technology led to another distinct feature in central business districts: skyscrapers. Before the Civil War few buildings exceeded six stories, but the invention of the elevator and new building materials like cast iron and steel led to ten- and twelve-story buildings by the early 1880s. The big breakthrough came in 1885 with the completion of the Home Insurance Building in Chicago. It was remarkable not for its height (ten stories), but for its internal steel skeleton that allowed for thin walls and large windows. This first true skyscraper led to a boom in tall building construction in downtowns across the country. By 1900, Lower Manhattan alone featured 12 buildings of 300 feet or more in height. Equally significant, although less dramatic, than the upward reach of city skylines was the outward sprawl of urban areas due to mass transit. Suburbs, or residential communities established just beyond a city’s boundary but connected to the urban center by

View the Closer Look The Bowery at Night


 mass transit, boomed in the Gilded Age. This cover image (17.9) from an 1874 real estate publication renders the great commercial metropolis of Chicago in the background while touting the immense tracts of surrounding land as ideal for suburban development. Note the many sets of tracks for trains and trolleys, suggesting the ease with which commuters could travel to and from work in the dirty, loud, and crowded city. Suburbs attracted middle-class

17.9 Spreading
Outward
 Fast and inexpensive transportation systems in cities led to the development of separate and distinct urban areas. This image from the cover of an 1874 real estate publication shows the densely settled commercial and residential districts of Chicago surrounded by vast stretches of land being developed into commuter suburbs. Note the many sets of train and trolley tracks.

 How did new modes of transportation promote the development of specialized urban and suburban districts?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 families that could afford to buy a house and pay the cost of commuting to the city for work. Middle-class families found suburbs attractive for their serenity, cleanliness, and greenery—aspects that stood in sharp contrast to the crime, disease, violence, and noise of the inner city. Given the prevalence of racist and nativist attitudes in Gilded Age American society, suburbs also attracted people unwilling to live with immigrants and African Americans.

 dishonesty, immorality, and violence that threatened virtuous womanhood. Yet two trends in the late nineteenth century led directly to new, more public roles for middleclass women. The first was a rise in education, especially at the college level. By 1900, women constituted nearly 20 percent of college graduates, up from just 13 percent in 1890. Education allowed women, if only temporarily, to leave the domestic sphere to interact with other young women and encounter emerging ideas about women’s rights. Not surprisingly, nearly every leader in the women’s rights movement in the late nineteenth century had attended Real estate columnist, Chicago Tribune, 1888 college. The second was the inThe creation of middle-class communities of creased involvement of women in clubs dedilike-minded people of similar ethnic and religious cated to charity and social reform. The General backgrounds fostered the development of new Federation of Women’s Clubs, established in middle-class values, tastes, and social patterns. 1890, counted 160,000 members in more than Middle-class families had fewer children and 500 clubs by 1900. The largest and best known higher incomes than their working-class counterorganization was the Women’s Christian Temparts. Greater wealth and fewer mouths to feed perance Union (WCTU). Activism in clubs allowed them to purchase an ever-increasing argave women the opportunity to exert politiray of consumer products, most often by women cal influence, build leadership skills, and learn who rode trolleys or commuter lines to the cenfrom networks of other activist, reform-minded tral business district. Many of these products women. were everyday items that came with increasingly By the 1890s, many of these activist women recognizable names like Ivory Soap and Cocajoined the women’s suffrage movement to obtain Cola. Others were more substantial, such as small voting rights for women. The movement had pianos that could be purchased on credit. The split into rival factions in 1869 in the debate over popularity of pianos in the late nineteenth century the Fourteenth Amendment (see Chapter 14), reflected not merely the rising wealth of middlebut in 1890, they reunited to form the National class families, but also the increased leisure time American Woman Suffrage Association they enjoyed and their desire to develop refined (NAWSA). It helped win suffrage in states like tastes. Colorado (1893) and Idaho (1896) and then, after considerable struggle, for all women with the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment in 1920 (see Chapter 18). Racism led white women to exclude black women from their clubs and the suffrage movement. Nonetheless, African American women esLower birth rates and a growing trend for hiring tablished their own clubs to pursue goals such as servants to perform duties like cooking, cleaning, temperance and women’s suffrage. Most of these and laundry left middle-class women with more free time. The dominant notions about gender roles, clubs affiliated with the National Association however, emphasized the need for women to remain of Colored Women, an umbrella group. Some black women pursued goals of particular concern in the home, focusing on creating a moral and nurturing environment for their husbands and children. to African Americans. Ida B. Wells launched a According to this view the outside world of business national campaign against lynching in the 1890s that drew many African American women and and politics was the male sphere, full of corruption,

 “Since water hems in the business center on three sides and the nexus of railroads on the south, Chicago must grow upward.”

New Roles and Expectations
 for Women

 Why did public activism among women increase?

Read the Document Susan B. Anthony, “The ‘New
Departure’ for Women” (1873)


NEW HABITS, ROLES, AND LIFESTYLES



 men into public activism for reform, especially civil rights. By the 1890s, Americans had begun to use the term “New Woman” to describe middle-class women who pursued higher education, engaged in political activism, delayed marriage, and bore fewer children. The New Woman had a distinct look, donning the clothing, hair style, and air of the so-called Gibson Girl. A creation of illustrator Charles Dana Gibson in 1890s popular magazines, the Gibson Girl was tall and beautiful, with a tightly cinched waist that accentuated her bosom and with hair piled high on her head. Offsetting these traditionally feminine characteristics, however, was an outgoing, even mischievous spirit that reflected the greater independence and activism of younger American women. Symbolic of this attitude was the degree to which young women took part in the great national enthusiasm for bicycling in the 1890s. Note the striking contrast between these two images.

 The first from 1886 (17.10) shows a traditional Victorian-era wife in formal attire being carried as a passenger by her husband. The second image, an 1896 advertisement poster for the Stearns Bicycle Company (17.11), shows a self-confident and carefree woman in the Gibson Girl style breezing along on her own bicycle. Many conservative Americans condemned the bicycling craze as unnatural and immoral because it allowed young women and men the freedom to pedal off unchaperoned, away from the watchful eyes of parents and other guardians of respectability.

17.11 The New
Woman
Many Americans
 saw a connection between the growing independence, activism, and outgoing spirit of young women and their participation in the national enthusiasm for bicycling in the 1890s.

17.10 The Traditional Woman
 Reflecting Victorian values, this conservatively dressed woman in 1886 enjoys a bicycle ride only as the passenger of her husband.

View the Map Atlas Map: Changing Lives of
American Women, 1880–1930


 What was new about the “New Woman”?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 “Bicycling has done more to emancipate women than anything else in the world. I stand and rejoice every time I see a woman ride by on a wheel. It gives women a feeling of freedom and self-reliance.” SUSAN B. ANTHONY, 1896 17.12 Selling Celebrity The booming tobacco industry created the original baseball cards to capitalize on the value of sports celebrity endorsements for their products.

New Forms of Leisure
 and Popular Culture As industrial life created sharp distinctions between time spent at work and time doing everything else, Americans in the Gilded Age developed the concept of leisure time. This trend

 How did commercial interests shape the new forms of leisure in the Gilded Age?

 was at the heart of the labor movement’s persistent demand for the eight-hour day as both a call for shorter hours of toil and an insistence on the right to leisure time. Many city dwellers spent their leisure time in informal activities in their neighborhood, such as walking about, playing games in streets and local parks, and socializing with their neighbors. For many working-class men, the local saloon was the preferred place of leisure. Increasingly popular, however, were more formal leisure opportunities such as amusement parks and organized spectator sports. Amateur, semiprofessional, and professional baseball teams, for example, drew large crowds. Entrepreneurs soon saw baseball as a business, despite its reputation as the “national pastime.” They built large baseball stadiums near streetcar lines and sold patrons not merely tickets but also food, beer, trinkets, and scorecards. By the 1880s, baseball stars like Mike “King” Kelly and Adrian “Cap” Anson were high-paid celebrities. Corporations, especially the booming tobacco industry, quickly realized the value of celebrity endorsements for their products and in the 1880s created the original baseball cards like the one shown here ( 17.12 ). To legitimize tobacco use, companies such as Old Judge portrayed players like Kelly as ideal men—the perfect blend of athletic masculinity and refined, almost gentlemen-like bearing. In an era when the press rarely reported on the bad behavior of athletes or politicians, few Americans could have known that the real Mike Kelly was a violent alcoholic who would drink himself to death in 1894 at age 37. Other spectator sports also enjoyed great popularity in the late nineteenth century. Professional boxing, horseracing, track and field competitions, and bicycle races drew large crowds to venues such as Madison Square Garden in New York City, the Chicago Coliseum, and the Boston Arena. By the 1890s, college football games in Boston, New York,

Read the Document Coney Island Frolics


NEW HABITS, ROLES, AND LIFESTYLES

 Philadelphia, and Chicago often drew more than 50,000 fans. Baseball, football, and other urban spectator sports proved consistent money-makers for promoters, but they also attracted criticism from ministers and public officials who decried the violence, alcohol consumption, and gambling associated with them and the trend to play them on Sundays. Competing for the attention of the American with increased leisure time on his or her hands was a burgeoning theatrical entertainment industry. By the late nineteenth century, the typical city resident could choose from a vast array of entertainment forms on stage. In ethnic neighborhoods, for example, Old World productions like Italian melodramas based loosely on operas and Yiddish comedies drawn from Eastern European traditions flourished. Elsewhere in the city in more mainstream venues, people flocked to musical comedies, a distinctly American innovation pioneered by the duo of Edward Harrigan and Tony Hart. They were succeeded by others such as George M. Cohan and Irving Berlin, whose popular songs like “Give My Regards to Broadway” and “Alexander’s Ragtime Band” became enduring hits. Also popular was vaudeville, a kind of variety show featuring a series of acts by entertainers from jugglers, musicians, acrobats, and family routines, to singers, wild animal acts, ribald comedians, and scantily clad women. With its low admission fees and democratic approach, vaudeville was geared for the masses. At its peak circa 1900, vaudeville shows drew two million patrons a day. Many of the great American stage and film performers from the early twentieth century, such as James Cagney, Mae West, and Al Jolson, began their careers in vaudeville. Wealthier and better-educated city residents rejected vaudeville and the more raucous forms of musical comedy as undignified and coarse. Instead they went to opera houses to hear European music and to what they considered legitimate theater to see productions of Shakespeare and the classics. While these varied forms of entertainment were developed and popularized in large cities, they quickly spread via published sheet music and touring companies to communities across the nation. The result was the beginning of a national popular culture, one that would flourish more fully with the arrival of movies, radio, and television in the twentieth century.



Lifestyles of the Rich
 and Famous Another feature of urban life that became a defining feature of the Gilded Age (so much so that it gave the era its name) was lavish displays of wealth. Dubbed “conspicuous consumption” by sociologist Thorstein Veblen in 1899, this trend featured the construction of opulent mansions in elite urban districts such as New York’s Fifth Avenue, Chicago’s Lake Shore Drive, and San Francisco’s Nob Hill, as well as in exclusive summer retreats like Newport, Rhode Island. Wealthy families like the Vanderbilts and Astors competed to see who could throw the most extravagant balls, weddings, and parties.

 “There is many a palace in Europe that would hide its diminished roof beside the sheer luxury of Fifth Avenue homes.” EDGAR SALTUS One of the most famous was a ball hosted on March 26, 1883 by Alva Vanderbilt, wife of tycoon William K. Vanderbilt, to celebrate the opening of their new $3 million mansion on upper Fifth Avenue. The elite of New York arrived in costume (17.13). Many dressed as Marie Antoinette, Queen Elizabeth, and Louis XV. This choice of an ostentatious royal theme reflected the belief by the nation’s wealthy elite that they constituted an American aristocracy—a notion that ran counter to the longstanding American fear and loathing for such undemocratic pretensions (see Chapters 4 and 5). Labor activists and social critics castigated the ball and high society’s rejection of republican simplicity, but Mrs. Vanderbilt’s guests paid no heed. They reveled past dawn in a party that cost $250,000—in an age when an average worker could expect to earn less than $700 per year. By the mid-1880s, most newspapers featured “society” columns that devoted extensive coverage to the lives of the wealthy. While Americans followed the exploits of the rich with a certain wonder, the public would accept only so much extravagance before expressing

 How did varied forms of leisure reflect class differences?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 revulsion. That finally occurred in February 1897, when the Bradley Martin family hosted a $400,000 party in which 800 guests arrived in costumes depicting European royalty. One society reporter described “a gorgeous, superb, and wonderful spectacle.” But in 1897, when the nation was suffering from a severe depression, public criticism of the ball erupted, including indignation from public officials, clergymen, and workers,. The Bradley Martins fled to Europe and settled permanently in England, ending the days of diamondnecklace party favors.

 “[Y]ou rich people put next to nothing in the collection plate, and yet you’ll spend thousands of dollars on Mrs. Bradley Martin’s ball.” Sermon of a minister outraged over the Bradley Martin Ball

17.13 Imagining an American Aristocracy
 Wealthy Americans in the Gilded Age competed to throw the most expensive and decadent balls, weddings, or parties. At Mrs. William K. Vanderbilt’s 1883 ball, New York’s elite arrived in costumes depicting figures of European royalty.

 How did the great displays of wealth in the Gilded Age represent a break with America’s republican traditions?

 Read the Document Thorstein Veblen, excerpt from The Theory of Leisure Class

THE CHALLENGE FROM BELOW



 The Challenge from Below The revulsion expressed over the Bradley Martin Ball in 1897 reflected rising discontent. Many farmers and industrial workers felt exploited by powerful corporations. When they turned to elected officials to address these problems, they found them unresponsive. Most politicians remained committed to a laissez-faire philosophy, which argued against government intervention in the economy. As a result the period was marked by some of the most bitter and violent strikes in American history and by the rise of a third party comprised mainly of farmers, workers, and reformers—the People’s Party—to challenge the Republicans and Democrats.

Out of Touch Politics
 Popular enthusiasm for politics reached extraordinary heights in the Gilded Age. Indeed, American voters turned out in astonishing numbers, averaging 79 percent between 1876 and 1896 (as compared with between 50 and 60 percent in recent decades). Despite such intense interest, politicians made little progress in resolving the major issues that dominated national politics in this period. This political stalemate

 stemmed from several factors. First, as indicated in (17.14), the electorate was evenly divided between the two major parties, resulting in remarkably close presidential elections. For example, the five presidential elections between 1876 and 1892 were decided by tiny margins of 1 to 3 percent. Indeed, in 1876 and 1888, the candidate with the highest popular vote total lost because his opponent tallied more electoral votes. No incumbent president won reelection, and only twice (Republicans, 1889–1891 and Democrats, 1893–1895)

Year


Candidate


Party


Popular Vote


Electoral Vote




Rutherford B. Hayes*


Republican


4,036,298 (48%)




Samuel J. Tilden


Democrat


4,300,590 (51%)




James Garfield


Republican


4,454,416 (48.5%)




Winfield S. Hancock


Democrat


4,444,952 (48.1%)




Grover Cleveland


Democrat


4,874,986 (48.5%)




James G. Blaine


Republican


4,851,334 (48.2%)




Benjamin Harrison*


Republican


5,439,853 (47.9%)




Grover Cleveland


Democrat


5,540,309 (48.6%)




Grover Cleveland


Democrat


5,556,918 (46%)




Benjamin Harrison


Republican


5,176,108 (43%)




James B. Weaver


 People’s

1,041,028 (9%)












17.14 Deadlocked
Presidential
Politics in the
Gilded Age
 With an electorate evenly divided between the two major parties, Gilded Age politics were often marked by stalemate on key issues.

 Winner in bold * = winner despite losing popular vote

Read the Document Mary Elizabeth Lease,
“The Popular Crusader” (1892)


 Why were election results in the Gilded Age so close?



 CHAPTER 17

17.15 Liberty
Suffocated by
Big Business
This 1889
Thomas Nast
 cartoon captured the concerns of many, that trusts threatened democracy, equality, and liberty by monopolizing the necessities of life.

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 did one party control both houses of Congress and the presidency. Political inaction in the Gilded Age also reflected the conservatism of most politicians who clung to longstanding political traditions that celebrated small, nonintrusive government, especially at the federal level. For many leaders government regulation of business appeared socialistic and harmful to both the economy and republican principles. Political paralysis stemmed from the power of corporate interests to use huge donations to political parties and bribery of lawmakers to stymie legislation they deemed harmful to their interests. For example, big business interests blocked efforts to lower the tariff because a high tariff protected their manufactures from foreign competition. The record for 1890, the year Congress took up the big issues of tariff, currency reform, and corporate regulation, provides a particularly vivid example of this ineffective political system. Support for corporate regulation reflected rising concern from many

 Why did Congress in this period fail to address major social issues?

 corners of American society. Industrial workers saw themselves as victims of corporate power that demanded long hours of dangerous toil for low wages. Many other Americans, as suggested by this 1889 Thomas Nast cartoon, The Rising of the Usurpers and the Sinking of the Liberties of the People (17.15), viewed trusts as a threat to democracy and equality. By monopolizing the necessities of life, trusts literally threatened to smother American liberty. The Sherman AntiTrust Act of 1890 promised to empower the federal government to crack down on business practices that diminished competition (see Chapter 16), but opposition from pro-business legislators weakened the law to such a point that it did little to slow the growth of big business. Indeed, the 1890s saw record numbers of mergers, and big business used the Sherman Act to weaken labor unions by arguing that strikes amounted to restraint of trade. In 1890, Congress also took up the contentious issue of currency reform to determine what constituted the proper basis for American currency. Advocates of “hard money,” which included most Republicans, businessmen, and the wealthy, argued for basing currency solely on the amount of gold in the U.S. Treasury. They opposed issuing paper money, popularly known as “greenbacks,” or minting more silver coinage, arguing that it contributed to inflation and lowered interest rates. “Soft money” proponents like farmers, workers, and Democrats, however, argued that the supply of gold, and thus of a currency based exclusively on it, was insufficient to meet the needs of an expanding commercial economy. They advocated the issuance of greenbacks and expanded coinage of silver, which was more plentiful than gold. More money in circulation would lead to inflation, but debtors, especially farmers, welcomed inflation because it promised to raise the prices of their goods and diminish the burden of their debts. In 1890, they supported the Sherman Silver Purchase Act, which required the Treasury to purchase 4.5 million ounces of silver every month and issue notes (paper money) redeemable in either silver or gold. Republicans opposed the bill but wanted a higher tariff. Democrats opposed a higher tariff, arguing that it amounted to a huge subsidy paid by American consumers to business. Both sides therefore compromised, and both the silver act and a higher tariff became law. Neither bill, however, had the desired effect. The higher tariff caused consumer prices to

THE CHALLENGE FROM BELOW

 surge, producing widespread discontent. The silver program caused the price of silver to fall, so most of the people holding the notes redeemed them for gold, which depleted the nation’s gold reserves and contributed to the Panic of 1893 and four years of severe depression. The one notable exception to the politics of stalemate was a civil service law to open certain government jobs only to those who demonstrated their competency on a civil service exam rather than those who merely possessed strong political connections. Neither party favored the law, since it threatened to undermine their ability to reward friends and campaign contributors. It took the assassination of President James A. Garfield in 1881 by a frustrated and apparently deranged office seeker to pass the Pendleton Act in 1883, which placed ten percent of federal jobs under civil service.

 The People’s Party Anger against the political system’s corruption and failure to act on critical issues like corporate regulation and currency and tariff reform gradually produced a popular reaction. In the late 1870s, farmers’ alliances, successors to the Granger movement (see Chapter 15), formed to alleviate the plight of farmers beset by rising costs and falling prices for their products. The Southern Farmers’ Alliance (1877) and Northern Farmers’ Alliance (1880) grew in the 1880s to a combined membership of more than five million. Excluded by the segregationist doctrines of the post-Reconstruction South, black farmers formed the Colored Farmers’ Alliance in 1886 and soon had more than 1.25 million members. The alliances argued that the economic woes of the American farmer were due to exploitive bankers who charged farmers exorbitant interest rates for farm mortgages, to railroads that charged them extortionate rates to transport farm produce to market, and to commodity brokers on Wall Street, who bought their crops at rock bottom prices and then resold them at many times the original price paid. To combat this injustice, the alliances promoted the establishment of cooperatives that combined the buying and selling power of farmers to gain them better prices for their produce and lower rates for loans and crop insurance. They also promoted education on agricultural topics. In 1889, the Northern Farmers’ Alliance and Southern Farmers’ Alliance united to form the

 Read the Document N.A. Dunning, ed., Alliance’s Vision of Community (1891)



 National Alliance. One year later, convinced that the only way to combat the power of the monopolies and trusts was to transform the National Alliance into a political movement to elect pro-farmer candidates to office, delegates gathered in Ocala, Florida, and drew up a manifesto listing their grievances and proposed reforms. That fall National Alliance-backed candidates won complete or partial control of 12 state legislatures and elected 6 governors. They also sent 50 representatives and 3 senators to Congress. Because most of these men were Democrats, Republicans lost control of the House. These victories convinced many National Alliance activists like Ignatius Donnelly of Minnesota and Tom Watson of Georgia that they needed to form a third party and run a slate of candidates in the 1892 presidential contest. A National Alliance convention in St. Louis in early 1892 led to the formal creation of the People’s Party (its followers would be known as “Populists”) and the adoption of a platform that emphasized the plight of the American farmer and worker at the hands of greedy businessmen and corrupt politicians (see Competing Visions: Progress or Peril?). By now the People’s Party movement had begun to alarm the leaders of the mainstream political parties. Worried about the party’s potential to determine the winner in 1892 by taking votes from them, the major parties launched a campaign to discredit the Populists. In this political cartoon (17.16), which appeared on the cover of Judge, a pro-Republican magazine, the artist ridicules the Populists as a “patchwork” of strange and dangerous political and ideological movements like socialism and prohibition. The balloon’s basket, labeled “Platform of Lunacy,” carried the party leaders, depicted as eccentric fools. In July 1892, the Populists nominated Union Army veteran James B. Weaver for president and Confederate veteran General James G. Field of Virginia for vice president. Their convention adopted a platform aimed at the following: eliminating monopolies (abolition of national banks and government ownership of railroads and telegraphs); protecting small producers (free silver coinage and “sub-treasuries” to store surplus farm produce during times of low prices and to allow farmers to borrow money against it at low interest); strengthening democracy (the popular election of U.S. senators and the referendum and initiative); and promoting fairness (a graduated income tax to make the rich pay more of the tax burden). To create a national base of support among all struggling people, not just

 What grievances led to the rise of farmers’ alliances?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

Competing Visions
PROGRESS OR PERIL?
Americans in the Gilded Age interpreted the economic, political, and social developments of the era in very different ways. Some looked about them with enthusiasm at the sight of a nation growing in size, wealth, population, and international prestige. President Benjamin Harrison, in his inaugural address in 1889 reflects this optimistic view. Other Americans, however, especially many farmers and industrial workers who sympathized with the People’s Party, expressed alarm and dismay over the state of the nation. What key signs of progress and national strength does President Harrison cite? What dangers to American ideals such as equality and democracy do the authors of the People’s Party Platform identify? How do we account for these starkly different visions? President Benjamin Harrison, Inaugural Address, March 4, 1889 [O]ur growth has not been limited to territory, population and aggregate wealth, marvelous as it has been in each of those directions. The masses of our people are better fed, clothed, and housed than their fathers were. The facilities for popular education have been vastly enlarged and more generally diffused. The virtues of courage and patriotism have given recent proof of their continued presence and increasing power in the hearts and over the lives of our people. The influences of religion have been multiplied and strengthened. The sweet offices of charity have greatly increased.… We have not attained an ideal condition. Not all of our people are happy and prosperous; not all of them are virtuous and law-abiding. But on the whole the opportunities offered to the individual to secure the comforts of life are better than are found elsewhere and largely better than they were here one hundred years ago. No other people have a government more worthy of their respect and love or a land so magnificent in extent, so pleasant to look upon, and so full of generous suggestion to enterprise and labor. God has placed upon our head a diadem and has laid at our feet power and wealth beyond definition or calculation. But we must not forget that we take these gifts upon the condition that justice and mercy shall hold the reins of power and that the upward avenues of hope shall be free to all the people. I do not mistrust the future. Dangers have been in frequent ambush along our path, but we have uncovered and vanquished them all. Passion has swept some of our communities, but only to give us a new demonstration that the great body of our people are stable, patriotic, and lawabiding.… The peaceful agencies of commerce are more fully revealing the necessary unity of all our communities, and the increasing intercourse of our people is promoting mutual respect.… 
 How did the People’s Party platform reflect the concerns of farmers and industrial workers?

 Platform of the People’s Party, July 4, 1892 [W]e meet in the midst of a nation brought to the verge of moral, political, and material ruin. Corruption dominates the ballot box, the Legislatures, the Congress, and touches even the ermine of the bench. The people are demoralized … The newspapers are largely subsidized or muzzled, public opinion silenced, business prostrated, homes covered with mortgages, labor impoverished, and the land concentrating in the hands of capitalists. The urban workmen are denied the right to organize for self-protection, imported pauperized labor beats down their wages, a hireling standing army, unrecognized by our laws, is established to shoot them down, and they are rapidly degenerating into European conditions. The fruits of the toil of millions are boldly stolen to build up colossal fortunes for a few, unprecedented in the history of mankind; and the possessors of those, in turn, despise the Republic and endanger liberty. From the same prolific womb of governmental injustice we breed the two great classes—tramps and millionaires. … A vast conspiracy against mankind has been organized on two continents, and it is rapidly taking possession of the world. If not met and overthrown at once it forebodes terrible social convulsions, the destruction of civilization, or the establishment of an absolute despotism. We have witnessed for more than a quarter of a century the struggles of the two great political parties for power and plunder, while grievous wrongs have been inflicted upon the suffering people. We charge that the controlling influences dominating both these parties have permitted the existing dreadful conditions to develop without serious effort to prevent or restrain them. Neither do they now promise us any substantial reform.…

THE CHALLENGE FROM BELOW



17.16 Discrediting the
Populists
 Concerned about the potential of the People’s Party to determine the outcome of the 1892 presidential election, the major parties ridiculed them as a “patchwork” of dangerous political and ideological movements like socialism and prohibition.

 farmers, the platform also expressed sympathy with industrial workers. In the end, the People’s Party was no match for the established parties. Democrat Grover Cleveland won the election with 46 percent of the vote to Republican incumbent, Benjamin Harrison’s 43 percent. Yet Weaver garnered more than one million votes (9 percent) and won Kansas, Colorado, Idaho, and Nevada. Results on the local and state levels were

 even more impressive, as Populists elected almost 1,500 candidates to state legislatures, three governors, and five senators and ten representatives to Congress. People’s Party leaders hoped to build on this achievement in 1896, but they faced severe challenges. In 1892, the party had performed poorly among Midwestern farmers and industrial workers who stayed with either the Republicans or Democrats. In addition, a campaign by conservatives to equate

 Read the Document The People’s Party Platform (1892)

 How did opponents try to discredit the Populists?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 support for the People’s Party with attacks on white supremacy severely weakened the party in the South.

Industrial Conflict
 and Depression Events soon highlighted the unchecked power of big business and the severe consequences of a laissez-faire economy. Many People’s Party activists hoped the anger and suffering produced by the Homestead strike and Panic of 1893 would prompt workers and farmers to reject the mainstream political parties and join the Populists. Workers at the Homestead Steel Works, a mammoth plant near Pittsburgh owned by Andrew Carnegie, for years enjoyed a strong union (the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers), high wages, and decent living conditions. But in 1892, Carnegie decided to rid the company of the union to cut costs by introducing labor-saving machinery and reducing wages. To protect the public persona of a benevolent capitalist that he had worked for years to develop (see Chapter 16), Carnegie went on vacation in Scotland, leaving his hard-nosed business partner, Henry Clay Frick, to do the dirty work. On June 29, Frick announced a lockout and closed the mills. After a week the standoff turned violent when

 workers exchanged gunfire with heavily armed professional strikebreakers of the Pinkerton Detective Agency, whom Frick had brought by boat to the Homestead complex. Six strikers and five Pinkertons were killed. The national press gave extensive coverage to the strike, and its tone was surprisingly pro-worker, probably due in part to the Pinkertons’ negative reputation. Carnegie, despite his attempt to separate himself from the conflict, drew some of the harshest criticisms. His critics challenged his reputation as the great philanthropist who handed out libraries to communities in the United States and Europe by depicting him as a two-faced hypocrite who funded his philanthropic largesse by grinding down his workers with wage cuts (17.17). But the tide of public opinion soon shifted against the strikers, for on July 23 anarchist Alexander Berkman burst into Frick’s office and shot him. Remarkably Frick survived the assassination attempt. Even though Berkman had no connection to Homestead workers, his actions brought widespread condemnation upon the strikers. In September state officials arrested 33 members of the union’s leadership and charged them with treason against the state. On November 20, 1892, with nearly all the jobs at Homestead filled by replacement workers, the union ended the strike. Six months later, on May 5, 1893, a financial crisis rocked the nation, leading to the most severe economic depression in American history

 17.17 Carnegie’s Reputation Takes a Hit The Homestead strike tarnished Carnegie’s image as a benevolent capitalist and friend of labor. This cartoon from the July 9 issue of the Utica, New York, Globe accuses him of being a two-faced hypocrite, who funded his philanthropy by cutting his workers’ salaries.

 Why did critics accuse Carnegie of hypocrisy during the Homestead Strike?

THE CHALLENGE FROM BELOW

 to that time. Within a year the Panic of 1893 led to the failure of thousands of farms and businesses, including almost 200 railroads and 600 banks closed, throwing millions out of work and pushing the unemployment rate to 20 percent. The depression produced two vivid images of the widespread suffering endured by millions and the unwillingness of public officials to do much about it. The first came from an Ohio Populist named Jacob Coxey, who called for the government abandon laissez-faire and create public works projects such as building roads to alleviate mass unemployment and stimulate the economy (programs the federal government adopted in the Great Depression of the 1930s). To draw attention to this idea, he organized 100 unemployed men in Massillon, Ohio, to march to Washington, D.C. (the first such march on the capital). Setting out on March 25, 1894 Coxey’s Army, as it came to be known grew in size as as various groups joined along the route. As this photograph (17.18) and nearly every other one taken of the march shows, Coxey and his followers sought to portray an image of patriotism, earnestness, and moderation. Dressing as decently as their poverty permitted and marching with dozens of



 American flags, Coxey and his men rejected the accusations of their critics that they were violent radicals determined to attack the government. Rather, they asserted, theirs was a campaign to save the republic from the trusts and laissez-faire policies. Most of the men and women who joined Coxey walked for only part of the march to Washington. Nonetheless, about 600 accompanied him when he entered the nation’s capital on April 30, 1894. Denied entry into the Capitol, Coxey delivered an impassioned address on its steps. We stand here to-day in behalf of millions of toilers whose petitions have been buried in committee rooms, whose prayers have been unresponded to, and whose opportunities for honest, remunerative, productive labor have been taken from them by unjust legislation, which protects idlers, speculators, and gamblers. Coxey and other activists were arrested for “disturbing the peace” but convicted only for walking on the Capitol lawns. Other groups of unemployed workers staged similar protest marches, but all met with frustration and inaction.

 17.18 Coxey’s Army Emphasizes Its Patriotism Aware that critics denounced them as violent radicals, Coxey and his “army” of protesters emphasized their patriotism and moderation by marching with American flags.

Read the Document Jacob S. Coxey, Address of Protest (1894)


 What did Coxey and his followers want from the federal government?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

 This sensibility informs the drawing of Pullman’s A second image of government indifference to widespread suffering arose in Chicago. The World’s vision of the future town (since it was still under construction in 1881) as a model community of neat Columbian Exposition had opened on May 1, houses, schools, churches, stores, open spaces, and, of 1893, just four days before the panic on Wall Street. The fair’s emphasis on American progress and course, the factories that made it all possible. So long as the company remained profitable, its prosperity, symbolized by the opulence and beauty of its huge complex of white neoclassical buildings, employees considered themselves fortunate. But the soon stood in stark contrast to the growing despair of depression in 1893 hit the railroad industry hard, the city’s tenement districts a few blocks away. When and Pullman laid off hundreds of workers and announced a wage cut of 30 the fair closed in Octopercent for the rest. On ber, thousands of hometop of this devastating less people moved into the news, workers learned vacant buildings that had that Pullman would only recently housed elabonot reduce their rents, rate displays of prosperity. which were deducted That winter of 1893–1894, automatically from their 60,000 Chicagoans per day paychecks. Some workreceived a free meal from ers soon began receiving soup kitchens and missions. checks for less than one Some of the hardest hit dollar per week to cover workers during the depresthe cost of food, heat, sion were employees of the and clothing. Pullman Palace Car ComOn May 11, 1894, pany, located just outside Pullman worker Pullman’s hard-pressed Chicago. Founded by workers went out on George Pullman in 1867, strike. After a six-week the company manufacstandoff during which Pullman refused to negotiate, tured luxury railroad cars. Pullman was an idealist who believed that workers and employers could work Eugene Debs, the leader of the American Railway Union (ARU) announced all of the union’s 125,000 together in harmony for mutual benefit. Acting on members across the country, as an act of solidarity this idea he established the town of Pullman in 1880, with the Pullman workers, would refuse to handle a company town built and owned by the Pullman corporation for its employees, who rented homes and Pullman cars. Within days the Pullman strike caused the nation’s railroad system to slow to a patronized stores owned by the company. As this crawl. 1881 depiction of the town demonstrates (17.19), The heads of more than two dozen railroads Pullman, like Carnegie, prided himself on being a moved to support Pullman and break the ARU by model capitalist, who earned a vast fortune but still hiring thousands of strikebreakers and pressuring managed to provide a decent living for his workers.

 “We are born in a Pullman house, fed from the Pullman shop, taught in the Pullman school, catechized in the Pullman church, and when we die we shall be buried in the Pullman cemetery and go to the Pullman Hell.”

17.19 Capitalism
 and Community George Pullman’s vision of himself as a benevolent capitalist was captured in these plans for Pullman, a company town of neat houses, schools, churches, stores, open spaces, and factories. [Source: i38519. Sepia illustration showing the town and factories of Pullman, with Index to Works on lower left and Index to Town on lower right.]

 Why did the Pullman workers strike?

Read the Document Address to 1894 Convention of American
Railway Union by Jennie Curtis


THE CHALLENGE FROM BELOW

 Governor Richard Altgeld, to send in the state militia. When he refused out of sympathy for the strikers and a desire to avoid violence, the railroads asked President Grover Cleveland to send federal troops (see Choices and Consequences: The Pullman Strike).



17.20 For Silver and the People
 The Democratic Party emphasized Bryan’s commitment to workers and farmers through his advocacy of free silver and his promise to protect Americans from being crucified on a “Cross of Gold.”

The Election of 1896 and
Political Realignment
 The turmoil caused by the depression and Pullman strike greatly affected the 1894 off-year elections. Dissatisfaction with Cleveland’s administration hurt the Democrats, who lost their brief hold on both houses of Congress. The shift in power meant more stalemate for the next two years, with a Republican Congress opposed by a Democratic president. The election of 1896, however, led to a major realignment in political affiliations among the American people. Republicans nominated former Congressman and Governor of Ohio William McKinley for president and affirmed their conservative commitment to the gold standard and a high tariff. The Democrats nominated a young and dynamic congressman from Nebraska, William Jennings Bryan. Just 36 years old, Bryan had earned a reputation for stirring oratory against the tariff and in support of free silver. The latter issue held great symbolic importance in the middle of the depression. Silver was the metal of the common man, argued its supporters, while gold was the metal of elites. In speeches, pamphlets, songs, and images, People’s Party activists had convinced millions of Americans that free coinage of silver (putting more money into circulation and thus lowering the value of the dollar backed exclusively by gold) would both end the depression and curb the monopolies and trusts. Recognizing the popularity of this policy, delegates at the Democratic Party convention made free silver a key plank in the party platform. Bryan then delivered one of the most famous speeches in American history, in which he argued that average Americans were being crucified on a “cross of gold,” forced upon them by Wall Street and big business. Capturing this theme, this campaign poster (17.20) included the text of the famous speech (framed by silver coins) and ribbons bearing two of its most memorable

Read the Document William Jennings Bryan, “Cross
 of Gold” Speech (1896)

 Why did silver hold such political significance in the late nineteenth century?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900

Choices and Consequences
THE PULLMAN STRIKE
Grover Cleveland was not the first president to face the choice of whether to send federal troops to quell a labor dispute. Andrew Jackson had dispatched troops in 1834 to end a strike by canal workers. Rutherford B. Hayes had sent troops to crush the great railroad strike of 1877. Despite these precedents, Cleveland was aware that many considered the use of the army against American citizens a violation of the key republican principles of limited federal power. He also worried that the public would condemn such use of federal power if violence ensued as it had in 1877. He spent days in late June and early July 1894, consulting with advisors and mulling over his options. 
Choices




 Take no action, allowing Illinois and its pro-labor governor to handle the matter.

Continuing
Controversies
 When is using federal troops in a strike compatible with republican principles? Subsequent presidents, including Woodrow Wilson, also ordered military intervention during labor disputes. In 1916, the National Security Act empowered the president to federalize a state’s National Guard to quell a disturbance like a natural disaster, riot, or strike. The two most notable uses of this law, however, came in 1957 (Little Rock, Arkansas) and 1963 (Tuscaloosa, Alabama) to enforce federal desegregation orders.



 Intervene as a neutral and insist that both sides negotiate an equitable settlement.



 Send in the army to break the strike and allow the railroads to use strikebreakers to operate the trains.

Decision
 Despite misgivings Cleveland was a pro-business conservative. He authorized Attorney General Richard Olney, a man with extensive ties to the railroad industry, to obtain a court injunction declaring the ARU boycott of Pullman cars a “conspiracy in restraint of trade” that unlawfully blocked the U.S. mail. When the union defied the injunction, Cleveland ordered the army to end the boycott and get the trains moving again. Debs and other ARU leaders were arrested.

 Federal troops sent by President Cleveland to break the Pullman strike escort the first meat train out of the Chicago stockyards.

Consequences
 Cleveland’s decision touched off violence. Workers destroyed railroad property, and soldiers killed 13 workers and wounded scores more. The boycott collapsed in mid-July and with it the ARU. The Pullman strike ended in early August in complete defeat for the workers. Public opinion, however, turned against Pullman for his obstinate refusal to negotiate with his workers. A government investigation later criticized him and argued that labor unions and government regulation were needed to curb corporate power. Yet in 1895, the Supreme Court (In re Debs) upheld the use of injunctions to end strikes.

 How did President Cleveland justify using federal power to break the Pullman strike?

THE CHALLENGE FROM BELOW

 lines: “You shall not press down upon the brow of Labor this Crown of Thorns” and “You shall not crucify mankind upon a Cross of Gold.” A youthful Bryan flanked by his wife and children tops the poster, while images of a worker and farmer flank the speech text. That left the People’s Party facing a dilemma. Most of its activists had expected the Democrats to follow the Republicans and support the gold standard, leaving the silver issue to the Populists. Now the People’s Party had to decide whether to nominate their own candidate and divide support for the silver issue with the Democrats, or, as was common practice among small parties in the nineteenth century, to nominate Bryan as their candidate, a move that would diminish their standing as an independent party concerned with issues other than silver. In July the People’s Party nominated Bryan. But they nominated their own candidate for vice president, Populist leader Tom Watson of Georgia. Rejecting a longstanding tradition that considered campaigning by presidential candidates unseemly, Bryan embarked on one of the most remarkable campaigns in American history, traveling more than 18,000 miles through 27 states and delivering more than 600 stump speeches to three million people.



 Bryan’s campaign generated a lot of commentary and excitement, but not enough votes on Election Day. McKinley, backed with an unprecedented amount of corporate money, won with 51 percent of the vote to Bryan’s 47 percent. The most significant outcome of the contest was a new and enduring political alignment. The Republican Party became dominant in the Midwest and Northeast and dominated national political power for the next three decades. Republicans would portray themselves as the party of economic prosperity (the economy recovered under McKinley) and international power. The Democrats became the party of the South and West. They retained the Populist belief that government needed to do more to secure the wellbeing of the average citizen and limit the power of big business. Given its base in the South, however, the Democratic Party also upheld a states’ rights philosophy that protected white supremacy. The People’s Party disintegrated after 1896, but many of its core ideas, such as the graduated income tax and the direct election of U.S. senators, remained popular and were eventually adopted during the next two decades, a period known as the Progressive Era.

 “If they dare to come out in the open field and defend the gold standard as a good thing, we will fight them to the uttermost. Having behind us the producing masses of this nation and the world, supported by the commercial interests, the laboring interests and the toilers everywhere, we will answer their demand for a gold standard by saying to them: ‘You shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns! You shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold!’” WILLIAM JENNINGS BRYAN

View the Closer Look Republican Campaign Poster
 of 1896, William McKinley

 What factors led to the demise of the People’s Party?



 CHAPTER 17

BECOMING A MODERN SOCIETY: AMERICA IN THE GILDED AGE, 1877–1900



1874–1877


1882–1883




 Boss Tweed’s corruption ring exposed

 Women’s Christian Temperance Union established

Charity Organization
 Society founded

The Home Insurance Building
 completed in Chicago

 Shows the rising influence of political machines in cities and efforts to limit their power

 An early indication of growing women’s activism in the Gilded Age

 Founded by wealthy reformers who feared that too much charity was actually harming the poor

 Considered the world’s first skyscraper, it signaled the transformation of the modern urban landscape.

The Southern Farmers’ Alliance
 established in Texas

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Reflects growing discontent of American farmers that eventually leads to the formation of the People’s Party

The Vanderbilt Ball
 A lavish exhibition of “conspicuous consumption” attended by the richest families in America

The Pendleton Act
 becomes law Intended to diminish nepotism and corruption, it required Civil Service exams for 10 percent of federal jobs

 Josiah Strong publishes, Our Country A best-selling book written in an alarmist style, it warned Americans that cities and immigrants posed a grave threat to the republic.

Review Questions
 1. Why did cities grow in the late nineteenth century? 2. Who supported political machines and why? Why did reformers dislike political machines so much? 3. How did the approach to poverty by reformers like Jacob Riis and Jane Addams differ from traditional approaches?

 4. How did the roles and expectations for middleclass women change in the Gilded Age? What social and economic developments made this possible? 5. What were the primary grievances of people who supported the People’s Party? How did they propose to resolve them? 6. What was the long-term impact of the 1896 election?

Key Terms
 Gilded Age The name for the period 1877–1900 that suggested the amazing achievements of the period were like a thin gold layer that covered many unresolved social problems. Tenement Multiple family dwelling of four to six stories housing dozens of families that became the most common form of housing for poor city dwellers by the 1860s. Political machine Powerful urban political organization that mobilized large blocs of working-class and immigrant voters and often engaged in corrupt and illegal activity.

 People’s Party A third party effort launched in 1890 by a coalition of farmer organizations, reformers, and labor unions and dedicated to curbing corporate power and increasing the voice of the masses in politics. Farmers’ alliance Organization in the 1870s and 1880s dedicated to helping farmers struggling with rising costs and falling crop prices by advocating farmer cooperatives and laws to regulate banks and railroads.

 Settlement house Institution established in cities beginning in the 1880s and dedicated to helping the poor by providing a wide range of social and educational services.

 Coxey’s Army A protest march from Ohio to Washington, D.C., organized by Jacob Coxey in 1894 to publicize demands for the federal government to alleviate the suffering brought on by the Panic of 1893.

 City Beautiful Movement A movement begun in the 1880s that advocated comprehensive planning and grand redesign of urban space to eliminate pollution and overcrowding.

 Company town A town built and owned by a corporation and rented to its employees, reflecting both the corporation’s desire to help their workers and to control them.

 New Woman A phrase used to describe young women in the 1890s and early 1900s that reflected their rising levels of education, economic independence, and political and social activism.

 Pullman strike A bitter strike that began on May 11, 1894, at the Pullman Palace Car Company and soon spread nationwide, paralyzing the railroad system. President Cleveland sent in federal troops and broke the strike.

CHAPTER REVIEW

1887–1889




1892–1893


1894–1896


American Protective
 Association founded

 Women’s suffrage activists form NAWSA

 People’s Party established

 Coxey’s Army marches on Washington, D.C.

 Signals a rise in anti-immigrant sentiment

 Brings together two separate women’s organizations to concentrate on securing the vote for women

 Hull House founded in Chicago Settlement house movement provides a wide range of social services to poor and immigrants city dwellers

 Jacob Riis publishes How the Other Half Lives A shocking exposé of urban poverty that builds support for reform measures

 Sherman Anti-Trust Act passed

 A coalition of farmers, workers, and reformers committed to curbing the power of big business

 The Homestead strike A bitter and highly publicized defeat for workers

 Columbian Exposition opens in Chicago Celebrates American progress and promotes cleaner, healthier, and more beautiful cities



 Economic depression prompts many to demand relief by the federal government

 The Pullman strike President Cleveland breaks the strike by sending in federal troops

Election of 1896
 Republican William McKinley defeats Democrat William Jennings Bryan

 Reflects growing concern over corporate power, but fails to curb it

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Becoming a Modern Society.

Questions for Analysis
 1. What role did immigration play in the rise of large cities? View the Closer Look Immigration to the U.S. 1870–1915, p. 501

 2. Why did political machines grow so powerful in the late nineteenth century? Read the Document Lincoln Steffens, The Shame of the Cities, p. 504

 3. How did reformers offer a new interpretation of the causes of poverty?

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • Adna Weber, “The Growth of Cities,” p. 500 • George Waring, “Sanitary Conditions in New York” (1897), p. 503 • Josiah Strong, “Anglo-Saxon Culture Under Siege” (1885), p. 505 • Proposal to Buffalo, New York, Park Commission (1888), p. 506 • Jane Addams, Twenty Years at Hull House, p. 508 • Susan B. Anthony, “The ‘New Departure’ for Women” (1873), p. 512 • Thorstein Veblen, excerpt from The Theory of Leisure Class, p. 516 • Mary Elizabeth Lease, “The Popular Crusader” (1892), p. 517 • N.A. Dunning, ed., Alliance’s Vision of Community (1891), p. 519 • Jacob S. Coxey, Address of Protest (1894), p. 523 • Address to 1894 Convention of American Railway Union by Jennie Curtis, p. 524 • William Jennings Bryan, “Cross of Gold” Speech (1896), p. 525

Read the Document Jacob Riis, How the Other Half Lives,


View the Closer Look


 p. 507

• Competing Visions: How Best to Help the Poor?, p. 504
• The Bowery at Night, p. 511
 • Republican Campaign Poster of 1896, William McKinley, p. 527

 4. What led to the emergence of new forms of leisure in the Gilded Age? Read the Document Coney Island Frolics, p. 514

 5. What did Populists identify as major threats to American values like democracy and equality? Read the Document The People’s Party Platform (1892), p. 521

View the Map Atlas Map: Changing Lives of American Women,
1880–1930, p. 513


 What factors led to the emergence of Progressivism?

Reining in Big
Business p. 535


 How did the federal government tackle the problem of monopolies and trusts in the Progressive Era?

Competing Views
 on Transforming the Workplace p. 541

 How did industrialists, workers, and Progressive reformers differ in their approaches to ending labor conflict?

Protecting Women
 and Children p. 546

How did Progressive Era
 reforms change the lives of women and children?

Reforming the
Government p. 552


 How did the role of government change during the Progressive Era?

Source: Victor Joseph Gatto/
Museum of the City of New York


 CHAPTER

The Progressive
Impulse p. 532




