 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 15

Conflict and
Conquest
The Transformation of the West,
1860–1900
 Most Americans envisioned the conquest and transformation of the West as a tale of triumph. In John Gast’s 1872 painting, American Progress, the goddess Liberty glides westward, stringing telegraph wire and holding a book, symbols, along with the distant railroad, of the civilization and new technology that would soon tame the wilderness. Beneath her, Gast depicts farmers and pioneers intent on taking advantage of the West’s bountiful resources. Turned into a lithograph, it was advertised as worthy of hanging in both “the miner’s humble cabin” and the “stately marble mansion of the capitalist.” Publishers put the image on the cover of a popular guide to the West, The New Overland Tourist and Pacific Coast Guide. Before 1840 most Americans viewed the lands west of the Mississippi as a great, untamed, and dangerous wilderness of rugged terrain, extreme temperatures, wild animals, and hostile Native Americans. But beginning in the 1840s, an ever-growing number of farmers, miners, ranchers, entrepreneurs, and adventurers moved west, aided after 1869 by the completion of the transcontinental railroad and soaring demand for Western products and resources. Gast’s celebratory scene reveals, doubtless unintentionally, the bitter conflict that accompanied the transformation of the West. On the painting’s left border, a cluster of Native Americans flee before the advancing whites. Above them a herd of buffalo likewise make their escape. Gast’s matter-of-fact portrayal of the seizure of Indian land and the near extinction of the buffalo reflected the nation’s enthusiasm for “progress” and the inability—or unwillingness—to confront the human and environmental costs associated with it. By 1900, the West had been radically transformed. Networks of railroads and telegraph lines crisscrossed the landscape, as did millions of miles of fencing that marked the boundaries of farms and ranches. Western cities like San Francisco and Denver rivaled their Eastern counterparts. Perhaps even more remarkable than the appearance of these new aspects of Western life was the disappearance of others. By 1900, the American government had confined hundreds of independent Native American tribes that had once lived in virtually every corner of the West to reservations. Gone, too, were the millions of buffalo from the plains and, in areas of intensive mining, large sections of once pristine mountain landscape were defaced. The conquest of the West between 1865 and 1900 included many stories of success, achievement, and undeniable progress, but it was far more complex, violent, and tragic than Gast’s dreamy vision suggests.

 “The destiny of the American people is to subdue the continent—to rush over this vast field to the Pacific Ocean . . . to change darkness into light and confirm the destiny of the human race . . . Divine task! Immortal mission!” WILLIAM GILPIN, The Central Gold Region, 1859





 CHAPTER 15

CONFLICT AND CONQUEST: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST, 1860–1900

Natives and Newcomers
 Inspired by visions of unlimited opportunity and measures of Congress like the Homestead Act, westward migration increased dramatically after the Civil War. Contrary to the popular notions of a vacant landscape, much of the West was home to hundreds of thousands of Native Americans. Their many languages, lifestyles, and religious practices made for a rich cultural landscape, but also conflict with the rising numbers of newcomers.

Congress Promotes
Westward Settlement
 In 1862, Congress passed three major bills to facilitate settlement of the trans-Mississippi West, the vast region of the United States west of the Mississippi River. The Morrill Land Grant College Act of 1862 created a system whereby funds raised by the sale of public land went toward establishing colleges specializing in agricultural, mechanical, and technological education. Far more significant, however, was the Homestead Act. It provided 160 acres of free land to any settler willing to live on it and improve it for five years. Farmers with more capital could buy the land for $1.25 per acre after living on it for only six months. Those who took advantage of the program included immigrants, landless farmers from the East, single women, and ex-slaves. By making available more than 600 million acres of public land to be settled and farmed, the Homestead Act touched off the largest migration of people ever within the United States. Advertisements and promotional literature produced by land companies and railroads convinced many people to head West to acquire homesteads. Like this image (15.1), which ap-

 peared in a Czech language magazine, these enticements promised rapid success. Note the year-by-year progression that begins with a barren farm and humble house. By the fourth year the landscape features not only a substantial house and flourishing farm, but also trees, a road, and more homes, suggesting that the loneliness of life on the plains will be short-lived. One year later a church steeple appears, further suggesting the development of a community and all the blessings of civilization. But the actual results of the Homestead Act varied widely by region. On the Great Plains and the lands farther west—regions with a harsh climate, poor soil, inconsistent supplies of water, and limited access to transportation—farmers who participated in the Homestead Act often went bankrupt. By contrast, the act worked well in the northern and central portions of the Midwest, where the soil and the climate were favorable to farming. Some people prospered from the Homestead Act in ways not intended by Congress. Many “homesteaders” were actually speculators who claimed their 160 acres with the intention of selling them for a quick profit in a few years. Larger enterprises like railroads and real estate companies accumulated vast land holdings by buying out farmers who failed or paying people to file homestead claims and then buying the land from them. The Homestead Act did indeed attract farmers to the West, but by 1900, only 52 percent of original homestead claimants had acquired legal title to the land. The third major piece of legislation passed by Congress in 1862 to promote Western development, the Pacific Railway Act, created two corporations to build the transcontinental railroad spanning the continent. The Union Pacific was to build west

15.1 Homesteads and the Promise of Success in the West
 The B. and M. Railroad paid for this advertisement, which appeared in a Czech magazine. Its six panels showing extraordinary year-by-year progress of a typical homesteading family were intended to draw settlers to Nebraska.

 Why did the Homestead Act have uneven results?

Read the Document Homestead Act of 1862


NATIVES AND NEWCOMERS

 from Omaha, Nebraska, across the Plains and the Rockies to meet the Central Pacific, which was to build from California through the Sierra Nevada Mountains. To help the railroad corporations raise capital to pay for the road, Congress granted them ten square miles of land (in a checkerboard pattern with the federal government retaining ownership of the remaining sections) for every mile of track completed. The law also granted the railroads cheap loans and cash subsidies for each mile of track laid. It took six years of low-paid, hard, and dangerous work by huge gangs of workers, especially Irish and Chinese, to complete the project. Scores were killed. On May 10, 1869, a grand ceremony marking the union of the two lines took place at Promontory Point, Utah. At the appointed moment, Leland Stanford, president of the Central Pacific, drove a symbolic golden spike into place, joining two rails, one placed by a team of Chinese workers and another by an Irish crew. Telegraph wires attached to the sledge hammer and spike sent a signal across the nation, announcing the



 long-anticipated news: the continent had been spanned. Keenly aware of the historic nature of the event, railroad officials staged this iconic photograph (15.2) showing the workers and locomotives of the Union Pacific and Central Pacific. It soon appeared in numerous publications, often as a lithograph. Conspicuously absent from the photograph, however, are any of the thousands of Chinese workers who labored on the Central Pacific.

The Diversity of the Native
American West
 As this map of the trans-Mississippi West (15.3 on page 442) shows, white settlers heading west encountered Native Americans belonging to hundreds of different tribes that comprised some 360,000 persons. That number was significantly lower than it had been a century earlier, reflecting the impact of earlier European contact, starting with the Spanish, French, and Russians, that brought conflict and

15.2 The
Continent Spanned
Conscious of the
 historic significance of the event, workers and officials of the Union Pacific and Central Pacific railroads pose for a photograph while celebrating the completion of the transcontinental railroad in 1869.

 Why did the federal government provide land and loans to the companies that built the transcontinental railroad?



 CHAPTER 15

CONFLICT AND CONQUEST: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST, 1860–1900

Kwakiuti
Salish


Cree


GREAT PLAINS

Lummi


 SUB-ARCTIC

PLATEAU
Makah Quileute Chinook Kalapuya Tolowa 
Yakima
Assiniboine
Blackfeet
Ojibwa
Spokane
Flathead
Gros
Hidatsa
Nez Perce
Ventre
Cayuse
Crow
Mandan
Winnebago
Sioux
Sauk
Arikara
GREAT
Ponca Cheyenne Fox BASIN 
NORTHWEST COAST

Karok
Yurok
Shasta
Wiyot
Hupa
Washo
Wintun
Yuki
Pomo Maidu


PACIFIC OCEA N

Miwok


Shoshone


Arapaho


Ute
Paiute


Illinois


 NORTHEAST

Kansa


Yokuts
Chumash


 CALIFORNIA

Omaha
Iowa
Missouri


Pawnee
Oto


Kiowa


Hopi
Mohave


Comanche


Navajo


Quapaw


Zuni
 Luiseño

Pima
Tohono


Osage


Wichita
Apache


 SOUTHWEST

Jumano Caddo


 SOUTHEAST

Jumano
Karankawa


Gulf of
Mexico


15.3 The Major Tribes of the Trans-Mississippi West
 More than 360,000 Native Americans, constituting some 500 tribes, lived west of the Mississippi River.

 devastating disease. Most Indians had lived there as far back as anyone could remember, while some had come from the East only decades earlier during the many forced removals (see Chapter 8). Before the arrival of Europeans, dozens of Native American tribes in what is now California lived in villages as small bands of hunters and gatherers. These include the Hupa, Karok, Northern Paiute, Pomo, Wintun, and Yuki peoples. Their way of life was first disrupted in the late eighteenth century when the Spanish established a line of Christian missions on the Pacific coast running north from San Diego. While thousands of Indians lived beyond the reach of the missions, many were gradually transformed by the Spanish into an exploited class of laborers, converted to Christianity, and absorbed

 What was the impact of European contact with Indians in the trans-Mississippi West before 1850?

 into Spanish colonial society. Even greater change followed the discovery of gold in northern California shortly after the U.S. government seized the territory in the Mexican War. Waves of white fortune seekers soon arrived and drove the Native Americans off their lands. This violence, along with the starvation and disease that followed, killed thousands of Indians (see Chapter 12). Present-day Arizona, New Mexico, and west Texas also fell under Spanish colonial rule in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. But because this region was dry and remote, it attracted few Europeans. Its native inhabitants, therefore, retained core elements of their culture despite Spanish rule and the presence of Catholic missionaries. Indeed, missionaries managed to gain converts only

NATIVES AND NEWCOMERS

 by blending Christianity with local customs and traditions. One major group, descended from the ancient Anasazi people, included the Hopi, Zuni, and Rio Grande Pueblo tribes. They lived in settled farming communities in western New Mexico and eastern Arizona, growing corn, beans, and cotton, and herding sheep. They also traded with neighboring Mexican ranchers, exchanging their decorative pottery and woven cloth for manufactured products such as hoes and tools. Eastern New Mexico and western Texas harbored more tribes, including the Jicarilla Apache and Navajo. Like the Pueblo, they lived in relative isolation from Spanish missions and thus retained much of their traditional religion, language, and culture. Before the sixteenth century they had lived much like the Pueblos, but their adoption of horses and, for the Navajo, sheep which had been brought to America by the Spanish, transformed them into more migratory peoples. The Navajo tended large flocks of sheep, following them on their seasonal migrations. Sheep provided food, but also wool, which Indian women wove into cloth. Navajo silversmiths also produced beautiful jewelry. The Pacific Northwest, comprising presentday Washington, Oregon, and northern California, was home to thriving native societies such as the Chinook, Salish, Yurok, and Shasta. Living in large villages, they divided their time between growing vegetables, hunting in the lush forests for bear, deer, and moose, and fishing along rivers and the ocean shore. Highly skilled in woodworking, the men produced excellent canoes for fishing and elaborate totem poles. Women wove intricate baskets that were both beautiful and practical. Many of these tribes enjoyed a rich material life that was offset by their custom of potlatch—a ceremony during which rich tribe members gave away many of their possessions as an act of competitive benevolence and a demonstration of superior status.

Native American Tribes
 of the Great Plains While Native American tribes could be found in virtually every corner of the West, the largest group—constituting nearly two-thirds of all Native Americans in the West—lived on the Great Plains. This vast open territory stretched



 from present-day Missouri to the Rocky Mountains and from North Dakota to Texas. In the northern half (the Dakotas, Idaho, Minnesota, and Montana) lived tribes such as the Flathead, Blackfeet, Crow, Arapaho, Northern Cheyenne, and Sioux. Tribes in the southern Great Plains (present-day Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, and New Mexico) included those relocated from the East during the so-called Trail of Tears ordeal (Cherokee, Choctaw, Creek, Chickasaw, and Seminole; see Chapter 8), as well as Pawnees, Comanches, Kiowas, Southern Arapahos, and Cheyenne. The Plains tribes varied culturally, but many shared a similar tribal structure. Most tribes consisted of bands of about 300–500 related men and women, each governed by a council that welcomed community involvement in decision making. The Comanches, for example, divided their population of 7,000 (ca. 1870) into 13 bands. Religious beliefs and practices varied among the Plains tribes, but most shared important fundamental elements, beginning with the worship of one primary god whom the Sioux called Wakan Tanka (the Great Spirit). Plains Indians also believed in spirits found in everything in creation, from the earth itself, to plants, animals, stars, the moon, and sun, and they considered certain places, such as burial grounds, sacred. A shaman deemed wakan, or blessed, led religious ceremonies, healed the sick, and even decided where to hunt. Many Plains tribes lived in settled villages near rivers where they tended fields of corn, beans, and squash; fished; and hunted game, including bear, deer, and buffalo. Trade with white settlers, explorers, and trappers since the eighteenth century had allowed them to procure guns, kettles, and tools. These sedentary tribes included the Wichitas of northern Texas and Oklahoma, Pawnees of western Kansas, the Dakota Sioux of Minnesota, the Mandans of North Dakota, the Omahas of Nebraska, the Osages of western Missouri and Arkansas, and the Arikawas of South Dakota. Although essential aspects of this Plains lifestyle had changed little over the centuries, some of the largest tribes took to using horses by the eighteenth century and adopted a migratory lifestyle. These included the Crow, Blackfeet, Cheyenne, Arapaho, Comanche, and Lakota Sioux. The horse allowed the Plains tribes to follow the seasonal migrations of the buffalo, whose

 What is significant about the diversity of Native American life in the trans-Mississippi West?



 CHAPTER 15

15.4 Plains
Indians Hunting
 the Buffalo This 1844 painting by George Catlin shows Native Americans hunting the buffalo, which they relied on as a major source of food, clothing, tools, and fuel.

CONFLICT AND CONQUEST: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST, 1860–1900

 population stood at 30 million in 1800. This scene, Buffalo Chase over Prairie Bluffs, (15.4), painted in 1844 by George Catlin, who traveled extensively among Indian tribes in the West from the 1830s to the 1850s, reveals both the drama of the buffalo hunt and the extraordinary horsemanship of Plains Indians. It also shows the centrality of the buffalo in Plains Indian culture, for the hunters’ clothing, jewelry, spear tips, and bridles are made from buffalo parts. Other uses for the buffalo included flesh for food; skin for teepees and blankets; horns and hooves for glue; bones and tendons for weapons; hair for rope; teeth for ornaments; and dried dung for fuel. The military advantages of the horse and the material wealth provided by the buffalo led these migratory tribes to become the dominant powers on the Plains, allowing them to exact tribute from weaker sedentary tribes. But reliance on the huge migratory beasts also meant that tribes, such as the Lakota Sioux in the north and Comanche in the central Plains, traversed enormous tracts of land during their annual migrations, a practice that increasingly brought them into conflict with whites eager to acquire land. It also increased conflict between rival tribes, such as the Lakota Sioux and Crow, as white settlement forced tribes into closer contact. While not all Native Americans were warlike, the culture of most Plains Indians glorified battle. Warriors aspired to earn reputations as brave hunters and fighters. Warfare between tribes to control land and access to game consisted of small skirmishes where the goal was not so much to kill their opponents as to steal their horses (a measure of a tribe’s

 How did the introduction of horses change the lifestyle of some Plains Indians?

 “I was famous as a hunter.… I gave the [buffalo] calves that I killed to the poor that had no horses. I was considered a good man.” SITTING BULL wealth and power) and drive them from the field. Individual warriors earned fame and respect by “counting coup,” or touching an enemy with one’s hand or weapon. Respect was also earned through acts of charity. Sitting Bull of the Lakota Sioux, for example, became chief of his tribe both because of his success as a warrior and his generosity.

The Great Westward
Migration
 In the late 1840s, after the Mexican War and the discovery of gold in California, a steady flow of settlers into the trans-Mississippi West commenced. By the mid-1850s, thousands annually traversed the 2,000-mile Oregon Trail that stretched from Missouri to Oregon. What attracted them was a torrent of pamphlets, books, articles, and photographs produced by publicists and boosters, many employed by railroads and land companies, celebrating the West as a region of wealth and opportunity. Several groups led this migration westward. One was the recently freed slaves who hoped to secure new lives as independent farmers, free of the poverty and violence in the South. One of these ex-slaves, Henry Adams, who became a land promoter after emancipation, helped more than 20,000 other black “Exodusters” move in the “Exodus of 1879” from the South to farms in Kansas. This image from Harper’s Weekly (15.5) captures the hope this movement inspired. Note the contrast the artist draws between the “old style” of African American migration (a desperate escaped slave hiding from a passing steamboat) and “the new” (well-dressed ex-slaves arriving at their destination by steamboat). The name Exodusters reflected the belief that, like the Israelites in the Bible’s Book of Exodus, they were heading

View the Map Atlas Map: Western Migration, 1850–1880


NATIVES AND NEWCOMERS

 for a “promised land.” The inclusion of a black veteran of the Union army symbolizes the fulfillment of the promise of emancipation won during the war. Unfortunately many Exodusters settled on poor land and lacked the capital to establish successful farms. As a result only about one-third stayed. The rest moved on or returned to the South. Native-born whites constituted a second, much larger segment of the westward migration. Many were Eastern and Midwestern farmers who sought larger plots of land, either through purchase or by the Homestead Act, and opportunities for upward mobility. Others came to work in railroad construction or mining. In addition, many westward migrants were white soldiers who had been stationed in the West and elected to stay and settle after their terms of service expired. One distinct subgroup of native-born whites migrants were the Mormons. Joseph Smith had founded this religious sect in upstate New York in 1830. But violent persecution—Smith was killed by a mob in Illinois in 1844—prompted the Mormons to head west in 1846 in search of an isolated homeland that could ensure their security and survival. They eventually chose a valley in Utah near the Great Salt Lake, territory then under Mexican rule. After the United States acquired the region following the Mexican-American War, Congress created the Utah territory in 1850 (see Chapter 12), and by 1865 some 20,000 Mormons lived in the region under a form of theocratic local rule where the church controlled most property, businesses, and

 public services. Gradually, as more non-Mormons moved to Utah and federal officials condemned the sect’s practice of polygamy (a practice the Mormons officially banned in 1896), the church took a less prominent role in public life. Joining Exodusters, Mormons, and nativeborn Americans in the great migration into the trans-Mississippi West were more than two million immigrants. They were drawn by the same desire for free, or at least inexpensive, farmland or to find work in mines, on railroads, or in the rapidly expanding economies of Western towns and cities. Over time large concentrations of particular ethnic groups emerged. For example, 30 percent of Minnesota’s population in 1880 was foreign-born, including more than 66,000 Germans, 62,000 Norwegians, and 39,000 Swedes. Drawn by jobs in the copper mines, thousands of Irish immigrants settled in Butte, Montana. By 1900, it was the most Irish city in America.



15.5 Seeking
 a Better Life in the West In response to poverty and mounting violence in the South, more than 20,000 African Americans known as “Exodusters” migrated to Kansas in 1879–1880 to acquire homesteads and start new lives as independent farmers.

 “[I]f you strike off into the broad, free West, and make yourself a farm from Uncle Sam’s generous domain, you will crowd nobody, starve nobody, and . . . neither you nor your children need evermore beg for Something to Do.” HORACE GREELEY, Editor, New York Tribune, 1867

View the Map Atlas Map: Immigration
View the Image Ho for Kansas!


 Why did different groups migrate to the West?



 CHAPTER 15

CONFLICT AND CONQUEST: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST, 1860–1900

 As in the East, increased ethnic and racial diversity and economic competition in the West led to tension and conflict that occasionally exploded into raw violence. Frequently victims of the violence were Chinese immigrants. By 1880, California was home to 75,132 Chinese, while 30,000 more lived elsewhere in the West. But as this drawing (15.6) from Harper’s Weekly shows, anti-Chinese racism surged in the 1870s and 1880s as white laborers accused the Chinese of taking jobs and lowering wages. In this attack in 1885 at Rock Springs, Wyoming, whites killed 28 Chinese miners. Two years later white laborers massacred at least 34 Chinese miners in Hells Canyon, Oregon. Railroads and land companies played a key role in promoting immigration to the West, sending agents to Europe and advertising there to encourage migration, sometimes by entire villages, directly to the West. Railroads brought more than two million immigrants to the trans-Mississippi West between 1870 and 1900. “California, Cornucopia of the World” (1883) was one of countless posters that railroads placed in Eastern seaports to attract newly arrived immigrants (15.7). The competition among Western states for settlers is indicated in the phrase “without Cyclones or Blizzards,” a clear attempt to make California more appealing than the Plains states like Kansas. Also significant is the claim of “Room for Millions of Immigrants,” since only one year earlier Congress, with heavy lobbying from California, passed the Chinese Exclusion Act that barred Chinese immigration to the United States. 15.7 The Railroads Promote Westward Settlement Railroads placed promotional posters such as this one from 1883 in Eastern cities to entice settlers to head west to settle on land owned by the railroads, much of it acquired in land grants from the federal government.

 Why did railroads promote the migration of immigrants to the West?

15.6 Anti-Chinese Violence Surges in the West
 In the 1870s and 1880s, Chinese workers in the American West faced hostility and violence from whites. In this incident at Rock Springs, Wyoming in 1885, whites killed 28 Chinese miners.

THE ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST



The Economic Transformation
 of the West While many Americans were inspired to migrate westward by notions of Manifest Destiny, the primary motivation was economic—a search for land and work. As a result, economic development was the chief driving force behind the profound transformations of the West after 1865. By 1900, four major industries—the railroad, farming, ranching, and mining—had fundamentally reshaped the region. These industries employed millions of workers and supplied some of the essential needs of consumers and industry in the East and internationally. Such progress, however, was accompanied by labor exploitation, environmental damage, and conflict with Indians.

The Railroad Fuels Western
Development


 (15.8) shows, the transcontinental railroad marked only the beginning of a vast transportation network of both major east-west railroad lines, such as the Atlantic and Pacific Railroad and the Northern Pacific Railroad, and countless smaller feeder railroads. This growing network opened up more and more western lands for farming, allowing farmers in once remote areas to sell their grain in the national market. The railroad also benefited many non-farmers, opening up Western lands for mining and ranching and providing employment for thousands who built the lines

15.8 The Spread
 of the Railroad Government loans and land grants helped spread a railroad network across the nation, facilitating economic development and settlement in the West.

 CANADA

PAC I F I C O C E A

N


 Between 1860 and 1900, the country’s agricultural output soared. The number of farms in the United States grew from two million to six million, with most of the growth taking place in the West. Agricultural output increased from $1.6 billion in 1860 to $4.3 billion in 1900. Several factors account for this agricultural boom. New technologies such as the steel plow and mechanical reaper dramatically increased the acreage a farmer Seattle could till. The establishment of Portland many agriculture schools, most funded by states Promontory and the federal Point government, led Sacramento Salt Lake to advances in City Denver San fertilization, irFrancisco rigation, crop rotation, seed selection, and the Los Angeles care of livestock. One of the biggest factors El Paso underlying this MEXICO boom in agriculture was the Railroads in operation spread of the railby 1870 road. As the map

Boston


St. Paul
Detroit
Pittsburgh


Chicago
Omaha
Kansas
City


New York
Philadelphia
Washington DC


Indianapolis
Cincinnati
St. Louis


Wilmington


Memphis
Birmingham


Atlanta


Fort Worth


Charleston


Savannah


ATLANTIC OCEAN

New Orleans


Gulf of Mexico


 by 1890

 How did the railroad shape western economic development?



 CHAPTER 15

CONFLICT AND CONQUEST: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST, 1860–1900

 and later gained employment as firemen, engineers, switchmen, mechanics, dispatchers, and clerks. Railroads also transformed the West by promoting urban growth. Many Western cities like San Francisco, Portland, and Denver, were significant centers of trade before the arrival of the railroad. Once connected to the national rail network, however, they boomed into major metropolises. Their economies diversified as demand for construction, food, transportation, and retail opened up new opportunities for entrepreneurs. By 1890, the West was more urbanized than any region in the United States except the Northeast. Between 1860 and 1890, for example, Denver’s population rose from 2,600 to over 100,000, while Omaha, Nebraska’s soared from less than 2,000 to over 140,000. Like their Eastern counterparts, Western cities struggled with urban problems, including crime, disorder, corruption, poor public health, inadequate water, and ethnic tensions.

Hard Times for Farmers
 While the overall trend in this period was one of expansion and profit, the reality for many farmers was struggle, frustration, and failure. To begin with, farmers faced unpredictable weather patterns. Farmers on the Plains, for example, enjoyed unusually high levels of rainfall between 1878 and 1886, leading them to think this was the norm and encouraging still more farmers to acquire homesteads. But a return to dry conditions and occasional drought after 1886 caused widespread hardship and failure. Other threats came from swarms of insects such as grasshoppers that attacked crops. Farmers also struggled with wild fluctuations in prices for their crops from year to year. A plentiful harvest of wheat or corn often meant a glutted market and low prices. In the 1880s, wheat farmers on the Plains saw prices fall due to competition with less expensive wheat grown in Russia, South America, Canada, and Australia. Sudden drops in prices pushed many farmers into foreclosure because most carried high levels of debt

 to finance the purchase of land and equipment such as harvesters, plows, and windmills. These conditions favored larger farms, revealing a significant flaw in the original Homestead Act: in the more arid regions of the West the 160-acre allotment was too small for profitable farming. By the 1880s, so-called bonanza farms of 1,000 acres or more became increasingly common in the Dakotas and California. With more capital, these large enterprises could better afford the expensive equipment needed for plowing, sowing, and harvesting. On top of all these challenges were the loneliness and drudgery of life on the Plains. As this photograph (15.9) of the four Chrisman sisters standing by their sod house in Custer County, Nebraska, illustrates, life on a Western farm was often Spartan. Sod houses and dugouts cut into hills lacked even the most basic amenities like running water and glass windows. Apart from occasional trips to town, church, court sessions, and harvest fairs, opportunities for social interaction were rare since farmers usually situated their homesteads far apart. The Chrisman sisters developed a strategy that diminished their isolation and allowed them to fulfill the Homestead Act’s requirement that they live on their land to receive full title to it. Beginning with Lizzie’s homestead claim in 1887 and Lutie’s in 1888, the two younger sisters took turns living on the homesteads, keeping their sisters’ company, helping on the farm, and waiting until they were old enough to file their own claims. Hattie eventually did, but all the homestead plots were gone by the time Jennie Ruth came of age. To improve the lot of American farmers, a former clerk in the Department of Agriculture named Oliver

15.9 Homesteading on the Plains
 Western farmers received 160 acres of free land through the Homestead Act, but success required years of hard work and sacrifices such as living in crude sod houses. This one, in Nebraska, was owned by one of the four Chrisman sisters shown here.

 What challenges did Western farmers face?

View the Closer Look Thirty-Three Horse Team Harvester
Watch the Video Video Lectures: “The Urban West”


THE ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST

H.
Kelley founded in 1867 the Patrons of Husbandry, or Grange. This social and educational society was dedicated to alleviating the problems faced by farmers by promoting fellowship, fraternity, and education. Grangers, as they were called, shared ideas about farming through a newsletter and attended lectures by traveling experts. Local chapters opened across the nation, and by the early 1870s, the organization had several hundred thousand loyal members. The Grange was transformed into a powerful political movement during the economic depression triggered by the Panic of 1873. Hundreds of thousands of farmers faced ruin as prices plummeted, while their creditors demanded payment for loans, and railroads charged high prices to transport their produce to market. In their desperation they created Granger Parties, which in 1874 won control of the legislatures of Illinois, Wisconsin, Iowa, and Minnesota and gained significant influence in others. They enacted “Granger Laws,” some of the earliest regulations of banks and corporations, especially railroads. These measures set maximum rates for transporting or storing grain and banned abusive practices such as offering preferred customers special rates. Grangers tried, as this 1873 cartoon (15.10) indicates, to convince Americans not involved in farming to recognize the threat posed to them by uncontrolled railroad power. As a “Consolidation Train,” a name suggesting monopoly, pulls cars labeled “extortion,” “bribery,” “usurpation,” and “oppression,” a Granger warns unsuspecting citizens of their impending doom. Railroad magnates denounced these limitations on their power and profit as unconstitutional and sued. The Supreme Court, however, in two key cases in 1876 (Munn v. Illinois and Peik v. Chicago and Northwestern Railway) ruled that state legislatures had the legal authority under the Constitution to regulate commerce, including especially commerce between states. Despite this legal victory, the Granger movement faded when the depression lifted and farm product prices rose in the late-1870s. The Democratic and Republican parties also added pro-farmer planks to their platforms that made the Granger parties seem less necessary. 
The Cattle Kingdom
 Another key emerging sector of the Western economy was cattle ranching. When the United States annexed Texas in 1845, millions of longhorn cattle (introduced to Central America in the sixteenth century by the Spanish) roamed the range, raised mainly for their skins and tallow. But as Americans developed a taste

View the Closer Look Railroad Routes, Cattle Trails,
Gold and Silver Rushes




15.10 Warning
 of the Perils of Monopoly The Grangers saw themselves as reformers trying to warn the American public about the growing danger of powerful railroads to the survival of democracy and individual liberties.

 for beef in the 1860s, ranchers envisioned the great profits to be made if they could get their cattle to Northern markets. A longhorn that cost $4 in Texas could be sold for $40 on the Northern market. Beginning in 1866 and lasting two decades, Texas ranchers began the first of the annual Long Drives of more than 1,000 miles to bring the cattle to market. Ranchers Charles Goodnight and Oliver Loving drove thousands of cattle from Texas to Colorado, prompting many imitators. In 1867, another cattle entrepreneur, Joseph McCoy, established a stockyard, hotel, bank, and office in a small Kansas town along the Kansas-Pacific Railroad. Advertising heavily, he quickly turned Abilene, Kansas for a time into the premier cattle drive destination. By the late 1870s, more than 600,000 longhorns arrived per year to be sold and transported by rail to Chicago and other destinations for slaughter. Over time the need for the drives diminished as rail lines were extended from Kansas into Texas and entrepreneurs established large cattle ranches close to railroads in states such as Kansas, Nebraska, Wyoming, and Colorado. The period of the great cattle drives lasted only 20 years, but it established the cowboy as an enduring icon of the Old West. Nineteenth-century dime novels, paintings, books, and plays (and in the twentieth century, films) depicted cowboys as paragons of manliness, independence, and courage who spent most of their days battling fierce Indians and driving cattle (see 15.21 on page 464) and nights in raucous saloons playing poker, brawling, and gun fighting. But the life of a cowboy was far more difficult and

 Why did Western farmers resent the railroads?



 CHAPTER 15

15.11 African
American Cowboys
 Despite the popular image of cowboys as white men, many were African American and Hispanic.

CONFLICT AND CONQUEST: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST, 1860–1900

 complicated. Cattle drives exposed them to harsh weather that included searing heat, flash floods, and deadly blizzards. Cowboys’ wages averaged only about $1 a day—or less if the price of beef fell—and they survived on a relentless diet of meat, beans, and coffee. They worked from dawn until dusk and then served a shift guarding the cattle at night against rustlers and Indians. Moreover, American cowboys were a far more diverse lot than the popular images depicting them as exclusively white men would indicate. Approximately one-third of cowboys in the American West were nonwhite, the largest group being Mexican vaqueros. Indeed, much of the equipment, clothing, techniques, and culture of the American cowboy derived from Mexican and Spanish traditions. This borrowing is evident in the many items associated with cowboys that bear names derived from Spanish. For example, the word cowboy itself is a direct translation of the Spanish term vaquero, while other terms such as lariat (la reata), chaps (chaparejos), and wrangler (catallerango) are anglicized versions of Spanish words. African Americans comprised the second-largest group of nonwhite cowboys. The eight black cowboys shown in this 1880s photograph (15.11) worked on the ranch of Thomas Jones (shown standing) in Texas. One of the most famous black cowboys was Bose Ikard. Born a slave in Mississippi in 1847, he was taken to Texas where he became a skilled cowboy. Freed by the Civil War, he played a key role in the first Long Drive led by Goodnight and Loving. Ranching held out the prospect of great profits, but ranchers faced big challenges. In the early 1870s,

 How did the reality of cowboy life differ from that presented in popular culture?

 the invention of barbed wire soon ended open-range ranching and the long drives, as farmers enclosed their land to protect crops from cattle hooves. Cattle ranchers also clashed with other livestock enterprises, such as sheep herders, over access to water and grazing lands. These conflicts frequently led to violence and even widespread hostilities known as “range wars.” Ranchers, like farmers, also were vulnerable to extremes of weather, losing cattle to scorching heat and drought and freezing cold and snow. They also suffered from rapid expansion of the ranching industry in the mid-1880s and consequent flooding of the cattle market that caused a collapse of beef prices, bankrupting many ranchers.

Fortunes Beneath the
Ground: The Mining Booms
 While many Western adventurers found fortune and failure in railroads, farms, and ranches, still others tried their luck underground in the many mining districts that emerged in the West. The second great Western mining boom, after California in 1849 (see Chapter 12), began in 1859 with the discovery of gold in Colorado and silver in Nevada. The Comstock Lode, as the Nevada site was called, yielded an astonishing $400 million in silver in the next 20 years. As with most mining booms, the initial wave of small-time prospectors garnered only modest profits. The real fortunes came in the succeeding years as heavily capitalized and incorporated enterprises established mining operations to extract the ore that lay deep underground. Among the titans who

View the Map Atlas Map: The New Economy of the West, 1850–1893


THE ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST

 accrued stupendous fortunes were four Irishmen— John Mackay, Jim Fair, James Flood, and William O’Brien—known collectively as the “Silver Kings.” They bought a controlling interest in a mine many declared “spent” and virtually worthless. Yet in 1873, their miners hit the greatest silver vein of them all, the Big Bonanza, that eventually yielded more than $100 million. Most fortune seekers, however, earned modest livings as wage earners working in the mines, while others flocked to the resulting boomtown, Virginia City, to work in construction, dry goods stores, and saloons. Thousands of women in Virginia City found work in hotels, laundries, and restaurants. Unfortunately, low wages and a lack of a family network to fall back upon forced many women to become prostitutes. Other discoveries of gold, silver, copper, lead, and zinc, followed in Colorado, Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, and the Dakotas. As in Nevada, the initial prospectors eventually gave way to larger, more sophisticated industrial operations that possessed the capital to invest in the technology needed to dig deep shafts, extract the ore from rocks, process it on site, and ship it by rail to market. Like Eastern industrialists such as Andrew Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller, these corporations often integrated their resources with the means and methods of production to maximize profits (see Chapter 16). The industrial revolution was not merely an Eastern phenomenon.

The Environmental Legacy
 Economic development in the trans-Mississippi West led to countless success stories of enterprising and risk-taking individuals who established farms, ranches, mines, and small businesses, or who simply found lucrative employment in the region’s many urban centers. But such development often came at the expense of the natural environment. Mining, for example, came in many forms, but in nearly every case it left behind a badly scarred landscape. Open-pit mining of the Mahoning iron ore mine in Minnesota’s Mesabi Range eliminated vast tracts of forest and created massive gouges in the land (15.12). These changes shattered the local ecosystem and choked surrounding waterways with muddy runoff water. Hydraulic mining, or the use of high-pressure water streams to wash away soil and gravel, created similar problems.

 Ore processing often used toxic chemicals to separate ore from rock or other materials. Miners simply dumped them into rivers or open fields, where they eventually seeped into the water table and throughout the ecosystem. The arrival of ever-growing numbers of humans in the West altered the delicately balanced Western ecosystems. On the Great Plains, for example, hunting and other human activity led to the eradication or near eradication of elk, bear, wolf, and buffalo populations. Conversely, settlers introduced foreign animals and plants that, lacking natural predators, spread rapidly and disrupted the balance of the ecosystem. For example, cheatgrass, accidentally introduced to the West from Asia in the 1890s, quickly spread over millions of acres, wiping out or diminishing other flora and greatly increasing the incidence of wildfires. Farming in arid areas of the West, through the use of deep-cutting steel plows that loosened hard-packed dry soil, contributed to significant topsoil erosion. Vast herds of livestock had a similar effect as their grazing eliminated the grass whose roots held the soil in place. Likewise the practices of the timber industry led to deforestation, the loss of habitat for many animal and plant species, and without trees to shield the soil from heavy rainfall, erosion. Some Americans decried this environmental damage, but most viewed the West through the lens of Manifest Destiny, seeing it as a place of limitless resources provided by God for the enjoyment and enrichment of human beings.

View the Closer Look Competing Visions: Preservation
 versus Exploitation



15.12 The Price
 of Unchecked Economic Development Western states bowed to the powerful and profitable mining industry, leaving its practices unregulated. As a result, methods such as open-pit mining led to serious environmental damage.

 How did human settlement and economic development alter the Western environment?



 CHAPTER 15

CONFLICT AND CONQUEST: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST, 1860–1900

 Native Americans under Siege Westward expansion benefited many Americans, but it devastated Native Americans. They faced a relentless tide of white settlers who possessed both superior weaponry and a belief that they had a higher claim to Western land. White settlers also enjoyed the support of the federal government and army. The result for Native Americans in the last third of the nineteenth century was broken treaties, devastating wars, relocation to reservations, and forced assimilation. 15.13 Promoting an Image of Indian Savagery This 1853 sculpture by Horatio Greenough promoted the idea among white Americans that Native Americans were violent savages.

15.14 Seeing
Savagery
 Greenough’s image became so widely known that a dime novel artist easily adapted it to a Daniel Boone story.

Mounting Problems
 for Native Americans In 1851, as it became clear that the traditional government policy of simply forcing tribes into the West was no longer viable because of increased white migration into the region, Congress passed the Indian Appropriations Act. It set aside vast tracts of the Oklahoma Territory as reservations for dozens of Native American tribes. That same year the U.S. government, the Sioux, and other Plains tribes signed the first Treaty of Fort Laramie. In exchange for declaring nearly all of the central and northern Great Plains off limits to white settlement, the tribes agreed to allow whites to pass unmolested along the Oregon Trail as they moved westward. But the lasting peace that government officials and tribal leaders hoped the treaty would secure did not materialize. Tension and violence between white settlers and Native American tribes only increased in the coming years. One of the most serious problems Native Americans faced in resisting Euro-American incursion onto their lands was the racism of white Americans that characterized Indians as backward, pagan, violent savages who lacked a rightful claim to

 Why did the government sign treaties with Native American tribes?

 the lands they occupied. As Competing Visions: Inevitable Progress or Unjust Invasion? makes clear, many Americans believed their own culture was vastly superior and viewed Native Americans as obstacles to national progress that must be removed. These notions originated in the colonial period, but greater contact and conflict between whites and Indians after 1850 led to a proliferation of largely negative depictions of Native Americans in newspapers, magazines, songs, plays, and works of art like The Rescue, by sculptor Horatio Greenough (15.13). Commissioned by the federal government and placed at the entrance to the U.S. Capitol in 1853, the scene drew on the many sensationalized stories and paintings of white settlers, especially women, being kidnapped, raped, and murdered by Native Americans. But Greenough departed from the traditional depictions and introduced a towering, dominant white settler. Note the contrasts in the men’s size, demeanor, and clothing. “I have endeavoured,” Greenough explained, “to convey the idea of the triumph of the whites over the savage tribes.” By 1874, the scene had merged with the life of the famous pioneer and icon of frontier masculinity, Daniel Boone (15.14). Both images proclaim Indian savagery and justify white domination, a message that eventually resulted in the sculpture’s removal from public view in 1958. Read the Document Chief Seattle, Oration (1854)

NATIVE AMERICANS UNDER SIEGE



Competing Visions
INEVITABLE PROGRESS OR UNJUST INVASION?
As more and more Euro-Americans moved westward in search of land and opportunity, they came into conflict with the region’s Native American inhabitants. As you read these documents from 1877, the first by an Englishman William Blackmore and the second by the famous Sioux Chief, Sitting Bull, consider the sharply different ideas expressed over which group had the higher claim to the land and which culture brought a more moral and enlightened notion of how to treat it. How does Blackmore make the extinction of Native Americans seem natural and inevitable? What message does this notion convey to white Americans? How does Sitting Bull express the Native American vision of nature and access to resources? How does he criticize the vision of whites like Blackmore? 
William Blackmore, Introduction to Richard Irving
Dodge, The Plains of the Great West and Their
Inhabitants (1877)
 All authorities who have investigated the subject are unanimous in predicting that the Red Men are a doomed race. The … Indians will as surely disappear before the progress of the more energetic and aggressive Anglo Saxon, as sure as the snows of winter melt away before the summer sun. But sad as the fate of the Red Man is, yet, even as philanthropists, we must not forget that, under what appear to be one of immutable laws of progress, the savage is giving place to a higher and more civilized race. Three hundred thousand Red Men at the present time require the occupation of an entire continent as large as Europe, in order that they may obtain an uncertain and scanty subsistence by the chase. Ought we, then, to regret if in the course of a few generations their wigwams, tepees, and mud lodges, rarely numbering more than one hundred in a village, are replaced by new cities of the West, each equaling, perhaps, in magnificence, in stately structures, and population (exceeding that of all the Indians), either in St. Louis or Chicago? Or if in supplanting less than 300,000 wandering, debased, and half-naked savages, we can people the self-same district with a population of many tens of millions of many prosperous and highly civilized whites? . . . in a few years the only reminiscence of the Red Men will be the preservation of the names of some of the extinct tribes and dead chiefs in the nomenclature of the leading cities, counties, and States of the Great West.

View the Map Atlas Map: Native Americans, 1850–1896


Sitting Bull, Speech at the Powder River Council, 1877
 Behold, my friends, the spring is come; the earth has gladly received the embraces of the sun, and we shall soon see the results of their love! Every seed is awakened, and all animal life. It is through this mysterious power that we too have our being, and we therefore yield to our neighbors, even to our animal neighbors, the same right as ourselves to inhabit this vast land. Yet hear me, friends! we have now to deal with another people, small and feeble when our forefathers first met with them, but now great and overbearing. Strangely enough, they have a mind to till the soil, and the love of possessions is a disease in them. These people have made many rules that the rich may break, but the poor may not! … They claim this mother of ours, the Earth, for their own use, and fence their neighbors away from her, and deface her with their buildings and their refuse. They compel her to produce out of season, and when sterile she is made to take medicine in order to produce again. All this is sacrilege. This nation [of whites] is like a spring freshet; it overruns its banks and destroys all who are in its path. We cannot dwell side by side. Only seven years ago we made a treaty by which we were assured that the buffalo country should be left to us forever. Now they threaten to take that from us also. My brothers, shall we submit? or shall we say to them: ‘First kill me, before you can take possession of my fatherland!’

 Why did many white Americans believe they had a right to take lands inhabited by Native Americans?



 CHAPTER 15

CONFLICT AND CONQUEST: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST, 1860–1900

 “Women and children were killed and scalped, children shot at their mothers’ breasts, and all the bodies mutilated in the most horrible manner. . . . Colonel J. M. Chivington all the time inciting his troops to their diabolical outrages.” MAJOR EDWARD WYNKOOP, testimony before congressional committee investigating the Sand Creek Massacre White hostility to Native Americans shaped government policy, especially when it came to signing and honoring treaties. Invariably, it seemed, federal officials negotiated treaties with tribes that promised to permanently fix the boundaries of their hunting grounds and places of habitation, only to find soon thereafter that whites, hungry for land, had begun settling there. Rather than enforce the terms of the treaty and force the removal of white settlers, the government inevitably revised the treaty to further shrink designated Native American lands. This combination of white settlers’ desire for land and disregard for Native Americans’ rights, and the efforts of Native Americans to resist

 white encroachment, led to repeated outbreaks of violence. One of the worst incidents was the Sand Creek Massacre. On November 29, 1864, angered by sporadic attacks on settlers by Native American tribes in Colorado, a military outfit under Colonel John M Chivington raided a peaceful encampment of 800 Cheyenne at Sand Creek. With most of the Cheyenne men off hunting, Chivington’s force slaughtered more than 200 Indians, mostly defenseless women and children, mutilated their bodies, and returned to Denver with their scalps. Native Americans also confronted epidemics of diseases such as smallpox and measles—diseases that they possessed little or no resistance to. While the worst devastation had taken place in previous centuries during initial European contact (see Chapter 1), epidemics continued to kill thousands. For example, a smallpox outbreak in the Pacific Northwest in 1862 killed some 12,000 Indians. The widespread abuse of alcohol, a commodity obtained

15.15 Evidence
 of Extermination This mountain of buffalo skulls gathered by a fertilizer company attests to the scale of wanton killing of buffalo in the 1870s and 1880s.

 How did negative stereotypes of Native Americans influence government policy?

View the Closer Look Railroad and Buffalo


NATIVE AMERICANS UNDER SIEGE

 through trade with whites, further compromised Native American health. Additionally, long-standing animosities among tribes prevented Native Americans from developing a united front against the U.S. Army. White officials took advantage of these divisions to obtain help from one tribe, in the form of guides and even soldiers, against another. Disunity within tribes also contributed to this problem, as individual bands guarded their autonomy and resisted the idea of centralized tribal authority. For example, in 1863 leaders of the Nez Perce tribe split over whether to sign a treaty that would confine them to a reservation. The Plains tribes’ dependence on the buffalo left them particularly vulnerable in the 1870s. Railroad companies, disdainful of the large herds that occasionally disrupted the passage of trains, hired gunmen to kill buffalo. Entrepreneurs made buffalo robes fashionable in the East, thereby encouraging hunters to kill still more buffalo. The army soon recognized the strategic value of wiping out the great herds to undermine the independence of the Plains tribes and force them to stay on reservation lands. The scale of extermination was staggering. In this photograph (15.15), workers at the Michigan Carbon Works prepare thousands of buffalo skulls for processing into fertilizer, glue, and other products. The buffalo population, estimated at 30 million in 1800, plunged to only a few thousand by the early 1880s creating a crisis for the Plains Indians who depended on them. The technological disparity between Indians and white settlers left the latter at a great disadvantage. Euro-American settlers and soldiers alike were heavily armed with modern rifles. The army also had early machine guns (called Gatling guns) and heavy artillery. While many Native American tribes had long ago acquired firearms, they never produced guns and ammunition and remained dependent on whites for them. The telegraph also allowed the army to communicate over great distances about troop movements and Native American military activity, and request supplies and reinforcements.

Wars on the Plains
 Despite its lack of commitment to honoring them, the federal government nonetheless signed many treaties in the late 1860s hoping to bring peace to the West and allow continued settlement by whites. Treaties were drawn up and signed with the Apache, Cheyenne, and Arapaho in

 Read the Document Chief Red Cloud’s Speech



1865, the Kiowa, Comanche, and Apache in 1867
 (the Medicine Lodge Treaty), and the Sioux (the second Fort Laramie Treaty) in 1868. The latter treaty ended Red Cloud’s War (1866–1868), a conflict that erupted when the army announced plans to build forts along the Bozeman Trail in the Wyoming and Montana territories to protect white migrants drawn by the discovery of gold in Montana. It guaranteed to the Sioux ownership of the Black Hills and land and hunting rights in South Dakota, Wyoming, and Montana. It also explicitly barred white people from these lands. “From this day forward all war between the parties to this agreement shall forever cease,” declared the treaty in words that would soon prove false. “The government of the United States desires peace, and its honor is hereby pledged to keep it.” Despite these measures, continued violation of treaties by white settlers who ventured onto Indian lands and bands of Indians who refused to accept confinement on reservation lands led to increased bloodshed. The Red River War broke out in 1874 on the southern plains in present-day Texas, Oklahoma, and Kansas when bands of Kiowa, Comanche, southern Cheyenne, and southern Arapaho, angered over the federal government’s failure to uphold its obligation to provide adequate supplies and keep whites off the reservation land (the army actually organized buffalo hunting parties that devastated local herds), left the reservation and raided white settlements. Led by General Philip Sheridan, the army crushed the rebellion by the spring of 1875, thereby ending Native American resistance on the southern plains. By then the primary conflict had shifted to the northern plains. The discovery of gold in the Black Hills of South Dakota in 1874 touched off a flood of white fortune seekers into the region that was indisputably (as stipulated in the 1868 Fort Laramie Treaty) territory granted exclusively to Native American tribes. Rather than keep white trespassers out, however, the federal government demanded the Sioux vacate their Red River hunting grounds and return to their reservations. When the tribes refused to comply, the army launched an offensive. In the late spring 1876, the Seventh Cavalry, led by a young and vainglorious lieutenant colonel named George Armstrong Custer, closed in on a large band of Cheyenne, Sioux, and Arapaho warriors, including the well-known Crazy Horse and Sitting Bull, near the Little Bighorn River in

 How did the dependence of the Plains Indians on the buffalo weaken their ability to resist the loss of their lands?



 CHAPTER 15

CONFLICT AND CONQUEST: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST, 1860–1900

 Montana. Eager to earn fame and believing there were only a few hundred Indian warriors when in fact the number was closer to 2,000, Custer attacked before the rest of the army (and other officers who might overshadow him) arrived. The Battle of Little Bighorn quickly disintegrated into

 one of the most devastating defeats ever suffered by the U.S. military as Custer and more than 250 of his men were killed. Although the battle was an overwhelming triumph for the Sioux, Cheyenne, and Arapaho, it quickly proved a hollow victory. As this cartoon ( 15.16) published in the New York Graphic a few weeks after the battle demonstrates, the Eastern media ignored Custer’s blundering and instead depicted him and his men as valiant victims and demanded vengeance. Note the artist’s blunt depiction of Indians as savage, semi-animal beings in stark contrast to the two white soldiers, one a heroic victim and the other a coolheaded executioner. The caption, “The Right Way to Dispose of Sitting Bull and His Braves—What the Country Expects of General Sheridan,” was a not-so-subtle assertion of the popular belief that the government was showing too much leniency toward Native Americans who resisted white expansion. Responding to this pressure, the government expanded military action in the Black Hills and forced the Sioux and other defiant tribes onto reservations.

War and Conflict
 in the Far West

 15.16 The Negative Fallout from Little Bighorn After the Sioux, Cheyenne, and Arapaho Indians defeated Custer and the Seventh Cavalry in the Battle of Little Bighorn, negative press coverage hardened white attitudes toward Native Americans. This image appeared in the New York Graphic (August 15, 1876) with the caption, “The Right Way to Dispose of Sitting Bull and His Braves—What the Country Expects of General Sheridan.”

 How did the victory over Custer and his men ultimately prove costly to the Plains Indians?

 Farther west, native tribes encountered similar problems. During the last third of the nineteenth century, the states and territories west of the Rockies also were growing. The mining and railroad industries, the economic centerpieces of that

NATIVE AMERICANS UNDER SIEGE

 region, required a great deal of land—land long occupied by Native Americans. Just as on the Great Plains, the tribes on the West Coast and in the intermountain West faced an encroaching white population that considered the land theirs for the taking. In 1876, following the massacre of Custer and the Seventh Cavalry, army and government officials increased pressure on tribes to move to reservations. One such group targeted was a portion of the Nez Perce tribe that lived on the northwestern plateau of Idaho, Oregon, and Washington. In 1863, most of the Nez Perce had agreed to move onto a reservation, but about a quarter had refused. Led by Chief Joseph, about 750 Nez Perce (500 of them women, children, and elderly non-combatants) fled the region to escape the army. Over the ensuing four months, they engaged in an epic flight of 1,400 miles, hoping to cross into Canada. Despite their small numbers and dwindling supplies, they defeated the army in several battles and came within 40 miles of the Canadian border before they were forced to surrender to the army and to life on a reservation. Similar scenes of final military resistance played out in the Southwest. An Apache warrior named Geronimo had emerged in the 1860s and 1870s as a fearless opponent to encroaching Euro-American and Mexican settlers. Captured in 1874, Geronimo and some 4,000 Apaches were sent to a reservation at San Carlos, Arizona. The grim life on the reservation led him to escape and resume his campaign of resistance. He surrendered in 1884, but in 1885 and again in 1886, Geronimo escaped with a few warriors and their families and eluded capture for months. These escapades added to his already legendary status, but he eventually surrendered for good in 1886, ending the last significant Native American resistance. In the 1880s and 1890s resistance to exploitation and abuse also erupted in the Southwest among Hispanos (descendants of Spanish colonists) and Mexicans. Euro-American settlers who arrived in New Mexico in the mid-nineteenth century eventually gave rise to a powerful ruling class of politicians, landowners, and ranchers. Many allied themselves with powerful gangs that provided protection and intimidated (and sometimes killed) their rivals. Poor Hispano and Mexican farmers often bore the brunt of these ruling Euro-Americans’ ruthless tactics and hunger for

 Read the Document Helen Hunt Jackson, from “A Century of Dishonor” (1881)



 land. When officials began to sell off to speculators and ranchers what had long been used as common grazing lands, the poor farmers resisted. The most famous of these resistors were Las Gorras Blancas, or The White Caps, a secret militant vigilante group of Mexican men who in the late 1880s and early 1890s wore white masks and cut fences on lands taken over by speculators. They also destroyed railroad bridges, buildings, and crops.

In Pursuit of a Solution
 While most Americans expressed little concern over the fate of Native Americans in the West, a few did protest. One of the first was Helen Hunt Jackson. Inspired by an 1879 lecture by Susette La Flesche and her uncle, Chief Standing Bear, relating the plight of the Ponca tribe to an audience in Connecticut, she began speaking and lobbying on behalf of Native Americans. In 1881, she published A Century of Dishonor, a book that chronicled in searing detail the misguided and murderous treatment of Native Americans by the U.S. government. The book prompted Congress to appoint a commission to study Indian affairs and seek a new and more humane policy.

 “Hear me, my chiefs! I am tired. My heart is sick and sad. From where the sun now stands, I will fight no more forever.” CHIEF JOSEPH, shortly after his surrender in 1877

 Another influential reformer garnered a wide audience as an authentic spokesperson for the Native Americans. Sarah Winnemucca, the granddaughter of a Northern Paiute chief, had received some education from white families in Nevada and California and worked as a translator for the army. In the late 1870s, her lectures in the East demanding more humane treatment of the Paiutes and other tribes brought her to the attention of reformers. Winnemucca tried to gain credibility among whites by presenting herself as an “Indian Princess,” an image firmly established in American popular

 Why did Native Americans resist the government’s demand that they settle on reservations?



 CHAPTER 15

15.17 Speaking
 Out for NativeAmerican Rights Sarah Winnemucca, a member of the Paiute tribe in California, drew attention to the injustices being suffered by Native Americans through a speaking tour of the Eastern United States and the publication of a book.

CONFLICT AND CONQUEST: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST, 1860–1900

 culture by the mid-nineteenth century, notably in the story of Pocahontas (see Chapter 2). In her posed portrait (15.17), hardly anything in her costume, especially the crown and bag embroidered with a cupid and bow and arrow, resembles traditional Paiute clothing and jewelry. Nonetheless, in an era when the political and social opinions of women, especially Native American women, were largely ignored, Winnemucca’s strategy brought extensive and respectful press coverage of her speeches and eventually her book, Life Among the Paiutes: Their Wrongs and Claims (1883). “In the history of the Indians,” wrote one reporter in 1885, “she and Pocahontas will be the principal female characters.” Both Jackson and Winnemucca promoted education for Native Americans, but with different goals in mind. Jackson represented the reformers who believed it the duty of the government to elevate Native Americans from “savagery” by educating and assimilating them into white Euro-American society. In particular they advocated the establishment of boarding schools for Indian children and the eventual dissolution of reservations (see Choices and Consequences: Forced Assimilation Versus Cultural Preservation). In contrast, Winnemucca believed in formal education, but not at the expense of eliminating Native American culture. She believed that Indian children could become educated and productive Americans, while retaining the core of their culture and traditions. Jackson’s ideas prevailed among reformminded legislators in Congress concerned about the plight of Native Americans, especially Senator Henry L. Dawes. In 1887, Congress passed the Dawes Severalty Act to break up the reservations

 Why did reformers like Dawes believe the break up of reservations would benefit Native Americans?

 “For shame! For shame! You dare to cry out Liberty, when you hold us in places against our will, driving us from place to place as if we were beasts.” SARAH WINNEMUCCA, Life Among the Paiutes: Their Wrongs and Claims (1883)

 and assimilate Native Americans into the dominant white Christian American culture. The plan offered Native American heads of household allotments of 160 acres of reservation land (with smaller amounts going to those unmarried or under age 18) to encourage them to become independent family farmers. Remaining reservation lands would be sold off and the profits set aside for tools and education. Native Americans who accepted these terms could apply for U.S. citizenship. To prevent speculators from defrauding Indians, land allotments would be held in trust for 25 years before full ownership was conferred. The Dawes Severalty Act (and subsequent related laws) was born of high ideals and good intentions, but it proved devastating to the Native Americans it was intended to help. The program was rife with flaws, beginning with the allotment of land that was often of poor quality, making successful farming difficult if not impossible. It also included restrictions on

Read the Document Autobiographical Narrative by Zitkala-Sa on Her
First Days at Boarding School in Indiana (1900)


NATIVE AMERICANS UNDER SIEGE



Choices and Consequences
FORCED ASSIMILATION VERSUS CULTURAL PRESERVATION
The Dawes Severalty Act of 1887 stipulated that revenue generated from the sale of reservation lands be applied to the education of Native American children. As with the land allotment plan, the principal motivation of people like Dawes and reformer Helen Hunt Jackson was to assimilate Indians into American society, which they believed would be facilitated by providing vocational training to enhance their job prospects. But the act did not specify what kind of education ought to be provided, and so Congress and the Bureau of Indian Affairs faced a choice. 
Choices




 Establish reservation-based schools offering a traditional public school curriculum, while allowing Native Americans to maintain their culture and language.



 Establish reservation-based schools offering a traditional public school curriculum, while requiring a higher degree of assimilation (especially learning English).



 Establish off-reservation boarding schools committed to eliminating all vestiges of Native American culture.

Decision
 The government chose to establish off-reservation boarding schools. The model was the Carlisle Indian Industrial School in Carlisle, Pennsylvania. Established in 1879, it operated on the simple, but brutal principle of “kill the Indian, save the man.” As the “before and after” photographs indicate, Native American children sent to boarding schools were required to cut their hair, wear American clothing, take an American name, and speak only English. Some schools made conversion to Christianity a top priority.

Consequences
 Removal from families and fellow Native Americans on their reservations caused many children to suffer psychological trauma. Many also suffered from physical abuse, malnutrition, and poor health care. About one in seven ran away, and many committed suicide. Still, by 1902, 25 federally funded boarding schools, and many more private ones, operated in 15 states with 6,000 students.

Continuing Controversies
 What was the long-term impact of the boarding schools? Along with the trauma inflicted on generations of children, it hastened the demise of Native American culture, including the disappearance or near disappearance of many languages. Native American groups have filed lawsuits against the government and the churches that ran the schools and demanded formal apologies.

 Read the Document Secretary of Interior’s Congressional Report on Indian Affairs (1887)

 Before-and-after photos of Chiricahua Apache children at the Carlisle Boarding School, circa 1890.

 What assumptions about Native American culture influenced the boarding school program?



 CHAPTER 15

CONFLICT AND CONQUEST: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST, 1860–1900

 hunting, further limiting options for participants. Despite safeguards, white speculators and scammers found ways to con Native Americans out of their allotted land long before the 25-year term. The act also allowed, as indicated by the poster (15.18), the government to sell land deemed “surplus” to white settlers. This poster touts the high quality of the estimated 350,000 acres being offered for sale in 1910. As the map (15.19) shows, by the time the Dawes Act was replaced in 1934, two-thirds of Native American reservation land had been lost.

15.18 Selling off Reservation Lands
 This advertisement issued by the federal government in 1911 vividly illustrates the Dawes Severalty Act in action as it exuberantly proclaims a sale of 350,000 acres of Indian land.









 Land transferred from Indians to whites

 Land held by or returned to Indians

15.19 The Loss of Native-American Lands
 Native-American land possessions shrank steadily in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries through treaties, sales, and forced expulsion by white settlers and soldiers. In 1887, the Dawes Severalty Act accelerated this trend by encouraging the breakup of reservations.

 How did the Dawes Act play a key role in the loss of Native American land?

RESISTANCE AND ROMANTICISM



Resistance and Romanticism
 The surrender of Geronimo in 1886 symbolized the end of significant armed resistance by Native Americans to the Euro-American settlement of the trans-Mississippi West. Nonetheless, a revival movement called the Ghost Dance, offered one final chance to reverse the fortunes of Native Americans. When that effort was brutally crushed by the army at a place called Wounded Knee, Native Americans turned to more subtle and enduring efforts to preserve their tribes, families, and culture. At the same time, white Americans continued to fashion a pleasing image of the West as a place of adventure, heroism, individualism, and opportunity. This image found its way into art, literature, music, and popular culture in the twentieth century. Yet historians and activists have offered a corrective to this romantic image that takes into account the experiences of Native Americans, Mexicans, and women, and the impact on the environment.

Persecution and Persistence
 The last major form of resistance to the EuroAmerican conquest of the West emerged in the late 1880s. The Ghost Dance movement originated in the 1870s, but did not become widely popular until a Northern Paiute shaman named Wovoka began preaching a message of Native American revival based on a vision he had experienced during a total eclipse of the sun in 1889. In this vision, which he related to his followers, a great flood scoured the land clean of all white settlers, leaving behind Indians who had remained true to traditional teachings and a renewed herd of buffalo. Wovoka told his followers to perform the Ghost Dance, a ritual ceremony where participants donned special shirts and danced in a circle until brought to an ecstatic state that they believed drew to them the spirits of ancestors who would protect them from the white man’s bullets. The hopeful message of the Ghost Dance spread rapidly among Native Americans from the Rocky Mountains to the Great Plains, alarming federal officials who feared it contained the seeds of rebellion. The director of the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota ordered Sitting Bull arrested. When he resisted, the police shot him dead. Two weeks later, on December 29, 1890 the army confronted about 300 Sioux Ghost Dancers at Wounded Knee Creek in South Dakota. When one of the Indians accidentally fired his gun, the soldiers attacked and

 massacred more than 200. This photograph (15.20), “The Medicine Man Taken at Wounded Knee, S.D.,” conveyed the brutality of the event. The date of January 1, 1891, on the photograph indicates that bodies were left unattended for days before being interred in a mass grave. Note the rifle placed on the body by a soldier, so that the photographer could present an image of a hostile Indian. It was not the bloodiest clash between Native Americans and the U.S. Army, but the Wounded Knee Massacre symbolized the brutality associated with the conquest of the West. The end of armed conflict did not mean an end to resistance for Native Americans. In the coming

Read the Document Accounts of the Wounded Knee Massacre


15.20 Massacre
 at Wounded Knee In an incident that symbolized American brutality toward Native Americans, soldiers killed between 200 and 300 Sioux at Wounded Knee, South Dakota, after a tense standoff over the Ghost Dance movement.

 Why was Wovoka’s message so appealing to Indians and so frightening to military officials?



 CHAPTER 15

CONFLICT AND CONQUEST: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST, 1860–1900

 decades, as they struggled with the loss of tribal lands, the cultural erosion caused by the boarding schools, and high levels of poverty and alcoholism, Native Americans found ways to preserve their culture, including languages, artistic forms, and religious beliefs. They did so by maintaining traditions within families and establishing informal methods of passing on traditions from one generation to the next. As a result, when a Native American rights movement emerged in the 1960s and 1970s, it included a commitment to reaffirming and strengthening traditional Native American cultures.

Creating Mythical Heroes
 and Images The story of the American West has long been the object of romanticism and myth. The image of the West as a place of high adventure, heroism, rugged individualism, and endless opportunity developed with the first enthusiastic reports of Western explorers such as Lewis and Clarke (see Chapter 7). But this image really flourished after 1850 as more migrants and journalists headed west and sent back to the East countless letters and dispatches describing the West’s wide-open lands, roaring rivers, and majestic mountains, as well as the heroic struggles of pioneers against weather and hostile Indians. Eventually writers turned to fiction, especially a new genre known as the “dime novel.” The first Western dime novels appeared in the 1860s and their subjects—characters like cowboy Deadwood Dick and his rough and ready girlfriend Calamity Jane—soon became pop heroes. So too did Buffalo Bill. Stories based on the legendary exploits of a real Western scout, buffalo hunter, and Pony Express rider named William “Buffalo Bill” Cody first appeared in a newspaper and then in dime novel form as Buffalo Bill, King of the Border Men. When it sold well, its author (and many imitators) wrote hundreds more Buffalo Bill stories. Cody grew famous but he earned no royalties from the novels. To capitalize on his fame, he created in 1883 “Buffalo Bill’s Wild West,” a circus-like production that purported to show audiences the thrilling and harrowing life on the frontier, replete with huge reenactments of cattle drives and clashes between Indians and cowboys, and exhibitions of marksmanship,

 Why did the West become such a popular topic in entertainment and literature?

 cattle roping, and riding. Immensely popular, it grew more elaborate every year, eventually topping out at 400 horses and 650 cowboys, Indians, musicians, and support staff. Over time Cody added big-name stars like the famous sharpshooter Annie Oakley and even the Sioux chief Sitting Bull. Most Americans, indeed, much of the Western world, viewed the West, through Buffalo Bill’s performances, as a place of heroism, optimism, gallantry, and success (see Images as History: Annie Oakley).

The West in Art
 and Literature Western imagery and ideas also shaped American art and literature. Mark Twain, whose real name was Samuel Langhorne Clemens, emerged in the late nineteenth century as one of the first American novelists generally unaffected by European mores. Twain headed west in the early 1860s seeking adventure and wealth in Nevada’s Comstock Lode mines. The result was his classic book Roughing It (1872). Based on his experiences of the wild life in Virginia City, Nevada, the book fit in with the evolving Western tradition of the yarn or tall tale. Twain’s major works, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer (1876) and The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn (1884), were set along the earlier frontier of the Mississippi River and both contained Western themes of adventure, individualism, and a desire to escape the constraints of modern society for a purer, more authentic world. When Huck Finn sets out at the end of the book to start life anew, he heads for the West. Many subsequent writers like Owen Wister and Zane Grey popularized this vision of the West, especially the figure of the cowboy as the embodiment of American manliness, decency, courage, and common sense. In addition to writers, artists popularized a heroic image of the West. One of the most famous was Frederic Remington. Raised in the east, Remington eventually made his way West where he worked a variety of jobs before becoming a newspaper artist covering battles between the army and Native Americans. Drawing upon earlier Western artists like George Catlin (see 15.4), he painted, drew, and sculpted vivid scenes of Western life. Most were vignettes of the lives of unknown cowboys, Native Americans, and soldiers.

RESISTANCE AND ROMANTICISM



Images as History
ANNIE OAKLEY
Two years after William Cody launched his Wild West show, he hired a woman who became one of his most celebrated performers. Born and raised not in the West, but in Ohio, Annie Oakley was a gifted sharpshooter. She had been taught to shoot at a young age and killed game to earn money for her struggling family. At age 16 she beat a professional in a sharpshooting match. She soon married the man and joined him on stage. In 1885, they joined Buffalo Bill’s Wild West. For 16 seasons Oakley thrilled audiences with her marksmanship. She shot cigarettes from her husband’s mouth and coins from his fingers. She blasted an endless succession of glass balls thrown in the air. 
 She hit a target behind her by holding a mirror in one hand and shooting over her shoulder with the other. No one could match the “peerless lady wing shot.” But as this photograph and virtually every one she posed for show, an essential part of Oakley’s appeal lay in her image as an ideal frontier woman who combined Victorian femininity and rugged, almost masculine, strength. Oakley’s adoring public was not put off by her entry into the traditionally male world of guns and horses because she presented a pleasing and reassuring feminine persona. In so doing Annie Oakley, the woman from Ohio, played a key role in shaping the evolving mythical image Americans held of the Old West.

•


 Oakley’s dual image as both feminine and tough is captured in her facial expression. In all of her studio portraits, she presents herself as beautiful and composed, but unsmiling, to emphasize her grit and fearlessness.

•


 While Oakley radiated a beguiling feminine charm (she entered the show ring skipping and blowing kisses to the audience), this hand-on-hip pose was masculine and expressive of the manly self-assuredness that audiences associated with cowboys.

 Oakley’s outfit was modeled on the cowboy’s, but with exceptions to emphasize her femininity. Unlike the oblong cowboy hat, hers had a broad round brim. She set it on the back of her head to reveal her face and ladylike curls.

•


•
 Conforming to Victorian mores about proper behavior for women, Oakley always wore a dress and rode side saddle.

•


•


 She always appeared with a gun, a central icon of how Americans in the late nineteenth century understood the West. It was a symbol they associated almost entirely with men.

 Her many medals were intended to lend her authenticity, as if to say that although she was a performer, her skills as a shooter were real.

 Annie Oakley poses for one of her many studio portraits depicting an idealized image of a frontier woman.

 What traits did Annie Oakley portray to present an ideal woman of the West?



 CHAPTER 15

CONFLICT AND CONQUEST: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST, 1860–1900

 One exception was Lt. Col. George A. Custer, whom Remington helped make into a hero after the Battle of Little Bighorn. Charles Russell, a cowboy-turned-artist, also emerged as a leader of Western art, producing works that often depicted more sensational and imaginative scenes than Remington’s. Both men played a central role in creating the iconic image of the American cowboy. Russell’s 1897 painting (15.21) is typical of most depictions, showing skilled and fearless cowboys roping a bull.

Historians Reinterpret
 the American West

15.21 The Making
 of an American Icon Artists such as Charles Russell, who painted this scene, The Herd Quitters, in 1897, played a central role in promoting the cowboy as a symbol of the West and the West as a place of heroism, daring, and manly individualism.

 Another key influence on the way Americans came to develop a particular image of the West was the work of historian Frederick Jackson Turner. In 1893, he published an essay, “The Significance of the Frontier in American History,” that focused on a recent announcement by the Census Bureau (based on data compiled from the 1890 census) that the American frontier was “closed,” that is, the United States was essentially “settled” from coast to coast. He argued in what historians came to call the Frontier Thesis that the frontier had played a vital role in shaping the American character and American institutions. The frontier’s importance began with the first settlers along the Eastern seaboard during the colonial period and continued in every succeeding generation as it pushed farther and farther west. This seemingly endless supply of land created

 How have new Western historians changed the way many Americans understand the history of the West?

 widespread opportunity for upward mobility. The demands of the frontier, Turner argued, forced Americans to develop a spirit of rugged individualism and innovation. Frontier life also fostered values such as equality and democracy because success was determined not by one’s background but rather by one’s ability to work hard, sacrifice, and command the respect of others. Turner’s thesis proved enormously influential. Generations of Western historians based their writing and research on his ideas about the frontier. His influence also spread well beyond Western history— indeed, well beyond the study of history itself. Some American politicians and policy makers reacted to the apparent closing of the frontier in the 1890s by embracing imperialism to acquire new lands and markets that might make up for the absence of new places to conquer within the United States (see Chapter 19). During the second half of the twentieth century, a new generation of historians challenged Turner’s thesis. One of the leading figures in this “new Western history” movement is Patricia Nelson Limerick who in 1987 published The Legacy of Conquest: The Unbroken Past of the American West. Just as Turner’s article was a product of the optimism and anxiety of late-nineteenth-century American society, Limerick’s book offered an interpretation that reflected the fact that she was a woman raised in the 1960s, a time of social ferment, when historians began to focus more on racial, ethnic, and gender issues. Consequently she brought a far more critical eye to her study of the West than Turner. While Turner had depicted white EuroAmerican settlers as triumphing over such “obstacles” as a stubborn landscape and “a fierce race of savages;” historians like Limerick present a far more complicated story. They emphasize, for example, that Native Americans had inhabited the West for thousands of years before the arrival of Europeans and thus had a legitimate claim to the land. Viewed from this perspective, the story of westward migration was one of violence, exploitation, and conquest. New Western historians also stress the diversity of the West, seeing it as a meeting place of Native Americans, Euro-Americans, immigrants from Europe and Asia, African Americans, Mexicans, and Hispanos who contributed to and shaped a Western

Read the Document Frederick Jackson Turner, The Significance
 of the Frontier in American History (1893)

RESISTANCE AND ROMANTICISM



15.22 Reinterpreting the History of the West
 After more than 125 years of commemorating only Custer and his men, in 2003, the site of the Battle of Little Bighorn added an Indian Memorial to honor the Native Americans who fell there.

 culture that was not simply “white.” Finally, these historians study the environmental impact of westward economic development. This new way of seeing the history of the West in recent years has had an impact beyond the history books. Hollywood films on Western themes also began to change. In the classic Western epics of the 1940s and 1950s, cowboys were heroes, fighting Indians who terrorized innocent white settlers. Beginning in the 1990s, filmmakers began to present a more complicated view of westward settlement, lawlessness, and white-Indian conflict. Dances with Wolves (1990), for example, presented Native Americans in sympathetic terms. Unforgiven (1992) presented the West as a place of violence, lawlessness, failure, desperation, and corruption, where the line between good and evil is not at all clear. Many more such films followed. This reassessment of the West’s history has also changed the way museums and public memorials present key chapters in American history. Nowhere is this more apparent than at the site of

 the 1876 Battle of Little Bighorn. For more than a century following the battle, the site memorialized Custer and his men as heroic martyrs who died in the cause of Western settlement. Named the Custer Battlefield National Cemetery it featured a memorial to the Seventh Cavalry and some Indian scouts on Last Stand Hill. Native Americans, who, of course, won the battle, were ignored. But the influence of new Western history and Native American activism led to the renaming in 1991 of the site as the Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument and in 2003 the unveiling of the Native American memorial shown here (15.22). Only 100 yards from the Seventh Cavalry monument, it features three bronze outline sculptures representing Sioux, Cheyenne, and Arapaho warriors who participated in the battle. Its official theme is “Peace through Unity,” but it also represents a growing awareness that for far too long Americans relied on an incomplete and overly simplistic understanding of the history of the American West.

 Why are Native Americans so committed to reshaping the interpretation of historic sites like Little Bighorn?



 CHAPTER 15

CONFLICT AND CONQUEST: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST, 1860–1900

1862–1866


1866–1867


1868–1874


1876–1877


Homestead and Pacific
 Railway acts passed

 First “Long Drive” of cattle from Texas to the Great Plains

Second Fort Laramie
 Treaty signed

The Battle of Little Bighorn


 The first distributes millions of free land to settlers; the second starts construction of the transcontinental railroad

 Leads to the rapid expansion of the ranching industry in the West

 Guarantees the Sioux ownership of the Black Hills and additional land and hunting rights in South Dakota, Wyoming, and Montana

 George Perkins Marsh publishes Man and Nature A widely read book that warns of environmental damage due to unrestricted exploitation of western resources

The Grange Movement
 founded by Oliver Kelley Becomes a powerful pro-farmer political movement by 1874 in western states

Sand Creek Massacre


CHAPTER REVIEW

 Soldiers in Colorado massacre two hundred Indians

 John Gast paints American Progress Widely reproduced, the painting presents an enthusiastic vision of westward expansion and Manifest Destiny.

Defeat of Lt. Col. Custer and
 Seventh Cavalry hardens white attitudes toward Native Americans

 The flight of the Nez Perce fails Symbolizes both Native American resistance to reservation policy and its ultimate failure

 Gold discovered in Black Hills Leads to escalating conflict as white miners move onto land reserved to Native Americans in the Second Fort Laramie Treaty

Review Questions
 1. What was the significance of railroad building to the West as a region and to its peoples? 2. What challenges did American farmers face in establishing successful farms in the West? 3. What significant industries, including agriculture, developed in the West, and how were they linked to the economy of the Eastern United States?

 4. What critical factors led to the conquest of Native American tribes and their forced relocation to reservations? 5. Why did U.S. officials favor forced assimilation for Native Americans in the late nineteenth century? How did they implement it? 6. Why did Americans embrace a romanticized vision of the American West in the late nineteenth century? How close was this image to reality?

Key Terms
 Homestead Act Passed in 1862, it provided 160 acres of free land to any settler willing to live on it and improve it for five years; promoted massive westward migration. Transcontinental railroad A line spanning the continental United States. Congress helped the Union Pacific and Central Pacific railroads build it by providing land grants, cash incentives, and loans. Great Plains Vast open territory stretching east to west from present-day Missouri to the Rocky Mountains, and north to south from North Dakota to Texas. Exodusters More than twenty thousand ex-slaves who in 1879 left violence and poverty in the South to take up farming in Kansas. Grange Originally founded in the fall of 1867 by Oliver H. Kelley as a social and educational society for farmers, it became a major political force in the Midwest in the mid-1870s. Long Drive The annual cattle drives of more than 1,000 miles from Texas to the Great Plains that started in 1866 and established the ranching industry in the West.

Battle of Little Bighorn Lt. Col. George A. Custer and the
 Seventh Cavalry are wiped out by a force of Cheyenne, Sioux, and Arapaho warriors on June 25, 1876; hardens white attitudes toward Native Americans. Dawes Severalty Act 1887 law that started the breakup of reservations by offering Native Americans allotments of 160 acres of reservation land to encourage them to become independent farmers. Wounded Knee Massacre U.S. soldiers open fire on a group of Sioux Indians on December 29, 1890, killing between two hundred and three hundred. “Buffalo Bill’s Wild West” A circuslike production begun in 1883 that helped create a romantic and mythological view of the West in the American imagination. Frontier Thesis Historian Frederick Jackson Turner’s 1893 theory that extolled the positive role the frontier had played in shaping the American character and consequently American institutions.

CHAPTER REVIEW



1879–1881


1883–1886




1890–1893


 Exoduster movement begins

 William Cody launches “Buffalo Bill’s Wild West”

 Dawes Severalty Act passed

 Wounded Knee massacre

 Begins breakup of reservations and promotes boarding schools to encourage farming and assimilation

 Soldiers open fire on a gathering of Sioux, killing as many as three hundred

 To avoid violence in the South, thousands of ex-slaves migrate to Kansas, Nebraska, and Colorado to take up homestead farming

 This hugely popular traveling show romanticizes the story of westward settlement

 Helen Hunt Jackson publishes A Century of Dishonor

 Apache resistance leader Geronimo surrenders

 Brings national attention to the brutal and dishonest treatment of Native Americans

 Ends the last major Native American military opposition to the U.S. military

Frederick Jackson Turner
 publishes his frontier thesis Bemoans the closing of the frontier, arguing that it had exerted a major influence on American values, ideals, and institutions

 MyHistoryLab Connections Visit www.myhistorylab.com for a customized Study Plan that will help you build your knowledge of Conflict and Conquest.

Questions for Analysis
 1. How did Congress promote westward migration and settlement? Read the Document Homestead Act of 1862, p. 440

 2. What role did immigration play in the peopling of the trans-Mississippi West? View the Map Atlas Map: Immigration, p. 445

 3. How did the dependence of the Plains Indians on the buffalo make them vulnerable to white settlement? View the Closer Look Railroad and Buffalo, p. 454

 4. What was the goal of Indian boarding schools? Read the Document Autobiographical Narrative by ZitkalaSa on Her First Days at Boarding School in Indiana (1900), p. 458

 Other Resources from This Chapter Read the Document • Chief Seattle, Oration (1854), p. 452 • Chief Red Cloud’s Speech, p. 455 • Helen Hunt Jackson, from “A Century of Dishonor” (1881), p. 457 • Secretary of Interior’s Congressional Report on Indian Affairs (1887), p. 459 • Accounts of the Wounded Knee Massacre, p. 461

View the Closer Look
• Thirty-Three Horse Team Harvester, p. 448
• Railroad Routes, Cattle Trails, Gold and Silver Rushes, p. 449
 • Competing Visions: Preservation versus Exploitation, p. 451

View the Image Ho for Kansas!, p. 445
View the Map
• Atlas Map: Western Migration, 1850–1880, p. 444
• Atlas Map: The New Economy of the West, 1850–1893, p. 450
• Atlas Map: Native Americans, 1850–1896, p. 453


Watch the Video Video Lectures: “The Urban West”, p. 448


 5. How did historians help shape the mythical image of the West? Read the Document Frederick Jackson Turner, The Significance of the Frontier in American History (1893), p. 464

 What factors led to the rise of big business?

Creating a Mass
Market p. 478


 How did U.S. businesses promote consumption?

The World of Work
Transformed p. 481


 How did industrial capitalism change American workers?

Conflicting Visions
 of Industrial Capitalism p. 487

 Why did many Americans fear the power of big business?

 CHAPTER

The Emergence of Big
Business p. 470




