chapter 30 entering a new time 867 30 1 significant dates hi 2001 m2 wj 2002 io j 20q3 2004 2005 2006 2008 2009 2010 2012 2013 george w bush inaugurated as u s president apple itunes and wikipedia launched president bush signs tax cut legislation terrorist attack on world trade center and pentagon united states installs new interim government in afghanistan bush signs no child left behind education legislation united states invades iraq overthrows saddam hussein abuse of iraqi prisoners in abu ghraib prison comes to light the 9 11 commission report issued bush defeats john kerry to be reelected hurricane katrina hits new orleans and the gulf coast after republican election losses rumsfeld replaced as secretary of defense in a sign of growing financial trouble bear stearns absorbed by jp morgan financial crisis including lehman brothers bankruptcy barack obama defeats john mccain barack obama inaugurated as president of the united states republican scott brown wins ted kennedy s seat in the u s senate republicans win majority of house of representatives obama reelected for a second term u s supreme court rules part of defense of marriage act unconstitutional in united states v windsor 30 1 at 9 37 a m american flight 77 crashed into the pentagon.
by this time passengers on united flight 93 had learned from cell phone calls that they were part of a massive terrorist plot.
as the plane headed for washington dc heroic passengers overpowered the hijackers and the plane crashed in a field in somerset county pennsylvania.
many acts of heroism occurred on that chaotic morning.
betty ong a flight attendant on american airlines flight 11 stayed on her cell phone reporting minute by minute until the plane crashed into the world trade center.
in new york city nick gerstle a technician for verizon knew cpr and thought he could be helpful at ground zero the now horrific site where the twin towers of the trade center had stood.
in the midst of the rubble he and some firefighters found two trapped new york city police officers.
he heard the officers say please.
dont let us die.
and they didnt.
the two officers were among the few rescued from the collapsed buildings.
julia martinez and margaret espinoza were paraprofessionals teacher aids at the high school for leadership and public service that was only a block away from the world trade center.
they began moving two wheelchair bound students out of the chaos found their way blocked by debris and with the aid of two strangers simply picked up the girls and carried them to safety blocks away.
new yorkers pentagon employees passengers on the flights and average americans did heroic things.
that day changed history as few others had.
ihe focus of this chapter is on the decade and more after that tragic day during which public and personal events were shadowed by what came to be called simply 9 11.
the impact of september 11 2001 analyze the impact of 9 11 on the nation and presidency of george bush and the impact of bush administration policies around the world.
in the first moments and hours after the horrific crashes no one knew what to make of the attack on the world trade center and pentagon.
on first hearing the news on radio or tv most people had the same reaction as florence engoran who worked in the south tower of the world trade center.
when she arrived at her office on the 55th floor someone said a small plane hit the other building she remembered i wasnt especially upset by the news and tended to agree with her coworker who said oh just sit down lets keep working.
we have to get out some focus reports within minutes however as she saw flames and heard another crash engoran realized that something much more serious was happening.
although she was 5 months pregnant engoran headed for the stairs and walked down the 55 flights.
before she made it to the bottom the lights were off and the stairwell was filled with dust but she made it.
most of those working in the buildings made it out.
but many did not.
handicapped people who could not walk down the stairs were stuck.
people on the higher floors could not get past the fires.
some 78 police officers and 400 firefighters who had responded to the emergencies remained in the buildings trying to evacuate people when the structures collapsed.
it all happened very fast.
at 9 58 a m just 1 hour after the crash the south tower of the world trade center collapsed floor by floor showering a wide area with rubble.
thirty minutes later the north tower also collapsed.
what had been two of the tallest buildings in the world that morning were now simply a giant hole in the ground.
the worst violence on united states soil since the civil war had just taken place.
nearly 3 000 people died 246 passengers on the planes 2 600 at the world trade center including workers in the two towers police and fire rescue workers and a few unlucky passersby and 125 people at the pentagon.
the fear loss anger and fortitude generated from that day would shape a new reality for the nation.
at 9 30 a m the federal aviation administration grounded all flights within the united states.
for the week that followed the skies would be clear of everything but high flying military planes.
airports would be eerily quiet.
at a little after 1 00 p m that tuesday president bush just 9 months into his first term addressed the nation 868 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present the twisted ruins of the world trade center in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of september 11 2001 from an air force base in louisiana telling people that massive security measures were in effect and that the united states would hunt down and punish those responsible for these cowardly acts though at that point no one was quite sure who they were.
at 8 30 p m president bush spoke to the nation for a second time this time from the oval office asking for prayers for the families and friends of the victims and again promising retaliatory action.
ground zero was still a mass of burning rubble and would be for weeks.
the pentagon fire was contained but not under control.
the nation tried to make sense of what had happened.
finding the terrorists al qaeda the taliban afghanistan in the initial confusion of the morning of september 11 no one was quite sure who was behind the attack.
by early afternoon george tenet the director of the cia informed president bush that while the agency was still investigating all the evidence pointed to an attack by al qaeda ordered by its leader osama bin laden.
by late that evening when the president met with what he then called his war council they all agreed that plans needed to be developed to punish not only the perpetrators of the 9 11 attack but any who harbored them.
on september 20 president bush spoke to a joint session of congress.
he said tonight we are a country awakened to danger he said of the government of afghanistan that they will hand over the terrorists or they will share their fate and he told the rest of the world either you are with us or you are with the terrorists there would be no neutrals in the war on terror.
the president said that the war was with terrorists not with islam.
he insisted the enemy of america is not our many muslim friends.
it is not our many arab friends.
our enemy is a radical network of terrorists and every government that supports them nevertheless the militant tone of the speech while reassuring some worried many.
in the immediate aftermath of the attacks international support and sympathy for the united states was high.
even nations long hostile to the united states such as syria were expressing support.
but with bush s response some of the support began to fade.
9 11 attack the attack of september 11 2001 on the world trade center and the pentagon organized by al qaeda.
chapter 30 entering a new time 869 30 1 bo.
i american voices 9 11 memories michael muskal september 11 2013 veryone who lived through the day had their own experience of 9 11 one they will not forget.
twelve years later a los angeles 303 i times reporter looked back on his own memories and those of j others who contacted him.
i even 12 years later the events of sept 11 2001 sear 30 j j americans memories.
j in comments posted on people remember the tragic events of the day the moments both good and bad heroic and fearful that are summed up by the numerals 9 11.
it was early morning when the first airplane hit one of the towers of the world trade center in lower manhattan.
on the east coast commuters were rushing to their jobs schools were filling with educators and students.
it seemed an ordinary day until 8 46 a m when it wasn t.
on 9 11 2001 i was having a national sales meeting in our offices at the world trade center.
we had visitors from chicago california and new orleans.
everyone was looking forward to getting together to recharge writes keith webster of malibu.
at 8 45 a m while standing in our boardroom looking at the statue of liberty in the south harbor all hell was about to break loose.
we heard a pop then a swoosh.
a stream of debris crossed the sky.
it looked like a ticker tape parade but only a few thousand feet higher.
in an instant i knew what was happening in my mind s eye an image of a terrorist walking onto my floor with a bomb vest flashed.
i could see my lobby vaporized and in flames.
webster also writes about his eventual rescue by heroic responders.
maralynn mash of ft lauderdale fla says she was at an elementary school near the world trade center that day.
the children were headed toward the basement for safety when police and fire officials came into the building thinking it was empty but then we were directed to run run for your lives.
teachers and students under the guidance of an incredibly able principal ran ahead of the second cloud north on greenwich what i remember is a day of bravery a year of dedication in response to an act of cowardice.
so very proud to be a new yorker and an american.
on the west coast people were just waking up many watched the tragedy in new york unfold on television.
instead of the usual fodder of second day news lifestyle features and celebrity pomp viewers saw the horror of the deadliest terrorist attack on u s soil.
the images of the towers crashing and exploding gave me a sense of insecurity that something like this could happen in downtown los angeles writes maricela of la puente.
i remember arriving at raymond a villa intermediate school in santa ana calif.
it was an ordinary day.
i hung out with my friends for a little bit headed to first period sat at my desk the usual.
i was in sixth grade at the time.
around the middle of class my teacher put the tv on writes lene de leon now of san antonio.
i will never forget the images or the confusion i felt upon seeing the videos replaying over and over again.
i tried so hard not to cry for fear of being made fun of but i was hurting for all those people and my country.
everything happening was so painful to watch.
the second plane hitting people desperate for help and waving white flags out of the windows people jumping out of the windows the towers falling.
all the images were engraved in my memory and are still vivid.
they are etched onto the nation s soul nation too and are freshly renewed every 9 11 as officials relatives and mourners gather in new york pennsylvania and washington.
in all nearly 3 000 people died.
as kendra of auburn ala writes mom said to me this day will be a day to remember for the rest of your life.
source michael muskal 9 11 memories all hell was about to break loose los angeles times september 11 2013.
thinking critically 1.
documentary analysis what different emotions do people remember when recalling 9 11.
have the emotions changed in the 12 years between the event and when this article was written.
comparison in what ways were the memories of those who were in or near the world trade center similar to and in what ways different from the memories of others who lived much farther away but shared the same moment in the nation s history.
870 by the time bush spoke cia and u s army forces had been dispatched to pakistan and uzbekistan to prepare for an attack on afghanistan whose taliban government was protecting bin laden and al qaeda.
in early october the united states attacked sites within afghanistan while building on the ground alliances with afghan warlords who were hostile to the taliban regime.
soon u s ground forces allied with the warlords began an assault on the taliban government.
on november 9 the northern city of mazar e sharif fell to the u s led coalition forces and a few days later the taliban government fled the capital of kabul.
by early december the united states and its local allies were in control of the country and on december 22 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present hamid karzai a leader of one of the anti taliban factions was installed as the new leader of afghanistan.
for the most part however the taliban leaders had escaped.
many afghans celebrated the defeat of the austere and tyrannical taliban even as they kept a wary eye on the americans and on each other.
late in 2001 u s backed forces attacked the remaining al qaeda strongholds in a region of mountainous caves known as tora bora.
perhaps a quarter of all al qaeda and taliban operatives were killed or captured but the rest including bin laden and his chief lieutenant ayman al zawahiri escaped into the lightly governed provinces on the pakistani side of the border from which they continued to operate with considerable freedom.
the united states did not track bin laden down until may 2011 almost 10 years later.
in the aftermath of the attack president bush under considerable pressure from families of victims agreed to appoint a special commission to study the 9 11 attack and make recommendations regarding future policy.
the chair of the commission former republican governor of new jersey thomas kean and vice chair lee h hamilton former democratic representative from indiana were careful to say we write with the benefit and handicap of hindsight.
we are mindful of the danger of being unjust to men and women who made choices in conditions of uncertainty and in circumstances over which they often had little control nevertheless they noted significant mistakes.
they reported that while presidents and cia directors are inundated with information a lot of information had pointed to a possible large scale al qaeda attack.
as early as december 1998 the cias presidential daily brief for bill clinton said suggests bin laden and his allies are preparing for attacks on u s including an aircraft hijacking a report to george w bush on august 6 2001 included a detailed note headlined bin laden determined to strike in us they also noted that the united states was unprepared for dealing with an attack.
although air force planes were launched after the first plane crashed into the world trade center the pilots had no clear instructions and the commission had great doubts that if the passengers had not caused the fourth plane to crash in pennsylvania it could have been stopped before reaching washington dc.
the most important failure they concluded was one of imagination.
we do not believe leaders understood the gravity of the threat the terrorist danger from bin laden and al qaeda was not a major topic for policy debate among the public the media or in the congress.
it had barely come up during the 2000 presidential campaign.
30 1 i while the defeat of the taliban brought new opportunities to many afghans especially women who could again study in school and take jobs it did not bring stability to the country.
chapter 30 entering a new time 871 no child left behind federal legislation requiring that all students be tested and that schools show adequate yearly progress in the test scores of all students.
the george w bush presidential agenda once in office in january 2001 george w bush did not waste any time implementing his own agenda.
while the events of the following september would make foreign policy central to that agenda he did not come to office with such a focus.
indeed most early initiatives focused on domestic policy.
as his administration took shape especially his choices for members of his cabinet many wondered about his promise to be a uniter he had selected a cabinet with more racial minorities and more women than any previous one but they were a very conservative lot.
three days after the inauguration bush announced that he would use the upcoming renewal of the elementary and secondary education act first passed under lyndon johnson in 1965 see chapter 22 to change the course of federal education policy.
he had campaigned on a promise to address what he called the soft bigotry of low expectations for poor students and he acted quickly on that promise.
he called his new proposal no child left behind and announced he would seek a bipartisan education reform that would be the cornerstone of my administration in spite of the highly partisan split around his election two of the most liberal democratic members of congress massachusetts senator edward m kennedy and california house member george miller played key roles in developing the act and shepherding it through congress.
the core of no child left behind was a requirement that to receive federal funds states must develop clear standards then test all students from the third to the eighth grade and use the test results to measure whether individual schools and districts were making adequate yearly progress ayp in improving the education of all students and closing the achievement gap although many supported the legislation its implementation quickly generated criticism of the amount of testing involved the constraints imposed by the regulations and the lack of funding available for implementation.
bush moved with equal speed on his other top priority an across the board tax cut.
during the campaign he had insisted that the clinton budget surpluses should be given directly back to taxpayers.
alan greenspan of the federal reserve board told congress that bushs proposed tax cut of 1 6 trillion over 10 years would not harm the economy and might do some good.
there was general consensus about some sort of cut and bush was able to sign a phased in tax cut of 1 4 trillion on june 7 2001 less than 5 months after the inauguration.
the new law cut the highest tax rate from american classrooms like this one were transformed by the expectations included in the no child left behind legislation.
in this 2003 photo ron paige secretary of the department of education under george w bush answers questions from students during a visit to the skinner magnet center in omaha nebraska.
872 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present 30 1 39 6 percent to 35 percent a significant cut though still above the reagan rates.
it also created a new lower tax bracket of only 10 percent for the working poor exempted many people from any federal tax and phased out inheritance taxes.
almost immediately many tax payers received rebate checks.
cutting taxes was a very popular policy.
the tax cut legislation however posed two serious problems.
the first was that most of the major cuts were to be phased in and people were impatient.
pressure mounted to speed up the implementation of the tax cuts and in less than 2 years bush proposed and congress passed the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act of 2003 which speeded tax reductions significantly.
the second problem was that with reduced taxes the u s treasury took in a lot less money.
while some especially within the administration argued that the tax cuts were stimulating the economy and creating jobs most economists outside of government saw little evidence for the claim.
both sides had to acknowledge that the tax cuts along with significantly increased spending by the administration especially after 9 11 were creating a growing federal deficit.
the surpluses of the late clinton years disappeared.
for the rest of the bush term the federal deficit grew significantly.
some like vice president dick cheney said deficits don t matter economists and many leaders of both parties were less sure.
education reform and tax cuts were the most significant domestic policy agendas of george w bushs 8 years in office and both were enacted during his first year.
a number of other policy initiatives however were also important to the president.
bush came to office committed to what he called faith based initiatives he believed that religious communities were often better than the federal government at delivering direct human services.
nine days after the inauguration he proposed what he called charitable choice legislation that would allow religious groups to apply for federal funds as long as they were not to be used for worship or proselytizing.
while legislation made it through the house two different bills were blocked in the senate.
in frustration bush issued executive orders in december 2002 that prohibited federal agencies from discriminating against religious charities and established faith based offices in several cabinet departments.
for religious communities that sought federal funds it created an especially friendly atmosphere.
bush had also campaigned on a promise to reform social security giving individuals greater choice in the investment of the funds they contributed to the social security system.
while other priorities dominated his early years bush devoted a significant amount of his 2005 state of the union speech the first of his second term to his proposal to allow more choice in the use of social security funds.
by 2005 however bush was distracted by the war and democrats were far less willing to give in to the presidents initiatives.
little movement happened on allowing greater choice in social security and after the 2008 financial crisis when people realized that such choices might have been financially devastating the idea died.
bush had little patience with conservationists.
he signed legislation allowing drilling in the arctic national wildlife refuge in alaska and supported offshore oil exploration.
he did not move on environmental issues or global warming.
because of his own religious convictions he opposed stem cell research in spite of dramatic appeals from many including nancy reagan.
his appointments especially to the federal courts tended to be very conservative.
while the 2000 presidential election had been fought almost exclusively over domestic issues the events of september 11 2001 changed everything.
from then onward foreign policy and the impact of international issues on the internal politics of the united states would be the dominant agenda of the bush administration until his last few months in office when a new economic crisis returned attention to the domestic agenda.
in the meantime however terrorism took center stage.
the war on terror at home the report of the 9 11 commission made recommendations to tighten security within the united states and abroad.
however they noted many of our recommendations call for the government to increase its presence in our lives therefore while chapter 30 entering a new time 873 30 1 ii 1 r if m usa patriot act j legislation that sought to protect zzr americans by authorizing significant new j data gathering by the federal government.
protecting our homeland americans should be mindful of threats to vital personal and civil liberties whether the bush administration or the obama administration that followed kept the right balance has been a subject of continuing debate.
even before the commission finished its work congress at bush s request passed the usa patriot act which the president signed on october 26 2001 only weeks after the attack.
the act expanded not only the authority of the department of justice to search telephone e mail medical financial and library records without a court order but also the authority to increase monitoring of the u s borders and of noncitizens within the country.
it also gave the treasury the right to monitor financial records and bank transactions.
in the midst of the fears generated by 9 11 the patriot act passed by large majorities in both houses of congress.
most defended the laws provisions as necessary at a time of national emergency.
nevertheless some were deeply troubled by the bill.
richard armey a conservative republican member of the house insisted that the act have a sunset provision and expire in 5 years.
wisconsin liberal democratic senator russell feingold the only member of the senate to vote against the law said some have said rather cavalierly that in these difficult times we must accept some reduction in our civil liberties in order to be secure.
of course there is no doubt that if we lived in a police state it would be easier to catch terrorists but that probably would not be a country in which we would want to live the debate about the patriot act continued long after it passed.
in january 2003 the american library association worried about increasing searches of library records condemned the patriot act as a present danger to the constitutional rights and privacy rights of library users others disagreed.
john yoo who had served as one of the lead attorneys in the u s department of justice advising president bush and eric posner a law professor wrote a piece for the american enterprise institute in december 2003 in which they said the worst thing about the patriot act is its orwellian name.
if the act marginally reduces peacetime liberties this is a reasonable price to pay for a valuable weapon against al qaeda while the debate continued president bush signed a renewed version of the patriot act in march 2006 and president barack obama signed two further extensions of the law in 2010 and 2011.
the war in afghanistan and iraq from the moment the first plane hit the world trade center some people were convinced that iraqs saddam hussein was somehow behind it or at least allied with al qaeda.
deputy secretary of defense paul wolfowitz insisted that iraq had to be dealt with if terrorism was to be defeated.
vice president cheney supported a u s attack on iraq.
others urged caution.
the cia and others in the national security council initially found no compelling case against iraq.
indeed evidence showed considerable antipathy between the very religious al qaeda leader osama bin laden and a secular leader like saddam hussein in iraq.
so in the immediate aftermath of 9 11 the focus stayed on the al qaeda strongholds in afghanistan see map 30 1.
however the issue of iraq never went away.
british prime minister tony blair supported plans for an attack on iraq but jack straw blairs foreign minister insisted saddam was not threatening his neighbors and his wmd weapons of mass destruction capability was less than that of libya north korea or iran as talk of a possible u s attack on iraq circulated an article appeared in the wall street journal on august 15 2002 by brent scowcroft who had been the national security adviser in the administration of h w.
scowcroft wrote dont attack saddam he argued that such a war could lead to armageddon in the middle east and urged instead that the united states should be pressing the united nations security council to insist on an effective no notice inspection regime for iraq some speculated that scowcrofts article was in fact a warning from bushs father a close friend of scowcroft but if it was it came too late.
874 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present 30 1 map 30 1 afghanistan and iraq.
after a 2001 attack on the taliban government of afghanistan the united states turned its attention to iraq which it attacked in 2003.
in january 2002 just 4 months after the attacks in new york and washington dc bush gave his state of the union message in which he singled out iraq along with iran and north korea as an axis of evil bush said iraq continues to flaunt its hostility toward america and to support terror this is a regime that has something to hide from the civilized world a conservative columnist charles krauthammer wrote if there was a serious internal debate within the administration over what to do about iraq that debate is over the only remaining debate seems to have been whether the united states and great britain needed to seek authorization from the u s congress and united nations to attack iraq.
although british prime minister blair supported the attack on iraq he insisted on united nations approval.
the un had imposed a financial and trade embargo on iraq after it invaded kuwait and among other things required it to disclose and eliminate weapons of mass destruction wmd and to allow un inspections to confirm the status of any such weapons.
u s secretary of state colin powell urged seeking support from congress and the un.
ever since the earlier 1991 u s war with iraq over kuwait the united states had protected kurds in northern iraq and maintained a boycott of iraqi oil.
now the united states was preparing to do much more.
after considerable debate congress voted to authorize the use of military force if diplomacy with iraq failed.
the resolution passed the senate by a vote of 77 to chapter 30 entering a new time 875 23 and the house by 296 to 133.
while almost everyone supported the invasion of afghanistan and the attack on al qaeda divisions ran deep about iraq.
the two liberal democratic senators from massachusetts were divided.
john kerry said i believe that a deadly arsenal of weapons of mass destruction in his saddam hussein s hands is a threat and a grave threat in contrast the senior senator from massachusetts edward m kennedy voted no as did the most senior member of the senate west virginia senator robert byrd.
a young barack obama had not yet been elected to the senate but he told a rally this is a dumb war after the congressional vote colin powell took the arguments to the united nations security council.
powell put his personal prestige on the line to convince the security council of the need to topple saddam husseins government.
the vote was 15 to zero in favor.
france russia and china all of which had grave reservations about a war in iraq hoped that the authorization would force iraq to agree to tougher inspections to avoid an invasion.
with authorization from congress and the un the united states great britain and a coalition of other countries most of whom sent only token forces went to war and toppled saddam hussein with lightning speed.
on march 19 2003 u s forces began the war with a huge attack using bombers over 1 500 flights a day plus launching navy cruise missiles.
the u s military called it shock and awe after the air attack ground forces moved across the country.
by the first week in april the airport at baghdad fell to u s led troops and u s tanks roared into the capital city.
the iraqi minister of information was captured most of the rest of the leadership fled and saddam hussein was a fugitive in the country he had long dominated.
u s and british casualties were very low.
the war it seemed had been won skillfully.
on may 1 president bush announced major combat operations in iraq have ended.
in the battle of iraq the united states and our allies have prevailed the next steps would not be so easy however.
securing a country as large and as tightly regulated as iraq was no easy task.
many iraqis who were delighted to see hussein gone were uneasy about the role of foreign troops in their country.
an iraqi professor told american reporter anne garrels you understand you will now have to be in complete control and we will resent you under a sign proclaiming mission accomplished president bush announced the end of combat operations in iraq on may 1 2004 the worst of america s difficulties in iraq however were just beginning.
876 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present 30 1 every step of the way.
in fact the united states never sent enough forces to manage the country once the old government had been removed.
very little planning had gone into preparation for the postinvasion world of iraq.
most officials assumed that iraqis would quickly return to work.
as condoleezza rice then the national security adviser said the concept was that we would defeat the army but the institutions would hold everything from ministries to police forces it did not happen.
as soon as the old authority was gone looters began to pillage government buildings.
they stole computers televisions and metal to be sold for scrap which they raided from places such as towers holding communication lines and metal file cabinets filled with important documents.
at the central bank looters drilled into the vaults and ran out with the money much of it in u s dollars or euros that could not be traced.
they broke into the national museum and carried off 15 000 ancient objects of extraordinary value.
defense secretary rumsfeld responded stuff happens most iraqis and people around the world were less understanding.
one military advisor said were incompetent as far as they re concerned in august 2003 thomas friedman wrote in the new york times it would be a tragic irony if the greatest technological power in the history of the world came to the cradle of civilization with its revolutionary ideas and found itself defeated because it couldnt keep the electricity on in may 2003 secretary rumsfeld appointed a u s diplomat l paul jerry bremer as head of the coalition provisional authority cpa to bring order to iraq.
bremer was an experienced diplomat but he was not familiar with the middle east.
he set up his headquarters in the fortified green zone a former hussein palace and issued two orders that in retrospect seemed a serious mistake.
modeling the first order on the de nazification of germany after world war ii bremer ordered the de baathification of iraq.
the baath party had been husseins political party the only one allowed in the country.
government officials senior officials police officers and teachers were required to be members.
the order that no member of the baath party could work in the new administration immediately threw some 30 000 to 50 000 out of work.
the idea that ministries or the police could quickly be up and running was gone.
a week later bremer dissolved the iraqi army.
the initial u s plans for a postwar government had focused on removing a few generals and then reestablishing the army since it was solid and had discipline as well as credibility inside iraq.
with his order bremer dissolved this source of structure and order.
he also infuriated some 400 000 iraqi soldiers who thought they had been promised that if they would not resist the americans they could keep their jobs after the war.
now they were out of their jobs and had lost their pensions but still had access to arms.
as it became clear that the united states did not have enough troops in iraq to maintain order iraqis not only became angry at the americans but also became angry at one another.
husseins dictatorship had maintained tight control over a country whose people were deeply divided.
within weeks members of the sunni muslim minority of which hussein was a part and which had been the nation s elite were attacked by members of the shiite muslim majority.
the sunnis fought back.
on august 29 two car bombs killed moderate shiite leader ayatollah mohammad baqir al hakim and 124 of his followers and destroyed the mosque where they were worshipping.
while sunnis and shiites fought in the center and south of the country iraqi kurds in the north who had been protected for 12 years by the no fly zone now fought to maintain their autonomy.
reprisal followed reprisal.
within months of the victory iraq was close to a civil war and the americans were caught in the middle of it.
more american soldiers were killed between may and october of 2003 in postwar fighting than from march to may of that year in the actual invasion.
between 2003 and 2004 u s forces searched the country trying to find weapons of mass destruction and the escaped dictator saddam hussein.
in spite of the fact that those weapons had been one of the prime reasons for going to war none were ever found.
hussein apparently had wanted to keep up the pretense that they existed to frighten the ml coalition provisional authority cpa the temporary governing authority for iraq set up after the u s invasion in march and april of 2003.
30 entering a new time 877 united states and his old enemies like iran.
in fact the weapons were not there.
bush wrote in his memoirs in retrospect of course we all should have pushed harder on the intelligence and revisited our assumptions however hussein himself was found not far from his hometown of tikrit in december 2003.
after an extended trial hussein was executed by the u s backed provisional government of iraq in december 2006.
as iraq spiraled into civil war u s soldiers complained that they had no training for serving as an occupying force.
in the city of fallujah some 2 500 marines battled abu ghraib prison an iraqi prison taken over by u s forces after the invasion.
iraqi detainees wait to be released at abu ghraib prison west of baghdad in iraq june 2006.
pictures taken in abu ghraib prison of tortured prisoners circulated around the world including i the muslim middle east.
with 1 200 dissidents in street to street sometimes room to room fighting.
in the end the u s forces won but then withdrew from the city and the dissidents regrouped.
similar battles took place elsewhere.
iraqi sunnis made an alliance with al qaeda.
the home grown version of al qaeda in iraq known as al qaeda in mesopotamia grew stronger as much of the country experienced anarchy.
electricity worked in baghdad for perhaps 8 hours a day even in the summer when air conditioning was desperately needed.
oil was being pumped only at very low levels.
another disaster took place at a prison in bagdad.
hussein had built abu ghraib prison as a fortress prison for dissidents.
by late summer 2003 husseins prisoners had been freed and the u s military was using the prison to hold some 4 000 prisoners of their own.
they had orders from the pentagon to get information from the new prisoners at abu ghraib.
in the search for information they humiliated prisoners by keeping some naked in front of female guards by piling them on top of each other and by making them crawl and bark u s troops took pictures of what they were doing.
in april 2004 the whole sordid mess at abu ghraib came to light.
cbs news the new yorker magazine and news organizations around the world including arab news sources like al jazeera showed the pictures and reported what was happening at abu ghraib.
hearing the reports u s general james mattis responded when you lose the moral high ground you lose it all a year after the invasion the u s commanding officer general ricardo sanchez described the situation as a civil war and added whats more we had created these conditions ourselves paul bremer said weve become the worst of all things an ineffective occupier at home in the united states opposition to the war and the occupation was growing.
there were no weapons of mass destruction.
there was no order in iraq.
there was no end in sight.
the war in iraq dominated u s elections.
in the 2004 presidential contest the democrats nominated a vietnam era war hero senator john kerry of massachusetts after a spirited contest in which howard dean the governor of vermont and a virtual unknown on the national stage was the first candidate to make the internet the core of his campaign.
although the dean campaigns success at raising funds and recruiting volunteers did not lead to his nomination it transformed future political campaigns.
once kerry secured the democratic nomination the party united behind him and focused not only on the war in iraq but also on bushs handling of the economy.
kerry had voted for the war but he had become a major critic.
he called the war and the subsequent u s occupation of iraq a colossal blunder and said that the president was deliberately misleading the american people about the war.
bush responded that the world is better off without saddam hussein outside political groups supporting bush sought to tarnish kerrys military record.
kerry struck a chord with his criticism but he was not a strong campaigner indeed one critic called him a genius at 878 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present self destruction.
in the end the president won by a very small margin of 62 million to 59 million or 50 7 percent of the popular vote to kerrys 48 3 percent.
the electoral vote was also close 286 to 251.
nonetheless bush had won a second term.
in addition republicans also maintained control of congress.
two years later protests against the war had grown much stronger as it continued into its fourth year.
although the president was not on the ballot his policies were and democrats won a majority in both houses of congress in the 2006 midterm elections.
by 2006 the war s cost in lives and dollars was a top issue in the election.
democrat nancy pelosi replaced republican dennis hastert as speaker of the house of representatives the first woman in history to serve as speaker and democrat harry reid replaced republican mitch mcconnell as majority leader in the senate.
two new women were added to the senate bringing the total of women to 16 a then all time high.
many thought the republicans were going to be in trouble in the 2008 presidential election.
in the meantime president bush knew he would face an unfriendly congress during his last 2 years in office.
looking at the situation in iraq in 2006 one american official said weve taken samarra four times and weve lost it four times we need a new strategy in november 2006 after the midterm elections president bush fired defense secretary rumsfeld and replaced him with robert gates a less ideological administrator.
a new u s ambassador to iraq ryan crocker who spoke arabic and who knew the middle east well was appointed.
general david petraeus was made the overall commander of military forces in the region.
he developed a very different strategy in iraq.
first there was the surge an infusion of an additional 30 000 u s troops to provide strength in numbers.
but instead of staying in fortified enclaves petraeus placed units in population centers.
their mission was to get to know and protect the iraqi people to find out what their complaints were and try to respond.
if troops took control of an area they stayed and tried to build a new infrastructure.
troops felt vulnerable and losses were high.
slowly however the troops and the iraqi government began to take control of the country.
by fall one journalist reported from baghdad some shops stay open until late in the evening.
children play in parks young women stay out after dark restaurants are filled with families and old men sit at sidewalk cafes playing backgammon and smoking shisha pipes it was a peace of sorts.
30 2 quick review did the war on terror dominate george w bush s presidency at home and abroad.
hurricane katrina and its aftermath 30 2 explain the impact of hurricane katrina on the gulf coast.
early monday morning august 29 2005 hurricane katrina one of the most powerful and deadly hurricanes in american history hit new orleans and the gulf coast of louisiana mississippi and alabama.
hurricanes have naturally pounded florida and the gulf coast since long before the first europeans or africans arrived but katrina was a natural disaster compounded by human failure.
the result was hours and days of anguish for many over 1 800 deaths and more than 75 billion in damage.
the surge a plan for the handover of authority to a new government for iraq and an eventual orderly withdrawal of all u s forces.
hurricane katrina a massive storm that hit new orleans and the gulf coast in august 2005 leading to widespread death and destruction.
the failure to prepare only 4 years after it was founded new orleans was swept away by a hurricane in september 1722.
in 1849 the levees protecting new orleans failed flooding more than 200 city blocks.
hurricanes in 1893 and 1919 flooded the city and killed many the great mississippi river flood of 1927 devastated the city.
after the 1927 floods the army corps dredged the lower mississippi river which made for easier transport chapter 30 entering a new time 879 but changed the rivers course.
development and the pumping of oil and gas from underground further degraded the mississippi delta and hundreds of square miles of swampland simply disappeared under water leaving new orleans much more vulnerable to storms coming from the gulf of mexico.
in 2005 a giant storm arrived.
as hurricane katrina began to strengthen in late august 2005 more immediate failures added dangerously to the already vulnerable area.
weather forecasters began to realize that hurricane katrina might be the big one the hurricane that people feared.
nevertheless new orleans mayor ray nagin louisiana governor kathleen blanco and mississippi governor haley barbour all refused to issue mandatory evacuation orders.
an offer by amtrak to take people by train was ignored and the last trains left the city with empty passenger cars.
at least a quarter of new orleans population did not own cars and the school buses that could have been used to evacuate people sat idle and eventually flooded.
as the storm grew stronger on sunday morning august 28 mayor nagin opened the superdome the citys massive sports complex as a shelter of last resort.
some 8 000 or 9 000 people moved in before the storm hit.
however most of the poorest people in new orleans lived too far from the superdome to get there and no transportation was offered.
then katrina hit.
the storm it started raining in biloxi mississippi around 5 00 p m on sunday august 28.
by 9 00 p m it was raining in new orleans and the wind was starting to pick up.
by midnight the storm surge hit mississippi.
between 2 00 and 6 00 a m the wind rain and storm surge was pounding the gulf coast and new orleans.
winds were blowing steadily at 150 miles per hour.
sometime between 3 00 and 5 00 a m the levees on the 17th street canal gave way.
new orleans lost electric power at 5 15 a m and telephone service at 7 11 a m ihe hurricanes winds splintered buildings toppled power lines collapsed highway bridges tore off part of the roof of the new orleans superdome and stirred up waves on lake pontchartrain that weakened the levees.
the wind also drove a huge surge of water onto the shore and up the mississippi river.
finally in new orleans the weakened levees failed and a wall of water poured into neighborhoods where it rose rapidly destroyed buildings and trapped people in upper floors and attics.
examples of the power of the storm were everywhere.
in st bernard parish just across the mississippi river from new orleans the rising water filled st ritas nursing facility and 35 bedridden patients were drowned.
in waveland mississippi where police were riding out the storm in the brick police headquarters water filled the building and then the storm toppled it.
twenty seven officers ended up swimming to safety some clinging to a nearby tree for 3 hours before they were rescued.
the worst destruction came in new orleans itself however especially in its poorer neighborhoods.
by the time katrina hit new orleans almost 80 percent of its 485 000 people had evacuated.
the 100 000 or so who were left were those too stubborn or too poor to go anywhere.
the lower ninth ward had been a working class african american community for generations.
it had strong community institutions from churches to the neighborhood bars where jazz blues and iconic new orleans style music thrived.
the area was 7 feet below sea level but the levees were designed to keep the water out.
people in the lower ninth ward had no transport to the superdome no transport out of town and few options rather than trying to ride out the storm.
at 8 14 a m the industrial canal that brought cargo ships in but also channeled water away from the lower areas filled from the storm surge.
pumps failed and the walls were breached.
within an hour much of the ninth ward was filled with 6 8 feet of water and the water kept rising.
in a very short time the lower ninth ward was devastated.
the most famous resident of the lower ninth ward was the 77 year old fats domino the famous rock n roll musician.
domino his wife and their five children 880 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present v ninth ward residents stranded on the roof of their homes await rescue.
the death and destruction that came with hurricane katrina was unimaginable to most americans.
j 30 j and their families were riding out the storm at their house on marais street.
then the water from the breech started pouring in and quickly rose to the top of first floor.
ihe water was full of mud sewage oil and stank of death.
workers would later call it a toxic stew.
with 8 feet of mud filled water destroying everything in the house and reaching the ceiling the family ran to the attic.
some neighbors thought they had all drowned but the water in the domino house did not rise higher.
by afternoon a new orleans harbor police rescued the family.
fats domino his wife and his children joined what was by then 20 000 survivors in the superdome.
the mementos of a life time were gone.
the cleanup few failed to notice that the worse scenes of suffering and death were in african american communities.
the new orleans police department was part of the problem.
many of the officers simply deserted their posts leaving new orleans to its own devices.
some of those who remained offered heroic help but others were eventu ally convicted of criminal activity.
in addition the federal emergency management agency fema failed to live up to its responsibilities.
fema had been created during the carter administration to coordinate the diverse federal agencies that might be needed in the case of a natural disaster.
however for too long during katrina and its aftermath fema did nothing.
fema staff were asking why arent we getting the orders.
why isnt this being treated like a real emergency femas director in 2005 michael brown was a political appointee with no experience in managing any disas ters.
when brown assured mississippi governor haley barbour that fema had lots of hurricane practice in florida barbour responded i dont think you ve seen anything like this it was one of the kinder statements brown heard that week as peo ple waited for federal help that did not come.
chapter 30 entering a new time 881 american voices surviving hurricane katrina mary gehman 2005 veryone who lived through hurricane katrina has their own memories.
mary gehman shares this one.
all through the night gusts of incredibly heavy wind battered the house from the east side.
it started out mild but eventually i was awakened by the noise snug on my living room couch.
i could only hope the upstairs rooms were going to hold tight.
finally about noon on monday the winds started to diminish.
there were another few hours of rain and some gusts but the storm s fury had been spent for about an hour or two late that afternoon after the storm had quieted and the rain stopped i enjoyed a sense of relief and self righteous victory.
i had been right to follow my gut feeling about being able to weather the hurricane.
the water outside in the street had risen higher than i had ever seen it before in my 27 years living in the alley.
it flowed fast like a roiling creek lapping the second step of my porch.
by 5 00 p m that evening the creek outside my front steps had turned from a greenish grey to black and the water was imperceptibly inching up.
the flow had slowed somewhat but there was no sign of it stopping or receding.
with a sickening feeling i watched as it came up to the threshold and began to ooze in under the front door.
a few minutes later water pressed in through the baseboards i knew we were in for a fight.
the radio reported there had been a massive break in the 17th street canal levee and the water would rise farther before it stopped hopefully the water would stop in an hour or two.
by tuesday 3 a m the water had risen to cover the second step as i eased into it from the slick hardwood stairs it came up above my knees to mid thigh well over two feet deep the floor boards were slippery coated i assumed by a film of oil and filth by about 3 00 that afternoon i had pretty much made up my mind to get out.
what to do about the dogs was the one remaining block.
i knew the boats and helicopters that were picking people up were not taking large dogs i glanced at the photos of my sons their wives and my grandchildren on my night stand and thought how useless i d be to them were i to be found dead my two old dogs keeping guard over me.
no i had to prioritize things in a rational manner out on the balcony i could not look at the dogs not even as i set out a bucket of water and a dish of food for each it was dusk by the time a flat bottomed boat manned by bossier city louisiana firefighters finally pulled up in the alley by the house where i was sitting on the roof peak.
i scrambled down grabbed the school bag and my purse pulled the tall window shut behind me and handed my things down to a man in the boat.
the red cross would be providing food and water so no need to take more than the absolute minimum the man in the boat assured me the dogs pressed against me and i petted them for the last time my eyes welling over with tears all i know is that on my return to the house five weeks later there was no trace of the dogs.
i don t regret that i stayed through the storm i was able to salvage a lot of important papers and items that are now of great comfort to me.
the overpass will never feel the same to me as i pass over it nearly every day.
my lovely dogs still haunt me.
their questioning faces swim up to the surface of my consciousness now and then i tell them i left them for their own good.
they seem to understand.
they have no choice.
none of us does.
source downloaded august 14 2011.
thinking critically 1.
historical interpretation what does gehman s description of the crisis tell you about her response to it.
contextualization how does gehman s descriptions of her actions fit with the actions that government leaders did or did not take regarding the storm.
by wednesday august 31 2 days after the storm two hospitals in new orleans charity and university lost their generators.
it was over 100 degrees in the hospitals.
with no electricity staff and volunteers used hand pumps to keep oxygen flowing to desperately ill people.
with virtually no water or supplies only the most rudimentary medical aid was possible.
those in the superdome were trying to survive in horrifying primitive conditions with no sanitation and dead bodies laying exposed in hallways.
not until thursday were thousands of people finally evacuated to houston texas where shelter was offered.
new orleans never returned to its pre katrina population and a year after the storm whole neighborhoods were virtually abandoned even as others like the ninth ward slowly rebuilt and came back to life.
3 2 quick review based on this information why do you think people from all over the country volunteered to help the city and people of new orleans.
882 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present the financial crisis of 2008 30 3 explain the costs and consequences of the 2008 financial crisis.
30 1 ihe headline on the wall street journal for monday september 15 2008 was double the normal size and ran across all six columns of the paper.
it said crisis on wall street as lehman totters merrill is sold and aig seeks to raise cash by the time most people read the paper lehman was no longer tottering the storied bank had declared bankruptcy.
bank of america bought merrill lynch and bankers and federal authorities were trying to save the american international group aig.
before the day was over the stock market fell by 504 48 points.
it would fall much further.
the financial exuberance of the last 2 decades had come to a sudden end.
in one extraordinary weekend saturday and sunday september 13 and 14 most of the nations leading bankers and senior government officials led by the secretary of the treasury henry hank paulson tried to salvage the american economy.
although the government and the bankers failed to save lehman brothers they avoided a far worse fate of massive bankruptcies and the coming of a second great depression.
nevertheless they did not succeed in saving the thriving economy of the last 2 decades.
the extent of the financial crisis of 2008 came as a surprise even to treasury secretary paulson who had warned that a crisis was coming since becoming the top federal financial official in july 2006 and to timothy geithner then the head of the new york federal reserve bank.
the size and complexity of the crisis that hit the country in 2008 was much more severe than they would have predicted.
ihe economy had been growing rapidly since the early 1990s.
interest rates had remained low in part because of policies at the federal reserve bank in part because of the clinton era efforts to cut the size of the federal deficit and in part because bankers and governments in asia especially china were willing to make low interest loans to americans and european borrowers particularly to finance their purchases of asian goods.
during the 1990s and later because of policies fostered by the clinton and bush administrations bankers got much more freedom from federal regulations than had been the case in any period since the depression.
in 1999 with bipartisan support congress passed the gramm leach bliley act that repealed a section of the 1933 glass steagall act.
glass steagall which was passed at the height of the great depression created the federal deposit insurance corporation fdic to provide federal insurance for bank accounts but also required that insured banks not use their money to speculate that is to make risky investments.
for decades insured banks provided mortgages to families that wanted to buy a home usually up to 80 percent of the price of a house so people could pay off their homes over a 20 to 30 year time span.
banks were cautious in making loans insisting on detailed documentation of a familys ability to pay back the loan.
most of the time a bank that issued a mortgage continued to hold it until the loan was paid off.
investment banks like lehman brothers and goldman sachs were free to speculate on the stock market or in other investments but they were not federally insured they were risking their own money not that of the taxpayers.
what had been a hard and fast divide between investment and commercial banks in 1933 had been slowly eroding and after 1999 had became a very porous wall.
two further developments changed the way banks operated and mortgages were issued in the united states.
president george w bush talked of an ownership society in which americans would be invested in their communities because they owned their own homes.
liberal democrats like massachusetts representative barney frank insisted that mortgages be available to allow poorer people to own their own homes.
30 2 30 3 30 4 financial crisis of 2008 a significant economic downturn that began with the housing mortgage market and ultimately led to high unemployment.
chapter 30 entering a new time 883 inflated housing prices and problems with home mortgages helped cause the financial crisis of 2008.
as a result many people were evicted or forced to sell homes they could no longer afford which produced a glut on the housing market and a significant drop in home prices and values.
at the same time banks found new ways to handle and profit from home mortgages.
rather than issue a mortgage and then hold it banks divided mortgages into small shares sliced and diced them as some said and then sold the mortgage shares at a profit to many different banks and investors.
as a result banks could invest in pieces of many different mortgages in ways that seemed to lower the risk of individual mortgage defaulting since investors held portions of many mortgages rather than the whole amount of a few.
with interest rates low and mortgages easier than ever to sell to other banks mortgage lenders also began issuing mortgages to people who never before would have been eligible.
they issued mortgages with no down payment and no required documentation of income or ability to pay in what became known as the subprime mortgage market and then sold these mortgages at a profit.
the institution that had issued the mortgage was not at risk if the person who took out the mortgage later defaulted because that institution had long since sold the mortgage probably in pieces to several different investors.
with such easy funding available sellers found they could ask higher prices for homes and housing prices climbed at an extraordinary rate.
between 2001 and 2006 housing prices kept rising interest rates stayed low and bankers made a lot of money.
the investment bank goldman sachs generated an average income of 661 000 per employee in 2007.
goldmans chief lloyd blankfein earned 54 million that year.
mortgages were no longer merely for primary residences but for investment.
people bought houses as investments and then sold them for higher amounts known as flipping which enabled them to buy more expensive houses with the profits or simply pocket the money.
everyone seemed to be making money and many argued that only fools were left out of the process.
the situation was a classic bubble very much like every other bubble from the tulip bubble of the 1600s in holland to the stock market bubble of 1929 to the bubble of the 1990s.
in 2006 the housing bubble reached its peak.
housing prices stopped rising.
people who had bought houses they could not afford and had planned to flip them could not sell them.
people who had bought homes with flexible interest rates thinking that they would refinance for a lower rate later could not find a new mortgage.
more people started defaulting on loans.
as defaults grew banks who held the mortgages started to get into trouble.
even if mortgages had been sliced and diced banks that owned slices of mortgages that were in default were now themselves in trouble.
initially most people thought the crisis would be limited to a few mortgage lenders who had taken too many risks.
they were wrong.
before long it became clear that large and supposedly stable investment banks like lehman and goldman sachs which held portions of many sliced loans were in a lot of trouble.
bankers who had taken risks throughout their careers confident that there was always a way out could not find a way out of the crisis.
over the weekend of september 13 14 2008 while treasury secretary paulson was trying to maintain confidence he privately called his wife to share his worries.
what if the system collapses he asked.
in the end the nations financial system did not collapse.
but it did not resume the financial health that had characterized most of the 1990s and early 2000s.
at the end of september secretary paulson and congressional leaders put together troubled asset relief program tarp legislation that would stop the continuing financial collapse.
when tarp was put to a vote in the house of representatives in spite of the support of leaders of both parties the bailout was rejected by a 228 to 205 vote by members of both parties who did not think it was the governments business to use taxpayer money to bail out investors who had taken too many risks with their own funds.
immediately after the vote the dow jones industrial average lost another 777 points the biggest 1 day drop ever.
another report 884 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present indicated that 159 000 jobs had been lost in september.
the crisis was spreading far beyond the banks.
as credit and confidence dried up people saw jobs savings and pensions disappear.
the american economy seemed to be teetering badly.
finally on friday october 3 under pressure from president bush and from both major presidential candidates congress passed the tarp legislation.
the law created a 700 billion fund to buy the worst of the troubled assets from the banks and stabilize the system.
we have shown the world that the united states will stabilize our financial markets and maintain a leading role in the global economy bush said.
in may 2009 congress created a financial crisis inquiry commission to study the crisis.
the commission held a number of hearings.
at one of them in june 2010 the financier warren buffett was asked who was to blame.
i ts a little bit like cinderella at the ball buffett said.
people may have some feeling that at midnight it s going to turn to pumpkin and mice but its so darn much fun theres no villain.
others thought there was some specific blame to be assigned.
people blamed lehman brothers and other banks.
they blamed the auditing companies that should have looked more closely at the account books of the banks.
they blamed the repeal of glass steagall.
and many saw the crisis as one more in the sad long line of investment bubbles that when they burst hurt not only those caught up in the speculation but the economy of the whole nation and indeed of the world.
certainly the crisis could have been worse and the work of the treasury secretary and the tarp legislation may have kept the country from another great depression.
however as congressman barney frank said of paulsons efforts you dont get any credit for disaster averted after 2008 unemployment rates stayed stubbornly high.
in 2009 and 2010 the united states had an official unemployment rate of 10 percent and if one counted discouraged and part time workers it was closer to 16 percent.
those who lost their jobs were out of work for increasingly longer periods of time.
high unemployment creates its own negative cycle.
for the unemployed it is devastating.
when unemployed people do not buy cars computers and refrigerators the whole economy slows down.
as the nation entered the 2012 election cycle economic movement was very slow.
the crisis of 2008 also brought other economic problems to light.
firms like lehman brothers had been painting a rosier picture of their finances than the situation warranted and others were engaged in much more corrupt practices.
three months after the collapse of lehman brothers a new york financier bernard madoff was arrested and charged with securities fraud.
madoff s investment securities company was in reality a giant ponzi scheme see chapter 21 for information on the first such scheme by charles ponzi.
madoff delivered grand returns on investments made with his company but it turned out that madoff simply used the funds that were invested with his company to pay out high returns on older funds.
he did not invest or even save them.
as long as more money kept coming in madoff was able to keep up the illusion of amazing success and investors were happy.
when the nation s finances seized up in the fall of 2008 madoff was not able to keep the investments coming in and without them the payments could not keep going out and the whole house of cards collapsed.
madoff was sentenced to 150 years in prison investors lost between 10 and 17 billion.
in may 2011 another highly regarded investor raj rajaratnam head of galleon a multibillion dollar hedge fund or speculative investment group was convicted of 14 counts of securities fraud for bribing corporate employees to provide information that allowed galleon to guess future stock values and make a fortune.
by 2011 business leaders and especially investors were not highly regarded by a large segment of the american public.
business leaders were not the only ones held in low esteem however.
government officials both democrats and republicans were distrusted.
why people asked did the government bailout banks and the auto industry.
why was so much taxpayer money needed to stabilize investment banks when bankers were still getting huge bonuses but unemployment stayed stubbornly high.
were the high officials in the 30 1 302 30 3 304 chapter 30 entering a new time 885 treasury department really on the side of the average american.
some wondered when the real recovery would begin.
some wondered whether the united states was at the beginning of a permanent decline while other nations especially perhaps china might replace it as the worlds leading financial powerhouse.
38 3 quick review how did policies legislation and events from the 1990s onward lead to the financial crisis of 2008.
new liberals new conservatives 30 4 analyze the most recent political developments in the united states.
barack obama was elected as a u s.
senator from illinois just as george w bush won a second term in 2004.
from the day he entered the senate obama was better known than most newcomers.
his upset win in a 7 way illinois democratic primary and his keynote speech calling for a new politics of hope at the 2004 convention that nominated john kerry followed by his continuing telegenic appearance his life story and his ability to rally people all led many to notice him.
nevertheless he was a senate freshman and when the majority leader harry reid called him in for a meeting obama was surprised.
as he headed toward the meeting obama told robert gibbs his scheduler i wonder what we screwed up but reid stunned the young senator.
as obama recounted the meeting to gibbs he said harry wants me to run for president he really wants me to run for president reid had certainly noticed obamas discomfort with the senates slow pace but more important he had noticed the way obama could connect with voters.
reid also had another reason to look carefully at obama.
the obvious front runner for the democratic nomination was hillary clinton first lady from 1993 to 2001 and since 2001 the u s.
senator from new york.
in the senate clinton had established a solid track record.
reid liked her.
obama liked her.
but a lot of americans did not like her.
since her days as first lady and leader of president bill clintons health care task force hillary clinton had been a lightning rod for opposition to expanded government policies and for some for opposition to the role of women in politics.
a lot of voters hated her.
like many democrats including reid she had voted to authorize the war in iraq and by 2006 it was becoming clear that with the war going badly such a vote was a terrible burden among liberal democrats.
finally for reid and many of the democratic partys senior leaders the worst nightmare was the nomination of hilary clinton followed by some new revelation about her husbands behavior like the monica lewinsky scandal that would end up bringing another republican to the white house.
they were desperate for another candidate and in obama they thought they had found one.
the unprecedented election of 2008 in modern american politics being anointed by the partys leaders is a far cry from being nominated.
running for high office required obama and the other candidates to slog through months of primary elections including the iowa caucuses and the new hampshire primary in january until the midsummer nominating convention.
all along the way voters are more than happy to overrule the party elite.
obama needed to decide whether he was going to run for president or not.
david plouffe one of obamas inner circle of campaign leaders warned him that he could stay in the senate and enjoy weekends and vacations with his family or he could run for president have every aspect of his life pried into travel constantly and lead a lonely miserable life.
there was no middle ground.
obama needed time to talk it over with his wife michelle.
in the end they were both in.
most people still considered it a long shot but slowly the long shot turned into reality.
886 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present in one of the first steps toward seeking the 2008 democratic presidential nomination then senator obama visited netscape founder marc andreessen see chapter 29 and told him that he wanted to run the most sophisticated digital campaign on record.
andreessen was impressed that the senator was personally interested in the rise of social networking facebook youtube and user generated content several veterans of the dean campaign also signed on to help the new campaign and with the help of the internet obama was able to raise twice the funds of his main rival hillary clinton and go on to win the nomination in spite of a long and bruising race between obama and clinton that remained close through the end of the primary season.
only in june was it clear that obama had won the nomination.
it had been a historic contest.
hillary clinton was the first woman to come so close to the presidential nomination and barack obama was the first african american to win.
perhaps some thought the nation was past the point where either gender or race mattered as they had in the past.
others insisted that gender and race were still very powerful forces but in clinton and obama the country had two extraordinary candidates who transcended the odds to accomplish what they did.
the battle for the republican nomination was almost as hard fought in 2008.
president bush could not run for a third term and his popularity had sunk as a result of the war and financial crisis.
arizona senator john mccain was the front runner throughout the campaign.
although he had almost defeated bush for the nomination in 2000 and was a war hero having been a prisoner of war in vietnam mccain also had a hair trigger temper and had divorced after having an affair and then remarried.
the 2006 midterm republican losses probably strengthened mccains chances.
mccains reputation as a moderate and an independent meant that he would not be tarred with all of bushs troubles.
in spite of several primary challengers mccain won key republican primaries and by march it was clear he would be the republican nominee for president.
the only remaining question was who he would select to be his running mate.
john mccain knew that his selection of a vice presidential candidate was especially important.
obama led in fund raising and public opinion polls.
mccain needed a game changing move.
mccain wanted connecticuts democratic senator joe lieberman.
lieberman was a staunch democrat and had served as al gores running mate in 2000 but he had broken with the majority of his own party on the war in iraq which he supported and he was already campaigning for mccain.
his selection would reinforce mccains credentials as an independent.
but in the end other republicans convinced mccain that proposing a democrat who more important was prochoice on the issue of abortion would split the party.
mccain rejected his friend lieberman and selected the 44 year old governor of alaska sarah palin.
she was popular in alaska and had all the credentials needed as a conservative republican.
palin became a campaign sensation but her lack of familiarity with national politics and her feuding with the mccain campaign staff probably hurt as much as it helped.
when obama asked delaware senator joseph biden to be his running mate the contrast between someone with decades of national experience and alaska s 20 month governor could not have been greater even if obama also had only served in the senate for that amount of time.
ihe september financial crisis played to obamas strengths.
mccain always said that economic issues were not his strong point and when after the lehman bankruptcy he said the fundamentals of our economy are strong the same words herbert hoover had used at the height of the great depression his advisors started to panic.
in contrast obama had a comprehensive economic plan and in the days after lehmans collapse he spent his time learning from people like bushs treasury secretary paulson and federal reserve chair ben bernanke both of whom came to respect him.
at the same time the economy and the war in iraq continued to hamper the republicans.
on election day obama defeated mccain by 53 percent to 46 percent of the vote carrying 365 electoral votes to mccains 173 votes.
ihe natron winch 30 1 30 2 303 30 4 chapter 30 entering a new time 887 health care reform the top priority of the obama administration to provide universal health care for all americans.
had fought a civil war and witnessed a long civil rights movement over issues of race had just elected its first african american president.
it was an historic moment.
now people were about to see what sort of change barack obama had been talking about.
in november 2008 barack obama was elected president of the united states a time of celebration for many.
obama s agenda stimulus and a health plan president elect obama asked his former opponent hillary clinton to serve as his secretary of state.
she was reluctant to leave the independence of the senate but obama pressed and clinton took the job.
obama told clinton ihe economy is a much bigger mess than imagined and he needed a very strong secretary of state to run foreign policy.
he knew that while the bailout of the banks had been a first step much more needed to be done.
nevertheless economic experts political leaders and average voters all disagreed sharply about what should be done.
obama was famous for his use of a blackberry and an iphone during his senate career and his presidential campaign.
bemoaning the need to give up his iphone for security reasons once elected president obama continued to use a blackberry as well as his personal twitter account his macbook pro and an ipad2.
the world of high technology arrived in the white house in january 2009.
immediately on taking office in january 2009 obama proposed the american recovery and reinvestment act and it passed within weeks.
the act pumped money into the economy providing funds for road improvements railroads and unemployment benefits.
the recovery and reinvestment act was standard economics an effort to prime the pump and get the economy moving by spending funds so employment would rise private spending would pick up and the government could step back.
unfortunately for obama the emergency spending piled further debts on top of those already in place and many began to worry about the cost.
while the administration struggled with the economy obama also moved quickly to implement what he hoped would be his signature initiative health care for all americans.
from harry truman on every democratic administration sought to implement health care reform but every effort had failed.
obama wanted to be the democrat who accomplished what others had failed.
after a long and bitter fight he was able to sign the patient protection and affordable care act on march 23 2010.
unlike the stimulus legislation however health care was a long fight filled with compromises.
it dominated the congress that came to office with obama.
from the beginning the republican minority was dedicated to defeating the measure.
the senate rule that a filibuster could stop all legislation unless 60 senators voted to close debate provided effective leverage for republicans and democrats.
the senate included only 60 democrats so every one of them could demand special consideration and exemptions and many did before the final vote.
the result was that the historic health care legislation passed only after a political process that discouraged almost everyone.
the new law required every american to have health insurance prohibited insurance companies from excluding anyone including those with preexisting conditions provided government subsidies for those who have trouble buying insurance and penalized employers not offering health insurance.
a number of state attorneys general challenged the legislation in court but in the spring of 2012 the u s supreme court in a split decision upheld the law.
surprising its supporters the law ended up being a political liability for a democratic president and his party in the midterm elections of 2010 and the presidential election of 2012.
888 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present the rise of the tea party occupy wall street and divided government in part because of anger at the health care legislation in part because of fears about the growing national debt and in part because of a long standing bias among americans against big government the huge plurality with which obama came to office started to evaporate rapidly.
on january 19 2010 just a year after obamas inauguration the growing voter anger became apparent to the nation particularly after one of the icons of american liberalism massachusetts senator edward m kennedy died of a brain tumor in august 2009.
kennedy had served in the u s senate since 1962 the fourth longest senate career in u s history.
a special election was called to fill kennedys unexpired term and almost everyone assumed that whoever received the democratic nomination would get the job.
but a little known republican state senator scott brown campaigned hard telling people it s not kennedy s seat its the peoples seat and promising to be the crucial 40th vote to sustain a filibuster in the senate against the health care legislation.
brown won easily telling his cheering supporters on election night what ive heard again and again on the campaign trail is that our political leaders have grown aloof from the people impatient with dissent and comfortable in the back room making deals although brown was not able to stop the passage of the health care law his election was a sign that something was shifting in american politics.
it was not the first such sign.
only weeks after obamas inauguration protests were springing up in many different places.
in seattle a 29 year old woman keli carender organized a small protest rally about the spending whether it was bushs tarp or obamas stimulus.
carender told a small crowd that i started thinking what are we getting ourselves into.
it didnt make sense to me to be spending all this money when we dont have it then a little while later on february 19 2009 a financial news commentator rick santelli said that obamas stimulus efforts were promoting bad behavior if they bailed out the losers who had taken out larger mortgages than they could afford.
santelli said were thinking of having a chicago tea party in july and the name took hold.
in september 2010 between 70 000 and 90 000 demonstrators converged on the mall in washington dc to protest the health care legislation and government spending.
some wore tricolor hats to symbolize their link to the original boston tea party.
some carried signs that said thank you glenn beck referring to the conservative television commentator who railed against the obama administration.
some alluding to fears that the health care legislation would limit treatments carried signs that said pull the plug on obama not grandma the national tea party coalition tried to coordinate efforts.
the republican vice presidential nominee from 2008 sarah palin adopted the tea party platform and spoke at its rallies.
nevertheless the movement was distrustful of self proclaimed leaders.
different groups in different places did as they pleased.
tea party candidates challenged republicans in primary elections all through 2009 and 2010 and sometimes defeated long standing republican moderates.
in november 2010 with solid tea party support republicans took control of the house of representatives and made gains in the senate.
but the tea party candidates were of a different sort than the older republicans not only more conservative but also far less willing to compromise.
the tea party was fueled by fear about the debt uncertainty about the economy and anger at big institutions most of all the federal government but also corporations and universities.
many in the tea party argued that the federal government should do no more than what was specifically authorized in the constitution and almost all of its members were generally distrustful of government programs especially those coming from the federal government and those designed to help the poor or minority groups.
it quickly became clear that the tea party was not going away even though its membership might be filled with internal contradictions.
tea party members disliked government but wanted their social security checks to arrive on time they hated the new health care but loved their medicare cards.
when the outgoing congress repealed tea party a protest group whose members sometimes modeled themselves on the tea party of the american revolution and objected to the rising federal debt obamacare and most government regulation.
chapter 30 entering a new time 889 level of student debt the lack of job opportunities and the fact that the economy seemed stacked in favor of the rich.
the dont ask dont tell ban on gay and lesbian personnel serving in the military in late 2010 the tea party was divided about its response neither the tea party nor the republicans made it a major issue.
still the tea party with its focus on economic issues and anger at big government was a powerful group.
in the summer of 2011 the new tea party fueled republican majority in the house of representatives brought the country to the brink of financial default as they refused until the last minute to raise the nations borrowing capacity.
standard poors one of the nations leading auditing agencies lowered the u s credit rating for the first time in history because of the governments seeming inability to deal with the federal debt.
as if in response to the tea party a new movement of students and other young people also emerged to protest conditions in the country.
while the tea party took a conservative stance on economic issues occupy wall street was closer to the left on most issues.
in september 2011 a group of young people held a rally near wall street in lower manhattan and then moved into nearby zuccotti park where they set up tents a library a communications center and a kitchen and planned to stay.
a canadian publication adbusters had been calling for just such a move and by late september it was a reality.
the rallying cry of occupy wall street was we are the 99 to differentiate themselves from the richest 1 percent including the bankers who surrounded them in lower manhattan.
although those gathering in protest consistently refused to issue a manifesto or platform occupy was an angry response to the financial crisis and the growing gap between rich and poor in the country.
they condemned the huge level of college debt that many young people were carrying and the difficulties for a new generation in getting jobs.
before long occupy movements were springing up all around the country occupy los angeles occupy oakland occupy denver occupy boston and occupy rochester.
in november some 3 months after the encampment at zuccotti park began new york police on orders from the mayor cleared the park.
mayors and police departments in other cities had generally acted sooner.
nevertheless the occupy movement was far from over.
through the winter and the following year occupy held rallies meetings and planning sessions.
neither occupy nor the tea party was going to go away and both would be forces to deal with.
governing a nation so deeply divided was going to be difficult.
the terms of the 2012 election were set.
the tea party movement named itself after those who had dumped tea in boston harbor in 1773 rather than pay a tax on it.
many in the modern movement shared the anti tax anti government sentiments of the earlier tea party while some dressed the part.
890 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present ill 30j thinking historically same sex marriage 302 on june 26 2013 in a 5 4 opinion in the case of united states v windsor the united states supreme court declared a significant part of the defense of marriage act unconstitutional.
writing for the majority justice anthony kennedy said doma s principal effect is to identify a subset of state sanctioned marriages and make them unequal by this dynamic doma undermines both the public and private significance of state sanctioned same sex marriages for it tells those couples and all the world that their otherwise valid marriages are unworthy of federal recognition.
this places same sex couples in an unstable position of being in a second tier marriage.
the decision was not without debate.
four justices opposed the majority.
writing for the minority justice antonin scalia said that the court should never have taken on the case and further that the decision would lead inevitably to the supreme court s declaring all state laws against gay marriage to be invalid.
nevertheless the majority opinion became the law of the land and as a result same sex couples married in the 13 states the district of columbia and under the five native american tribal governments that approved same sex marriage were provided all the benefits including tax advantages pension and visitation rights that all other married couples had.
it was a major change and one that came very quickly.
when the congress passed and president bill clinton signed the defense of marriage act in september 1996 no state recognized same sex marriage.
before the 1996 legislation congress had left decisions about what constituted a legitimate marriage to the states.
but fearing the potential of same sex marriage the republican congress passed the defense of marriage act and the democratic president signed it.
as a result federal law said that no matter what a state did in the eyes of the federal government for federal income tax for federal pensions for benefits for spouses of government employees and armed forces personnel and many related matters a state sanctioned same sex marriage was invalid.
nevertheless as some feared and others hoped states started to act on their own.
in 2003 the massachusetts supreme judicial court declared that state laws prohibiting same sex marriage were invalid in that state and gay and lesbian couples began getting married there.
state courts in other states including california connecticut and iowa issued similar rulings.
then in 2009 the vermont legislature sanctioned same sex marriage new york followed in 2011 and in 2012 washington maine and maryland passed similar laws.
activists phyllis lyon and del martin became the first same sex couple to be married in san francisco on february 12 2004.
in june 2013 the united states supreme court said that same sex couples could not be denied federal marriage benefits.
same sex marriages illegal in every part of the united states in the 1990s were recognized in 2013 by states comprising 30 percent of the american population and by the federal government.
opinion polls indicated that the majority of the american people agreed with the new policies.
it was a rapid and dramatic change in american culture.
thinking critically 1.
comparison how would you compare the political mood in the united states when the defense of marriage act was passed in 1996 and when it was declared unconstitutional in 2013.
contextualization what other developments in american culture and political debate might help explain decisions like those of the massachusetts supreme court the vermont legislature or in 2013 the u s supreme court.
how much does context impact such decisions.
mil chapter 30 entering a new time 891 united states v windsor a june 2013 supreme court decision that declared americans in same sex marriages had the same federal rights as all other married citizens.
the election of 2012 as president obama and the democrats looked to the 2012 election they did so with considerable optimism.
the worst of the financial crisis was past and the wars in iraq and afghanistan were at least winding down.
at the same time the president and his party were aware of some significant liabilities.
the economy remained far from robust the health care law which some called obamacare remained unpopular especially among people who resented all forms of government intrusion in their lives.
many of those who had voted for the first time in 2008 to support obama were disillusioned with the slow pace of change and might well not bother to vote in 2012.
it was going to be a close contest.
the battle for the republican nomination was a long one.
in the early stages many wondered whether 2008 vice presidential nominee and tea party darling sarah palin would enter the race but she never did.
once the contest for the republican nomination got under way former massachusetts governor mitt romney who had been a serious contender for the 2008 nomination was always a front runner.
but many in the republican party thought romney was too liberal and a number of other candidates including former minnesota governor tim pawlenty former speaker newt gingrich businessman herman cann and representative michele bachmann gave romney a strong challenge.
in the end romney won the nomination and asked congressman paul ryan who had earned his conservative credentials with a series of tax cutting proposals to be his running mate.
in the fall election obama was generally considered to be the front runner but many thought the race was too close to call.
in the first presidential debate obama performed poorly seeming disinterested and romney surged.
in the later debates however obama came on strong.
one of romneys great strengths his years of business experience came to hurt him as democrats exploited the numbers of layoffs that had taken place in romney owned companies.
late in the campaign a polls open obama leading n romney leading polls closed obama won romney won i i llj i ivimr au z i ne ciecuon or zui z nap captures tne extent of obama s presidential election triumph and underscores the realignments of republican red states and democratic blue states.
892 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present private conversation in which romney had told a group of supporters that 47 percent of the electorate would never support him because they were dependent on the government angered many.
on election day obama won by a solid 51 percent to 47 percent majority and carried 332 electoral votes to romneys 206 see map 30 2.
the congress however remained divided with democrats having a majority in the senate and republicans in the house.
at his second inauguration in january 2013 on what was martin luther king jr s birthday president obama laid out the themes that he said would be most important in his second term.
appealing to some important moments in american history he said we the people declare today that the most evident of truths that all of us are created equal is the star that guides us still just as it guided our forebears through seneca falls and selma and stonewall and then appealing to kings memory he added our individual freedom is inextricably bound to the freedom of every soul on earth and he continued it is now our generations task to carry on what those pioneers began.
for our journey is not complete until our wives our mothers and daughters can earn a living equal to their efforts.
our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law for if we are truly created equal then surely the love we commit to one another must be equal as well.
our journey is not complete until no citizen is forced to wait for hours to exercise the right to vote.
our journey is not complete until we find a better way to welcome the striving hopeful immigrants who still see america as a land of opportunity until bright young students and engineers are enlisted in our workforce rather than expelled from our country.
our journey is not complete until all our children from the streets of detroit to the hills of appalachia to the quiet lanes of newtown know that they are cared for and cherished and always safe from harm.
his address was not a set of policy recommendations but rather a way of carving out a vision.
30 1 303 303 30 4 began his second term the united states was more diverse than ever with some king optimistically toward the future and others looking nostalgically toward the past.
chapter 30 entering a new time 893 former speaker newt gingrich who had contested the republican nomination said of obamas speech that he approved of 80 percent of president barack obama s inaugural address however the rest gingrich said was goofy left wingism deciding where any consensus might be found would be more difficult than gingrichs response might imply.
soon after the inauguration obama said he would use executive authority to institute action on climate change and quickly issued tough new limitations on emissions.
the president had promised as much in his inaugural address which had led gingrich to say the whole section about climate change is nonsense ihe divides on that issue as on so many issues that had split the congress and the country during obamas first term seem destined to continue for the foreseeable future.
many spoke of their desire for greater national unity and good will but it remained an illusive goal.
quick review how have domestic issues contributed to divisions in the government and the country since 2008.
conclusion george w bush in the first year of his presidency achieved two major domestic policy goals education reform and tax reform.
but september 11 2001 permanently shifted the focus of the bush administration from domestic problems to international terrorism.
henceforth the war on terror would dominate his presidency and remain a key issue for his successor in office barack obama.
in the days after the september 11 attacks it became clear that al qaeda and its leader osama bin laden were responsible.
the bush administration immediately developed a strategy to punish not only the direct perpetrators but also those who harbored them.
when it was determined that the taliban government of afghanistan was protecting bin laden and al qaeda u s ground forces invaded the country and quickly overthrew the taliban regime.
although the united states had forced a change in government in afghanistan and had killed or captured many al qaeda operatives both bin laden and his chief lieutenant had escaped into pakistan.
it took another 10 years to find bin laden but taliban insurgents continued to engage the u s military and destabilize afghanistan and other parts of the world.
while the united states waged war in afghanistan the bush administration turned its attention to iraq.
despite the fact that neither the cia nor the un nations found compelling evidence that iraq was connected to the september 11 attacks many in the administration favored u s military intervention.
ultimately the united states and great britain obtained un and congressional approval for an invasion based on alleged iraqi possession of weapons of mass destruction.
major combat operations in iraq ended quickly but the united states was ill prepared to serve as an occupying force.
u s troops lacked clearly defined military objectives and iraq quickly descended into civil war.
by 2004 public opinion was turning against the war.
u s casualties were high iraq was in chaos and no weapons of mass destruction had been found.
still the u s mission in iraq continued until december 2011.
894 part ix certainty uncertainty and new beginnings 1980 to the present from 2005 until 2008 domestic problems also plagued the bush administration.
in 2005 the federal response to hurricane katrina was wholly inadequate and the u s economy was in 2008 in a deep recession.
the 2008 presidential election took place against this backdrop and culminated in the election of the nations first african american president barack obama.
obama moved quickly to address the financial crisis but while the economy was stabilized unemployment remained high.
the obama administrations highest priority was to get congress to approve a federal health insurance system which was signed into law in 2010.
in the midst of a very slow recovery in which ordinary americans suffered greatly new protests including the tea party and the occupy movements emerged to express voter dissatisfaction with continual war and with the economic meltdown.
by the time of the 2012 presidential election the nation was more divided than it had been in decades.
nevertheless many liberal americans celebrated when obama won a second term in november 2012 and when in june 2013 the u s supreme court declared portions of the federal defense of marriage act to be unconstitutional giving people in a same sex marriage the same federal rights as other married people.
still the nation entered obamas second term deeply divided on social and economic issues and lasting resolutions seemed hard to find.
chapter e how did the election of 2012 encompass issues that plagued the united states since 2000.
chapter 30 entering a new time 895.
