chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 wa mt or id nv ca nd wy sd co wi ia ne ut az mn ks ok nm il la tx mi in mo oh ky ms al wv va nc tn ar me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 12 ri pa nj ct 4 15 8 ga sc de md dc fl ak hi candidate party electoral vote popular vote clinton democrat 68 8 44 908 233 43 0 bush republican 31 2 39 102 282 37 4 0 0 19 741 048 18 9 perot independent map 41 1 presidential election of 1992 with electoral vote by state interactive map opportunity in 1993 to nominate ruth bader ginsburg to the supreme court where she joined sandra day oconnor to make a pair of women justices.
a false start for reform badly overestimating his electoral mandate for liberal reform the young president made a series of costly blunders upon entering the white house.
in one of his rst initiatives on taking ofce he stirred a hornets nest of controversy by advocating an end to the ban on gays and lesbians in the armed ser vices.
confronted with erce opposition the president nally had to settle for a dont ask dont tell policy that quietly accepted gay and lesbian soldiers and sailors without ofcially acknowledging their presence in the military.
even more damaging to clintons political standing and to his hopes for lasting liberal achievement was the asco of his attempt to reform the nations health care system.
in a dramatic but personally and politically risky move the president appointed his wife nationally prominent lawyer and childrens advocate hillary rodham clinton as the director of a task force charged with redesigning the medical ser vice in dustry.
their stupefyingly complicated plan was dead on arrival when it was presented to congress in october 1993.
the first lady was doused with a torrent of abuse although she eventually rehabilitated herself sufciently to win election as a u s senator from new york in 2000 the rst first lady ever to hold elective ofce.
her bid to win the democratic nomination for president in 2008 proved equally as historic if less successful.
clinton had better luck with a decitreduction bill in 1993 which combined with an increasingly buoyant economy by 1996 to shrink the federal decit to its lowest level in more than a decade.
by 1998 clintons policies seemed to have caged the ravenous decit monster as congress argued over the unfamiliar question of how to manage federal budget surpluses.
the new president also induced congress in 1993 to pass a gun control law the brady bill named for presidential aide james brady who had been wounded and disabled by gun re in the assassination attempt on president ronald reagan in 1981.
in july 1994 clinton made further progress against the national plague of rearms when he persuaded congress to pass a 30 billion anticrime bill which contained a ban on several types of assault weapons that continued until the law expired in 2004.
with these mea sures the government struggled to hold the line against an epidemic of violence that rocked american society in the 1990s.
a huge explosion destroyed a federal ofce building in oklahoma city in 1995 taking 168 lives in retribution for a 1993 standoff in waco texas between federal agents and a fundamentalist sect known as the branch davidians.
that showdown had ended in the destruction of the sects compound and the deaths of many branch davidians including women and children.
events like the oklahoma city bombing brought to light a lurid and secretive underground of paramilitary private militias composed of alienated citizens armed to the teeth and ultrasuspicious of all government.
even many law abiding citizens shared to some degree in the antigovernment attitudes that drove the militia members to murderous extremes.
thanks largely to the disillusioning agony of the vietnam war and the naked cynicism of richard nixon in the watergate scandal the condence in government that had come naturally to the generation that had licked the great depression and won the second world war was in short supply by centurys end.
reecting that pervasive disenchantment with politics and politicians violence in america bombing of federal building in oklahoma city 1995 a truck bomb killed 168 people in this federal ofce building in the worst act of terrorism in the united states until september 11 2001.
convicted on eleven counts for the attack antigovernment militant timothy mcveigh became the rst person executed by the federal government in nearly forty years in 2001 several states passed term limit laws for elected ofcials although the supreme court ruled in 1995 that the restrictions did not apply to federal ofceholders.
before the decade was out the logic of clintons emphasis on gun control was tragically con rmed.
on an april morning in 1999 two students at columbine high school in littleton colorado killed twelve fellow students and a teacher.
debate ared over the origins of school violence.
some observers targeted the violence portrayed in movies tv shows and video games others pointed to the failings of parents.
but the culprit that attracted the most sustained political attention was guns their abundance and accessibility especially in suburban and rural communities.
clinton engaged in a pugnacious debate with the progun national rie association over the need to toughen gun laws and lmmaker michael moore agi tated for gun control in his popular 2002 documentary bowling for columbine.
the million mom march in washington d c in may 2002 and the tragic killing of thirty two people by a disturbed student at virginia tech in 2007 further drove calls for new antigun mea sures but reform was slow in coming.
the politics of distrust clintons failed initiatives and widespread antigovernment sentiment afforded republicans a golden opportunity in 1994 and they seized it aggressively.
led by outspoken georgia representative newt gingrich republicans offered voters a contract with america that promised an all out assault on budget decits and radical reductions in welfare programs.
their campaign chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 succeeded fabulously as a right wing tornado roared across the land in the 1994 congressional elections.
every incumbent republican gubernatorial senatorial and congressional candidate was reelected.
republicans also picked up eleven new governorships eight seats in the senate and fty three seats in the house where gingrich became speaker giving them control of both chambers of the federal congress for the rst time in forty years.
but if president clinton had overplayed his mandate for liberal reform in 1993 the congressional republicans now proceeded to overplay their mandate for conser vative retrenchment.
in 1996 the new congress achieved a major conser vative victory when it compelled a reluctant clinton to sign the welfare reform bill which made deep cuts in welfare grants and required able bodied welfare recipients to nd employment.
the new welfare law also tightly restricted welfare benets for legal and illegal immigrants alike reecting a rising tide of anti immigrant sentiment as the numbers of newcomers climbed toward an alltime high.
old line liberal democrats howled with pain at the presidents alleged betrayal of his partys heritage and some prominent administration members resigned in protest against his decision to sign the welfare bill.
but clintons acceptance of the welfare reform package was part of his shrewd political strategy of accommodating the electorates conser vative mood by moving to his right.
president clinton was at rst stunned by the magnitude of the republican congressional victory in 1994.
but many americans gradually came to feel that the gingrich republicans were bending their conser vative bow too far especially when the new speaker advocated provocative ideas like sending the children of welfare families to orphanages.
in a tense confrontation between the democratic president and the republican congress the federal government actually had to shut down for several days at the end of 1995 until a budget package was agreed upon.
these outlandishly partisan antics bred a backlash that helped president clinton rebound from his political neardeath experience.
as the 1996 election approached the republicans chose kansas senator robert dole as their presidential candidate.
a decorated world war ii veteran dole ran a listless campaign.
clinton buoyed by a healthy economy and by his artful trimming to the conser vative wind breezed to an easy victory with 47 401 898 popular votes to doles 39 198 482 see map 41 2.
the reform partys egomaniacal leader ross perot ran a sorry third picking up less than half the votes he had wa mt or id nv ca nd wy sd co wi ia ne ut az mn ks ok nm il la tx mi in mo oh ky ms al wv va nc tn ar me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 12 ri pa nj ct 4 15 8 ga sc de md dc fl ak hi candidate party electoral vote clinton democrat 70 4 47 401 054 49 2 dole republican 29 6 39 197 350 40 7 0 0 8 085 285 8 4 perot independent popular vote map 41 2 presidential election of 1996 with electoral vote by state the solid south once a safe democratic stronghold had by centurys end largely become republican territory.
interactive map garnered in 1992.
clinton won 379 electoral votes dole only 159.
but republicans remained in control of congress.
clinton again as clinton began his second term the rst democratic president since franklin delano roosevelt to be reelected the heady promises of far reaching reform with which he had entered the white house four years earlier were no longer heard.
still facing republican majorities in both houses of congress he proposed only modest legislative goals even though soaring tax revenues generated by the prosperous economy produced in 1998 a balanced federal budget for the rst time in three decades.
clinton cleverly managed to put republicans on the defensive by claiming the political middle ground.
he now warmly embraced the landmark welfare reform bill of 1996 that he had initially been slow to endorse.
juggling the political hot potato of af rmative action clinton pledged to mend it not end it when voters in cal i fornia in 1996 approved proposition 209 prohibiting af rmative action preferences in government and higher education the number of minority post cold war foreign policies protesting nafta 1993 these members of the teamsters union feared that the adoption of the north american free trade agreement would mean the replacement of high paying american jobs with low wage nonunion mexican labor.
more than a decade later the treaty still rankled.
policymakers disagreed about whether nafta had been damaging to american workers.
in the 2008 election the republicans endorsed it while the democrats attacked it.
students in the states public universities temporarily plummeted.
a federal appeals court decision hopwood v texas had a similar effect in texas.
clinton criticized these broad assaults on af rmative action but stopped short of trying to reverse them aware that public support for afrmative action especially among white americans had diminished since the 1970s.
clintons major political advantage continued to be the roaring economy which by 2000 had sustained the longest period of growth in american history driven by new internet dot com businesses and other high tech and media companies.
while unemployment crept down to 4 percent and businesses scrambled madly for workers inationary pressure remained remarkably low.
prosperity did not make clinton immune to controversy over trade policy.
during his rst term he had displayed political courage by supporting the north american free trade agreement nafta creating in 1993 a free trade zone encompassing mexico canada and the united states.
in doing so he reversed his own stand in the 1992 election campaign and bucked the opposition of protectionists in his own party especially labor leaders fearful of losing jobs to lowwage mexican workers.
clinton took another step in 1994 toward a global free trade system when he vigorously promoted the creation of the world trade organization wto the successor to the general agreement on tariffs and trade gatt and a cherished goal of free trade advocates since the end of the second world war.
simmering discontent over trade policy boiled over in 1999 when clinton hosted the meeting of the wto in seattle.
the citys streets lled with protesters railing against what they viewed as the human and environmental costs of economic globalization trade talks zzled in seattle with clinton taking a hefty share of the blame.
money spurred controversy of another sort in the late 1990s.
campaign nance reform long smoldering as a potential issue suddenly ared up after the 1996 presidential contest.
congressional investigators revealed that the clinton campaign had received funds from many improper sources including contributors who paid to stay overnight in the white house and foreigners who were legally prohibited from giving to american candidates.
but republicans and democrats alike had reason to avoid reform.
both parties had grown dependent on vast sums to nance television ads for their candidates.
clinton did little more than pay lip ser vice to the cause of campaign nance reform.
but within the ranks of both parties a few mavericks proposed to eliminate the corrupting inuence of big donors.
senator john mccain from arizona made campaign nance reform a centerpiece of his failed 2000 campaign for the republican presidential nomination and ultimately succeeded in passing the mccain feingold act of 2002 that more strictly regulated how money owed to candidates.
problems abroad the end of the cold war dismantled the framework within which the united states had conducted foreign policy for nearly half a century.
clinton groped for a diplomatic formula to replace anticommunism as the basic premise of american diplomacy.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 absorbed by domestic issues president clinton at rst seemed uncertain and even amateurish in his conduct of foreign policy.
he followed his predecessors lead in dispatching american troops as part of a peacekeeping mission to somalia and reinforced the u s contingent after somali rebels killed more than a dozen americans in late 1993.
but in march 1994 the president quietly withdrew the american units without having accomplished any clearly de ned goal.
burned in somalia washington stood on the sidelines in 1994 when catastrophic ethnic violence in the central african country of rwanda resulted in the deaths of half a million people.
clinton also struggled to de ne a policy with respect to china which was rapidly emerging as an economic and political powerhouse.
candidate clinton had denounced george bush in 1992 for not imposing economic sanctions on china as punishment for beijings wretched record of human rights abuses.
but president clinton learned what bush had long known chinas economic importance to the united states did not permit washington the luxury of taking the high road on human rights.
clinton soon soft pedaled his criticism of the beijing regime and instead began seeking improved trade relations with that robustly industrializing country and potential market bonanza.
by 2000 clinton was crusading for a controversial china trade bill.
congress passed it in may 2000 making the asian giant a full edged trading partner of the united states.
clintons approach to the tormented balkans in southeastern europe showed a similar initial hesitation followed eventually by rm leadership.
in the former yugoslavia as vicious ethnic con ict raged through bosnia the washington government dithered until nally deciding to commit american troops to a nato peacekeeping contingent in late 1995.
deadlines for removing the troops were postponed and then intifada against israeli control 1994 beginning in 1987 palestinians living in the israeli controlled territories of the west bank and gaza rose up in protest.
as the stalemate dragged on the likelihood of middle east peace receded despite repeated international diplomatic efforts to reach a settlement.
these young palestinians in east jerusalem wave palestine liberation organization plo ags outlawed by israel.
the impeachment of clinton nally abandoned altogether as it became clear that they were the only force capable of preventing new hostilities.
natos expansion to include the new member states of poland hungary and the czech republic in 1997 and its continuing presence in bosnia failed to pacify the balkans completely.
when serbian president slobodan milosevic in 1999 unleashed a new round of ethnic cleansing in the region this time against ethnic albanians in the province of kosovo u s led nato forces launched an air war against serbia.
the bombing campaign initially failed to stop ethnic terror as refugees ooded into neighboring countries but it eventually forced milosevic to accept a nato peacekeeping force on the ground in kosovo.
milosevic was arrested in 2001 and put on trial before the international criminal court in the hague where he died in 2006 before the trial was completed.
the middle east remained a major focus of american diplomacy right up to the end of clintons tenure.
in 1993 clinton presided over a historic meeting at the white house between israeli premier yitzhak rabin and palestine liberation organization plo leader yasir arafat.
they agreed in principle on selfrule for the palestinians within israel.
but hopes ickered two years later when rabin fell to an assassins bullet.
clinton and his second term secretary of state madeleine albright spent the rest of the 1990s struggling in vain to broker the permanent settlement that continued to elude israelis and palestinians.
arafat died in 2004 with his dream of creating a palestinian state still unrealized.
in his nal year as president clinton stepped up his efforts to leave a legacy as an international peacemaker.
along with his work in the middle east he sought to bring peace to northern ireland and the korean peninsula and he traveled to india and pakistan in hopes of reducing the rivalry between the two nuclear powers of southern asia.
but the guiding principles of american foreign policy in the post cold war era remained ill de ned and elusive scandal and impeachment scandal had dogged bill clinton from the beginning of his presidency.
critics brought charges of every thing from philandering to illegal nancial transactions.
allegations of corruption stemming from a real estate deal called whitewater while he was governor of arkansas triggered an investigation by a special prosecutor but no indictment ever materialized.
all the previous scandals were overshadowed by the revelation in january 1998 that clinton had engaged in a sexual affair with a young white house intern monica lewinsky and then blatantly lied about it when testifying under oath in another womans civil suit accusing him of sexual harassment.
caught in his bold lie the president made a humiliating confession but his political opponents smelled blood in the water.
in september 1998 the special prosecutor investigating whitewater who had broad powers to investigate any evidence of presidential malfeasance presented a stinging report including lurid sexual details to the republican controlled house of representatives.
that report presented eleven possible grounds for impeachment all related to lying about the lewinsky affair.
the house quickly cranked up the rusty machinery of impeachment.
as an acrid partisan at mosphere enveloped the capitol house republicans in december 1998 passed two articles of impeachment against the president perjury before a grand jury and obstruction of justice.
crying foul the democratic minority charged that however deplorable clintons personal misconduct sexual transgressions did not rise to the level of high crimes and misdemeanors prescribed in the constitution see art.
iv in the appendix.
the house republican managers prosecutors of impeachment for the senate trial replied that perjury and obstruction were grave public issues and that nothing less than the rule of law was at stake.
as cries of honor the constitution and sexual mccarthyism lled the air the nation debated whether the presidents peccadilloes amounted to high crimes or low follies.
most americans apparently leaned toward the latter view.
in the 1998 midterm elections voters reduced the house republicans majority causing ery house speaker newt gingrich to resign his post.
although americans held a low opinion of clintons slipshod personal morals most liked the presidents political and economic policies and wanted him to stay in ofce.
in early 1999 for the rst time in 130 years the nation witnessed an impeachment proceeding in the u s senate.
dusting off ancient precedents from andrew johnsons trial the one hundred senators solemnly heard arguments and evidence in the case with chief justice william rehnquist presiding.
with the facts widely known and the two parties political positions rmly locked in the trials outcome was a foregone conclusion.
on the key obstruction of justice charge ve northeastern republicans joined all fortyve democratic senators in voting not guilty.
the fty chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 the legacy of impeachment time magazines cartoonist asked how future generations would judge the clinton impeachment episode and how it might be treated in history textbooks.
republican votes for conviction fell far short of the constitutionally required two thirds majority.
the vote on the perjury charge was forty ve guilty fty ve not guilty.
clintons legacy and the 2000 election beyond the obvious stain of impeachment clintons legacy was mixed.
his sound economic policies encouraged growth and trade in a rapidly globalizing post cold war world.
yet as a new democrat and avowed centrist clinton did more to consolidate than to reverse the reagan bush revolution against new deal liberalism that had for half a century provided the compass for the democratic party and the nation.
further by setting such a low standard in his personal conduct he replenished the sad reservoir of public cynicism about politics that vietnam and watergate had created a generation before.
nonetheless as the end of the clinton term and the beginning of the new millennium approached the democrats stayed on their political course and nom the controversial election of 2000 counting chads with bush and gore neckand neck in floridas presidential vote count election ofcials in broward county examined by eye paper ballots disqualied by machine because the punched chads had not fully separated from the ballots.
they hoped that close scrutiny would reveal the voters intentions.
inated loyal vice president albert gore for president.
gore faced the tricky challenge of linking himself to clinton era peace and prosperity while at the same time distancing himself from his bosss personal foibles.
he chose as his running mate connecticut senator joseph lieberman an outspoken clinton critic and the rst jew nominated to a major national ticket.
their republican challenger george w bush won the nomination on the strength of his fathers name and his years as governor of texas.
bush surrounded himself with washington insiders including vice presidential nominee richard cheney and in a clear jab at clinton promised to restore dignity to the white house rosy estimates that the federal budget would produce a surplus of some 2 trillion in the coming decade set the stage for the presidential contest.
echoing the republican creed of smaller government bush argued for returning the budget surplus to the people through massive tax cuts and for promoting privatesector programs such as school vouchers and a reliance on faith based institutions to help the poor.
gore proposed smaller tax cuts targeted at middleand lower class people and strengthening social security.
in an era of peace foreign policy gured hardly at all in the campaign although bush struck a moderate note when he urged that america should act like a humble nation pollsters predicted a close election but none foresaw the epochal cliffhanger that the election would become.
on election day the country split nearly evenly between the two candidates and it was soon clear that floridas electoral votes would determine the winner.
television news programs announced that bush had won the sunshine state and al gore called the texas governor to concede defeat.
yet just an hour later gores camp decided that florida was too close to call and the vice president in perhaps the most awkward phone call in modern politics retracted his concession.
what ensued was a ve week political standoff over how to count the votes in florida.
democrats argued that some ballots were confusing or had been misread by machines and asked for recounts by hand in several counties.
republicans claimed that such recounts would amount to changing the rules in the middle of the game and thus thwart the rule of law.
after weeks of legal bickering with the presidency in the balance the supreme court nally intervened.
by a ve to four vote along partisan lines the court reasoned that since neither floridas legislature nor its courts had established a uniform standard for evaluating disputed ballots the hand counts amounted to an unconstitutional breach of the fourteenth amendments equal protection clause.
that ruling gave bush the white house but cast a dark shadow of illegitimacy over his presidency.
bush ofcially won florida by 537 votes out of 6 million cast and he squeaked by in the electoral college 271 to 266 see maps 41 3 and 41 4.
the national popular vote went decisively to gore 50 999 897 to 50 456 002.
for the rst time since 1888 a candidate won the white house with fewer popular votes than his opponent.
calls to abolish the electoral college however were few and muted see art.
v of the constitution.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 map 41 3 presidential election of 2000 with electoral vote by state although democrat albert gore won the popular election by half a million votes george w bushs contested 537 vote advantage in florida gave him a slight lead in the electoral college.
the 2 7 million popular votes won by green party candidate and consumer activist ralph nader almost surely deprived gore of victory casting nader in the role of spoiler.
bushs failure to win the popular vote inspired critics to protest at his inauguration with placards reading hail to the thief wa mt or id nv mn sd wy co az wi ia ne ut ca map 41 4 america in red and blue this map showing the vote by county in the hotly contested 2000 presidential election vividly illustrates the geography of modern americas political divisions.
democratic candidate albert gore won a popular majority by carrying just 676 mostly urban counties heavily populated by union members minorities and prosperous educated white collar workers.
republican george w bush won the election by taking 2 477 mostly rural counties where feelings about social issues such as abortion and gun control ran high and shaped solid conservative constituencies.
source adapted from vns graphic by stanford kay newsweek.
nd il ks nm mi in mo ok oh wv ky ms la al va nc tn ar tx me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 12 ri pa nj ct 4 15 8 ga sc de md dc 2 fl ak hi candidate party electoral vote bush republican 50 4 50 456 169 47 88 gore democrat 49 4 50 996 116 48 39 0 0 2 783 728 2 72 nader green popular vote one elector from the district of columbia abstained.
interactive map wash me.
ore vt n h minn idaho n y wisc.
conn mich wyo.
nev ohio ill utah colo calif md.
w va kansas r i pa mo.
va n j del.
d c ky n c tenn okla ariz n mex.
s c ala miss.
texas ga la.
fla alaska gore democrat bush republican hawai i tie results not available alaska does not have county boundaries.
the boundaries shown are election areas.
interactive map george w bush as president bush begins as the son of the forty rst president george w bush 43 became the rst presidential offspring since john quincy adams to reach the white house.
raised largely in texas the younger bush publicly distanced himself from his familys privileged new eng land heritage and affected the chummy manner of a selfmade good ol boy though he held degrees from yale and harvard.
his adversaries sniped that he had been born on third base and claimed to have hit a triple.
he promised to bring to washington the conciliatory skills he had honed as the republican governor of texas where he had worked well with the democratic majority in the states legislature.
but as president bush soon proved to be more of a divider than a uniter less a compassionate conservative than a crusading ideologue.
religious traditionalists cheered but liberals jeered when he withdrew american support from international health programs that sanctioned abortion advocated federally nanced faith based social welfare initiatives and sharply limited government sponsored research on embryonic stem cells which many scientists believed held the key to conquering diseases such as parkinsons and alzheimers.
he pleased corporate chief tains but angered environmentalists by challenging scientic ndings on groundwater contamination and global warming repudiating the kyoto treaty limiting greenhouse gas emissions negotiated by the clinton administration but never ratied by the senate advocating new oil exploration in the arctic national wildlife refuge on alaskas ecologically fragile north coast and allowing vice president cheney to hammer out his administrations energy policy in behindclosed doors meetings with representatives of several giant oil companies.
even many scal conser vatives thought him reckless when he pressed ahead with a whopping 1 3 trillion tax cut.
together with a softening economy and the increasing costs of war in iraq the tax cut turned the federal budget surpluses of the late 1990s into yawning decits reaching more than 400 billion in 2004 see figure 41 1.
terrorism comes to america on september 11 2001 the long era of americas impregnable national security violently ended.
on a balmy late summer morning suicidal terrorists slammed two hijacked airliners loaded with passengers and jet fuel into the twin towers of new york citys world trade center.
they ew a third plane into the military billions of dollars surpluses 100 200 162 deficits 300 248 290 318 400 375 413 500 1993 1994 1995 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 figure 41 1 decits into surpluses and back again in 1998 the u s budget decit became a surplus for the rst time in decades.
but by 2002 the government was back in decit due to president bushs tax cuts a weak economy and mushrooming defense spending on the iraq war.
source ofce of management and budget historical table budget of the united states government fiscal year 2008.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 the toll of terror grief overcame this exhausted reghter during the search for survivors in the wreckage of new york citys world trade center.
nerve center of the pentagon near washington d c kill ing 189 people.
heroic passengers forced another hijacked aircraft to crash in rural pennsylvania killing all 44 aboard but depriving the terrorists of a fourth weapon of mass destruction.
as the two giant new york skyscrapers thunderously collapsed some three thousand innocent victims perished including people of many races and faiths from more than sixty countries as well as hundreds of new yorks policeand re department rescue workers.
a stunned nation blossomed with ags as grieving and outraged americans struggled to express their sorrow and solidarity in the face of the catastrophic terrorism of 9 11.
president bush responded with a sober and stirring address to congress nine days later.
his solemn demeanor and the gravity of the situation helped to dissipate the cloud of illegitimacy that had shadowed his presidency since the disputed election of 2000.
while emphasizing his respect for the islamic religion and muslim people he identied the principal enemy as osama bin laden head of a shadowy terrorist network known as al qaeda the base in arabic.
a wealthy extremist exiled from his native saudi arabia bin laden was associated with earlier attacks on american embassies in east africa and on the uss cole in yemen.
he had taken refuge in landlocked afghanistan ruled by islamic fundamentalists called the taliban.
ironically the united states had indirectly helped bring the taliban to power by supporting religious rebels resisting the soviet invasion of afghanistan in the 1980s.
bin laden was known to harbor venomous resentment toward the united states for its growing military presence in the middle east especially on the sacred soil of the arabian peninsula and its unyielding support for israel in the face of intensifying palestinian nationalism.
bin laden also fed on worldwide resentment of americas enormous economic military and cultural power.
ironically americas most conspicuous strengths had made it a conspicuous target.
when the taliban refused to hand over bin laden bush ordered a massive military campaign against afghanistan.
within three months american and afghan rebel forces had overthrown the taliban but failed to nd bin laden and americans continued to live in fear of future attacks.
confronted with this unconventional diffuse menace antiterrorism experts called for new tactics of asymmetrical warfare employing not just traditional military muscle but also innovative intelligence gathering economic reprisals in ltration of suspected orga ni zations and even assassinations.
the terrorists blows diabolically coincided with the onset of a recession.
the already gathering economic downturn worsened as edgy americans shunned air travel and the tourist industry withered.
then while the rubble in new york was still smoldering a handful of americans died after receiving letters contaminated with the deadly respiratory disease anthrax.
the perpetrators of the anthrax attacks remained unknown but the gnawing fear spread that biological warfare might be the next threat facing the american people.
in this anxious at mosphere congress in october 2001 rammed through the usa patriot act.
the act the acts ofcial name is uniting and strengthening america by providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism.
fighting back against terrorism the attacks seen around the world the attacks of september 11 2001 became events of international not just american signicance as revealed in the newspapers on display in soa bulgaria.
permitted extensive telephone and e mail surveillance and authorized the detention and deportation of immigrants suspected of terrorism.
just over a year later congress created the new cabinet level department of homeland security to protect the nations borders and ferret out potential attackers.
the justice department meanwhile rounded up hundreds of immigrants and held them without habeas corpus formal charges in an open court.
the bush administration further called for trying suspected terrorists before military tribunals where the usual rules of evidence and procedure did not apply.
as hundreds of taliban ghters captured in afghanistan languished in legal limbo and demoralizing isolation in the guantnamo detention camp on the american military base at guantnamo cuba public opinion polls showed americans sharply divided on whether the terrorist threat fully warranted such drastic encroachments on americas venerable tradition of protecting civil liberties.
catastrophic terrorism posed an unprecedented challenge to the united states.
the events of that murderous september morning reanimated american patriotism but they also brought a long chapter in american history to a dramatic climax.
all but unique among modern peoples americans for nearly two centuries had been spared from foreign attack on their homeland.
that unusual degree of virtually cost free liberty or death critics of the usa patriot act feared the extinction of cherished civil liberties including the right to protest against the governments policies.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 national security had undergirded the values of openness and individual freedom that de ned the distinctive character of american society.
now american security and american liberty alike were dangerously imperiled.
bush takes the offensive against iraq on only its second day in ofce the bush administration warned that it would not tolerate iraqs continued deance of united nations weapons inspections mandated after iraqs defeat in the 1991 persian gulf war.
iraqi dictator saddam hussein had played hideand seek with the inspectors for years.
in 1998 he had expelled both the u n.
monitoring verication and inspection commission unmovic and the international atomic energy agency iaea inducing president clinton with congressional approval to declare that saddams removal regime change was an ofcial goal of u s policy.
but no sustained military action against iraq had followed.
now in the context of the new terrorist threat the bush administration focused on iraq with a vengeance.
in january 2002 just weeks after the september 11 attacks bush claimed that iraq along with iran and north korea constituted an axis of evil that gravely menaced american security.
iran and north korea were both known to be pursuing nuclear weapons programs and iran had long supported terrorist operations in the middle east.
but iraqi tyrant saddam hussein defeated but not destroyed by bushs father in 1991 became the principal object of the new presidents wrath.
the elder bush had carefully assembled a broad international coalition to ght the 1991 persian gulf war.
he had also spoken so often of prudence that late night television comedians had mocked him for it.
in contrast his son was brashly determined to break with long standing american traditions and wage a preemptive war against iraq and to go it alone if necessary.
the younger bush thus cast off his appeal for america to be a humble nation and stood revealed as a plunger a daring risk taker willing to embrace bold dramatic policies foreign as well as scal.
in that spirit bush began laying plans for a war against iraq while somewhat halfheartedly pursuing diplomatic initiatives to avoid war.
itching for a ght and egged on by hawkish vice president cheney and other neoconser vative advis ers bush accused the iraqi regime of all manner of wrongdoing oppressing its own people frustrating the weapons inspectors developing nuclear chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction referred to as wmd and supporting terrorist orga ni zations like al qaeda.
perhaps most controversially he also suggested that a liberated democratized iraq might provide a beacon of hope to the islamic world and thereby begin to improve the political equation in the volatile middle east.
to skeptical observers including americas usually reliable european allies the very multiplicity of bushs reasons for war cast doubt on his case and his ambition to create a democracy in long suffering iraq seemed hopelessly utopian.
secretary of state colin powell urged caution warning about the long term consequences for the united states of invading and occupying an unstable religiously and culturally divided nation of 25 million people.
you break it you own it he told the president.
in his 2002 state of the union address president george w bush b.
1946 declared iraq continues to aunt its hostility toward america and to support terror.
the iraqi regime has plotted to develop anthrax and nerve gas and nuclear weapons for over a decade.
this is a regime that has already used poison gas to murder thousands of its own citizens leaving the bodies of mothers huddled over their dead children.
this is a regime that agreed to international inspections then kicked out the inspectors.
this is a regime that has something to hide from the civilized world.
states like these and their terrorist allies constitute an axis of evil arming to threaten the peace of the world.
by seeking weapons of mass destruction these regimes pose a grave and growing danger.
they could provide these arms to terrorists giving them the means to match their hatred.
they could attack our allies or attempt to blackmail the united states.
in any of these cases the price of indifference would be catastrophic.
the war in iraq 40e 45e turkey shia arab shia arab sunni arab sunni arab sunni arab sunni kurd mosul sunni kurd kirkuk 35n tikrit syria iran samarra haditha baquba ramadi fallujah baghdad igr is r.
t map 41 5 iraq in transition carved out of the old ottoman empire after world war i iraq has long been a combustible compound of rivalrous ethnic and religious groups.
saddam husseins dictatorial regime imposed a brutal peace on the country for twenty four years following his ascent to power in 1979 but after the american invasion in 2003 old feuds resumed exacerbated by stinging resentment against the occupying forces.
iraq kut karbala jordan n najaf eup saudi arabia hrates nasiriya r basra path of u s coalition forces march april 2003 sunni triangle oil field site of major clash with iraqi insurgents 30n 100 km.
kuwait 100 mi.
persian gulf interactive map heavy majorities in both houses of congress nevertheless passed a resolution in october 2002 authorizing the president to employ armed force to defend against iraqi threats to americas national security and to enforce united nations resolutions regarding iraq.
a month later the u n security council voted unanimously to give iraq a nal opportunity to comply with its disarmament obligations there followed a months long cat and mouse game.
u n weapons inspectors returned to iraq.
saddam once again harassed and blocked them.
no weapons of mass destruction were found.
the inspectors asked for more time.
the united nations declined to authorize the use of force to compel compliance.
in this tense and confusing at mosphere bush with britain his only major ally launched the longanticipated invasion of iraq on march 19 2003.
saddam husseins vaunted military machine collapsed almost immediately.
in less than a month baghdad had fallen and saddam had been driven from power and hounded into hiding.
he was found and arrested ethnic and religious groups by percent of total population c 25 000 000 other 3 sunni kurd 17 sunni arab 20 shia arab 60 some nine months later and executed in 2006.
from the deck of a u s aircraft carrier off the cal i fornia coast speaking beneath a banner declaring mission accomplished bush triumphantly announced on may 1 2003 that major combat operations in iraq have ended see map 41 5.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 owning iraq president bushs words quickly came back to haunt him and americas forces in iraq.
neoconser vative pundits in washington had predicted that american soldiers would be greeted as liberators and that saddams ouster would lead to owering democracy across the middle east.
in reality post saddam iraq quickly devolved into a seething cauldron of violence.
the countrys largest ethnic groups sunni and shia muslims clashed violently especially in the capital city of baghdad.
both groups attacked american forces who after their leaders disbanded the iraqi army were left to secure the country single handedly.
a locally grown insurgency quickly spread and occupying iraq be came ever more perilous for american troops.
hatred for americans only worsened with revelations in april 2004 that iraqi prisoners in baghdads abu ghraib prison had been tortured and humiliated by their american captors.
amid this chaos jihadist terrorists from around the region ooded into iraq and established strong positions there often fueling the intrairaqi con icts to further their own radical islamist vision.
although al qaeda had had no link to iraq under saddam as bush had falsely alleged the organization certainly moved in afterward.
these three battles shia sunni ethnic violence counter occupation insurgency and jihadist terrorism created a ceaseless cycle of bloodshed in which american soldiers found themselves increasingly bogged down.
by the end of 2006 more americans had died in iraq than in the at on the fiery ground in basra iraq 2004 these british soldiers are running from a gasoline bomb detonated during a protest by iraqi job seekers who claimed that they had been promised employment in the security services.
the british who had invaded iraq alongside the united states oversaw the southern iraq city of basra a role that proved so unpopular with british voters that prime minister tony blair was eventually forced to resign.
a divided nation in his 1998 book a world transformed former president george h w bush b.
1924 explained his rationale for not driving saddam hussein from power during the 1991 persian gulf war.
his words made sobering reading in the context of his sons subsequent invasion of iraq trying to eliminate saddam.
would have incurred incalculable human and political costs.
the coalition would instantly have collapsed the arabs deserting it in anger and other allies pulling out as well.
under the circumstances there was no viable exit strategy we could see violating another of our principles.
furthermore we had been self consciously trying to set a pattern for handling aggression in the post cold war world.
going in and occupying iraq thus unilaterally exceeding the united nations mandate would have destroyed the precedent of international response to aggression that we hoped to establish.
tacks of september 11.
see thinking globally america through foreign eyes hyperpower or hapless power pp.
the political situation in the war torn country took shape unevenly on shaky ground.
in the summer of 2004 the american military ceded political power and limited sovereignty to an interim iraqi government.
national elections followed in early 2005 and millions of iraqis voted for a national assembly to draft a constitution.
after a referendum vote on the constitution in october 2005 another round of elections chose parliamentary representatives a prime minister and a president.
but under the seeming stability of iraqs new democratic government lay deep violent tensions.
sunni muslims the minority that had held power under saddam hussein one of their own feared reprisals and repressions under a majority shia government.
sunnis largely boycotted the rst election and tried unsuccessfully to block the ratication of the constitution.
unsuccessful at the ballot box many sunnis turned to bombings and political assassinations.
reelecting george w bush americans had rarely been as divided as they were in the rst years of the twenty rst century.
civil libertarians worried that the government was trampling on personal freedoms in the name of ghting terrorism.
revelations in 2002 about agrant corporate fraud at energy giant enron telecommunications titan worldcom and other prominent rms fed rampant popular disillusion with the business community.
cultural tensions brewed over the rights of gay and lesbian americans when leaders in san francisco and massachusetts permitted same sex couples to marry in 2004.
af rmative action continued to spark sharp debate as the supreme court permitted some preferential treatment in admitting minority undergraduate and law students to the university of michigan in 2003.
amid this division george w bush positioned himself to run for reelection.
he proclaimed that his tax cuts had spurred economic growth by giving citizens more control.
targeting what he called the soft bigotry of low expectations he championed the no child left behind act of 2002 which mandated sanctions against schools that failed to meet federal performance standards.
he played to cultural conser vatives in opposing stem cell research see page 1067 and called for a constitutional amendment to ban gay marriage.
but most of all he promoted himself as a stalwart leader in wartime warning the country not to change horses midstream after a bruising round of primary elections the embattled democrats chose lanky and long jawed massachusetts senator john kerry to represent their ticket.
a more old fashioned liberal than clinton kerry pushed progressive visions of government and counted on his vietnam war record to counter charges that he would be weak in the face of terrorism.
but that plan back red as kerry fell under attack for his very public opposition to vietnam once he had returned from battle in the early 1970s.
the republicans also had success painting the senator as a ip opper changing his policy positions to t opinion polls.
in spite of increased public misgivings about the war in iraq bush nailed down a decisive victory in november 2004.
he received the rst popular vote majority in more than a decade 60 639 281 to 57 355 978 and won clearly if by only one state this time ohio in the electoral college 286 to 252 see map 41 6.
this time his mandate was clear constitutional and uncontested.
thinking globally america through foreign eyes hyperpower or hapless power.
w hen the soviet union disintegrated in 1991 the cold war concluded at last.
so did an era in the history of american foreign policy and in the history of the international order.
for nearly half a century following world war ii the confrontation with the soviets had deeply shaped americans conception of themselves their national identity as well as their role and reputation in the wider world.
in the long twilight struggle against soviet communism they had accumulated unprecedented economic military and cultural might and had taken virtuous pride in themselves as the global champions of democracy justice and human rights.
now as the sole surviving superpower they faced no counterbalancing regime and apparently no check on their national ambitions.
the united states seemed to wield all but limitless power to mold the international environment as it wished.
not since the days of ancient rome did any people bestride the world so unopposed.
not everyone welcomed the emergence of this international colossus.
australians grumbled that the united states was a tall poppy that needed to be cut down to size.
french foreign minister hubert vdrine coined a new term when he described the united states in 1999 not merely as a superpower but as a hyperpower one that is dominant or predominant in all categories including not only the traditional domains of politics economics and the military but even including attitudes concepts languages and modes of life he called upon europeans to create an alternative to the american steamroller to work in favor of real multilateralism against unilateralism for balanced multipolarism against unipolarism for cultural diversity against uniformity in the parlance of international relations vdrine was promoting a balancing strategy to cope with u s power rather than the bandwagon strategy of simply submitting to american hegemony and making the most of it.
notably he was not proposing outright opposition.
as the last days of the twentieth century slipped through the hourglass american power surely looked formidable.
the united states was the worlds third most populous nation after china and india enjoyed the worlds largest economy more than three times larger than second ranked japan was the acknowledged global leader in high tech information and biomedical innovations and spent more on its armed forces than the rest of the world combined.
yet the realities of american power were somewhat less imposing.
uncle sam struggled to nd solid footing in the post cold war international arena.
torture at abu ghraib prison baghdad 2003 revelations that american soldiers had brutally tortured iraqi prisoners contributed to condemnation of the nations disregard for human rights and growing disquiet about americas unilateral policing of the world.
washington in the 1990s badly botched a peacekeeping mission in lawless somalia stood by helplessly as genocidal militias murdered about a million rwandans dithered over how to stabilize chaotic haiti fumbled indecisively as nationalist and sectarian violence convulsed the former balkan nation of yugoslavia found no effective response to terrorist attacks on new york citys world trade center the destroyer uss cole and american embassies in kenya and tanzania and notoriously failed to bring any conclusion to the decades old confrontation between israelis and palestinians who erupted in a bloody intifada rebellion against the jewish state in 2000.
the barbarous al qaeda assault that nally toppled the twin towers of the world trade center on september 11 2001 momentarily brought an outpouring of sympathy from an astonished and outraged world and also brought a dramatic shift in american foreign policy.
even le monde frances leading newspaper declared that in this dangerous hour nous sommes tous amricains we are all americans.
for the rst time in history the north atlantic treaty organization nato invoked the treatys article five conrming that an attack on one member was an attack on all members.
but such sentiments proved short lived.
when president george w bush in 2002 asserted a new right of preemptive war and then proceeded to invade iraq for what looked to many observers like the most dubious of reasons table 41 1 anti american sentiment swelled the world over.
in february 2002 some 10 million people in sixty countries demonstrated against the impending u s invasion of iraq.
exacerbated by washingtons rejection of the kyoto treaty dealing with global warming and by several american states continuing embrace of the death penalty which had largely disappeared in europe and elsewhere americas standing deteriorated even among its traditional allies and sank to rock bottom lows in islamic countries.
simmering resentment over the detention of hundreds of captured afghans at the u s military base in guantnamo cuba revelations about human rights abuses inicted by american troops on iraqi prisoners at baghdads abu ghraib prison and rendition by american agents of suspected terrorists to the notoriously cruel security ser vices of other countries further drained the depleted reservoirs of americas moral and political capital.
once a moral beacon and political inspiration to a suffering world the united states in the early twenty rst century had come to be regarded by millions of people the world over as a moral scourge and a political and military danger see table 41 1.
recapturing its stature as a legitimate world leader rebuilding its alliances restructuring the myriad multilateral institutions it had worked so hard to build in the cold war era and recapturing a sense of itself as a just and humane society were tasks that urgently confronted the republic as the century advanced.
world public opinion of the united states question do you have a very favorable somewhat favorable somewhat unfavorable or very unfavorable opinion of the united states.
percent favorable great britain france germany spain russia indonesia pakistan jordan turkey nigeria japan india china 83 75 58 55 56 source from pew global attitudes project no global warming alarm in the u s china americas image slips but allies share u s.
concerns over iran hamas 2006.
reprinted by permission of pew research center.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 image not available due to copyright restrictions vt 3 n h me.
12 idaho mont.
3 nev utah calif pa 21 ariz ill 21 n d 3 s d.
5 colo 9 ind.
11 ohio md.
10 d c 3 ky 8 okla w va 5 ark.
3 ore remove keyline before placing 1053641 m 41 06b iowa r i mich minn wash conn n y wisc.
va 13 tenn 11 n c 15 n m miss.
texas ala s c 8 ga 15 la.
9 bush republican kerry democrat fla 27 hawai i alaska each box represents one electoral vote in the 2004 election.
the election of 2004 bushs second term reelection george w bush announced gave him political capital which he intended to spend on an aggressive domestic agenda.
the appointment of two new conser vative supreme court justices upon the retirement of sandra day oconnor and the death of chief justice william rehnquist seemed to bode well for his ambitions.
but bush overplayed his hand.
attacking the core of new deal liberalism bush proposed a radical program to privatize much of social security providing incentives for younger americans to fund their own retirements through personal accounts.
a massive outcry led by the american association of retired persons aarp and other liberal groups reminded americans how much they loved social security warts and all.
bushs proposal faded away within six months of his reelection.
the same fate befell a proposed constitutional amendment to ban same sex marriage which had been a major values issue in the 2004 campaign.
the president also took aim at the contentious issue of immigration reform where he parted company with the conser vative wing of his party.
bush opposed arresting and deporting the nearly 12 million undocumented people in the united states as some nativists proposed.
at the same time he felt that simply nor malizing their status would reward them for entering the country illegally.
his compromise plan to establish a guest worker program and a path to citizenship for the undocumented ended up pleasing no one.
congress rejected it in the summer of 2007 and the issue was dead for the rest of bushs term see p 1095.
very second term president since the 1960s had seen scandal mar his later years in ofce.
nixon had watergate reagan had iran contra and clinton had lewinsky.
the bush white house was no exception but this time the accusations were political not personal.
bushs critics claimed that the presidents erce loyalty to his staff prevented him from recognizing incompetence and that he had unlawfully expanded the power of the presidency under the guise of protecting america in the war on terror in the fall of 2005 vice president dick cheneys chief of staff was convicted of perjury in an investigation into the source of a leak that had exposed the identity of an undercover cia agent as political retaliation against her antiwar husband.
in december of that year journalists discovered that the government was conducting illegal wiretap surveillance on american citizens inside the united states in violation of federal law.
in 2007 scandal engulfed the justice department over the ring for political reasons of eight u s attorneys.
perhaps the most tragic and avoidable of bushs missteps came in the botched response to the deadly hurricane katrina after the levees broke in new orleans august 2005 when ferocious hurricane katrina hammered the gulf coast it overtaxed a decient levee system and unleashed oodwaters into new orleans submerging 80 percent of the city and destroying more than a quartermillion of its homes.
many families unable or unwilling to ee the city sought refuge in the superdome where water food and other supplies were soon in very short supply.
experts predicted that it would be years before the city fully recovered if ever.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 the democrats win back control of congress 2006 house majority whip james clyburn of south carolina left speaker of the house nancy pelosi of california center and majority leader steny hoyer of maryland right raise their hands in victory after being selected to lead the democratic party in the house of representatives.
their party also won a majority in the senate in the 2006 midterm elections the rst time since 1994 that the democrats controlled both houses.
which devastated new orleans and much of the gulf coast in late august 2005 ooding 80 percent of the historic city and causing over 1 300 deaths and 150 billion in damages.
midterm elections of 2006 as charges of dictatorial power grabbing cronyism and incompetence mounted during bushs second term democrats campaigned hard against the president and his party in the midterm elections of 2006.
republicans fell victim to the same anti incumbency sentiment they had ridden to power twelve years earlier as democrats charged that a culture of corruption had taken hold in washington.
a series of highpro le arrests and resignations over lobbying graft illegal campaign nancing and sexual misconduct among republican legislators added fuel to the democrats re.
democrats narrowly regained control of both houses of congress for the rst time since the gingrich revolution of 1994 see p 1059.
new speaker of the house nancy pelosi the rst woman to hold that post promised a new era of reform openness and a check on the bush administration.
the biggest factor in the democratic sweep was the perceived mishandling of the war in iraq.
public approval of the presidents management of the war had declined steadily since early 2005 as the american death toll continued to rise.
prewar claims about wmd and iraqs connections to al qaeda and 9 11 had all proved false.
by late 2005 a majority of americans believed that the war had been a mistake.
even more felt that the bush administration particularly the defense department under secretary donald rumsfeld had badly mismanaged events on the ground.
rumsfeld resigned after the republicans thumping in the 2006 midterm elections.
but the quagmire continued.
the bush administration attempted to bridge it in early 2007 by sending a surge of twenty thousand new troops to iraq to battle insurgents.
though the surge appeared to bring a modest measure of stability to iraq as the 2008 election cycle got under way public opinion solidied against the war.
the major question was how the united states could extract itself while at the same time avoid leaving in its wake a genocidal civil war.
election of 2008 the election of 2008 was historic from the beginning.
george w bush had twice selected dick cheney as his running mate for his experience and lack of political ambition after leaving the vice presidency.
in his late sixties and with a history of heart problems cheney never had any intention of running for president himself.
with neither the sitting president nor vice president running the 2008 election was truly open for the rst time in 80 years.
the surge in iraq european disapproval of the iraq war 2007 the presidential election of 2008 with president bushs popularity ratings dropping to historic lows a large eld of democratic candidates dove into the primary campaign of 2008 smelling republican blood in the electoral waters.
the democratic race soon tightened into a ercely fought contest between the 46 year old rst term illinois senator barack obama and the pre campaign favorite former first lady and new york senator hillary rodham clinton.
the ensuing battle destined to catapult either a black man or a woman into the general election as a major party nominee for the rst time split the party but drew millions of new voters into the democratic primaries.
obama narrowly prevailed surviving clintons attacks on his inexperience.
son of a black kenyan father and a white mother from kansas obama appealed to both the crusading spirit of the civil rights era of old and the newer ethos of tolerance that came more easily to the young in twentieth rst century america.
he also capitalized on an army of smartly managed volunteers a record of early opposition to the war in iraq and an astonishing gift for eloquence that he used to advocate a post partisan politics appealing to voters weary of the divisive partisanship of the bush years.
to strengthen his national security credentials he picked foreign policy savvy delaware senator joseph biden as his running mate.
in keeping with the countrys anti bush mood republicans nominated longtime arizona senator john mccain aged 72 a self styled maverick with a record of supporting bipartisan legislation on such issues as normalizing relations with north vietnam campaign nance and immigration reform.
he had launched his political career as a vietnam war hero who had endured years of torture as a pow.
to rally the conservative and christian evangelical wing of his party quite and then there were two february 2008 eight candidates competed for the democratic nomination in primaries and caucuses beginning in january 2008.
by the time of this debate at the university of texas at austin in february only illinois senator barack obama and new york senator hillary clinton remained in the race.
chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 barack obama riding the publics discontent with president bushs republican administration illinois senator barack obama beat arizona senator john mccain in 2008 to become the rst african american to reach the white house.
cool to his candidacy mccain picked sarah palin as his running mate.
the former beauty queen small town mayor self proclaimed hockey mom and staunch abortion rights opponent had served only twenty one months as alaskas governor.
as mccain hoped she galvanized the right wing republican base.
but when interview gaffes exposed her weak grasp of the issues palin became fodder for late night television comedians and polls showed at least as much a liability as an asset to the republican ticket.
armed with an unprecedented war chest of nearly 700 million dollars mostly raised from small donors via the internet obama seized the advantage in both the air war television and the ground war his legions of volunteers.
his strong performance in televised debates also lent him an aura of gravitas some voters had doubted he had.
what appeared to bolster his chances most however was the worldwide economic meltdown in the nal six weeks of the campaign.
the american housing price bubble had begun to burst in 2006 which in turn led to a huge wave of mortgage defaults housing foreclosures and declines in a vast array of mortgage backed securities held by banks around the globe.
financial institutions from tokyo to new york to london found themselves with too much debt and too little capital to provide the everyday credit banks worldwide need to function.
by early october the credit markets froze stock values plummeted and householders watched helplessly as their savings shrunk.
economists of every stripe spoke of the gravest nancial crisis since the great depression.
in contrast to the 1929 crash it took days not years for a terried bush administration to intervene on a gi gantic scale.
the treasury department and federal reserve system nationalized the countries two biggest mortgage companies fannie mae and freddie mac and took over the worlds biggest insurance company aig.
wa mt or id nv ca nd wy co wi ia ne ut az mn sd il ks in mo ok nm mi ky la ms al pa wv va nc tn ar tx oh ga me vt 3 nh ma ny 4 12 ri nj ct 4 15 7 de md sc dc fl ak hi candidate party electoral vote popular vote obama democrat 68 65 980 131 52 6 mccain republican 32 57 779 170 46 1 note preliminary results as of nov 11 2008 map 41 7 presidential election of 2008 a record voter turnout swelled by millions of young new voters african americans and latinos gave senator barack obama an electoral college landslide and the democratic party solid control of both houses of congress.
obama redrew the electoral map by taking nine states won by george w bush in 2004.
interactive map the surge in iraq treasury secretary henry paulson then persuaded congress to authorize a whopping 700 billion dollars to buy toxic mortgages and inject cash directly into the nations biggest banks.
suddenly even small government republicans spoke of the need to regulate the nancial sector.
this crisis presented the presidential candidates with a challenge and an opportunity.
obama criticized mccains plan to extend and even deepen the bush tax cuts as evidence that the mccain presidency would be a third bush term mccain countered that obamas proposed tax hikes on the wealthiest 5 percent of households and plans for big public investments in alternative energy and infrastructure repair were tantamount to socialism huge voter turnouts delivered a historic victory to barack obama who won 53 percent of the national popular vote.
by overtaking his rival in such traditional republican strongholds such as virginia nevada and colorado obama prevailed in the electoral college 364 to 175 see map 41 7.
democrats gained seats in the house and senate to enlarge the congressional majority they had won in 2006.
obamas election opened a new chapter in the history of countrys race relations.
it also presented the nations rst african american president the daunting challenge of governing a country struggling with wars in iraq and afghanistan and entering its roughest economic waters since the 1930s.
chronology clinton defeats bush and perot for presidency nafta signed republicans win majorities in both houses of congress welfare reform bill becomes law clinton defeats dole for presidency clinton lewinsky scandal u s and britain launch military strikes against iraq house of representatives impeaches clinton senate acquits clinton on impeachment charges kosovo crisis nato warfare with serbia protest in seattle against world trade organization million mom march against guns in washington d c u s normalizes trade relations with china george w bush wins presidency in electoral college albert gore takes popular vote terrorists attack new york city and washington d c on september 11 u s invades afghanistan congress passes usa patriot act energy trader enron collapses amid accounting scandals congress passes no child left behind act bush labels iraq iran and north korea axis of evil telecommunications giant worldcom declares bankruptcy congress authorizes use of force against iraq u n security council demands that iraq comply with weapons inspections republicans regain senate north korea withdraws from nuclear non proliferation treaty u s invades iraq bush signs drug prescription bill for seniors saddam hussein captured in iraq supreme court narrowly approves af rmative action gay marriage controversy erupts iraqi interim government installed bush defeats kerry for presidency iraq elects permanent government but quickly descends into sectarian con ict saddam hussein executed u s troop surge in iraq barack obama elected 44th president of the united states chapter 41 america confronts the post cold war era 1992 2009 key terms weapons of mass destruction wmd 1056 democratic leadership council 1057 oklahoma city bombing 1058 contract with america 1059 welfare reform bill 1060 north american free trade agreement nafta 1061 world trade organization wto 1061 mccain feingold act 1061 people to know whitewater 1063 lewinsky affair 1063 kyoto treaty 1067 9 11 1068 al qaeda 1068 usa patriot act 1068 department of homeland security 1069 guantnamo detention camp 1069 abu ghraib prison 1072 no child left behind act 1073 hurricane katrina 1077 william jefferson bill clinton h ross perot hillary rodham clinton newt gingrich robert dole john mccain sara palin monica lewinsky george w bush richard cheney john kerry nancy pelosi barack obama joseph r joe biden for further reference alan dershowitz supreme injustice how the high court hijacked election 2000 2001 elizabeth drew showdown the struggle between the gingrich congress and the clinton white house 1997 joe klein the natural 2002 richard posner an affair of state the investigation impeachment and trial of president clinton 1999 jack rakove the unnished election of 2000 2001 thomas ricks fiasco the american military adventure in iraq 2006 james stewart blood sport 1996 bob woodward bush at war 2002 plan of attack 2004 state of denial bush at war part iii 2006 the choice 1996 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the american people face a new century as our case is new so we must think anew and act anew.
we must disenthrall ourselves and then we shall save our country.
w ell beyond its two hundredth birthday as the twenty rst century began the united states was both an old and a new nation.
it boasted one of the longest uninterrupted traditions of democratic government of any country on earth.
indeed it had pioneered the techniques of mass democracy and was in that sense the oldest modern polity.
as one of the earliest countries to industrialize america had also dwelt in the modern economic era longer than most nations.
but the republic was in many ways still youthful as well.
innovation entrepreneurship and risk taking all characteristics of youth were honored national values.
the twenty rst century began much like the twentieth with american society continuing to be rejuvenated by fresh waves of immigrants full of energy and ambition.
the u s economy despite problems pulsated as a driv ing engine of world economic growth.
american inventions especially computer and communications technologies were transforming the face of global society.
consumers from lisbon to tokyo seemed to worship the icons of american culture downing soft drinks and donning blue jeans watching hollywood lms listening to rock or country music even adopting indigenous american sports like baseball and basketball.
in the realm of consumerism american products appeared to have coca colonized the globe.
the history of american society also seemed to have increased global signicance as the third millennium of the christian era opened.
americans were a pluralistic people who had struggled for centuries to provide opportunity and to achieve tolerance and justice for many different religious ethnic and racial groups.
their historical experience could offer valuable lessons to the rapidly internationalizing planetary society that was emerging at the dawn of the twenty rst century.
much history remained to be made as the country entered its third century of nationhood.
the great social experiment of american democracy was far from completed as the united states faced its future.
astonishing breakthroughs in science and technology this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
